CIK: 796343
Company Name: ADOBE SYSTEMS INC
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2015-01-20


ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our Consolidated Financial Statements and Notes thereto. ACQUISITIONS During fiscal 2014, we completed a business acquisition which was not material to our Consolidated Financial Statements. During fiscal 2013, we completed our acquisitions of privately held Neolane, a leader in cross-channel campaign management technology for $616.7 million and privately held Behance, an online social media platform to showcase and discover creative work for $111.1 million . During fiscal 2013, we integrated Neolane and Behance into our Digital Marketing and Digital Media reportable segments, respectively. The impact of these acquisitions was not material to our Consolidated Financial Statements. During fiscal 2012, we completed the acquisition of privately held Efficient Frontier, a multi-channel digital ad buying and optimization company for $374.7 million . During fiscal 2012, we began integrating Efficient Frontier into our Digital Marketing segment. See Note 2 of our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further information regarding these acquisitions. CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES In preparing our Consolidated Financial Statements in accordance with GAAP and pursuant to the rules and regulations of the SEC, we make assumptions, judgments and estimates that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses, and related disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities. We base our assumptions, judgments and estimates on historical experience and various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results could differ materially from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. On a regular basis, we evaluate our assumptions, judgments and estimates. We also discuss our critical accounting policies and estimates with the Audit Committee of the Board of Directors. We believe that the assumptions, judgments and estimates involved in the accounting for revenue recognition, business combinations, goodwill impairment and income taxes have the greatest potential impact on our Consolidated Financial Statements. These areas are key components of our results of operations and are based on complex rules requiring us to make judgments and estimates, so we consider these to be our critical accounting policies. Historically, our assumptions, judgments and estimates relative to our critical accounting policies have not differed materially from actual results. Revenue Recognition Our revenue is derived from the licensing of perpetual, time-based and subscription software products, associated software maintenance and support plans, non-software related hosted services, consulting services, training and technical support. We recognize revenue when all four revenue recognition criteria have been met: persuasive evidence of an arrangement exists, we have delivered the product or performed the service, the fee is fixed or determinable and collection is probable. Determining whether and when some of these criteria have been satisfied often involves assumptions and judgments that can have a significant impact on the timing and amount of revenue we report. We enter into multiple element revenue arrangements in which a customer may purchase a combination of software, upgrades, maintenance and support, hosted services and consulting. For our software and software-related multiple element arrangements, we must: (1) determine whether and when each element has been delivered; (2) determine whether undelivered products or services are essential to the functionality of the delivered products and services; (3) determine the fair value of each undelivered element using vendor-specific objective evidence ( VSOE ), and (4) allocate the total price among the various elements. VSOE of fair value is used to allocate a portion of the price to the undelivered elements and the residual method is used to allocate the remaining portion to the delivered elements. Absent VSOE, revenue is deferred until the earlier of the point at which VSOE of fair value exists for any undelivered element or until all elements of the arrangement have been delivered. However, if the only undelivered element is maintenance and support, the entire arrangement fee is recognized ratably over the performance period. Changes in assumptions or judgments or changes to the elements in a software arrangement could cause a material increase or decrease in the amount of revenue that we report in a particular period. 36 Table of Contents We determine VSOE for each element based on historical stand-alone sales to third parties or from the stated renewal rate for the elements contained in the initial arrangement. In determining VSOE, we require that a substantial majority of the selling prices for a product or service fall within a reasonably narrow pricing range. We have established VSOE for our software maintenance and support services, custom software development services, con sulting services and training, when such services are sold optionally with software licenses. For multiple-element arrangements containing our non-software services, we must: (1) determine whether and when each element has been delivered; (2) determine the fair value of each element using the selling price hierarchy of VSOE of selling price, third-party evidence ( TPE ) of selling price or best-estimated selling price ( BESP ), as applicable; and (3) allocate the total price among the various elements based on the relative selling price method. For multiple-element arrangements that contain both software and non-software elements, we allocate revenue to software or software-related elements as a group and any non-software elements separately based on the selling price hierarchy. We determine the selling price for each deliverable using VSOE of selling price, if it exists, or TPE of selling price. If neither VSOE nor TPE of selling price exist for a deliverable, we use BESP. Once revenue is allocated to software or software-related elements as a group, we recognize revenue in conformance with software revenue accounting guidance. Revenue is recognized when revenue recognition criteria are met for each element. We are generally unable to establish VSOE or TPE for non-software elements and as such, we use BESP. BESP is generally used for offerings that are not typically sold on a stand-alone basis or for new or highly customized offerings. We determine BESP for a product or service by considering multiple factors including, but not limited to, major product groupings, geographies, market conditions, competitive landscape, internal costs, gross margin objectives and pricing practices. Pricing practices taken into consideration include historic contractually stated prices, volume discounts where applicable and our price lists. We must estimate certain royalty revenue amounts due to the timing of securing information from our customers. While we believe we can make reliable estimates regarding these matters, these estimates are inherently subjective. Accordingly, our assumptions and judgments regarding future products and services as well as our estimates of royalty revenue could differ from actual events, thus materially impacting our financial position and results of operations. Product revenue is recognized when the above criteria are met. We reduce the revenue recognized for estimated future returns, price protection and rebates at the time the related revenue is recorded. In determining our estimate for returns and in accordance with our internal policy regarding global channel inventory which is used to determine the level of product held by our distributors on which we have recognized revenue, we rely upon historical data, the estimated amount of product inventory in our distribution channel, the rate at which our product sells through to the end user, product plans and other factors. Our estimated provisions for returns can vary from what actually occurs. Product returns may be more or less than what was estimated. The amount of inventory in the channel could be different than what is estimated. Our estimate of the rate of sell-through for product in the channel could be different than what actually occurs. There could be a delay in the release of our products. These factors and unanticipated changes in the economic and industry environment could make our return estimates differ from actual returns, thus impacting our financial position and results of operations. In the future, actual returns and price protection may exceed our estimates as unsold products in the distribution channels are exposed to rapid changes in consumer preferences, market conditions or technological obsolescence due to new platforms, product updates or competing products. While we believe we can make reliable estimates regarding these matters, these estimates are inherently subjective. Accordingly, if our estimates change, our returns and price protection reserves would change, which would impact the total net revenue we report. We recognize revenues for hosted services that are based on a committed number of transactions ratably beginning on the date the customer commences use of our services and continuing through the end of the customer term. Over-usage fees, and fees billed based on the actual number of transactions from which we capture data, are billed in accordance with contract terms as these fees are incurred. We record amounts that have been invoiced in accounts receivable and in deferred revenue or revenue, depending on whether the revenue recognition criteria have been met. Our consulting revenue is recognized on a time and materials basis and is measured monthly based on input measures, such as on hours incurred to date compared to total estimated hours to complete, with consideration given to output measures, such as contract milestones, when applicable. Business Combinations We allocate the purchase price of acquired companies to the tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed, assumed equity awards, as well as to in-process research and development based upon their estimated fair values at the acquisition 37 Table of Contents date. The purchase price allocation process requires management to make significant estimates and assumptions, especially at the acquisition date with respect to intangible assets, deferred revenue obligations and equity assumed. Although we believe the assumptions and estimates we have made are reasonable, they are based in part on historical experience and information obtained from the management of the acquired companies and are inherently uncertain. Examples of critical estimates in valuing certain of the intangible assets we have acquired or may acquire in the future include but are not limited to: future expected cash flows from software license sales, subscriptions, support agreements, consulting contracts and acquired developed technologies and patents; expected costs to develop the in-process research and development into commercially viable products and estimated cash flows from the projects when completed; the acquired company trade name and trademarks as well as assumptions about the period of time the acquired trade name and trademarks will continue to be used in the combined company product portfolio; and discount rates. In connection with the purchase price allocations for our acquisitions, we estimate the fair value of the deferred revenue obligations assumed. The estimated fair value of the support obligations is determined utilizing a cost build-up approach. The cost build-up approach determines fair value by estimating the costs related to fulfilling the obligations plus a normal profit margin. The estimated costs to fulfill the obligations are based on the historical costs related to fulfilling the obligations. In connection with the purchase price allocations for our acquisitions, we estimate the fair value of the equity awards assumed. The estimated fair value is determined utilizing a modified binomial option pricing model which assumes employees exercise their stock options when the share price exceeds the strike price by a certain dollar threshold. If the acquired company has significant historical data on their employee exercise behavior, then this threshold is determined based upon the acquired company history. Otherwise, our historical exercise experience is used to determine the exercise threshold. Zero coupon yields implied by U.S. Treasury issuances, implied volatility for our common stock and our historical forfeiture rate are other inputs to the binomial model. Unanticipated events and circumstances may occur which may affect the accuracy or validity of such assumptions, estimates or actual results. Goodwill Impairment We complete our goodwill impairment test on an annual basis, during the second quarter of our fiscal year, or more frequently, if changes in facts and circumstances indicate that an impairment in the value of goodwill recorded on our balance sheet may exist. In order to estimate the fair value of goodwill, we typically estimate future revenue, consider market factors and estimate our future cash flows. Based on these key assumptions, judgments and estimates, we determine whether we need to record an impairment charge to reduce the value of the asset carried on our balance sheet to its estimated fair value. Assumptions, judgments and estimates about future values are complex and often subjective. They can be affected by a variety of factors, including external factors such as industry and economic trends, and internal factors such as changes in our business strategy or our internal forecasts. Although we believe the ass umptions, judgme nts and estimates we have made in the past have been reasonable and appropriate, different assumptions, judgments and estimates could materially affect our reported financial results. We completed our annual impairment test in the second quarter of fiscal 2014 and determined there was no impairment. The results of our annual impairment test indicate there is no significant risk of future material goodwill impairment in any of our reporting units. Accounting for Income Taxes We use the asset and liability method of accounting for income taxes. Under this method, income tax expense is recognized for the amount of taxes payable or refundable for the current year. In addition, deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the expected future tax consequences of temporary differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities, and for operating losses and tax credit carryforwards. Management must make assumptions, judgments and estimates to determine our current provision for income taxes and also our deferred tax assets and liabilities and any valuation allowance to be recorded against a deferred tax asset. Our assumptions, judgments and estimates relative to the current provision for income taxes take into account current tax laws, our interpretation of current tax laws and possible outcomes of current and future audits conducted by foreign and domestic 38 Table of Contents tax authorities. We have established reserves for income taxes to address potential exposures involving tax positions that could be challenged by tax authorities. In addition, we are subject to the continual examination of our income tax returns by the IRS and other domestic and foreign tax authorities, including a current examination by the IRS of our fiscal 2010, 2011 and 2012 tax returns. We expect future examinations to focus on our intercompany transfer pricing practices as well as other matters. We regularly assess the likelihood of outcomes resulting from these examinations to determine the adequacy of our provision for income taxes and have reserved for potential adjustments that may result from the current examinations. We believe such estimates to be reasonable; however, the final determination of any of these examinations could significantly impact the amounts provided for income taxes in our Consolidated Financial Statements. Our assumptions, judgments and estimates relative to the value of a deferred tax asset take into account predictions of the amount and category of future taxable income, such as income from operations or capital gains income. Actual operating results and the underlying amount and category of income in future years could render our current assumptions, judgments and estimates of recoverable net deferred taxes inaccurate. Any of the assumptions, judgments and estimates mentioned above could cause our actual income tax obligations to differ from our estimates, thus materially impacting our financial position and results of operations. We are a United States-based multinational company subject to tax in multiple U.S. and foreign tax jurisdictions. A significant portion of our foreign earnings for the current fiscal year were earned by our Irish subsidiaries. In addition to providing for U.S. income taxes on earnings from the U.S., we provide for U.S. income taxes on the earnings of foreign subsidiaries unless the subsidiaries earnings are considered permanently reinvested outside the U.S. While we do not anticipate changing our intention regarding permanently reinvested earnings, if certain foreign earnings previously treated as permanently reinvested are repatriated, the related U.S. tax liability may be reduced by any foreign income taxes paid on these earnings. Our income tax expense has differed from the tax computed at the U.S. federal statutory income tax rate due primarily to discrete items and to earnings considered as permanently reinvested in foreign operations. Unanticipated changes in our tax rates could affect our future results of operations. Our future effective tax rates could be unfavorably affected by changes in the tax rates in jurisdictions where our income is earned, by changes in, or our interpretation of, tax rules and regulations in the jurisdictions in which we do business, by unanticipated decreases in the amount of earnings in countries with low statutory tax rates, by lapses of the availability of the U.S. research and development tax credit, or by changes in the valuation of our deferred tax assets and liabilities. The United States, countries in the European Union and other countries where we do business have been considering changes in relevant tax, accounting and other laws, regulations and interpretations, including changes to tax laws applicable to corporate multinationals such as Adobe. These potential changes could adversely affect our effective tax rates or result in other costs to us. Recent Accounting Pronouncements Not Yet Effective On May 28, 2014, the FASB issued ASU No. 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, requiring an entity to recognize the amount of revenue to which it expects to be entitled for the transfer of promised goods or services to customers. The updated standard will replace most existing revenue recognition guidance in U.S. GAAP when it becomes effective and permits the use of either the retrospective or cumulative effect transition method. Early adoption is not permitted. The updated standard becomes effective for us in the first quarter of fiscal 2018. We have not yet selected a transition method and we are currently evaluating the effect that the updated standard will have on our consolidated financial statements and related disclosures. With the exception of the new revenue standard discussed above, there have been no new accounting pronouncements not yet effective that have significance, or potential significance, to our Consolidated Financial Statements. RESULTS OF OPERATIONS Overview of 2014 For fiscal 2014, we reported financial results consistent with the continued execution of our long-term plans for our two strategic growth areas, Digital Media and Digital Marketing, while continuing to market and license a broad portfolio of products and solutions. In our Digital Media segment, we are a market leader with Creative Cloud, our subscription-based offering for creating and publishing content and applications. Creative Cloud, first delivered in May 2012, is our next-generation offering that supersedes our historical model of licensing our creative products with perpetual licenses. Creative Cloud delivers value through more frequent product updates, storage and access to user files stored in the cloud with syncing of files across users machines, community-based features and services through our acquisition of Behance in December 2012, app creation capabilities and lower entry point pricing for cost-sensitive customers. We offer Creative Cloud for individuals and for teams, and we enable larger enterprise customers to acquire Creative Cloud capabilities through Enterprise Term License Agreements ( ETLAs ). The three Creative Cloud offerings address the multiple 39 Table of Contents routes to market we use to license our creative software to targeted customers. Adoption of Creative Cloud has transformed our business model and we continue to expect this to drive higher long-term revenue growth through an expansion of our customer base by acquiring new users through a lower cost of entry and delivery of additional features and value, as well as keeping existing customers current on our latest release. This model drives our revenue to be more recurring and predictable as revenue is recognized ratably. We continue to implement strategies that will accelerate awareness, consideration and purchase of subscriptions to our Creative Cloud offering. These strategies include increasing the value Creative Cloud users receive, as well as targeted promotions and offers that attract past customers and potential users to try out and ultimately subscribe to Creative Cloud. Additionally, in May 2013 we announced we would exclusively deliver new creative product innovations and features to Creative Cloud subscribers, and that Adobe Creative Suite 6 ( CS6 ), which was released in May 2012, would be the last major update we provide for perpetual licensees. In the first half of fiscal 2014, we announced the removal of general availability of CS6 on a perpetual licensing basis from legacy shrinkwrap and volume licensing channels. We still offer CS6 through our Adobe.com website and in certain markets. Because of the shift towards Creative Cloud subscriptions and ETLAs, perpetual revenue for CS6 has declined, and by the fourth quarter of fiscal 2014 revenue from perpetual licensing of our creative professional products was immaterial. During fiscal 2014, we continued to experience strong adoption of our Creative Cloud subscription offerings which has caused our Creative Cloud subscription revenue to increase as compared to the year-ago period. To assist with an understanding of this transition, we are using certain performance metrics to assess the health and trajectory of our overall Digital Media segment. These metrics include the total number of current paid subscriptions and Annualized Recurring Revenue ( ARR ). ARR should be viewed independently of revenue, deferred revenue and unbilled deferred revenue as ARR is a performance metric and is not intended to be combined with any of these items. We plan to adjust our reported ARR on an annual basis to reflect any material exchange rates changes. For our Creative business, we define Creative ARR as the sum of: the number of current subscriptions, multiplied by the average subscription price paid per user per month, multiplied by twelve months; plus, twelve months of contract value of ETLAs where the revenue is ratably recognized over the life of the contract; plus twelve months of Adobe Digital Publishing Suite contract value where the revenue is ratably recognized. We exited fiscal 2014 with 3.454 million paid Creative Cloud subscriptions, up 140% from 1.439 million at the end of fiscal 2013 . Total Creative ARR exiting fiscal 2014 was $1.68 billion , up from $801 million at the end of fiscal 2013 . Our Digital Media segment also includes our Document Services products and solutions, including Acrobat, Acrobat cloud services and EchoSign e-signing solution. In fiscal 2014 we continued to drive solid adoption of our Acrobat family of products primarily through license agreements with enterprise customers. We also drove strong adoption of subscription-based services including our Acrobat cloud services. Combined, adoption of Acrobat through ETLAs and our Document Services subscription offerings helped grow Document Services ARR to $271 million exiting fiscal 2014 , up from $143 million at the end of fiscal 2013 . Total Digital Media ARR, which we define as the sum of Creative ARR and Document Services ARR, grew to $1.95 billion at the end of fiscal 2014 , up from $944 million at the end of fiscal 2013 , demonstrating the progress we have made with the transformation of our business to a more recurring, ratable and predictable revenue model. Our reported ARR results in fiscal 2014 are based on currency rates set at the start of the fiscal year and held constant throughout the year. Revaluing our ending ARR for fiscal 2014 using currency rates at the beginning of fiscal 2015, our Digital Media ARR at the end of fiscal 2014 would be $1.88 billion or approximately $72 million lower than ARR reported above. We are a market leader in the fast-growing category addressed by our Digital Marketing segment. Our Adobe Marketing Cloud includes six solutions addressing the expanding needs of marketers, the newest of which is Adobe Campaign a cross-channel campaign management tool that we added to our portfolio with the acquisition of Neolane during the third quarter of fiscal 2013. Revenue from Adobe Marketing Cloud increased 15% during fiscal 2014 compared to the year-ago period. Helping to drive this performance was strong adoption across our portfolio of Adobe Marketing Cloud solutions including solid growth of our Adobe Experience Manager ( AEM ) and Adobe Campaign offerings. AEM and Adobe Campaign have historically been licensed by our customers as on premise offerings where license revenue has been recognized at the time of the transactions. During fiscal 2014, we saw increased customer adoption of term-based licensing 40 Table of Contents of our AEM and Adobe Campaign solutions where revenue is booked and recognized ratably. We believe this is resulting in larger customer engagements, more predictable revenue as well as higher long-term revenue growth. In evaluating our Adobe Marketing Cloud revenue performance, we believe it is important to understand this licensing and revenue mix shift that is occurring with AEM and Adobe Campaign. In fiscal 2013, approximately 45% of our AEM and Adobe Campaign contracts were term-based. Entering fiscal 2014, based on our goal of migrating more of these solutions to be term-based, we expected a mix of approximately 60% term-based contracts for AEM and Adobe Campaign this fiscal year. Due to strong execution and customer demand, we saw an acceleration of term-based adoption of AEM and Adobe Campaign in fiscal 2014 and these solutions achieved approximately 75% term-based contracts this year. Financial Performance Summary for Fiscal 2014 Consistent with our strategy, during fiscal 2014 , our subscription revenue as a percentage of total revenue increased to 50% from 28% and 15% compared with fiscal 2013 and 2012 , respectively, as we have transitioned more of our business to a subscription-based model. We exited fiscal 2014 with 3.454 million paid Creative Cloud subscriptions, up 140% from 1.439 million at the end of fiscal 2013 . Total Digital Media ARR of approximately $1.95 billion as of November 28, 2014 increased by $1.00 billion , or 106% , from $944 million as of November 29, 2013 . The change in our Digital Media ARR was primarily due to increases in the number of paid Creative Cloud individual and team subscriptions and adoption of our enterprise Creative Cloud offering through our ETLAs. Adobe Marketing Cloud revenue of $1.17 billion increased by $154.3 million , or 15% , during fiscal 2014 , from $1.02 billion in fiscal 2013 , and $212.3 million , or 26% , during fiscal 2013 from $803.7 million in fiscal 2012 . The increases were primarily due to strong adoption of our AEM offering and the addition of Neolane which we acquired in the third quarter of fiscal 2013. Our total deferred revenue of $1.16 billion as of November 28, 2014 increased by $326.5 million , or 39% from $828.8 million as of November 29, 2013 , primarily due to increases in Creative Cloud subscriptions and ETLAs. To a lesser extent, new contracts and existing contract renewals for our Adobe Marketing Cloud services contributed to this increase as our retention rates for Adobe Marketing Cloud services have been improving slightly over time. Cost of revenue of $622.1 million increased by $35.5 million , or 6% , during fiscal 2014 , from $586.6 million in fiscal 2013 , and $102.8 million , or 21% , during fiscal 2013 from $483.8 million in fiscal 2012 . These increases were primarily due to increased hosting and server costs associated with our subscription and SaaS offerings, costs associated with compensation and related benefits driven by additional headcount and royalty costs. Operating expenses of $3.11 billion increased by $66.3 million , or 2% , during fiscal 2014 , from $3.05 billion in fiscal 2013 , and $306.3 million , or 11% , in fiscal 2013 from $2.74 billion in fiscal 2012 . These increases were primarily due to increased costs associated with compensation and related benefits. Net income of $268.4 million decreased by $21.6 million , or 7% , during fiscal 2014 from $290.0 million in fiscal 2013 , and $542.8 million, or 65%, during fiscal 2013 from $832.8 million in fiscal 2012. Net cash flow from operations of $1.29 billion during fiscal 2014 increased by $135.8 million , or 12% , from $1.15 billion during fiscal 2013 primarily due to cash inflows associated with the increases in deferred revenue and taxes payable, offset in part by lower net income. Net cash flow from operations during fiscal 2013 decreased by $347.9 million, or 23%, from $1.50 billion during fiscal 2012 primarily due to lower net income. 41 Table of Contents Revenue (dollars in millions) Fiscal 2014 Fiscal 2013 Fiscal 2012 % Change 2014-2013 % Change 2013-2012 Product $ 1,627.8 $ 2,470.1 $ 3,342.8 (34 )% (26 )% Percentage of total revenue 39 % 61 % 76 % Subscription 2,076.6 1,137.9 673.2 82 % 69 % Percentage of total revenue 50 % 28 % 15 % Services and support 442.7 447.2 387.7 (1 )% 15 % Percentage of total revenue 11 % 11 % 9 % Total revenue $ 4,147.1 $ 4,055.2 $ 4,403.7 2 % (8 )% Our subscription revenue is comprised primarily of fees we charge for our subscription and hosted service offerings including certain of our Adobe Marketing Cloud services and Creative Cloud. We recognize subscription revenue ratably over the term of agreements with our customers, beginning on the commencement of the service. We expect our subscription revenue will continue to increase as a result of our investments in new SaaS and subscription models. We also expect this to increase the amount of recurring revenue we generate as a percent of our total revenue. We have the following segments Digital Media, Digital Marketing and Print and Publishing. Subscription revenue by reportable segment for fiscal 2014 , 2013 and 2012 is as follows (dollars in millions): Fiscal 2014 Fiscal 2013 Fiscal 2012 % Change 2014-2013 % Change 2013-2012 Digital Media $ 1,268.3 $ 471.9 $ 116.8 169 % 304 % Digital Marketing 797.5 663.1 555.5 20 % 19 % Print and Publishing 10.8 2.9 0.9 * * Total subscription revenue $ 2,076.6 $ 1,137.9 $ 673.2 82 % 69 % _________________________________________ (*) Percentage is not meaningful. Our services and support revenue is comprised of consulting, training and maintenance and support, primarily related to the licensing of our enterprise, developer and platform products and the sale of our Adobe Marketing Cloud services. Our support revenue also includes technical support and developer support to partners and developer organizations related to our desktop products. Our maintenance and support offerings, which entitle customers to receive product upgrades and enhancements or technical support, depending on the offering, are generally recognized ratably over the term of the arrangement. Segments In fiscal 2014 , we categorized our products into the following segments: Digital Media Our Digital Media segment provides tools and solutions that enable individuals, small and medium businesses and enterprises to create, publish, promote and monetize their digital content anywhere. Our customers include traditional content creators, web application developers and digital media professionals, as well as their management in marketing departments and agencies, companies and publishers. Digital Marketing Our Digital Marketing segment provides solutions and services for how digital advertising and marketing are created, managed, executed, measured and optimized. Our customers include digital marketers, advertisers, publishers, merchandisers, web analysts, chief marketing officers, chief information officers and chief revenue officers. Print and Publishing Our Print and Publishing segment addresses market opportunities ranging from the diverse authoring and publishing needs of technical and business publishing to our legacy type and OEM printing businesses. 42 Table of Contents Segment Information (dollars in millions) Fiscal 2014 Fiscal 2013 Fiscal 2012 % Change 2014-2013 % Change 2013-2012 Digital Media $ 2,603.2 $ 2,625.9 $ 3,101.9 (1 )% (15 )% Percentage of total revenue 63 % 65 % 70 % Digital Marketing 1,355.2 1,228.8 1,085.0 10 % 13 % Percentage of total revenue 33 % 30 % 25 % Print and Publishing 188.7 200.5 216.8 (6 )% (8 )% Percentage of total revenue 4 % 5 % 5 % Total revenue $ 4,147.1 $ 4,055.2 $ 4,403.7 2 % (8 )% Fiscal 2014 Revenue Compared to Fiscal 2013 Revenue Digital Media Revenue from Digital Media decreased slightly during fiscal 2014 as compared to fiscal 2013. The slight decrease was primarily driven by declines in revenue associated with distribution of third-party software downloads and Hobbyist products launched in fiscal 2013. With respect to the Hobbyist product revenue decline, we are actively migrating customers to our Creative Cloud Photography Plan for which revenue is recognized ratably. Largely offsetting these decreases were increases in Creative Cloud and Document Services revenue. Revenue related to our creative professional products, which includes our Creative Cloud, Creative Suite editions and CS point products, increased during fiscal 2014 as compared to fiscal 2013 due to increases in revenue from subscriptions and ETLAs, partially offset by the decrease in revenue from CS point products and Creative Suite editions as we discontinued the general availability of our perpetually licensed CS6 products in the second quarter of 2014. Revenue associated with our other creative products decreased during fiscal 2014 as compared to fiscal 2013 primarily due to decreases associated with distribution of third-party software downloads and Hobbyist products launched in fiscal 2013. Additionally, actively migrating customers to our Creative Cloud Photography Plan is also contributing to the year-over-year decline in revenue. These decreases were offset in part by increases in revenue associated with our Digital Publishing Suite. For our creative offerings, the total number of perpetual units licensed decreased while the number of subscription units licensed increased during fiscal 2014 as compared to fiscal 2013 . Unit average selling prices for our perpetual units licensed decreased during fiscal 2014 as compared to fiscal 2013 . Document Services revenue, which includes our Acrobat product family, increased during fiscal 2014 as compared with the year-ago period primarily due to increases in our Acrobat Cloud Services revenue. The increases were slightly offset by decreases due to our continued shift to ETLAs. Within Document Services, excluding large enterprise license agreements, the number of units licensed decreased while the unit average selling prices remained stable during fiscal 2014, as compared with the year-ago period. Digital Marketing Revenue from Digital Marketing increased $126.3 million during fiscal 2014 as compared to fiscal 2013 due to continued revenue growth associated with our Adobe Marketing Cloud, which increased 15% during fiscal 2014 as compared with the year-ago period. Contributing to this increase was Adobe Campaign and the strong adoption of AEM. Print and Publishing Revenue from Print and Publishing decreased during fiscal 2014 as compared to fiscal 2013 primarily due to decreases in legacy product revenue and increased ETLAs for certain products in this group. Fiscal 2013 Revenue Compared to Fiscal 2012 Revenue Digital Media Revenue from Digital Media decreased $476.0 million during fiscal 2013 as compared to fiscal 2012 , primarily due to continued strong adoption of Creative Cloud and ETLAs as we continued to transition more of our business to a subscription-based model. 43 Table of Contents Revenue related to our creative professional products, which include our Creative Suite editions and CS point products as well as Creative Cloud, decreased during fiscal 2013 as compared to fiscal 2012 due to continued customer adoption of Creative Cloud subscription offerings, released in May 2012, for which revenue is recognized over time. Revenue associated with our other creative products increased during fiscal 2013 as compared to fiscal 2012 , primarily due to increases associated with distribution of third-party software downloads and our Digital Publishing Suite. These increases were partially offset by decreases in revenue associated with our Hobbyist products. For our creative offerings, the total number of perpetual units licensed decreased while the number of subscription units licensed increased during fiscal 2013 as compared to fiscal 2012 . Unit average selling prices for our perpetual units licensed decreased during the year ended fiscal 2013 as compared to fiscal 2012 . Document Services revenue, which includes our Acrobat product family, decreased slightly during fiscal 2013 as compared to fiscal 2012 , primarily due to the continued shift to ETLAs offset by increased Acrobat Cloud Services revenue including revenue generated from our EchoSign e-signing service. Within Document Services, excluding large enterprise license agreements, the number of units licensed decreased while the unit average selling prices increased during fiscal 2013 as compared to fiscal 2012 . Digital Marketing Revenue from Digital Marketing increased $143.8 million during fiscal 2013 as compared to fiscal 2012 . The increase was primarily due to continued revenue growth associated with our Adobe Marketing Cloud, which increased 26% during fiscal 2013 , as compared to the year ago period and includes Adobe Campaign revenue from our acquisition of Neolane in the third quarter of fiscal 2013. The increase noted above was partially offset by expected declines in revenue associated with our legacy products during fiscal 2013 . Print and Publishing Revenue from Print and Publishing decreased during fiscal 2013 as compared to fiscal 2012 , primarily due to increased ETLAs for certain products in this group. Geographical Information (dollars in millions) Fiscal 2014 Fiscal 2013 Fiscal 2012 % Change 2014-2013 % Change 2013-2012 Americas $ 2,314.4 $ 2,134.4 $ 2,196.4 8 % (3 )% Percentage of total revenue 56 % 53 % 50 % EMEA 1,179.9 1,129.2 1,294.6 4 % (13 )% Percentage of total revenue 28 % 28 % 29 % APAC 652.8 791.6 912.7 (18 )% (13 )% Percentage of total revenue 16 % 19 % 21 % Total revenue $ 4,147.1 $ 4,055.2 $ 4,403.7 2 % (8 )% Fiscal 2014 Revenue by Geography Compared to Fiscal 2013 Revenue by Geography Overall revenue during fiscal 2014 as compared to fiscal 2013 increased in the Americas and EMEA. Revenue in the Americas increased during fiscal 2014 as compared to the year-ago period due to increases in Digital Media and Digital Marketing revenue. Revenue in EMEA increased during fiscal 2014 as compared to the year-ago period primarily due to increases in Digital Marketing revenue. Digital Media and Print and Publishing revenue in EMEA remained relatively stable during fiscal 2014 compared to the year-ago period. Despite the strengthening of the U.S. Dollar against the Euro and the British Pound during the latter part of 2014, the overall weakening of the U.S. Dollar against these currencies during fiscal 2014 also caused revenue in EMEA to increase as compared to the year-ago period. Within the Americas and EMEA, the fluctuations in revenue by reportable segment were attributable to the factors noted in the segment information above. Revenue in APAC decreased during fiscal 2014 as compared to the year-ago period primarily as a result of decreases in Digital Media revenue due to slower adoption of Creative Cloud in Japan compared to other countries and the strengthening of the U.S. Dollar against the Japanese Yen and other Asian currencies during fiscal 2014 as compared to the year-ago period. Digital Marketing and Print and Publishing revenue in APAC remained relatively stable in fiscal 2014 compared to the year-ago period. 44 Table of Contents Fiscal 2013 Revenue by Geography Compared to Fiscal 2012 Revenue by Geography Revenue declined across all geographies during fiscal 2013 as compared to fiscal 2012 . Revenue in the Americas and APAC decreased during fiscal 2013 due to decreases in Digital Media and Print and Publishing revenue, offset in part by increases in Digital Marketing revenue. Revenue in EMEA decreased during fiscal 2013 due to decreases in Digital Media revenue, offset in part by increases in Digital Marketing and Print and Publishing revenue. Within each geographical region, the fluctuations in revenue by reportable segment were attributable to the factors noted in the segment information above. Included in the overall change in revenue for fiscal 2014 and fiscal 2013 were impacts associated with foreign currency as shown below. Our currency hedging program is used to mitigate a portion of the foreign currency impact to revenue. (in millions) Fiscal 2014 Fiscal 2013 Revenue impact: Increase/(Decrease) EMEA: Euro $ 12.3 $ 9.1 British Pound 12.9 (3.9 ) Other currencies (0.2 ) 0.6 Total EMEA 25.0 5.8 Japanese Yen (25.7 ) (63.6 ) Other currencies (8.9 ) (5.6 ) Total revenue impact (9.6 ) (63.4 ) Hedging impact: EMEA 10.1 3.7 Japanese Yen 8.6 32.3 Total hedging impact 18.7 36.0 Total impact $ 9.1 $ (27.4 ) During fiscal 2014, the U.S. Dollar strengthened against the Japanese Yen and other Asian currencies causing revenue in APAC measured in U.S. Dollar equivalents to decrease compared with the year-ago period. This decrease was offset by the favorable impact to revenue measured in EMEA currencies as the U.S. Dollar weakened against the Euro and the British Pound for the majority of fiscal 2014. Our EMEA and Yen currency hedging programs resulted in hedging gains during fiscal 2014. During fiscal 2013, the U.S. Dollar strengthened against the Japanese Yen and other Asian currencies causing revenue in APAC measured in U.S. Dollar equivalents to decrease compared with the year-ago period. This decrease was partially offset by the favorable impact to revenue measured in EMEA currencies as the U.S. Dollar generally weakened against these currencies. Our EMEA and Yen currency hedging programs resulted in hedging gains during fiscal 2013. See Note 18 of our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further geographic information. Product Backlog The actual amount of product backlog at any particular time may not be a meaningful indicator of future business prospects. Shippable backlog is comprised of unfulfilled orders, excluding those associated with new product releases, those pending credit review and those not shipped due to the application of our global inventory policy. We had minimal shippable backlog at the end of the fourth quarter of fiscal 2014 and fiscal 2013 . We expect that our shippable backlog will continue to be insignificant in future periods. The deferred revenue balance on our consolidated balance sheet does not represent the total contract value of annual or multi-year, non-cancellable subscription agreements. Unbilled deferred revenue represents expected future billings which are contractually committed under our existing subscription, SaaS and managed services agreements that have not been invoiced and are not recorded in deferred revenue within our financial statements. Our presentation of unbilled deferred revenue backlog may differ from that of other companies in the industry. As of November 28, 2014 , we had unbilled deferred revenue backlog of approximately $1.7 billion of which approximately 60% to 65% is not reasonably expected to be billed during fiscal 2015. As of November 29, 2013 , we had unbilled deferred revenue backlog of approximately $1.0 billion . 45 Table of Contents We expect that the amount of unbilled deferred revenue backlog will change from period to period due to certain factors, including the timing and duration of large customer subscription, SaaS and managed service agreements, varying billing cycles of these agreements, the timing of customer renewals, the timing of when unbilled deferred revenue backlog is to be billed, changes in customer financial circumstances and foreign currency fluctuations. Additionally, the unbilled deferred revenue backlog for multi-year subscription agreements that are billed annually is typically higher at the beginning of the contract period, lower prior to renewal and typically increases when the agreement is renewed. Accordingly, fluctuations in unbilled deferred revenue backlog may not be a reliable indicator of future business prospects and the related revenue associated with these contractual commitments. Cost of Revenue (dollars in millions) Fiscal 2014 Fiscal 2013 Fiscal 2012 % Change 2014-2013 % Change 2013-2012 Product $ 97.1 $ 138.2 $ 121.7 (30 )% 14 % Percentage of total revenue 2 % 3 % 3 % Subscription 335.5 278.1 219.1 21 % 27 % Percentage of total revenue 8 % 7 % 5 % Services and support 189.5 170.3 143.0 11 % 19 % Percentage of total revenue 5 % 4 % 3 % Total cost of revenue $ 622.1 $ 586.6 $ 483.8 6 % 21 % Product Cost of product revenue includes product packaging, third-party royalties, excess and obsolete inventory, amortization related to localization costs, purchased intangibles and acquired rights to use technology and the costs associated with the manufacturing of our products. Fluctuations in cost of product revenue are due to the following: % Change 2014-2013 % Change 2013-2012 Amortization of purchased intangibles and technology license arrangements (20 )% 27 % Cost of sales (4 ) (8 ) Royalty cost (2 ) Excess and obsolete inventory 1 (4 ) Various individually insignificant items (5 ) (1 ) Total change (30 )% 14 % Cost of product revenue decreased during fiscal 2014 as compared to fiscal 2013 primarily due to decreases in amortization of purchased intangibles and technology license arrangements, cost of sales and royalty costs, slightly offset by an increase in excess and obsolete inventory. Amortization of purchased intangibles and technology license arrangements decreased as compared with the year-ago period as we entered into certain technology licensing arrangements for which payments of $26.5 million related to historical use of certain technology licensing arrangements were expensed as cost of product revenue during fiscal 2013. Cost of sales decreased as compared with the year-ago period due to decreases in the number of perpetual units sold and associated packaging costs as we continue to focus our development and sales efforts on Creative Cloud. Royalty cost decreased as compared to the year-ago period primarily due to decreases in revenue from our perpetual offerings. Excess and obsolete inventory increased as compared to the year-ago period as a result of changes in reserve requirements for CS6 shrink boxes as we have discontinued the general availability of CS6 on a perpetual licensing basis. Cost of product revenue increased during fiscal 2013 as compared to fiscal 2012 primarily due to an increase in amortization of purchased intangibles and technology license arrangements offset by decreases in cost of sales and excess and obsolete inventory. Amortization of purchased intangibles and technology license arrangements increased as we entered into certain technology licensing arrangements totaling $51.8 million in the first quarter of fiscal 2013. Of this cost, an estimated $25.3 million was related to future licensing rights and was capitalized and is being amortized on a straight-line basis over the estimated useful lives ranging from five to ten years. The remaining cost of approximately $26.5 million was related to historical use of licensing rights and was expensed as cost of product revenue in fiscal 2013. In connection with certain of these licensing arrangements, we have the ability to acquire additional rights to use technology in the future. Cost of sales primarily decreased due to a decline in the number of perpetual units sold and packaging costs associated with our CS6 products as we focus our creative development efforts on our Creative Cloud offering. Excess and obsolete inventory decreased due to decreased reserve requirements for CS6 as we continue to transition to more of a subscription-based model. 46 Table of Contents Subscription Cost of subscription revenue consists of third-party royalties and expenses related to operating our network infrastructure, including depreciation expenses and operating lease payments associated with computer equipment, data center costs, salaries and related expenses of network operations, implementation, account management and technical support personnel, amortization of intangible assets and allocated overhead. We enter into contracts with third-parties for the use of their data center facilities and our data center costs largely consist of the amounts we pay to these third parties for rack space, power and similar items. Cost of subscription revenue increased due to the following: % Change 2014-2013 % Change 2013-2012 Data center cost 10 % 11 % Compensation cost and related benefits associated with headcount 4 5 Depreciation expense 3 3 Royalty cost 3 4 Amortization of purchased intangibles 4 Various individually insignificant items 1 Total change 21 % 27 % Cost of subscription revenue increased during fiscal 2014 as compared to fiscal 2013 primarily due to data center costs, compensation cost and related benefits, deprecation expense, and royalty cost. Data center costs increased as compared with the year-ago period primarily due to higher transaction volumes in our Adobe Marketing Cloud and Creative Cloud services. Compensation cost and related benefits increased as compared to the year-ago period primarily due to additional headcount in fiscal 2014, including from our acquisition of Neolane in the third quarter of fiscal 2013. Depreciation expense increased as compared to the year-ago period primarily due to higher capital expenditures in recent periods as we continue to invest in our network and data center infrastructure to support the growth of our business. Royalty cost increased primarily due to increases in subscriptions and downloads of our SaaS offerings. Cost of subscription revenue increased during fiscal 2013 as compared to fiscal 2012 primarily due to increased hosted server costs and amortization of purchased intangibles. Hosted server costs increased primarily due to increases in data center costs related to higher transaction volumes in our Adobe Marketing Cloud and Creative Cloud services, depreciation expense from higher capital expenditures in prior years and compensation and related benefits driven by additional headcount. Amortization of purchased intangibles increased primarily due to increased amortization of intangible assets purchased associated with our acquisitions of Behance and Neolane in fiscal 2013. Services and Support Cost of services and support revenue is primarily comprised of employee-related costs and associated costs incurred to provide consulting services, training and product support. Cost of services and support revenue increased during fiscal 2014 as compared to fiscal 2013 primarily due to increases in compensation and related benefits driven by additional headcount and third-party fees related to training and consulting services provided to our customers. Cost of services and support revenue increased during fiscal 2013 as compared to fiscal 2012 primarily due to increases in third-party fees related to training and consulting services provided to our customers and compensation and related benefits driven by additional headcount, including headcount from our acquisition of Neolane in fiscal 2013. 47 Table of Contents Operating Expenses (dollars in millions) Fiscal 2014 Fiscal 2013 Fiscal 2012 % Change 2014-2013 % Change 2013-2012 Research and development $ 844.4 $ 826.6 $ 742.8 2 % 11 % Percentage of total revenue 20 % 20 % 17 % Sales and marketing 1,652.3 1,620.5 1,516.1 2 % 7 % Percentage of total revenue 40 % 40 % 34 % General and administrative 543.3 520.1 435.0 4 % 20 % Percentage of total revenue 13 % 13 % 10 % Restructuring and other charges 19.9 26.5 (2.9 ) (25 )% * Percentage of total revenue % 1 % % Amortization of purchased intangibles 52.4 52.3 48.7 % 7 % Percentage of total revenue 1 % 1 % 1 % Total operating expenses $ 3,112.3 $ 3,046.0 $ 2,739.7 2 % 11 % _________________________________________ (*) Percentage is greater than 100%. Research and Development, Sales and Marketing and General and Administrative Expenses The increase in research and development and general and administrative expenses during fiscal 2014 as compared to fiscal 2013 is primarily due to increases in cash incentive and stock-based compensation. The increase in stock-based compensation was driven by a change in the vesting term for stock awards granted as part of our annual review process beginning in fiscal 2013, which decreased the term from four years to three years. The increase in sales and marketing expense during fiscal 2014 as compared to fiscal 2013 is primarily due to compensation and related benefits associated with additional headcount. The increase in research and development, sales and marketing and general and administrative expenses during fiscal 2013 as compared to fiscal 2012 is primarily due to higher cash incentive compensation program achievement in fiscal 2013, increases in stock-based compensation expense due to higher share prices during fiscal 2013 as compared to fiscal 2012 as well as a shorter vesting term which decreased from four years to three years for stock awards granted as part of our annual review process during fiscal 2013. Research and Development Research and development expenses consist primarily of salary and benefit expenses for software developers, contracted development efforts, related facilities costs and expenses associated with computer equipment used in software development. Research and development expenses increased due to the following: % Change 2014-2013 % Change 2013-2012 Compensation associated with cash and stock-based incentives 2 % 7 % Compensation and related benefits associated with headcount 3 Various individually insignificant items 1 Total change 2 % 11 % We believe that investments in research and development, including the recruiting and hiring of software developers, are critical to remain competitive in the marketplace and are directly related to continued timely development of new and enhanced products. We will continue to focus on long-term opportunities available in our end markets and make significant investments in the development of our application, tool and service offerings. Sales and Marketing Sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of salary and benefit expenses, sales commissions, travel expenses and related facilities costs for our sales, marketing, order management and global supply chain management personnel. Sales and marketing expenses also include the costs of programs aimed at increasing revenue, such as advertising, trade shows, public relations and other market development programs. Sales and marketing expenses for fiscal 2014 are lower than what was reported in our December 11, 2014 earnings press release by $19.5 million reflecting an update to our sales commission expense based on information received following the date of our press release. 48 Table of Contents Sales and marketing expenses increased due to the following: % Change 2014-2013 % Change 2013-2012 Compensation and related benefits associated with headcount 1 % 4 % Compensation associated with cash and stock-based incentives 4 Various individually insignificant items 1 (1 ) Total change 2 % 7 % General and Administrative General and administrative expenses consist primarily of compensation and benefit expenses, travel expenses and related facilities costs for our finance, facilities, human resources, legal, information services and executive personnel. General and administrative expenses also include outside legal and accounting fees, provision for bad debts, expenses associated with computer equipment and software used in the administration of the business, charitable contributions and various forms of insurance. General and administrative expenses increased due to the following: % Change 2014-2013 % Change 2013-2012 Compensation associated with cash and stock-based incentives 3 % 4 % Compensation and related benefits associated with headcount growth 4 Loss contingency 2 Professional and consulting fees (2 ) 7 Charitable contributions 2 Various individually insignificant items 1 3 Total change 4 % 20 % See Note 15 of our Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further information regarding the loss contingency. Professional and consulting fees increased during fiscal 2013 as compared to fiscal 2012 primarily due to increased professional and legal fees including those associated with the attacks on our network discovered in September 2013. Restructuring and Other Charges During the past several years, we have initiated various restructuring plans. During fiscal 2014, in connection with our recent Fiscal 2014 Restructuring Plan, we recorded $19.4 million associated with termination benefits and closing redundant facilities. In connection with our Other Restructuring Plans, we recorded insignificant charges associated with closing redundant facilities. We also recorded minor adjustments for changes in previous estimates during the fiscal year. During fiscal 2013, management approved a plan to sell land, building and other assets located in Waltham, Massachusetts (the "Waltham property assets") with a total carrying amount of $47.4 million . As of May 31, 2013, we classified the Waltham property assets as held for sale at $23.6 million representing their fair value, net of estimated costs to sell which was the lesser of the fair value less cost to sell or carrying amount of the assets. As a result, we recorded a write-down of $23.8 million during fiscal 2013. In September 2013, we finalized the sale of the Waltham property assets for net proceeds of $24.3 million which approximated the carrying value of the assets at the time of sale. Also during fiscal 2013, in connection with our Fiscal 2011 Restructuring Plan and Other Restructuring Plans, we recorded $6.3 million associated with termination benefits and closing redundant facilities. We also recorded $3.0 million in net favorable employee termination and facility related adjustments for changes in previous estimates during the fiscal year. During fiscal 2012, in connection with our Fiscal 2011 Restructuring Plan and Other Restructuring Plans, we recorded $17.4 million associated with termination benefits and closing redundant facilities. We also recorded $20.3 million in net favorable employee termination and facility related adjustments for changes in previous estimates during the fiscal year. See Note 10 of our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further information regarding our restructuring plans. 49 Table of Contents Amortization of Purchased Intangibles During the last several years, we have completed a number of business combinations and asset acquisitions. As a result of these acquisitions, we purchased intangible assets that are being amortized over their estimated useful lives ranging from one to fourteen years. Amortization expense remained stable during fiscal 2014 as compared to fiscal 2013. Amortization expense increased 7% during fiscal 2013 as compared to fiscal 2012 primarily due to amortization expense associated with intangible assets purchased through our acquisitions of Behance and Neolane in fiscal 2013. Non-Operating Income (Expense), Net (dollars in millions) Fiscal 2014 Fiscal 2013 Fiscal 2012 % Change 2014-2013 % Change 2013-2012 Interest and other income (expense), net $ 7.3 $ 4.9 $ (3.4 ) 49 % * Percentage of total revenue ** ** ** Interest expense (59.7 ) (67.5 ) (67.5 ) (12 )% % Percentage of total revenue (1 )% (2 )% (2 )% Investment gains (losses), net 1.1 (4.0 ) 9.5 * * Percentage of total revenue ** ** ** Total non-operating income (expense), net $ (51.3 ) $ (66.6 ) $ (61.4 ) (23 )% 8 % _________________________________________ (*) Percentage is not meaningful. (**) Percentage is less than 1%. Interest and Other Income (Expense), Net Interest and other income (expense), net consists primarily of interest earned on cash, cash equivalents and short-term fixed income investments. Interest and other income (expense), net also includes gains and losses on fixed income investments and foreign exchange gains and losses other than any gains recorded to revenue from hedging Euros, British Pounds and Yen currencies. Interest and other income (expense), net increased in fiscal 2014 as compared to fiscal 2013 primarily due to decreased foreign currency losses and increased realized gains on fixed income investments. The increases were partially offset by decreased interest income on our investment in lease receivable due to the purchase of the East and West Towers during fiscal 2014. See Note 15 of our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further details regarding our investment in lease receivables. Interest and other income (expense), net increased in fiscal 2013 as compared to fiscal 2012 primarily due to decreased foreign exchange losses. Interest Expense Interest expense primarily represents interest associated with our senior notes and interest rate swaps. Interest on our senior notes is payable semi-annually, in arrears, on February 1 and August 1. Floating interest payments on the interest rate swaps are paid monthly. The fixed-rate interest receivable on the swaps is received semi-annually concurrent with the senior notes interest payments. Interest expense decreased during fiscal 2014 as compared to fiscal 2013 due to the favorable impact of the interest rate swaps. See Notes 5 and 13 of our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further details regarding our interest rate swaps. Interest expense remained relatively stable during fiscal 2013 as compared to fiscal 2012. Investment Gains (Losses), Net Investment gains (losses), net consists principally of realized gains or losses from the sale of marketable equity investments, other-than-temporary declines in the value of marketable and non-marketable equity securities and unrealized holding gains and losses associated with our deferred compensation plan assets (classified as trading securities) and gains and losses associated with our direct and indirect investments in privately held companies. 50 Table of Contents Investment gains (losses), net fluctuated due to the following (in millions): Fiscal 2014 Fiscal 2013 Fiscal 2012 Net gains related to our trading securities $ 1.9 $ 3.0 $ 1.6 Net losses related to our direct and indirect investments in privately held companies (0.8 ) (0.2 ) Write-downs due to other-than-temporary declines in value of our marketable and non-marketable equity securities (7.0 ) (0.1 ) Gains from sale of marketable equity securities 8.2 Total investment gains (losses), net $ 1.1 $ (4.0 ) $ 9.5 During fiscal 2014, total investment gains (losses), net increased to net gains primarily due to write-downs for other-than-temporary declines in value of our direct investments in privately held companies in fiscal 2013 that did not recur in fiscal 2014, offset in part by a decrease in net gains related to our trading securities. During fiscal 2013, total investment gains (losses), net decreased to net losses primarily due to a decrease in net realized gains from the sale of marketable equity securities and an increase in write-downs for other-than-temporary declines in value of our direct investments in privately held companies. Provision for Income Taxes (dollars in millions) Fiscal 2014 Fiscal 2013 Fiscal 2012 % Change 2014-2013 % Change 2013-2012 Provision $ 93.0 $ 66.2 $ 286.0 40 % (77 )% Percentage of total revenue 2 % 2 % 6 % Effective tax rate 26 % 19 % 26 % Our effective tax rate increased by approximately seven percentage points during fiscal 2014 as compared to fiscal 2013. The increase was primarily due to the expiration of the federal research and development tax credit in December 2013 and stronger domestic profits for fiscal 2014. Our effective tax rate decreased by approximately seven percentage points during fiscal 2013 as compared to fiscal 2012. The decrease is primarily related to the reinstatement of the U.S. research and development credit and tax benefits recognized as a result of the completion of certain income tax examinations. In December 2014, the United States Congress passed an extension of the federal research and development tax credit through December 31, 2014. As a result, we expect that our income tax provision for the first quarter of fiscal 2015 will include a discrete tax benefit which will reduce our effective tax rate for the quarter and to a lesser extent the effective annual tax rate. We are a United States-based multinational company subject to tax in multiple U.S. and foreign tax jurisdictions. A significant portion of our foreign earnings for the current fiscal year were earned by our Irish subsidiaries. In addition to providing for U.S. income taxes on earnings from the U.S., we provide for U.S. income taxes on the earnings of foreign subsidiaries unless the subsidiaries earnings are considered permanently reinvested outside the U.S. While we do not anticipate changing our intention regarding permanently reinvested earnings, if certain foreign earnings previously treated as permanently reinvested are repatriated, the related U.S. tax liability may be reduced by any foreign income taxes paid on these earnings. Currently, there are a significant amount of foreign earnings upon which U.S. income taxes have not been provided. See Note 9 of our Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further information on our provision for income taxes. Accounting for Uncertainty in Income Taxes The gross liability for unrecognized tax benefits at November 28, 2014 was $148.8 million , exclusive of interest and penalties. If the total unrecognized tax benefits at November 28, 2014 were recognized in the future, $136.2 million of unrecognized tax benefits would decrease the effective tax rate, which is net of an estimated $12.6 million federal benefit related to deducting certain payments on future state tax returns. As of November 28, 2014 , the combined amount of accrued interest and penalties related to tax positions taken on our tax returns was approximately $14.6 million . This amount is included in non-current income taxes payable. The timing of the resolution of income tax examinations is highly uncertain as are the amounts and timing of tax payments that are part of any audit settlement process. These events could cause large fluctuations in the balance sheet classification of 51 Table of Contents current and non-current assets and liabilities. We believe that within the next 12 months, it is reasonably possible that either certain audits will conclude or statutes of limitations on certain income tax examination periods will expire, or both. Given the uncertainties described above, we can only determine a range of estimated potential decreases in underlying unrecognized tax benefits ranging from $0 to approximately $5 million . In July 2013 , a U.S. income tax examination covering fiscal 2008 and 2009 was completed. Our accrued tax and interest related to these years was $48.4 million and was previously reported in long-term income taxes payable. We settled the tax obligation resulting from this examination with cash and income tax assets totaling $41.2 million , and the resulting $7.2 million income tax benefit was recorded in the third quarter of fiscal 2013. LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES This data should be read in conjunction with our Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows. As of (in millions) November 28, 2014 November 29, 2013 Cash and cash equivalents $ 1,117.4 $ 834.6 Short-term investments $ 2,622.1 $ 2,339.2 Working capital $ 2,107.9 $ 2,520.3 Stockholders equity $ 6,775.9 $ 6,724.6 A summary of our cash flows is as follows: (in millions) Fiscal 2014 Fiscal 2013 Fiscal 2012 Net cash provided by operating activities $ 1,287.5 $ 1,151.7 $ 1,499.6 Net cash used for investing activities (490.7 ) (1,177.8 ) (834.7 ) Net cash used for financing activities (507.3 ) (559.1 ) (234.7 ) Effect of foreign currency exchange rates on cash and cash equivalents (6.7 ) (5.2 ) 5.4 Net increase (decrease) in cash and cash equivalents $ 282.8 $ (590.4 ) $ 435.6 Our primary source of cash is receipts from revenue. The primary uses of cash are payroll related expenses, general operating expenses including marketing, travel and office rent, and cost of revenue. Other sources of cash are proceeds from the exercise of employee options and participation in the employee stock purchase plan. Other uses of cash include our stock repurchase program, which is described below, business acquisitions and purchases of property and equipment. Cash Flows from Operating Activities For fiscal 2014, net cash provided by operating activities of $1.3 billion was primarily comprised of net income plus the net effect of non-cash items. The primary working capital sources of cash were net income coupled with increases in deferred revenue and accrued expenses. The increase in deferred revenue is primarily due to increased subscription and ETLA activity for our individual, team and enterprise Creative Cloud offerings and increases in Digital Marketing and Digital Publishing hosted services, offset in part by decreases in billings for our maintenance and Creative product software upgrade plans which we discontinued in January 2013. Accrued expenses increased primarily due to accruals for contract terminations and employee transition payments associated with business realignment initiatives implemented in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2014. For fiscal 2013, net cash provided by operating activities of $1.2 billion was primarily comprised of net income plus the net effect of non-cash items. The primary working capital sources of cash were net income coupled with increases in deferred revenue and accrued expenses and decreases in trade receivables. Deferred revenue increased primarily due to increased subscription and ETLA activity for our Creative Cloud offering and increases in Digital Marketing hosted services, offset in part by decreases in billings for our maintenance and Creative product software upgrade plans which we discontinued in January 2013. Accrued expenses increased primarily due to amounts due under our fiscal 2013 annual incentive plan and sales commission accruals associated with higher achievement levels. Trade receivables declined primarily due to lower perpetual license revenue levels and improved collections compared to the fourth quarter of fiscal 2012. The primary working capital uses of cash were decreases in taxes payable and increases in prepaid expenses and other assets. The decrease in taxes payable is largely attributed to tax payments made combined with audit settlement adjustments, offset in part by tax expense and other adjustments during fiscal 2013. Prepaid expenses and other assets increased primarily due to 52 Table of Contents increases in short-term income tax receivables related to the carryback of R&D and foreign tax credits in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2013. For fiscal 2012, net cash provided by operating activities of $1.5 billion was primarily comprised of net income plus the net effect of non-cash items. The primary working capital sources of cash were net income coupled with increases in deferred revenue and decreases in trade receivables. Deferred revenue increased primarily due to an increase in activity for both upgrade plans with support and site and term licenses largely associated with our Digital Media and Digital Marketing enterprise license agreements. The decrease in trade receivables is primarily related to an increase in revenue linearity and improved collections in our Digital Marketing portfolio offset in part by higher revenue levels due to the CS6 product release which occurred late in the second quarter of fiscal 2012. The primary working capital uses of cash were decreases in accrued restructuring and trade payables. Decreases in accrued restructuring primarily related to payments and adjustments for employee terminations and facility exit costs associated with the Fiscal 2011 Restructuring Plan, a significant portion of which were paid and adjusted in the first and second quarters of fiscal 2012. Trade payables decreased primarily due to the timing of payments as a greater number of invoices were paid prior to the fiscal year end in fiscal 2012 as compared to fiscal 2011. Cash Flows from Investing Activities For fiscal 2014, net cash used for investing activities of $490.7 million was primarily due to purchases of short-term investments, purchases of property and equipment and a business acquisition. These cash outflows were offset in part by sales and maturities of short-term investments. For fiscal 2013, net cash used for investing activities of $1,177.8 million was primarily due to our acquisitions of Neolane and Behance. Other uses of cash during fiscal 2013 represented purchases of short-term investments, purchases of property and equipment associated with our construction projects in Oregon and India and purchases of long-term technology licenses. These cash outflows were offset in part by sales and maturities of short-term investments and the sale of the Waltham Property. See Note 2 of our Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further information regarding our acquisitions of Neolane and Behance. For fiscal 2012, net cash used for investing activities of $834.7 million was primarily due to our acquisition of Efficient Frontier in the first quarter of fiscal 2012. Other uses of cash during fiscal 2012 represented purchases of short-term investments and property and equipment, offset in part by sales and maturities of short-term investments. See Note 2 of our Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further information regarding our acquisition of Efficient Frontier. Cash Flows from Financing Activities For fiscal 2014 , fiscal 2013 and fiscal 2012 , net cash used for financing activities of $507.3 million , $559.1 million and $234.7 million , respectively, was primarily due to payments for our treasury stock repurchases and costs associated with the issuance of treasury stock, offset in part by proceeds from the issuance of treasury stock and excess tax benefits from stock-based compensation. See the section titled Stock Repurchase Program discussed below. We expect to continue our investing activities, including short-term and long-term investments, venture capital, facilities expansion and purchases of computer systems for research and development, sales and marketing, product support and administrative staff. Furthermore, cash reserves may be used to repurchase stock under our stock repurchase program and to strategically acquire companies, products or technologies that are complementary to our business. In December 2014, we entered into a definitive agreement under which we expect to acquire Fotolia for approximately $800 million in cash. We expect to finance the acquisition using existing cash, cash equivalents and short-term investment balances, newly issued debt or drawings from our existing revolving credit agreement. We believe that these resources, in addition to cash generated from operations, will be sufficient to fund the acquisition. See Note 2 of our Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further information regarding our acquisition of Fotolia. Restructuring During the past several years, we have initiated various restructuring plans. Currently, the Fiscal 2014 Restructuring Plan is the only plan of significance to us as we consider our restructuring plans initiated in prior years to be substantially complete. As of November 28, 2014 , we have accrued total restructuring charges of $22.3 million of which approximately $15.0 million relates to ongoing termination benefits that are expected to be paid during fiscal 2015. The remaining $7.3 million relates to the cost of closing redundant facilities and are expected to be paid under contract through fiscal 2021 of which approximately 45% will be paid through 2016. During fiscal 2014, we made payments related to our restructuring plans totaling $11.0 million 53 Table of Contents which consisted of $5.7 million and $5.3 million in payments related to termination benefits and contract terminations and the closing of redundant facilities, respectively. As of November 29, 2013 , we accrued total restructuring charges of $13.9 million of which approximately $11.7 million related to cost of closing redundant facilities. The remaining accrued restructuring charges of $2.2 million related to the cost of termination benefits and contract terminations. During fiscal 2013, we made payments related to the above restructuring plans totaling $10.3 million which consisted of $1.3 million and $9.0 million in payments related to termination benefits and contract terminations and the closing of redundant facilities, respectively. As of November 30, 2012, we accrued total restructuring charges of $21.6 million of which $2.3 million related to ongoing termination benefits and contract terminations. The remaining accrued restructuring charges of $19.3 million related to the cost of closing redundant facilities. During fiscal 2012, we made payments related to restructuring plans totaling $63.1 million which consisted of $50.5 million and $12.6 million in payments related to termination benefits and contract terminations and the closing of redundant facilities, respectively. We believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents, short-term investments and cash generated from operations will be sufficient to meet the cash outlays for the restructuring actions described above. See Note 10 of our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information regarding our restructuring plans. Other Liquidity and Capital Resources Considerations Our existing cash, cash equivalents and investment balances may fluctuate during fiscal 2015 due to changes in our planned cash outlay, including changes in incremental costs such as direct and integration costs related to our acquisitions. Our cash and investments totaled $3.7 billion as of November 28, 2014 . Of this amount, approximately 80% was held by our foreign subsidiaries and subject to material repatriation tax effects. Our intent is to permanently reinvest a significant portion of our earnings from foreign operations, and current plans do not anticipate that we will need funds generated from foreign operations to fund our domestic operations. In the event funds from foreign operations are needed to fund operations in the United States and if U.S. tax has not already been previously provided, we would provide for and pay additional U.S. taxes in connection with repatriating these funds. Cash from operations could also be affected by various risks and uncertainties, including, but not limited to the risks detailed in Part I, Item 1A titled Risk Factors . However, based on our current business plan and revenue prospects, we believe that our existing cash, cash equivalents and investment balances, our anticipated cash flows from operations and our available credit facility will be sufficient to meet our working capital and operating resource expenditure requirements for the next twelve months. On March 2, 2012, we entered into a five-year $1.0 billion senior unsecured revolving credit agreement (the Credit Agreement ), providing for loans to us and certain of our subsidiaries. On March 1, 2013, we exercised our option under the Credit Agreement to extend the maturity date of the Credit Agreement by one year to March 2, 2018. As of November 28, 2014 , there were no outstanding borrowings under this Credit Agreement and the entire $1.0 billion credit line remains available for borrowing. As of November 28, 2014 , the amount outstanding under our senior notes was $1.5 billion , consisting of $600 million of 3.25% senior notes due February 1, 2015 (the 2015 Notes ) and $900 million of 4.75% senior notes due February 1, 2020 (the 2020 Notes ). During the first quarter of fiscal 2014, we reclassified $599.8 million as current debt on our Consolidated Balance Sheets, which represented the 2015 Notes, net of unamortized original issuance discount. We intend to refinance the current portion of our debt on or before the due date using either newly issued debt or drawings from our existing revolving credit agreement. In anticipation of this refinancing, we entered into an interest rate lock agreement with a large financial institution subsequent to November 28, 2014 , which fixed a benchmark U.S. Treasury rate for an aggregate notional amount of $600.0 million . This derivative agreement hedges the impact on future interest payments attributable to changes in the benchmark interest rate and will be terminated upon the debt issuance. We use professional investment management firms to manage a large portion of our invested cash. External investment firms managed, on average, 82% of our consolidated invested balances during fiscal 2014 . The fixed income portfolio is primarily invested in corporate bonds and commercial paper, foreign government securities, money market mutual funds, municipal securities, U.S. agency securities and U.S. Treasury securities. 54 Table of Contents Stock Repurchase Program We are currently repurchasing common stock under our $2.0 billion authority granted by our Board of Directors in April 2012. Subsequent to November 28, 2014 , as part of our $2.0 billion stock repurchase program, we entered into a structured stock repurchase agreement with a large financial institution whereupon we provided them with a prepayment of $200.0 million . This amount will be classified as treasury stock on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. Upon completion of the $200.0 million stock repurchase agreement, there is no remaining balance under our current authority. Subsequent to November 28, 2014 , the Board of Directors approved a new stock repurchase program granting the company authority to repurchase up to $2.0 billion in common stock through the end of fiscal 2017. The new stock repurchase program approved by our Board of Directors is similar to our previous $2.0 billion stock repurchase program. During fiscal 2014 , 2013 and 2012 , we entered into structured stock repurchase agreements with large financial institutions, whereupon we provided them with prepayments totaling $600.0 million , $1.1 billion and $405.0 million , respectively. The $600.0 million and $1.1 billion prepayments during fiscal 2014 and 2013 , respectively, were under the $2.0 billion stock repurchase authority. Of the $405.0 million of prepayments during fiscal 2012 , $100.0 million were under the $2.0 billion stock repurchase program and the remaining $305.0 million were under our previous $1.6 billion stock repurchase authority. We enter into these agreements in order to take advantage of repurchasing shares at a guaranteed discount to the Volume Weighted Average Price ( VWAP ) of our common stock over a specified period of time. We only enter into such transactions when the discount that we receive is higher than the foregone return on our cash prepayments to the financial institutions. There were no explicit commissions or fees on these structured repurchases. Under the terms of the agreements, there is no requirement for the financial institutions to return any portion of the prepayment to us. The financial institutions agree to deliver shares to us at monthly intervals during the contract term. The parameters used to calculate the number of shares deliverable are: the total notional amount of the contract, the number of trading days in the contract, the number of trading days in the interval and the average VWAP of our stock during the interval less the agreed upon discount. During fiscal 2014 , we repurchased approximately 10.9 million shares at an average price of $63.48 through structured repurchase agreements entered into during fiscal 2014 . During fiscal 2013 , we repurchased approximately 21.6 million shares at an average price of $46.47 through structured repurchase agreements entered into during fiscal 2013 and fiscal 2012. During fiscal 2012 , we repurchased approximately 11.5 million shares at an average price per share of $32.29 through structured repurchase agreements entered into during fiscal 2012. For fiscal 2014 , 2013 and 2012 , the prepayments were classified as treasury stock on our Consolidated Balance Sheets at the payment date, though only shares physically delivered to us by November 28, 2014 , November 29, 2013 and November 30, 2012 were excluded from the computation of earnings per share. As of November 28, 2014 , $40.3 million of prepayments remained under the agreement. See Note 13 of our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion of our stock repurchase programs. See Item 5, Market for Registrant Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities for share repurchases during the quarter ended November 28, 2014 . Summary of Stock Repurchases for Fiscal 2014 , 2013 and 2012 (in thousands, except average amounts) Board Approval Date Repurchases Under the Plan 2014 2013 2012 Shares Average Shares Average Shares Average June 2010 Structured repurchases (1) $ $ 9,482 $ 32.17 April 2012 Structured repurchases (1) 10,852 $ 63.48 21,603 $ 46.47 2,038 $ 32.87 Total shares 10,852 $ 63.48 21,603 $ 46.47 11,520 $ 32.29 Total cost $688,902 $1,003,794 $371,995 _________________________________________ (1) Stock repurchase agreements executed with large financial institutions. See Stock Repurchase Program above. Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements and Aggregate Contractual Obligations Our principal commitments as of November 28, 2014 consist of obligations under operating leases, capital leases, royalty agreements and various service agreements. See Note 15 of our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information regarding our contractual commitments . 55 Table of Contents Contractual Obligations The following table summarizes our contractual obligations as of November 28, 2014 (in millions): Payment Due by Period Total Less than 1 year 1-3 years 3-5 years More than 5 years Notes $ 1,744.9 $ 652.5 $ 85.5 $ 85.5 $ 921.4 Operating lease obligations 202.6 42.6 67.4 46.8 45.8 Capital lease obligations 3.3 3.3 Purchase obligations 288.9 227.9 42.2 18.8 Total $ 2,239.7 $ 926.3 $ 195.1 $ 151.1 $ 967.2 Senior Notes In February 2010, we issued $600.0 million of 3.25% senior notes due February 1, 2015 and $900.0 million of 4.75% senior notes due February 1, 2020 . Interest on our senior notes is payable semi-annually, in arrears on February 1 and August 1. At November 28, 2014 , our maximum commitment for interest payments under the senior notes was $244.9 million for the remaining duration of our senior notes. In June of fiscal 2014, we entered into interest rate swaps that effectively converted the fixed interest rate on our 2020 Notes to a floating interest rate based on the London Interbank Offered Rate ( LIBOR ) plus a fixed number of basis points through February 1, 2020. Capital Lease Obligation In January 2013, we entered into a sale-leaseback agreement to sell equipment totaling $25.7 million and leaseback the same equipment over a period of 24 months. This transaction was classified as a capital lease obligation and was recorded at fair value. Covenants Our credit facility contains a financial covenant requiring us not to exceed a maximum leverage ratio. Our Almaden Tower lease includes certain financial ratios as defined in the lease agreements that are reported to the lessors quarterly. As of November 28, 2014 , we were in compliance with all of our covenants. We believe these covenants will not impact our credit or cash in the coming fiscal year or restrict our ability to execute our business plan. Our senior notes do not contain any financial covenants. Under the terms of our credit agreement and lease agreements, we are not prohibited from paying cash dividends unless payment would trigger an event of default or one currently exists. We do not anticipate paying any cash dividends in the foreseeable future. Accounting for Uncertainty in Income Taxes The gross liability for unrecognized tax benefits at November 28, 2014 was $148.8 million , exclusive of interest and penalties. The timing of the resolution of income tax examinations is highly uncertain as are the amounts and timing of tax payments that are part of any audit settlement process. These events could cause large fluctuations in the balance sheet classification of current and non-current assets and liabilities. We believe that within the next 12 months, it is reasonably possible that either certain audits will conclude or statutes of limitations on certain income tax examination periods will expire, or both. Given the uncertainties described above, we can only determine a range of estimated potential decreases in underlying unrecognized tax benefits ranging from $0 to approximately $5 million . Royalties We have certain royalty commitments associated with the shipment and licensing of certain products. Royalty expense is generally based on a dollar amount per unit shipped or a percentage of the underlying revenue. Indemnifications In the normal course of business, we provide indemnifications of varying scope to customers against claims of intellectual property infringement made by third parties arising from the use of our products and from time to time, we are subject to claims by our customers under these indemnification provisions. Historically, costs related to these indemnification provisions have not 56 Table of Contents been significant and we are unable to estimate the maximum potential impact of these indemnification provisions on our future results of operations. To the extent permitted under Delaware law, we have agreements whereby we indemnify our directors and officers for certain events or occurrences while the director or officer is or was serving at our request in such capacity. The indemnification period covers all pertinent events and occurrences during the director or officer lifetime. The maximum potential amount of future payments we could be required to make under these indemnification agreements is unlimited; however, we have director and officer insurance coverage that limits our exposure and enables us to recover a portion of any future amounts paid. 
