CIK: 796343
Company Name: ADOBE SYSTEMS INC
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2013-01-22


ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our Consolidated Financial Statements and Notes thereto. In addition to historical information, this Annual Report on Form 10-K contains forward-looking statements, including statements regarding product plans, future growth and market opportunities which involve risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from these forward-looking statements. Factors that might cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those discussed in the section titled Risk Factors in Part 1, Item 1A of this report. You should carefully review the risks described herein and in other documents we file from time to time with the Securities and Exchange Commission ( SEC ), including our Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q to be filed in fiscal 2013. When used in this report, the words will, expects, could, would, may, anticipates, intends, plans, believes, seeks, targets, estimates, looks for, looks to, continues and similar expressions, as well as statements regarding our focus for the future, are generally intended to identify forward-looking statements. You should not place undue reliance on these forward-looking statements which speak only as of the date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We undertake no obligation to publicly release any revisions to the forward-looking statements or reflect events or circumstances after the date of this document. BUSINESS OVERVIEW Founded in 1982, Adobe Systems Incorporated is one of the largest and most diversified software companies in the world. We offer a line of software and services used by creative professionals, marketers, knowledge workers, application developers, enterprises and consumers for creating, managing, delivering, measuring, optimizing and engaging with compelling content and experiences across multiple operating systems, devices and media. We market and license our software directly to enterprise customers through our sales force and to end users through app stores and our own website at www.adobe.com. We also distribute our products through a network of distributors, value-added resellers ( VARs ), systems integrators, independent software vendors ( ISVs ), retailers and original equipment manufacturers ( OEMs ). In addition, we license our technology to hardware manufacturers, software developers and service providers for use in their products and solutions. We offer some of our products via a Software-as-a-Service ( SaaS ) model (also known as a hosted or cloud-based model) as well as through term subscription and pay-per-use models. Our software runs on personal computers ( PCs ) and server-based computers, as well as on smartphones, tablets and other devices, depending on the product. We have operations in the Americas, Europe, Middle East and Africa ( EMEA ) and Asia-Pacific ( APAC ). ACQUISITIONS On January 13, 2012 , we completed the acquisition of privately held Efficient Frontier, a multi-channel digital ad buying and optimization company. During the first quarter of fiscal 2012, we began integrating Efficient Frontier into our Digital Marketing segment, however, the impact of this acquisition was not material to our consolidated balance sheets and results of operations. During fiscal 2011, we completed six business combinations and two asset acquisitions with aggregate purchase prices totaling approximately $328.3 million . We have included the financial results of the business combinations in our consolidated results of operations beginning on the respective acquisition dates, however, the impact of these acquisitions was not material to our consolidated balance sheets and results of operations. On October 28, 2010 , we completed the acquisition of Day, a provider of Web Experience Management ( WEM ), digital asset management and social collaboration solutions based in Basel, Switzerland and Boston, Massachusetts for approximately $248.3 million . We have included the financial results of Day in our consolidated results of operations beginning on the acquisition date, however, the impact of this acquisition was not material to our consolidated balance sheets and results of operations in fiscal 2010. Following the closing, we integrated Day as a product line within our Digital Marketing segment for financial reporting purposes. See Note 2 of our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further information regarding these acquisitions. CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES In preparing our consolidated financial statements in accordance with GAAP and pursuant to the rules and regulations of the SEC, we make assumptions, judgments and estimates that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses, and related disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities. We base our assumptions, judgments and estimates on historical experience and various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results could differ materially from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. On a regular basis, we evaluate our assumptions, judgments and estimates. We also discuss our critical accounting policies and estimates with the Audit Committee of the Board of Directors. 55 Table of Contents We believe that the assumptions, judgments and estimates involved in the accounting for revenue recognition, stock-based compensation, business combinations, goodwill impairment and income taxes have the greatest potential impact on our consolidated financial statements. These areas are key components of our results of operations and are based on complex rules requiring us to make judgments and estimates, so we consider these to be our critical accounting policies. Historically, our assumptions, judgments and estimates relative to our critical accounting policies have not differed materially from actual results. Revenue Recognition Our revenue is derived from the licensing of perpetual and time-based software products, associated software maintenance and support plans, non-software related hosting services, consulting services, training and technical support. We recognize revenue when all four revenue recognition criteria have been met: persuasive evidence of an arrangement exists, we have delivered the product or performed the service, the fee is fixed or determinable and collection is probable. Determining whether and when some of these criteria have been satisfied often involves assumptions and judgments that can have a significant impact on the timing and amount of revenue we report. We enter into multiple element revenue arrangements in which a customer may purchase a combination of software, upgrades, maintenance and support, hosting services, and consulting. For our software and software-related multiple element arrangements, we must: (1) determine whether and when each element has been delivered; (2) determine whether undelivered products or services are essential to the functionality of the delivered products and services; (3) determine the fair value of each undelivered element using vendor-specific objective evidence ( VSOE ), and (4) allocate the total price among the various elements. VSOE of fair value is used to allocate a portion of the price to the undelivered elements and the residual method is used to allocate the remaining portion to the delivered elements. Absent VSOE, revenue is deferred until the earlier of the point at which VSOE of fair value exists for any undelivered element or until all elements of the arrangement have been delivered. However, if the only undelivered element is maintenance and support, the entire arrangement fee is recognized ratably over the performance period. Changes in assumptions or judgments or changes to the elements in a software arrangement could cause a material increase or decrease in the amount of revenue that we report in a particular period. We determine VSOE for each element based on historical stand-alone sales to third parties or from the stated renewal rate for the elements contained in the initial arrangement. In determining VSOE, we require that a substantial majority of the selling prices for a product or service fall within a reasonably narrow pricing range. We have established VSOE for our software maintenance and support services, custom software development services, con sulting services and training. For multiple element arrangement s containing our non-software services, we must: (1) determine whether and when each element has been delivered; (2) determine fair value of each element using the selling price hierarchy of VSOE of fair value, third-party evidence ( TPE ) or best-estimated selling price ( BESP ), as applicable; and (3) allocate the total price among the various elements based on the relative selling price method. For multiple-element arrangements that contain software and non-software elements such as our hosted offerings, we allocate revenue to software or software-related elements as a group and any non-software elements separately based on the selling price hierarchy. We determine the selling price for each deliverable using VSOE of selling price, if it exists, or TPE of selling price. If neither VSOE nor TPE of selling price exist for a deliverable, we use its BESP for that deliverable. Once revenue is allocated to software or software-related elements as a group, it follows historic software accounting guidance. Revenue is then recognized when the basic revenue recognition criteria are met for each element. When we are unable to establish selling prices using VSOE or TPE, we use BESP in our allocation of arrangement consideration. The objective of BESP is to determine the price at which we would transact a sale if the product or service were sold on a stand-alone basis. We are generally unable to establish VSOE or TPE for non-software elements and as such, we use BESP. We determine BESP for a product or service by considering multiple factors including, but not limited to major product groupings, geographies, market conditions, competitive landscape, internal costs, gross margin objectives and pricing practices. Significant pricing practices taken into consideration include historic contractually stated prices, volume discounts where applicable and our price lists. 56 Table of Contents We must estimate certain royalty revenue amounts due to the timing of securing information from our customers. While we believe we can make reliable estimates regarding these matters, these estimates are inherently subjective. Accordingly, our assumptions and judgments regarding future products and services as well as our estimates of royalty revenue could differ from actual events, thus materially impacting our financial position and results of operations. Product revenue is recognized when the above criteria are met. We reduce the revenue recognized for estimated future returns, price protection and rebates at the time the related revenue is recorded. In determining our estimate for returns and in accordance with our internal policy regarding global channel inventory which is used to determine the level of product held by our distributors on which we have recognized revenue, we rely upon historical data, the estimated amount of product inventory in our distribution channel, the rate at which our product sells through to the end user, product plans and other factors. Our estimated provisions for returns can vary from what actually occurs. Product returns may be more or less than what was estimated. The amount of inventory in the channel could be different than what is estimated. Our estimate of the rate of sell-through for product in the channel could be different than what actually occurs. There could be a delay in the release of our products. These factors and unanticipated changes in the economic and industry environment could make our return estimates differ from actual returns, thus materially impacting our financial position and results of operations. In the future, actual returns and price protection may materially exceed our estimates as unsold products in the distribution channels are exposed to rapid changes in consumer preferences, market conditions or technological obsolescence due to new platforms, product updates or competing products. While we believe we can make reliable estimates regarding these matters, these estimates are inherently subjective. Accordingly, if our estimates change, our returns and price protection reserves would change, which would impact the total net revenue we report. We recognize revenues for hosting services that are based on a committed number of transactions ratably beginning on the date the customer commences use of our services and continuing through the end of the customer term. Over-usage fees, and fees billed based on the actual number of transactions from which we capture data, are billed in accordance with contract terms as these fees are incurred. We record amounts that have been invoiced in accounts receivable and in deferred revenue or revenue, depending on whether the revenue recognition criteria have been met. Our consulting revenue is recognized on a time and materials basis and is measured monthly based on input measures, such as on hours incurred to date compared to total estimated hours to complete, with consideration given to output measures, such as contract milestones, when applicable. Stock-based Compensation Stock-based compensation cost is measured at the grant date based on the fair value of the award and is recognized as expense on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting period. In fiscal 2012, the Executive Compensation Committee of Adobe's Board of Directors eliminated the use of stock option grants for all employees and stock option grants to non-employee directors were minimal. In lieu of stock options, we granted restricted stock units as the primary form of equity awards to employees. Stock option grants prior to fiscal 2012 continue to vest over the requisite service period and had a material impact to stock-based compensation cost for fiscal 2012 and are expected to have a material impact to stock-based compensation cost until the majority of stock options are fully vested. We currently use the Black-Scholes option pricing model to determine the fair value of employee stock purchase plan ( ESPP ) shares. This fair value is affected by our stock price as well as assumptions regarding a number of complex and subjective variables. These variables include our expected stock price volatility over the expected term of the awards, the expected term of the awards, the risk-free interest rate, estimated forfeitures and expected dividends. We use a 24-month expected term, which approximates our offering period. We estimate the volatility of our common stock by using implied volatility in market traded options. Our decision to use implied volatility was based upon the availability of actively traded options on our common stock and our assessment that implied volatility is more representative of future stock price trends than historical volatility. We base the risk-free interest rate on zero-coupon yields implied from U.S. Treasury issues with remaining terms similar to the expected term on the options. We do not anticipate paying any cash dividends in the foreseeable future and therefore use an expected dividend yield of zero in the option pricing model. We estimate forfeitures at the time of grant and revise those estimates in subsequent periods if actual forfeitures differ from those estimates. We use historical data to estimate pre-vesting option forfeitures and record stock-based compensation expense only for those awards that are expected to vest. If we use different assumptions for estimating stock-based compensation expense for ESPP shares in future periods or if actual forfeitures differ materially from our estimated forfeitures for both ESPP shares and existing stock option grants that continue 57 Table of Contents to vest, the change in our stock-based compensation expense could materially affect our operating income, net income and net income per share. Business Combinations We allocate the purchase price of acquired companies to the tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed, assumed equity awards, as well as to in-process research and development based upon their estimated fair values at the acquisition date. The purchase price allocation process requires management to make significant estimates and assumptions, especially at the acquisition date with respect to intangible assets, deferred revenue obligations and equity assumed. Although we believe the assumptions and estimates we have made are reasonable, they are based in part on historical experience and information obtained from the management of the acquired companies and are inherently uncertain. Examples of critical estimates in valuing certain of the intangible assets we have acquired or may acquire in the future include but are not limited to: future expected cash flows from software license sales, subscriptions, support agreements, consulting contracts and acquired developed technologies and patents; expected costs to develop the in-process research and development into commercially viable products and estimated cash flows from the projects when completed; the acquired company trade name and trademarks as well as assumptions about the period of time the acquired trade name and trademarks will continue to be used in the combined company product portfolio; and discount rates. In connection with the purchase price allocations for our acquisitions, we estimate the fair value of the deferred revenue obligations assumed. The estimated fair value of the support obligations is determined utilizing a cost build-up approach. The cost build-up approach determines fair value by estimating the costs related to fulfilling the obligations plus a normal profit margin. The estimated costs to fulfill the obligations are based on the historical costs related to fulfilling the obligations. In connection with the purchase price allocations for our acquisitions, we estimate the fair value of the equity awards assumed. The estimated fair value is determined utilizing a modified binomial option pricing model which assumes employees exercise their stock options when the share price exceeds the strike price by a certain dollar threshold. If the acquired company has significant historical data on their employee exercise behavior, then this threshold is determined based upon the acquired company history. Otherwise, our historical exercise experience is used to determine the exercise threshold. Zero coupon yields implied by U.S. Treasury issuances, implied volatility for our common stock and our historical forfeiture rate are other inputs to the binomial model. Unanticipated events and circumstances may occur which may affect the accuracy or validity of such assumptions, estimates or actual results. Goodwill Impairment We complete our goodwill impairment test on an annual basis, during the second quarter of our fiscal year, or more frequently, if changes in facts and circumstances indicate that an impairment in the value of goodwill recorded on our balance sheet may exist. In order to estimate the fair value of goodwill, we typically estimate future revenue, consider market factors and estimate our future cash flows. Based on these key assumptions, judgments and estimates, we determine whether we need to record an impairment charge to reduce the value of the asset carried on our balance sheet to its estimated fair value. Assumptions, judgments and estimates about future values are complex and often subjective. They can be affected by a variety of factors, including external factors such as industry and economic trends, and internal factors such as changes in our business strategy or our internal forecasts. Although we believe the ass umptions, judgme nts and estimates we have made in the past have been reasonable and appropriate, different assumptions, judgments and estimates could materially affect our reported financial results. We completed our annual impairment test in the second quarter of fiscal 2012 and determined there was no impairment. The results of our annual impairment test indicate there is no significant risk of future material goodwill impairment in any of our reporting units. Accounting for Income Taxes We use the asset and liability method of accounting for income taxes. Under this method, income tax expense is recognized for the amount of taxes payable or refundable for the current year. In addition, deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the expected future tax consequences of temporary differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and 58 Table of Contents liabilities, and for operating losses and tax credit carryforwards. Management must make assumptions, judgments and estimates to determine our current provision for income taxes and also our deferred tax assets and liabilities and any valuation allowance to be recorded against a deferred tax asset. Our assumptions, judgments and estimates relative to the current provision for income taxes take into account current tax laws, our interpretation of current tax laws and possible outcomes of current and future audits conducted by foreign and domestic tax authorities. We have established reserves for income taxes to address potential exposures involving tax positions that could be challenged by tax authorities. In addition, we are subject to the continual examination of our income tax returns by the IRS and other domestic and foreign tax authorities, including a current examination by the IRS for our fiscal 2008 and 2009 tax returns. These examinations are expected to focus on our intercompany transfer pricing practices as well as other matters. Although we believe our assumptions, judgments and estimates are reasonable, changes in tax laws or our interpretation of tax laws and the resolution of the current and any future tax audits could significantly impact the amounts provided for income taxes in our consolidated financial statements. Our assumptions, judgments and estimates relative to the value of a deferred tax asset take into account predictions of the amount and category of future taxable income, such as income from operations or capital gains income. Actual operating results and the underlying amount and category of income in future years could render our current assumptions, judgments and estimates of recoverable net deferred taxes inaccurate. Any of the assumptions, judgments and estimates mentioned above could cause our actual income tax obligations to differ from our estimates, thus materially impacting our financial position and results of operations. We are a United States-based multinational company subject to tax in multiple U.S. and foreign tax jurisdictions. A significant portion of our foreign earnings for the current fiscal year were earned by our Irish subsidiaries. In addition to providing for U.S. income taxes on earnings from the U.S., we provide for U.S. income taxes on the earnings of foreign subsidiaries unless the subsidiaries' earnings are considered permanently reinvested outside the U.S. While we do not anticipate changing our intention regarding permanently reinvested earnings, if certain foreign earnings previously treated as permanently reinvested are repatriated, the related U.S. tax liability may be reduced by any foreign income taxes paid on these earnings. Our income tax expense has differed from the tax computed at the U.S. federal statutory income tax rate due primarily to discrete items and to earnings considered as permanently reinvested in foreign operations. Our future effective tax rates could be unfavorably affected by changes in the tax rates in jurisdictions where our income is earned, by changes in, or our interpretation of, tax rules and regulations in the jurisdictions in which we do business, by unanticipated decreases in the amount of earnings in countries with low statutory tax rates, by lapses of the availability of the U.S. research and development tax credit, or by changes in the valuation of our deferred tax assets and liabilities. Recent Accounting Pronouncements There have been no new accounting pronouncements made effective during the year ended November 30, 2012 , that are of significance, or potential significance, to us. Recent Accounting Pronouncements Not Yet Effective There have been no new accounting pronouncements not yet effective that have significance, or potential significance, to our consolidated financial statements. RESULTS OF OPERATIONS Overview of 2012 Effective in the first quarter of fiscal 2012 , we modified our segments due to changes in how we operate our business. We combined our Creative and Interactive Solutions segment with our Digital Media Solutions segment and our Knowledge Worker segment, and named it Digital Media. We also renamed our Omniture segment to Digital Marketing and combined it with our Enterprise segment. These changes reflect our focus on our two strategic growth opportunities. Our Print and Publishing segment, which contains many of our mature products and solutions, continues to be reported as it was in fiscal 2011 and 2010. See Note 18 of our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further segment and geographical information. Prior year information below has been updated to reflect these changes. For fiscal 2012 , we reported solid financial results and executed against our two strategic growth areas, Digital Media and Digital Marketing, while continuing to market and license a broad portfolio of products and solutions. In May 2012 , we launched Adobe Creative Suite 6 ( CS6 ) which is at the center of Adobe Creative Cloud, our new subscription-based offering for creating and publishing content and applications that was also released in May 2012 . The launch of CS6 included major updates to all of our core Creative Suite ( CS ) point products as well as four suite versions. Over time, 59 Table of Contents we expect Creative Cloud to transform our business model and drive higher revenue growth through an expansion of our customer base by acquiring new users through a lower cost of entry, as well as keeping existing customers current on our latest release. We anticipate accelerated adoption of Creative Cloud in fiscal 2013, which we expect will cause our traditional perpetual license revenue and, in turn, total net revenues in fiscal 2013, to decline. During this transition we do not anticipate a corresponding decrease in expenses, which we believe will adversely affect our net income and operating margin in fiscal 2013. However, over time we expect this business model transition will significantly increase our long-term revenue growth rate by (1) attracting new users, (2) keeping our end user base current and (3) thereby driving higher average revenue per user. Additionally, our shift to a subscription model will increase the amount of our recurring revenue that is ratably reported, driven by broader Creative Cloud adoption over the next several years. We plan to continue to offer the perpetual licensing model as we transition our customers to this new subscription-based model. To assist with the understanding of this transition and the related shift in revenue described above, we have introduced the use of certain performance metrics which we will use to assess the health and trajectory of our overall Digital Media segment. These metrics include the total number of paid, active subscribers and Annualized Recurring Revenue ( ARR ). We define ARR as the sum of: the number of paid, active subscribers, multiplied by the average subscription price paid per user per month, multiplied by twelve months; plus, twelve months of contract value of Enterprise Term License Agreements ( ETLAs ) where the revenue is ratably recognized over the life of the contract. In addition, we expect renewal rates associated with Creative Cloud, and potentially other subscription offerings, will become key metrics used to measure their performance. Because the majority of Creative Cloud subscriptions have been annual and the Creative Cloud launched in May 2012, we have not yet reached the first anniversary of these annual subscriptions and, therefore, we anticipate that meaningful data regarding subscription renewal rates will first become available later in fiscal year 2013. Financial Performance Summary for Fiscal 2012 We continue to derive the majority of our revenue from perpetual licenses. However, our subscription revenue, as a percentage of total revenue, has increased to 15% in fiscal 2012 from approximately 11% and 10% in fiscal 2011 and fiscal 2010, respectively, as we transition more of our business to a subscription-based model. Our total revenue of $4.4 billion increased $187.4 million and $603.7 million, or 4% and 11%, from $4.2 billion and $3.8 billion in fiscal 2011 and fiscal 2010, respectively. The increase is primarily due to the continued success of our Adobe Marketing Cloud and Creative Suite family of products. Cost of revenue and operating expenses of $3.2 billion increased by $106.5 million and $416.6 million, or 3% and 15%, from $3.1 billion and $2.8 billion in fiscal 2011 and 2010, respectively. These increases are primarily due to increases in costs associated with compensation and related benefits driven by additional headcount. Income before income taxes of $1.1 billion increased by $83.6 million and $175.6 million, or 8% and 19%, from $1.0 billion and $943.2 million in fiscal 2011 and 2010, respectively. Net income of $832.8 million remained stable compared to fiscal 2011 and increased $58.1 million, or 7%, from $774.7 million in fiscal 2010. Net cash flow from operations of $1.5 billion remained stable compared to fiscal 2011 and increased $386.6 million, or 35%, from $1.1 billion in fiscal 2010 primarily due to increases in net income and deferred revenue and decreases in trade receivables from increased cash collections. 60 Table of Contents Revenue (dollars in millions) Fiscal 2012 Fiscal 2011 Fiscal 2010 % Change 2012-2011 % Change 2011-2010 Product $ 3,342.8 $ 3,416.5 $ 3,159.2 (2 )% 8 % Percentage of total revenue 76 % 81 % 83 % Subscription 673.2 458.6 386.8 47 % 19 % Percentage of total revenue 15 % 11 % 10 % Services and support 387.7 341.2 254.0 14 % 34 % Percentage of total revenue 9 % 8 % 7 % Total revenue $ 4,403.7 $ 4,216.3 $ 3,800.0 4 % 11 % As described in Note 18 of our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements , we have the following segments: Digital Media, Digital Marketing and Print and Publishing. Our subscription revenue is comprised primarily of fees we charge for our subscription and hosted service offerings including our digital marketing services and Creative Cloud. We recognize subscription revenue ratably over the term of agreements with our customers, beginning on the commencement of the service. We expect our subscription revenue will continue to increase as a result of our investments in new SaaS and subscription models. We also expect this to increase the amount of recurring revenue we generate as a percent of our total revenue. Of the $673.2 million , $458.6 million and $386.8 million in subscription revenue for fiscal years 2012 , 2011 and 2010 , respectively, approximately $553.2 million , $429.2 million and $375.3 million , respectively, is from our Digital Marketing segment, with the remaining amounts representing our Digital Media segment offerings. Our services and support revenue is comprised of consulting, training and maintenance and support, primarily related to the licensing of our enterprise, developer and platform products and the sale of our hosted digital marketing services. Our support revenue also includes technical support and developer support to partners and developer organizations related to our desktop products. Our maintenance and support offerings, which entitle customers to receive product upgrades and enhancements or technical support, depending on the offering, are recognized ratably over the term of the arrangement. Segments In fiscal 2012 , we categorized our products into the following segments: Digital Media Our Digital Media segment provides tools and solutions that enable individuals, small businesses and enterprises to create, publish, promote and monetize their digital content anywhere. Our customers include traditional content creators, web application developers and digital media professionals, as well as their management in marketing departments and agencies, companies and publishers. Digital Marketing Our Digital Marketing segment provides solutions and services for how digital advertising and marketing are created, managed, executed, measured and optimized. Our customers include digital marketers, advertisers, publishers, merchandisers, web analysts, chief marketing officers and chief revenue officers. Print and Publishing Our Print and Publishing segment addresses market opportunities ranging from the diverse publishing needs of technical and business publishing to our legacy type and OEM printing businesses. Segment Information (dollars in millions) Fiscal 2012 Fiscal 2011 Fiscal 2010 % Change 2012-2011 % Change 2011-2010 Digital Media $ 3,128.5 $ 3,088.6 $ 2,834.4 1 % 9 % Percentage of total revenue 71 % 73 % 75 % Digital Marketing 1,058.4 909.4 739.4 16 % 23 % Percentage of total revenue 24 % 22 % 19 % Print and Publishing 216.8 218.3 226.2 (1 )% (3 )% Percentage of total revenue 5 % 5 % 6 % Total revenue $ 4,403.7 $ 4,216.3 $ 3,800.0 4 % 11 % 61 Table of Contents Fiscal 2012 Revenue Compared to Fiscal 2011 Revenue Digital Media Revenue from Digital Media remained relatively stable during fiscal 2012 as compared to fiscal 2011, due to solid demand for our Acrobat family of products as well as the continued momentum of the CS6 launch in the second quarter of fiscal 2012 , offset by better than expected growth associated with our subscription offerings. Revenue related to our creative professional products, which included our Creative Suite editions and CS point products as well as the recently released Creative Cloud, decreased slightly during fiscal 2012 as compared to fiscal 2011 due to higher than expected customer adoption of Creative Cloud and point product subscriptions. We anticipate accelerated adoption of Creative Cloud and point product subscriptions, for which revenue is recognized over time, and that this adoption will cause our traditional perpetual license revenue to decline. The decreases in revenue associated with our creative professional products were offset in part by growth associated with the May 2012 release of new Photoshop point products for which the previous release occurred in fiscal 2010 . Revenue associated with our other creative products increased during fiscal 2012 as compared to fiscal 2011 primarily due to increases associated with third-party toolbar distribution via Flash Player downloads as well as continued demand related to the May 2012 release of Adobe Lightroom 4. For our creative offerings, the total number of perpetual units licensed remained relatively stable while the number of subscription units licensed increased during fiscal 2012 as compared to fiscal 2011 . Unit average selling prices, excluding subscriptions, decreased during fiscal 2012 as compared to fiscal 2011 . Document Services revenue, which includes our Acrobat product family, also increased during fiscal 2012 as compared to fiscal 2011 primarily due to increased Document Exchange Services revenue including revenue generated from our EchoSign eSignatures service and the launch of Adobe Acrobat XI in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2012 . Within Document Services, excluding large enterprise license agreement deals, the number of units licensed remained relatively stable while the unit average selling prices increased for our Acrobat offerings for fiscal 2012 as compared to fiscal 2011 . Digital Marketing Revenue from Digital Marketing increased $149.0 million , or 16% during fiscal 2012 when compared to fiscal 2011 , primarily due to continued growth of our Adobe Marketing Cloud, which increased 35% year-over-year and includes our Adobe CQ WEM offerings and revenue generated from products associated with our recent acquisition of Efficient Frontier. Also contributing to the growth in revenue was our Adobe Connect hosted offering. As expected, increases in these areas were offset in part by a decrease in revenue associated with Adobe LiveCycle product offerings as we continue to shift our focus to our Adobe Marketing Cloud including our WEM solution. Print and Publishing Revenue from Print and Publishing remained relatively stable during fiscal 2012 as compared to fiscal 2011 primarily due to decreases in legacy product revenue, offset by increases in fees received for consulting services and royalties related to PostScript products. Fiscal 2011 Revenue Compared to Fiscal 2010 Revenue Digital Media Revenue from Digital Media increased $254.2 million, or 9%, during fiscal 2011 as compared to fiscal 2010 . The year-over-year increase in revenue was driven by continued licensing of the CS5 product family. Revenue related to our creative professional products, which included our Creative Suite editions and CS point products, increased during fiscal 2011 as compared to fiscal 2010 primarily due to an increase in suite revenue associated with our Master Collection, and to a lesser extent, our design and video authoring suites. Also contributing to the growth was an increase in revenue associated with our Illustrator and InDesign point products. Revenue associated with our other creative products increased during fiscal 2011 as compared to fiscal 2010 primarily due to increases associated with third-party toolbar distribution via Adobe Reader and Flash Player downloads as well as our Digital Publishing solution which was made available to all enterprise customers during fiscal 2011 . 62 Table of Contents For our creative offerings, both the total number of units licensed and unit average selling prices remained relatively stable during fiscal 2011 as compared to fiscal 2010 . Document Services revenue increased during fiscal 2011 as compared to fiscal 2010 . We attribute this success to strong adoption of our Acrobat X product, which was released in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2010. During fiscal 2011 as compared to fiscal 2010 , unit average selling prices for Document Services increased and the number of units licensed remained relatively stable. Digital Marketing Revenue from Digital Marketing increased $170.0 million, or 23%, during fiscal 2011 as compared to fiscal 2010 . The increase was primarily due to continued customer adoption of our Adobe Marketing Cloud, which includes our WEM offerings resulting from the acquisition of Day, which closed late in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2010 . Print and Publishing Revenue from Print and Publishing decreased $7.9 million , or 3%, during fiscal 2011 as compared to fiscal 2010 . The decrease was primarily due to lower Shockwave revenue and the release of ColdFusion 9 at the end of fiscal 2009 for which a comparable release did not occur in the current year. Also contributing to the decline was a one-time large deal in Adobe Captivate and our Tech Communications products during fiscal 2010 that did not recur in fiscal 2011 . Geographical Information (dollars in millions) Fiscal 2012 Fiscal 2011 Fiscal 2010 % Change 2012-2011 % Change 2011-2010 Americas $ 2,196.4 $ 2,044.6 $ 1,835.3 7 % 11 % Percentage of total revenue 50 % 49 % 48 % EMEA 1,294.6 1,317.4 1,191.9 (2 )% 11 % Percentage of total revenue 29 % 31 % 32 % APAC 912.7 854.3 772.8 7 % 11 % Percentage of total revenue 21 % 20 % 20 % Total revenue $ 4,403.7 $ 4,216.3 $ 3,800.0 4 % 11 % Fiscal 2012 Revenue by Geography Compared to Fiscal 2011 Revenue by Geography Overall revenue for fiscal 2012 increased in the Americas and APAC and declined slightly in EMEA when compared to fiscal 2011 . Revenue in the Americas increased during fiscal 2012 primarily due to revenue increases in Digital Media and Digital Marketing, offset slightly by a decline in Print and Publishing revenue. Despite the launch of CS6 in May 2012, the current economic conditions in Europe and the weakening of the Euro and British Pound against the U.S. Dollar caused revenue in EMEA to decline slightly during fiscal 2012 compared with fiscal 2011. Revenue in APAC increased across all reportable segments during fiscal 2012 as compared with fiscal 2011. Within each geographical region, the fluctuations in revenue by reportable segment were attributable to the factors noted in the segment information above. Fiscal 2011 Revenue by Geography Compared to Fiscal 2010 Revenue by Geography Overall revenue for fiscal 2011 increased in each of the geographic regions when compared to fiscal 2010. Within each geographic region, every reportable segment contributed to the increase in revenue with the exception of Print and Publishing, which experienced decreases in EMEA and APAC. The increase in revenue during fiscal 2011 as compared to fiscal 2010 in the Americas, EMEA and APAC was attributable to the factors noted in the segment information above. 63 Table of Contents Included in the overall increase in revenue for fiscal 2012 and fiscal 2011 were impacts associated with foreign currency as shown below. Our currency hedging program is used to mitigate a portion of the foreign currency impact to revenue. (in millions) Fiscal 2012 Fiscal 2011 Revenue impact: Increase/(Decrease) EMEA: Euro $ (46.9 ) $ 16.4 British Pound (1.8 ) 6.5 Other currencies (1.1 ) 2.9 Total EMEA (49.8 ) 25.8 Japanese Yen 6.0 38.5 Other currencies 1.5 14.6 Total revenue impact (42.3 ) 78.9 Hedging impact: EMEA 23.4 3.6 Japanese Yen 7.3 0.2 Total hedging impact 30.7 3.8 Total impact $ (11.6 ) $ 82.7 During fiscal 2012 , the U.S. Dollar strengthened against the Euro, British Pound and other EMEA currencies causing revenue in EMEA measured in U.S. Dollar equivalents to decrease compared with the same reporting period last year. This decrease was offset in part by the favorable impact to revenue measured in Japanese Yen and other Asian currencies as the U.S. Dollar weakened against these currencies. Our EMEA and Yen currency hedging programs resulted in hedging gains during fiscal 2012 as noted in the table above. During fiscal 2011, the Euro, British Pound and other EMEA currencies were favorably impacted as the U.S. Dollar weakened against these currencies causing revenue in EMEA measured in average U.S. Dollar equivalents to increase compared to fiscal 2010. Revenue measured in both the Japanese Yen and other currencies also were favorably impacted as the U.S. Dollar weakened against these currencies. During fiscal 2011, our EMEA and Japanese Yen currency hedging programs resulted in hedging gains as noted above. See Note 18 of our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further geographic information. Product Backlog The actual amount of product backlog at any particular time may not be a meaningful indicator of future business prospects. Shippable backlog is comprised of unfulfilled orders, excluding those associated with new product releases, those pending credit review and those not shipped due to the application of our global inventory policy. We had minimal shippable backlog at the end of the fourth quarter of fiscal 2012. We expect that our shippable backlog will continue to be insignificant in future periods. Cost of Revenue (dollars in millions) Fiscal 2012 Fiscal 2011 Fiscal 2010 % Change 2012-2011 % Change 2011-2010 Product $ 121.7 $ 125.7 $ 127.5 (3 )% (1 )% Percentage of total revenue 3 % 3 % 3 % Subscription 219.1 194.0 195.6 13 % (1 )% Percentage of total revenue 5 % 5 % 5 % Services and support 143.0 118.2 80.4 21 % 47 % Percentage of total revenue 3 % 3 % 2 % Total cost of revenue $ 483.8 $ 437.9 $ 403.5 10 % 9 % 64 Table of Contents Product Cost of product revenue includes product packaging, third-party royalties, excess and obsolete inventory, amortization related to localization costs, purchased intangibles and acquired rights to use technology and the costs associated with the manufacturing of our products. Cost of product revenue decreased due to the following: % Change 2012-2011 % Change 2011-2010 Cost of sales (6 )% % Excess and obsolete inventory 2 Amortization of purchased intangibles (1 ) 6 Royalty cost (3 ) Various individually insignificant items 2 (4 ) Total change (3 )% (1 )% Cost of product revenue decreased during fiscal 2012 as compared to fiscal 2011 primarily due to decrease in cost of sales and amortization of purchase intangibles, offset by increases in excess and obsolete inventory. Cost of sales decreased primarily due to a decrease in packaging costs associated with our CS6 products. Amortization of purchased intangibles decreased primarily due to certain intangible assets purchased through our acquisitions in prior years that were fully amortized in fiscal 2012. Excess and obsolete inventory increased primarily due to increased reserve requirements for Adobe Creative Suite 5 and Adobe Creative Suite 5.5 products necessitated by the launch of CS6 in the second quarter of fiscal 2012. Cost of product revenue decreased during fiscal 2011 as compared to fiscal 2010 primarily due to decrease in royalty costs, offset by increase in amortization of purchase intangibles. Royalty costs decreased primarily due to a decrease in obligations to certain key vendors. Amortization of purchased intangibles increased primarily due to amortization expense associated with intangible assets purchased through acquisitions during fiscal 2011 and our Day acquisition in the fourth quarter of 2010. Subscription Cost of subscription revenue consists of expenses related to operating our network infrastructure, including depreciation expenses and operating lease payments associated with computer equipment, data center costs, salaries and related expenses of network operations, implementation, account management and technical support personnel, amortization of intangible assets and allocated overhead. We enter into contracts with third-parties for the use of their data center facilities and our data center costs largely consist of the amounts we pay to these third-parties for rack space, power and similar items. Cost of subscription revenue increased in fiscal 2012 due to the following: % Change 2012-2011 Amortization of purchased intangibles 6 % Hosted server costs 7 Total change 13 % Cost of subscription revenue increased during fiscal 2012 as compared to fiscal 2011 primarily due to increased amortization of purchased intangibles and hosted server costs. Amortization of purchased intangibles increased primarily due to increased amortization of intangible assets associated with our acquisition of Efficient Frontier in the first quarter of fiscal 2012. Hosted server costs increased primarily due to increases in compensation and related benefits driven by additional headcount and hosting expenses associated with the launch of our Creative Cloud services in the second quarter of fiscal 2012. Also contributing to the increase in hosted server costs is the increase in depreciation expense from higher capital expenditures in prior years and data center costs related to higher transaction volumes in our Adobe Marketing Cloud services and Creative Cloud. Cost of subscription revenue remained relatively stable during fiscal 2011 as compared to fiscal 2010 primarily due to decreased amortization of purchased intangibles resulting from certain intangible assets purchased through our acquisition of Omniture that were fully amortized in fiscal 2011. This was offset in part by increases in costs associated with compensation and related benefits driven by additional headcount and increases in data center costs related to higher transaction volumes in our Adobe Marketing Cloud services. 65 Table of Contents Services and Support Cost of services and support revenue is primarily comprised of employee-related costs and associated costs incurred to provide consulting services, training and product support. Cost of services and support revenue increased during fiscal 2012 as compared to fiscal 2011 and fiscal 2011 as compared to fiscal 2010, primarily due to increases in costs associated with compensation and related benefits driven by additional headcount, including headcount from our acquisition of Efficient Frontier. Operating Expenses (dollars in millions) Fiscal 2012 Fiscal 2011 Fiscal 2010 % Change 2012-2011 % Change 2011-2010 Research and development $ 742.8 $ 738.1 $ 680.3 1 % 8 % Percentage of total revenue 17 % 18 % 18 % Sales and marketing 1,516.1 1,385.8 1,244.2 9 % 11 % Percentage of total revenue 34 % 33 % 33 % General and administrative 435.0 414.6 383.5 5 % 8 % Percentage of total revenue 10 % 10 % 10 % Restructuring and other related charges (credits) (2.9 ) 97.8 23.3 * * Percentage of total revenue % 2 % 1 % Amortization of purchased intangibles 48.7 42.8 72.1 14 % (41 )% Percentage of total revenue 1 % 1 % 2 % Total operating expenses $ 2,739.7 $ 2,679.1 $ 2,403.4 2 % 11 % _________________________________________ (*) Percentage is greater than 100%. Research and Development Research and development expenses consist primarily of salary and benefit expenses for software developers, contracted development efforts, related facilities costs and expenses associated with computer equipment used in software development. Research and development expenses remained relatively stable during fiscal 2012 as compared to fiscal 2011. The increase in research and development expenses during fiscal 2011 as compared to fiscal 2010 was primarily driven by higher employee compensation associated with headcount growth. We believe that investments in research and development, including the recruiting and hiring of software developers, are critical to remain competitive in the marketplace and are directly related to continued timely development of new and enhanced products. We will continue to focus on long-term opportunities available in our end markets and make significant investments in the development of our application, tool and service offerings. Sales and Marketing Sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of salary and benefit expenses, sales commissions, travel expenses and related facilities costs for our sales, marketing, order management and global supply chain management personnel. Sales and marketing expenses also include the costs of programs aimed at increasing revenue, such as advertising, trade shows, public relations and other market development programs. Sales and marketing expenses increased due to the following: % Change 2012-2011 % Change 2011-2010 Compensation and related benefits associated with headcount 2 % 5 % Marketing spending related to product launches and overall marketing efforts to further increase revenue 2 3 Compensation associated with incentive compensation and stock-based compensation 3 1 Various individually insignificant items 2 2 Total change 9 % 11 % 66 Table of Contents General and Administrative General and administrative expenses consist primarily of compensation and benefit expenses, travel expenses and related facilities costs for our finance, facilities, human resources, legal, information services and executive personnel. General and administrative expenses also include outside legal and accounting fees, provision for bad debts, expenses associated with computer equipment and software used in the administration of the business, charitable contributions and various forms of insurance. General and administrative expenses increased due to the following: % Change 2012-2011 % Change 2011-2010 Compensation and related benefits associated with headcount growth 4 % 3 % Professional and consulting fees (3 ) 5 Compensation associated with incentive compensation and stock-based compensation 1 2 Various individually insignificant items 3 (2 ) Total change 5 % 8 % Professional and consulting fees decreased during fiscal 2012 as compared to fiscal 2011 primarily due to decreased litigation expense. Professional and consulting fees increased during fiscal 2011 as compared to fiscal 2010 primarily due to increase in fees for various technology projects and increased litigation expense. Restructuring and Other Related Ch arges (Credits) During the past several years, we have initiated various restructuring plans. During fiscal 2012, in connection with our Fiscal 2011 Restructuring Plan and Other Restructuring Plans, we recorded $17.4 million associated with termination benefits and closing redundant facilities. We also recorded $20.3 million in net favorable employee termination and facility related adjustments for changes in previous estimates during the fiscal year. During fiscal 2011, in connection with our 2011 Restructuring Plan and Other Restructuring Plans, we recorded $85.6 million associated with termination benefits and closing redundant facilities as well as $12.7 million related to the write-off of certain assets that were no longer useful to the company based on changes in our business. We also recorded minor favorable adjustments for changes in previous estimates. During 2010, in connection with our Fiscal 2009 Restructuring Plan we recorded $23.3 million associated with termination benefits and closing redundant facilities which is net of minor favorable adjustments for changes in previous estimates. See Note 10 of our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further information regarding our restructuring plans. Amortization of Purchased Intangibles During the last several years, we have completed a number of business combinations and asset acquisitions including Macromedia in fiscal 2006, Omniture in fiscal 2009, Day in fiscal 2010, eight smaller acquisitions in fiscal 2011 and Efficient Frontier in fiscal 2012. As a result of these acquisitions, we purchased intangible assets that are being amortized over their estimated useful lives ranging from one to twelve years. Amortization expense increased 14% during fiscal 2012 as compared to fiscal 2011 primarily due to amortization expense associated with intangible assets purchased through our smaller acquisitions in fiscal 2011 and Efficient Frontier in fiscal 2012. Amortization expense decreased 41% during fiscal 2011 as compared to fiscal 2010 primarily due to amortization expense associated with certain intangible assets purchased through our acquisition of Macromedia that were fully amortized at the end of fiscal 2010. This decrease was offset in part by an increase in amortization expense as a result of intangible assets purchased through our acquisition of Day in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2010 as well as an increase in intangible assets purchased through our fiscal 2011 acquisitions. 67 Table of Contents Non-Operating Income (Expense), Net (dollars in millions) Fiscal 2012 Fiscal 2011 Fiscal 2010 % Change 2012-2011 % Change 2011-2010 Interest and other income (expense), net $ (3.4 ) $ (3.0 ) $ 13.1 13 % (123 )% Percentage of total revenue * * * Interest expense (67.5 ) (67.0 ) (56.9 ) 1 % 18 % Percentage of total revenue (2 )% (2 )% (1 )% Investment gains (losses), net 9.5 5.9 (6.1 ) 61 % (197 )% Percentage of total revenue * * * Total non-operating income (expense), net $ (61.4 ) $ (64.1 ) $ (49.9 ) (4 )% 28 % _________________________________________ (*) Percentage is not meaningful. Interest and Other Income (Expense), Net Interest and other income (expense), net consists primarily of interest earned on cash, cash equivalents and short-term fixed income investments. Interest and other income (expense), net also includes foreign exchange gains and losses, including those from hedging revenue transactions primarily denominated in Euro and Yen currencies, and gains and losses on fixed income investments. Interest and other income (expense), net increased in net expense in fiscal 2012 as compared to fiscal 2011 primarily due to lower average interest rates on our investments. Interest and other income (expense), net changed from net income in fiscal 2010 to net expense in fiscal 2011 primarily due to a gain of $20.8 million recorded in fiscal 2010 associated with a forward contract purchased to hedge our economic exposure related to our acquisition of Day that did not recur during fiscal 2011, as well as increased cash flow hedging costs in fiscal 2011. The increase in net expense in fiscal 2011 was partially offset by increased interest income of $2.4 million due to higher average interest rates on our investments. Interest Expense In February 2010, we issued $600.0 million of 3.25% senior notes due February 1, 2015 (the 2015 Notes ) and $900.0 million of 4.75% senior notes due February 1, 2020 (the 2020 Notes and, together with the 2015 Notes, the Notes ). On February 1, 2010 , we repaid the outstanding balance under our then existing $1.0 billion credit facility with a portion of the proceeds from the Notes. Interest expense remained relatively stable during fiscal 2012 as compared to fiscal 2011. The increase in interest expense during fiscal 2011 as compared to fiscal 2010 was primarily due to interest associated with higher borrowings resulting from the issuance of the Notes. Investment Gains (Losses), Net Investment gains (losses), net consists principally of realized gains or losses from the sale of marketable equity investments, other-than-temporary declines in the value of marketable and non-marketable equity securities and unrealized holding gains and losses associated with our deferred compensation plan assets (classified as trading securities) and gains and losses associated with our direct and indirect investments in privately held companies. Investment gains (losses), net fluctuated due to the following (in millions): Fiscal 2012 Fiscal 2011 Fiscal 2010 Net gains (losses) related to our direct and indirect investments in privately held companies $ (0.2 ) $ 5.3 $ (11.3 ) Gains from sale of marketable equity securities 8.2 0.8 4.0 Write-downs due to other-than-temporary declines in value of our marketable equity securities (0.1 ) (0.2 ) Net gains related to our trading securities 1.6 1.2 Total investment gains (losses), net $ 9.5 $ 5.9 $ (6.1 ) 68 Table of Contents During fiscal 2012, total investment gains (losses), net improved primarily due to an increase in net realized gains from the sale of marketable equity securities. This was offset in part by a decrease in realized gains related to our direct investments in privately held companies in fiscal 2011 that did not recur during fiscal 2012. During fiscal 2011, total investment gains (losses), net improved to net gains primarily due to unrealized losses related to our indirect investments in privately held companies in fiscal 2010 that did not recur during fiscal 2011. This was offset in part by a decrease in net realized gains from the sale of marketable equity securities during fiscal 2011 due to less sales of these investments. Provision for Income Taxes (dollars in millions) Fiscal 2012 Fiscal 2011 Fiscal 2010 % Change 2012-2011 % Change 2011-2010 Provision $ 286.0 $ 202.4 $ 168.5 41 % 20 % Percentage of total revenue 6 % 5 % 4 % Effective tax rate 26 % 20 % 18 % Our effective tax rate increased by approximately six percentage points during fiscal 2012 as compared to fiscal 2011. In fiscal 2011, the increase was primarily related to the expiration of the U.S. research and development credit, as well as tax benefits associated with a favorable state income tax ruling and tax costs associated with licensing acquired company assets to Adobe's trading companies. Our effective tax rate increased by approximately two percentage points during fiscal 2011 as compared to fiscal 2010. The increase was primarily due to tax costs of licensing acquired company assets to Adobe's trading companies. These costs were partially offset by tax benefits related to a favorable state income tax ruling and the reinstatement of the federal research and development tax credit. In January 2013, the United States Congress passed an extension of the federal research and development tax credit through December 31, 2013. As a result, we expect that our income tax provision for the first quarter of fiscal 2013 will include a discrete tax benefit which will reduce our effective tax rate for the quarter and to a lesser extent the effective annual tax rate. We are a United States-based multinational company subject to tax in multiple U.S. and foreign tax jurisdictions. A significant portion of our foreign earnings for the current fiscal year were earned by our Irish subsidiaries. In addition to providing for U.S. income taxes on earnings from the U.S., we provide for U.S. income taxes on the earnings of foreign subsidiaries unless the subsidiaries' earnings are considered permanently reinvested outside the U.S. While we do not anticipate changing our intention regarding permanently reinvested earnings, if certain foreign earnings previously treated as permanently reinvested are repatriated, the related U.S. tax liability may be reduced by any foreign income taxes paid on these earnings. Currently, there are a significant amount of foreign earnings upon which U.S. income taxes have not been provided. Accounting for Uncertainty in Income Taxes The gross liability for unrecognized tax benefits at November 30, 2012 was $160.5 million , exclusive of interest and penalties. If the total unrecognized tax benefits at November 30, 2012 were recognized in the future, $147.6 million of unrecognized tax benefits would decrease the effective tax rate, which is net of an estimated $12.9 million federal benefit related to deducting certain payments on future state tax returns. As of November 30, 2012 , the combined amount of accrued interest and penalties related to tax positions taken on our tax returns was approximately $12.5 million . This amount is included in non-current income taxes payable. The timing of the resolution of income tax examinations is highly uncertain as are the amounts and timing of tax payments that are part of any audit settlement process. These events could cause large fluctuations in the balance sheet classification of current and non-current assets and liabilities. We believe that within the next 12 months, it is reasonably possible that either certain audits will conclude or statutes of limitations on certain income tax examination periods will expire, or both. Given the uncertainties described above, we can only determine a range of estimated potential decreases in underlying unrecognized tax benefits ranging from $0 to approximately $5 million . 69 Table of Contents LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES This data should be read in conjunction with our Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows. As of (in millions) November 30, 2012 December 2, 2011 Cash and cash equivalents $ 1,425.1 $ 989.5 Short-term investments $ 2,113.3 $ 1,922.2 Working capital $ 3,059.6 $ 2,520.7 Stockholders equity $ 6,665.2 $ 5,783.1 A summary of our cash flows is as follows: (in millions) Fiscal 2012 Fiscal 2011 Fiscal 2010 Net cash provided by operating activities $ 1,499.6 $ 1,543.3 $ 1,113.0 Net cash used for investing activities (834.7 ) (757.4 ) (1,159.3 ) Net cash used for financing activities (234.7 ) (550.4 ) (215.3 ) Effect of foreign currency exchange rates on cash and cash equivalents 5.4 4.1 12.0 Net increase (decrease) in cash and cash equivalents $ 435.6 $ 239.6 $ (249.6 ) Our primary source of cash is receipts from revenue. The primary uses of cash are payroll related expenses, general operating expenses including marketing, travel and office rent, and cost of revenue. Other sources of cash are proceeds from the exercise of employee options and participation in the ESPP. Other uses of cash include our stock repurchase program, which is described below, business acquisitions and purchases of property and equipment. Cash Flows from Operating Activities For fiscal 2012, net cash provided by operating activities of $1.5 billion was primarily comprised of net income plus the net effect of non-cash items. The primary working capital sources of cash were net income coupled with increases in deferred revenue and decreases in trade receivables. Deferred revenue increased primarily due to an increase in activity for both upgrade plans with support and site and term licenses largely associated with our Digital Media and Digital Marketing enterprise license agreements. The decrease in trade receivables is primarily related to an increase in revenue linearity and improved collections in our Digital Marketing portfolio offset in part by higher revenue levels due to the CS6 product release which occurred late in the second quarter of fiscal 2012. The primary working capital uses of cash were decreases in accrued restructuring and trade payables. Decreases in accrued restructuring primarily related to payments and adjustments for employee terminations and facility exit costs associated with the Fiscal 2011 Restructuring Plan, a significant portion of which were paid and adjusted in the first and second quarters of fiscal 2012. Trade payables decreased primarily due to the timing of payments as a greater number of invoices were paid prior to the fiscal year end in fiscal 2012 as compared to fiscal 2011. For fiscal 2011, net cash provided by operating activities of $1.5 billion was primarily comprised of net income plus the net effect of non-cash items. The primary working capital sources of cash were net income coupled with increases in deferred revenue and accrued restructuring. Increases in deferred revenue related primarily to an overall increase in billing activity for maintenance and support/upgrade plans, hosted and professional services and site and term licenses. Accrued restructuring increased primarily due to recognition of liabilities related to employee termination and facility exit costs associated with the Fiscal 2011 Restructuring Plan which occurred in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2011 for which a majority was paid and adjusted in the first and second quarters of fiscal 2012. The primary working capital uses of cash for fiscal 2011 were increases in trade receivables coupled with decreases in accrued expenses and taxes payable. Trade receivables increased primarily as a result of overall higher sales levels and billing occurring during the latter half of the fourth quarter of fiscal 2011, offset in part by an increased rate of collection for Digital Marketing services. Decreases in accrued expenses were primarily related to lower accrued bonus levels in fiscal 2011, coupled with payment of our second and third semi-annual interest payments associated with our Notes totaling $62.3 million . The resulting reduction in accrued interest was partially offset by additional interest accruals made during the period. Taxes payable decreased primarily due to the resolution of a Canadian Tax audit offset in part by quarterly increases to the tax provision in excess of taxes paid. 70 Table of Contents For fiscal 2010, net cash provided by operating activities of $1.1 billion was primarily comprised of net income plus the net effect of non-cash items. The primary working capital sources of cash were net income coupled with increases in accrued expenses and deferred revenue. Accrued expenses increased primarily due to amounts due under our fiscal 2010 annual incentive plan and interest on our Notes, both of which were paid in the first quarter of fiscal 2011. During fiscal 2010, we made our first semi-annual interest payment associated with our Notes totaling $31.1 million . The resulting reduction in accrued interest was partially offset by additional interest accruals made during the period. Increases in deferred revenue related primarily to activity from our acquisition of Omniture, the related renewal of calendar-year based contracts in addition to increases in maintenance and support orders and royalty revenue deferrals related to changes in customer billing terms. The primary working capital uses of cash for fiscal 2010 were increases in trade receivables, prepaid expenses and other current assets as well as decreases in taxes payable, accrued restructuring and trade payables. Trade receivables increased as a result of products shipped and billed during the latter half of the fourth quarter of fiscal 2010 as a result of the launch of Acrobat X and slower receivable payments pertaining to Omniture services. Increases in prepaid expenses and other current assets related primarily to higher valuations on our cash flow and balance sheet hedges due to the strengthening of the U.S. dollar. Income taxes payable decreased primarily due to payments of approximately $200.0 million for tax liabilities associated with the repatriation of undistributed foreign earnings as well as a $20.0 million settlement of an IRS exam in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2010. Accrued restructuring decreased primarily due to payments made related to the fiscal 2009 restructuring plan that was initiated in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2009 in addition to adjustments made to previously recorded estimates, offset in part by new charges. Cash Flows from Investing Activities For fiscal 2012, net cash used for investing activities of $834.7 million was primarily due to our acquisition of Efficient Frontier in the first quarter of fiscal 2012. Other uses of cash during fiscal 2012 represented purchases of short-term investments and property and equipment, offset in part by sales and maturities of short-term investments. See Note 2 of our Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further information regarding our acquisition of Efficient Frontier. For fiscal 2011, net cash used for investing activities of $757.4 million was primarily due to purchases of short-term investments and multiple business acquisitions, offset in part by maturities and sales of short-term investments. Other uses of cash during fiscal 2011 represented purchases of property, plant and equipment and long-term investments, intangibles and other assets. For fiscal 2010, net cash used for investing activities of $1.2 billion was primarily due to purchases of short-term investments and the acquisition of Day, offset in part by maturities and sales of short-term investments. Other uses of cash during fiscal 2010 represented purchases of property and equipment and long-term investments and other assets. These uses of cash were offset in part by proceeds from the sale of equipment under our sale lease-back transaction and the sale of long-term investments. See Note 16 of our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for information regarding our sale lease-back transaction. Cash Flows from Financing Activities For fiscal 2012 and fiscal 2011, net cash used for financing activities of $234.7 million and $550.4 million , respectively, was primarily due to treasury stock repurchases offset in part by proceeds from our treasury stock issuances. See the section titled Stock Repurchase Program discussed below. For fiscal 2010, the primary cash flows from financing activities represented the issuance of $600.0 million of 3.25% senior notes due February 1, 2015 and $900.0 million of 4.75% senior notes due February 1, 2020 . On February 1, 2010 , we paid the outstanding balance on our then existing credit facility with a portion of the funds from our Notes. Other uses of cash during fiscal 2010 were for treasury stock repurchases offset in part by proceeds from our treasury stock issuances. We expect to continue our investing activities, including short-term and long-term investments, venture capital, facilities expansion and purchases of computer systems for research and development, sales and marketing, product support and administrative staff. Furthermore, cash reserves may be used to repurchase stock under our stock repurchase program and to strategically acquire companies, products or technologies that are complementary to our business. Restructuring During the past several years, we have initiated various restructuring plans. During fiscal 2012 the following five restructuring plans, two of which were the result of large acquisitions, were still active: Fiscal 2011 Restructuring Plan Fiscal 2009 Restructuring Plan Fiscal 2008 Restructuring Plan Omniture Restructuring Plan Macromedia Restructuring Plan 71 Table of Contents As of November 30, 2012 , we have accrued total restructuring charges of approximately $21.6 million of which approximately $2.3 million relates to ongoing termination benefits and contract terminations that are expected to be paid during fiscal 2013. The remaining accrued restructuring charges of $19.3 million relate to the cost of closing redundant facilities and are expected to be paid under contract through fiscal 2021, approximately 69% of which will be paid through 2015. During fiscal 2012, we made payments related to the above restructuring plans totaling approximately $63.1 million which consiste d of approximately $50.5 million and $12.6 million in payments related to termination benefits and contract terminations and the closing of redundant facilities, respectively. As of December 2, 2011 , we accrued total restructuring charges of approximately $88.4 million of which approximately $74.4 million related to ongoing termination benefits and contract terminations which were paid or adjusted during fiscal 2012 with the remaining $14.0 million related to the cost of closing redundant facilities. During fiscal 2011, we made payments related to the above restructuring plans totaling approximately $13.1 million which consisted of approximately $6.8 million and $6.3 million in payments related to termination benefits and contract terminations and the closing of redundant facilities, respectively. We believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents, short-term investments and cash generated from operations will be sufficient to meet the cash outlays for the restructuring actions described above. See Note 10 of our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information regarding our restructuring pl ans. Other Liquidity and Capital Resources Considerations Our existing cash, cash equivalents and investment balances may fluctuate during fiscal 2013 due to changes in our planned cash outlay, including changes in incremental costs such as direct and integration costs related to our business acquisitions. Our cash and investments totaled $3.5 billion as of November 30, 2012 . Of this amount, approximately 83% was held by our foreign subsidiaries and subject to material repatriation tax effects. Our intent is to permanently reinvest a significant portion of our earnings from foreign operations, and current plans do not anticipate that we will need funds generated from foreign operations to fund our domestic operations. In the event funds from foreign operations are needed to fund operations in the United States and if U.S. tax has not already been previously provided, we would provide for and pay additional U.S. taxes in connection with repatriating these funds. Cash from operations could also be affected by various risks and uncertainties, including, but not limited to the risks detailed in Part I, Item 1A titled Risk Factors . However, based on our current business plan and revenue prospects, we believe that our existing balances, our anticipated cash flows from operations and our available credit facility will be sufficient to meet our working capital and operating resource expenditure requirements for the next twelve months. As of November 30, 2012 , the amount outstanding under our senior notes was $1.5 billion . On March 2, 2012, we entered into a five-year $1.0 billion senior unsecured revolving credit agreement (the Credit Agreement ), providing for loans to us and certain of our subsidiaries. As of November 30, 2012 , there were no outstanding borrowings under this Credit Agreement and the entire $1.0 billion credit line remains available for borrowing. In connection with entering into the Credit Agreement, we terminated and paid off all obligations under our previous credit agreement dated as of February 16, 2007. We use professional investment management firms to manage a large portion of our invested cash. External investment firms managed, on average, 74% of our consolidated invested balances during fiscal 2012 . The fixed income portfolio is primarily invested in corporate bonds and commercial paper, foreign government securities, money market mutual funds and repurchase agreements, municipal securities, U.S. agency securities and U.S. Treasury securities. Stock Repurchase Program During the third quarter of fiscal 2010, our Board of Directors approved an amendment to our stock repurchase program authorized in April 2007 from a non-expiring share-based authority to a time-constrained dollar-based authority. As part of this amendment, the Board of Directors granted authority to repurchase up to $1.6 billion in common stock through the end of fiscal 2012. During the second quarter of fiscal 2012, we exhausted our $1.6 billion time-constrained dollar-based authority granted by our Board of Directors in fiscal 2010. In April 2012, the Board of Directors approved a new stock repurchase program granting authority to repurchase up to $2.0 billion in common stock through the end of fiscal 2015. The new stock repurchase program approved by our Board of Directors is similar to our previous $1.6 billion stock repurchase program. During fiscal 2012 , 2011 and 2010 , we entered into several structured stock repurchase agreements with large financial institutions, whereupon we provided them with prepayments totaling $405.0 million , $695.0 million and $850.0 million , respectively. Of the $405.0 million of prepayments during fiscal 2012, $100.0 million was under the new $2.0 billion stock repurchase program and the remaining $305.0 million was under our previous $1.6 billion authority. Of the $850.0 million of 72 Table of Contents prepayments during fiscal 2010 , $250.0 million was under the stock repurchase program prior to the program amendment and the remaining $600.0 million was under our $1.6 billion authority. We enter into these agreements in order to take advantage of repurchasing shares at a guaranteed discount to the Volume Weighted Average Price ( VWAP ) of our common stock over a specified period of time. We only enter into such transactions when the discount that we receive is higher than the foregone return on our cash prepayments to the financial institutions. There were no explicit commissions or fees on these structured repurchases. Under the terms of the agreements, there is no requirement for the financial institutions to return any portion of the prepayment to us. The financial institutions agree to deliver shares to us at monthly intervals during the contract term. The parameters used to calculate the number of shares deliverable are: the total notional amount of the contract, the number of trading days in the contract, the number of trading days in the interval and the average VWAP of our stock during the interval less the agreed upon discount. During fiscal 2012 , we repurchased approximately 11.5 million shares at an average price of $32.29 through structured repurchase agreements entered into during fiscal 2012 . During fiscal 2011, we repurchased approximately 21.8 million shares at an average price of $31.81 through structured repurchase agreements entered into during fiscal 2011. During fiscal 2010, we repurchased approximately 31.2 million shares at an average price per share of $29.19 through structured repurchase agreements entered into during fiscal 2009 and fiscal 2010. For fiscal 2012 , 2011 and 2010 , the prepayments were classified as treasury stock on our Consolidated Balance Sheets at the payment date, though only shares physically delivered to us by November 30, 2012 , December 2, 2011 and December 3, 2010 were excluded from the computation of earnings per share. As of November 30, 2012, $33.0 million of prepayments remained under the agreement. As of December 2, 2011 and December 3, 2010 , no prepayments remained under the agreements. Subsequent to November 30, 2012 , as part of our $2.0 billion stock repurchase program, we entered into a structured stock repurchase agreement with a large financial institution whereupon we provided them with a prepayment of $100.0 million . This amount will be classified as treasury stock on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. Upon completion of the $100.0 million stock repurchase agreement, $1.8 billion remains under our current authority. See Notes 13 and 20 of our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion of our stock repurchase programs. See Item 5, Market for Registrant Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities for share repurchases during the quarter ended November 30, 2012 . Summary of Stock Repurchases for fiscal 2012 , 2011 and 2010 (in thousands, except average amounts) Board Approval Date Repurchases Under the Plan 2012 2011 2010 Shares Average Shares Average Shares Average December 1997 From employees (1) 1 $ 33.57 1 $ 35.66 Structured repurchases (2) $ $ 9,358 $ 33.11 June 2010 Structured repurchases (2) 9,482 $ 32.17 21,849 $ 31.81 21,807 $ 27.51 April 2012 Structured repurchases (2) 2,038 $ 32.87 $ $ Total shares 11,520 $ 32.29 21,850 $ 31.81 31,166 $ 29.19 Total cost $ 371,995 $ 695,015 $ 909,900 _________________________________________ (1) The repurchases from employees represent shares canceled when surrendered in lieu of cash payments for the option exercise price or withholding taxes due. (2) Stock repurchase agreements executed with large financial institutions. See Stock Repurchase Program above. 73 Table of Contents Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements and Aggregate Contractual Obligations Our principal commitments as of November 30, 2012 consist of obligations under operating leases, capital leases, royalty agreements and various service agreements. See Note 15 of our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information regarding our contractual commitments . Contractual Obligations The following table summarizes our contractual obligations as of November 30, 2012 (in millions): Payment Due by Period Total Less than 1 year 1-3 years 3-5 years More than 5 years Notes $ 1,869.5 $ 62.3 $ 714.8 $ 85.5 $ 1,006.9 Operating lease obligations 246.1 47.3 73.0 46.7 79.1 Capital lease obligations 13.2 11.4 1.8 Purchase obligations 342.2 256.4 46.5 27.3 12.0 Total $ 2,471.0 $ 377.4 $ 836.1 $ 159.5 $ 1,098.0 Senior Notes In February 2010, we issued $600.0 million of 3.25% senior notes due February 1, 2015 and $900.0 million of 4.75% senior notes due February 1, 2020 . Interest on the Notes is payable semi-annually, in arrears on February 1 and August 1, commencing on August 1, 2010. During fiscal 2012 interest payments totaled $62.3 million . At November 30, 2012 , our maximum commitment for interest payments under the Notes was $369.4 million . Capital Lease Obligation In June 2010, we entered into a sale-leaseback agreement to sell equipment totaling $32.2 million and leaseback the same equipment over a period of 43 months. This transaction was classified as a capital lease obligation and was recorded at fair value. Covenants Our credit facility contains a financial covenant requiring us not to exceed a maximum leverage ratio. Our Almaden Tower lease includes certain financial ratios as defined in the lease agreements that are reported to the lessors quarterly. As of November 30, 2012 , we were in compliance with all of our covenants. We believe these covenants will not impact our credit or cash in the coming fiscal year or restrict our ability to execute our business plan. Our Notes do not contain any financial covenants. Under the terms of our credit agreement and lease agreements, we are not prohibited from paying cash dividends unless payment would trigger an event of default or one currently exists. We do not anticipate paying any cash dividends in the foreseeable future. Accounting for Uncertainty in Income Taxes The gross liability for unrecognized tax benefits at November 30, 2012 was $160.5 million , exclusive of interest and penalties. The timing of the resolution of income tax examinations is highly uncertain as are the amounts and timing of tax payments that are part of any audit settlement process. These events could cause large fluctuations in the balance sheet classification of current and non-current assets and liabilities. We believe that within the next 12 months, it is reasonably possible that either certain audits will conclude or statutes of limitations on certain income tax examination periods will expire, or both. Given the uncertainties described above, we can only determine a range of estimated potential decreases in underlying unrecognized tax benefits ranging from $0 to approximately $5 million . Royalties We have certain royalty commitments associated with the shipment and licensing of certain products. Royalty expense is generally based on a dollar amount per unit shipped or a percentage of the underlying revenue. 74 Table of Contents Guarantees The lease agreements for our corporate headquarters provide for residual value guarantees. The fair value of a residual value guarantee in lease agreements entered into after December 31, 2002, must be recognized as a liability on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. As such, we recognized $5.2 million and $3.0 million in liabilities, related to the extended East and West Towers and Almaden Tower leases, respectively. The balance was amortized to our Consolidated Statements of Income over the life of the original leases. As of November 30, 2012 there was no remaining balance of the unamortized portion of the fair value of the residual value guarantees, for either lease, remaining on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. Indemnifications In the normal course of business, we provide indemnifications of varying scope to customers against claims of intellectual property infringement made by third parties arising from the use of our products and from time to time, we are subject to claims by our customers under these indemnification provisions. Historically, costs related to these indemnification provisions have not been significant and we are unable to estimate the maximum potential impact of these indemnification provisions on our future results of operations. To the extent permitted under Delaware law, we have agreements whereby we indemnify our directors and officers for certain events or occurrences while the director or officer is or was serving at our request in such capacity. The indemnification period covers all pertinent events and occurrences during the director's or officer's lifetime. The maximum potential amount of future payments we could be required to make under these indemnification agreements is unlimited; however, we have director and officer insurance coverage that limits our exposure and enables us to recover a portion of any future amounts paid. 
