CIK: 858877
Company Name: CISCO SYSTEMS INC
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2011-09-14


Item 7. Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Forward-Looking Statements This Annual Report on Form 10-K, including this Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, contains forward-looking statements regarding future events and our future results that are subject to the safe harbors created under the Securities Act of 1933 (the Securities Act ) and the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (the Exchange Act ). All statements other than statements of historical facts are statements that could be deemed forward-looking statements. These statements are based on current expectations, estimates, forecasts, and projections about the industries in which we operate and the beliefs and assumptions of our management. Words such as expects, anticipates, targets, goals, projects, intends, plans, believes, seeks, estimates, continues, endeavors, strives, may, variations of such words and similar expressions are intended to identify such forward-looking statements. In addition, any statements that refer to projections of our future financial performance, our anticipated growth and trends in our businesses, and other characterizations of future events or circumstances are forward-looking statements. Readers are cautioned that these forward-looking statements are only predictions and are subject to risks, uncertainties, and assumptions that are difficult to predict, including those identified below, under Part I, Item 1A. Risk Factors, and elsewhere herein. Therefore, actual results may differ materially and adversely from those expressed in any forward-looking statements. We undertake no obligation to revise or update any forward-looking statements for any reason. OVERVIEW We design, manufacture, and sell Internet Protocol (IP)-based networking and other products related to the communications and information technology (IT) industry and provide services associated with these products and their use. Our products and services are designed to address a wide range of customers needs, including improving productivity, reducing costs, and gaining a competitive advantage. In addition, our products and services are designed to help customers build their own network infrastructures that support tools and applications that allow them to communicate with key stakeholders, including customers, prospects, business partners, suppliers, and employees. We focus on delivering networking products and solutions that are designed to simplify and secure customers network infrastructures. We believe that integrating multiple network services into our products helps our customers reduce their total cost of network ownership. Our product offerings fall into the following four categories: our two core technology categories, Routing and Switching; New Products; and Other Products. In addition to our product offerings, we provide a broad range of service offerings, including technical support services and advanced services. Our customer base spans virtually all types of public and private agencies and businesses, including enterprise businesses (including public sector entities), service providers, commercial customers, and consumers. A summary of our results is as follows (in millions, except percentages and per-share amounts): Fiscal 2011 Fiscal 2010 Variance Net sales $ 43,218 $ 40,040 7.9 % Gross margin percentage 61.4 % 64.0 % (2.6 )pts Research and development $ 5,823 $ 5,273 10.4 % Sales and marketing $ 9,812 $ 8,782 11.7 % General and administrative $ 1,908 $ 1,933 (1.3 )% Total R&D, sales and marketing, general and administrative $ 17,543 $ 15,988 9.7 % Total as a percentage of revenue 40.6 % 39.9 % 0.7 pts Amortization of purchased intangible assets $ 520 $ 491 5.9 % Restructuring and other charges $ 799 $ NM Operating margin percentage 17.8 % 22.9 % (5.1 )pts Net income $ 6,490 $ 7,767 (16.4 )% Net income as a percentage of revenue 15.0 % 19.4 % (4.4 )pts Earnings per share diluted $ 1.17 $ 1.33 (12.0 )% 38 Table of Contents Fiscal 2011 Compared with Fiscal 2010 Net sales increased 8%, with net product sales increasing 6% and service revenue increasing 14%. We experienced net sales increases across each of our geographic segments for both product and service revenue. Total gross margin declined by 2.6 percentage points primarily as a result of higher sales discounts and unfavorable product pricing, product mix shifts, increased amortization and impairment charges from acquisition-related intangible assets, and restructuring charges. As a percentage of revenue, the total for research and development, sales and marketing, and general and administrative expenses increased by 0.7 percentage points, primarily as a result of increased headcount-related costs. Total charges for restructuring and other in fiscal 2011 totaled $923 million, which consisted of $124 million recorded to cost of sales and $799 million recorded to operating expenses. Diluted earnings per share decreased by 12%, a result of a 16% decrease in net income, partially offset by a decline in our diluted share count of 285 million shares. For further details, see our Discussion of Fiscal 2011, 2010 and 2009 beginning on page 50. During fiscal 2011 net sales increased as compared to fiscal 2010; however, our results for the year reflect the effects of certain challenges that we faced. We identified challenges with the public sector market early in the year and we continued to experience declining business momentum with that market throughout the year as spending reductions were being taken across virtually all developed markets. In the service provider market, we experienced challenges in sales of traditional set-top boxes. In addition, we experienced challenges with regard to switching, as switching revenue was flat for fiscal 2011 as compared to fiscal 2010. We believe the performance in switching was due to continued transitions taking place in our product portfolio, the lower public sector spending, and the impact of increased competitive pressures. In fiscal 2011 switching gross margins declined on a year-over-year basis due to the transition of products at the high-end of the portfolio. We also identified significant pressures in our consumer market during the fiscal year and addressed these issues with targeted actions, as discussed below. Beginning in the third quarter of fiscal 2011, we initiated a number of key, targeted actions that are intended to accomplish the following: simplify and focus our organization and operating model; align our cost structure to the transitions in the marketplace; divest or exit underperforming operations; and deliver value to our shareholders. We are taking these actions to align our business based on five foundational priorities: leadership in our core business (routing, switching, and associated services), which includes comprehensive security and mobility solutions; collaboration; data center virtualization and cloud; video; and architectures for business transformation. In connection with these activities, we incurred restructuring and other charges, as discussed above, in the second half of fiscal 2011, and we have announced that we will incur additional charges in fiscal 2012. These actions include implementing a voluntary early retirement program, effecting a workforce reduction, and realigning and restructuring our consumer business, most notably exiting our Flip Video cameras product line. We anticipate that our total expense reduction actions will reduce our annualized operating expense run rate by approximately $1 billion, with the fourth quarter of fiscal 2011 operating expenses as our base. We expect to achieve this annualized run rate reduction target within fiscal 2012. While we experienced the challenges outlined above, there were several positive aspects to our fiscal 2011 performance. For fiscal 2011, the Emerging Markets segment experienced revenue growth of 14%. We had strong growth in our commercial market and in our enterprise market (excluding the public sector). Positive aspects of our results for fiscal 2011 also included revenue growth in New Products of 14%, with strong growth of 31% in collaboration (which includes the impact of the Tandberg ASA ( Tandberg ) acquisition completed at the end of the third quarter of fiscal 2010) and 44% in data center, both key strategic areas for us. For fiscal 2011, service revenue increased by 14%. In addition, as we focused on and addressed the items that impacted our financial performance in the first three quarters of fiscal 2011, in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2011 there was improvement in our general business momentum. 39 Table of Contents Strategy and Focus Areas We announced a plan in May 2011, which we began implementing in fiscal 2011 and expect to complete in fiscal 2012, to realign our sales, services and engineering organizations in order to simplify our operating model and focus on our five foundational priorities: Leadership in our core business (routing, switching, and associated services) which includes comprehensive security and mobility solutions Collaboration Data center virtualization and cloud Video Architectures for business transformation We believe that focusing on these priorities will best position us to continue to expand our share of our customers information technology spending. We are currently undergoing product transitions in our core business and introducing next-generation products with higher price performance and architectural advantages compared to both our prior generation of products and the product offerings of our competitors. We believe that many of these product transitions are gaining momentum based on the strong year-over-year product revenue growth across these next-generation product families. We believe that our strategy and our ability to innovate and execute may enable us to improve our relative competitive position in many of our product areas even in uncertain or difficult business conditions and, therefore, may continue to provide us with long-term growth opportunities. However, we believe that these newly introduced products may continue to negatively impact product gross margins, which we are currently striving to address through various initiatives including value engineering, effective supply chain management, and delivering greater customer value through offers that include hardware, software, and services. We continue to seek to capitalize on market transitions. Market transitions on which we are primarily focused include those related to the increased role of virtualization/the cloud, video, collaboration, networked mobility technologies and the transition from Internet Protocol Version 4 to Internet Protocol Version 6. For example, a market in which a significant market transition is under way is the enterprise data center market, where a transition to virtualization/the cloud is rapidly evolving. There is a continued growing awareness that intelligent networks are becoming the platform for productivity improvement and global competitiveness. We believe that disruption in the enterprise data center market is accelerating, due to changing technology trends such as the increasing adoption of virtualization, the rise in scalable processing, and the advent of cloud computing and cloud-based IT resource deployments and business models. These key terms are defined as follows: Virtualization: refers to the process of aggregating the current siloed data center resources into unified, shared resource pools that can be dynamically delivered to applications on demand thus enabling the ability to move content and applications between devices and the network. The cloud: refers to an information technology hosting and delivery system in which resources, such as servers or software applications, are no longer tethered to a user physical infrastructure but instead are delivered to and consumed by the user on demand as an Internet-based service, whether singularly or with multiple other users simultaneously. This virtualization and cloud-driven market transition in the enterprise data center market is being brought about through the convergence of networking, computing, storage, and software technologies. We are seeking to take advantage of this market transition through, among other things, our Cisco Unified Computing System platform and Cisco Nexus product families, which are designed to integrate the previously siloed technologies in the enterprise data center with a unified architecture. We are also seeking to capitalize on this market transition through the development of other cloud-based product and service offerings through which we intend to enable customers to develop and deploy their own cloud-based IT solutions, including software-as-a-service (SaaS) and other-as-a-service (XaaS) solutions. 40 Table of Contents The competitive landscape in the enterprise data center market is changing. Very large, well-financed, and aggressive competitors are each bringing their own new class of products to address this new market. We expect this competitive market trend to continue. With respect to this market, we believe the network will be the intersection of innovation through an open ecosystem and standards. We expect to see acquisitions, further industry consolidation, and new alliances among companies as they seek to serve the enterprise data center market. As we enter this next market phase, we expect that we will strengthen certain strategic alliances, compete more with certain strategic alliances and partners, and perhaps also encounter new competitors in our attempt to deliver the best solutions for our customers. Other market transitions on which we are focusing particular attention include those related to the increased role of video, collaboration, and networked mobility technologies. The key market transitions relative to the convergence of video, collaboration, and networked mobility technologies, which we believe will drive productivity and growth in network loads, appear to be evolving even more quickly and more significantly than we had previously anticipated. Cisco TelePresence systems are one example of product offerings that have incorporated video, collaboration, and networked mobility technologies, as customers evolve their communications and business models. We are focused on simplifying and expanding the creation, distribution, and use of end-to-end video solutions for businesses and consumers. We believe that the architectural approach that has served us well in the past in addressing market opportunities in the communications and IT industry will be adaptable to other markets. An example of a market where we aim to apply this approach is mobility, where growth of IP traffic on handheld devices is driving the need for more robust architectures, equipment and services in order to accommodate not only an increasing number of worldwide mobile device users, but also increased user demand for broadband-quality business network and consumer web applications to be delivered on such devices. Revenue For fiscal 2011, total revenue increased by 8%. Within total revenue, net product revenue increased 6% and net service revenue increased 14%, each as compared with fiscal 2010. With regard to our geographic segment performance, net revenue increased 6% in the United States and Canada segment, 6% in our European Markets segment, 14% in our Emerging Markets segment, and 12% in our Asia Pacific Markets segment. Customer market product revenue performance in fiscal 2011 was driven by increases, in order of largest percentage growth, in our commercial, service provider, and enterprise markets. Our consumer market experienced a large revenue decline in fiscal 2011, as compared with fiscal 2010, as we exited the Flip Video cameras business and experienced weakness in sales of our networked home products. The 6% increase in product revenue was driven by growth across most of our product categories. In particular, our New Products category experienced a revenue increase of 14%, primarily as a result of the acquisition of Tandberg, which was completed at the end of the third quarter of fiscal 2010. Within the New Products category, increased revenue was driven by growth of 44% in data center and revenue growth of 31% in collaboration. In our core product categories we experienced revenue growth of 6% in Routers, principally as a result of strength in the high-end router product offerings, and flat revenue in our Switches product category, with single-digit revenue growth in fixed-configuration switching products being offset by a similar revenue decline in modular switches. The net service revenue increase was experienced across the technical support services and advanced services categories with revenue increases of 12% and 21%, respectively, in fiscal 2011 as compared with fiscal 2010. For further details see our Discussion of Fiscal 2011, 2010 and 2009 beginning on page 50. Gross Margin In fiscal 2011, our gross margin percentage decreased by approximately 2.6 percentage points, as compared with fiscal 2010. Within this total gross margin change, product gross margin declined by 3.7 percentage points, while service gross margin increased by 1.5 percentage points. The decrease in our product gross margin percentage was a result of higher sales discounts and unfavorable product pricing, unfavorable product mix, and 41 Table of Contents restructuring and other charges. Additionally, increased amortization expense and impairment charges from purchased intangible assets contributed to the decline in product gross margin. Partially offsetting these decreases were lower overall manufacturing costs and higher shipment volume. The increase in our service gross margin was due to increased volume, partially offset by increased costs and unfavorable mix impacts. For further details see our Discussion of Fiscal 2011, 2010 and 2009 beginning on page 50. Operating Expenses Total operating expenses in fiscal 2011, as compared with fiscal 2010, increased by 14%. In fiscal 2011, research and development expenses increased 10%, sales and marketing expenses increased 12%, while general and administrative expenses were down slightly. The collective increase was primarily a result of higher headcount-related expenses. This increase was partially offset by the impact from the fiscal 2011 period containing one less week compared with the fiscal 2010 period. Operating expense as a percentage of revenue increased by 2.4 percentage points, primarily as a result of restructuring and other charges and the higher headcount-related charges along with increased expense from purchased intangible asset amortization and impairments. Other Key Financial Measures The following is a summary of our other key financial measures for fiscal 2011: We generated cash flows from operations of $10.1 billion, compared with $10.2 billion in fiscal 2010. Our cash and cash equivalents, together with our investments, were $44.6 billion at the end of fiscal 2011, compared with $39.9 billion at the end of fiscal 2010. Our total deferred revenue at the end of 2011 was $12.2 billion, compared with $11.1 billion at the end of fiscal 2010. We repurchased approximately 351 million shares of our common stock at an average price of $19.36 per share for an aggregate purchase price of $6.8 billion during fiscal 2011. As of the end of fiscal 2011, the remaining authorized repurchase amount under the stock repurchase program was $10.2 billion with no termination date. We also declared and paid dividends of $658 million to our shareholders during fiscal 2011. Days sales outstanding in accounts receivable (DSO) at the end of fiscal 2011 was 38 days, compared with 41 days at the end of fiscal 2010. Our inventory balance was $1.5 billion at the end of fiscal 2011, compared with $1.3 billion at the end of fiscal 2010. Annualized inventory turns were 11.8 in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2011, compared with 12.6 in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2010. Our product backlog at the end of fiscal 2011 was $4.3 billion, or 10% of fiscal 2011 net sales, compared with $4.1 billion at the end of fiscal 2010, or 10% of fiscal 2010 net sales. CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States requires us to make judgments, assumptions, and estimates that affect the amounts reported in the Consolidated Financial Statements and accompanying notes. Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements describes the significant accounting policies and methods used in the preparation of the Consolidated Financial Statements. The accounting policies described below are significantly affected by critical accounting estimates. Such accounting policies require significant judgments, assumptions, and estimates used in the preparation of the Consolidated Financial Statements, and actual results could differ materially from the amounts reported based on these policies. 42 Table of Contents Revenue Recognition Revenue is recognized when all of the following criteria have been met: Persuasive evidence of an arrangement exists. Contracts, Internet commerce agreements, and customer purchase orders are generally used to determine the existence of an arrangement. Delivery has occurred. Shipping documents and customer acceptance, when applicable, are used to verify delivery. The fee is fixed or determinable. We assess whether the fee is fixed or determinable based on the payment terms associated with the transaction and whether the sales price is subject to refund or adjustment. Collectibility is reasonably assured. We assess collectibility based primarily on the creditworthiness of the customer as determined by credit checks and analysis, as well as the customer payment history. In instances where final acceptance of the product, system, or solution is specified by the customer, revenue is deferred until all acceptance criteria have been met. When a sale involves multiple deliverables, such as sales of products that include services, the multiple deliverables are evaluated to determine the unit of accounting, and the entire fee from the arrangement is allocated to each unit of accounting based on the relative selling price. Revenue is recognized when the revenue recognition criteria for each unit of accounting are met. The amount of product and service revenue recognized in a given period is affected by our judgment as to whether an arrangement includes multiple deliverables and, if so, our valuation of the units of accounting for multiple deliverables. According to the accounting guidance prescribed in Accounting Standards Codification (ASC) 605, Revenue Recognition , we use vendor-specific objective evidence of selling price (VSOE) for each of those units, when available. We determine VSOE based on our normal pricing and discounting practices for the specific product or service when sold separately. In determining VSOE, we require that a substantial majority of the selling prices for a product or service fall within a reasonably narrow pricing range, generally evidenced by approximately 80% of such historical standalone transactions falling within plus or minus 15% of the median selling price. VSOE exists across most of our product and service offerings. In certain limited circumstances when VSOE does not exist, we apply the selling price hierarchy to applicable multiple-deliverable arrangements. Under the selling price hierarchy, third-party evidence of selling price (TPE) will be considered if VSOE does not exist, and estimated selling price (ESP) will be used if neither VSOE nor TPE is available. Generally, we are not able to determine TPE because our go-to-market strategy differs from that of others in our markets, and the extent of customization varies among comparable products or services from our peers. In determining ESP, we apply significant judgment as we weigh a variety of factors, based on the facts and circumstances of the arrangement. We typically arrive at an ESP for a product or service that is not sold separately by considering company-specific factors such as geographies, competitive landscape, internal costs, gross margin objectives, pricing practices used to establish bundled pricing, and existing portfolio pricing and discounting. Some of our sales arrangements have multiple deliverables containing software and related software support components. Such sale arrangements are subject to the accounting guidance in ASC 985-605, Software-Revenue Recognition . As our business and offerings evolve over time, our pricing practices may be required to be modified accordingly, which could result in changes in selling prices, including both VSOE and ESP, in subsequent periods. There were no material impacts during fiscal 2011, nor do we currently expect a material impact in fiscal 2012 on our revenue recognition due to any changes in our VSOE, TPE, or ESP. Revenue deferrals relate to the timing of revenue recognition for specific transactions based on financing arrangements, service, support, and other factors. Financing arrangements may include sales-type, direct-financing, and operating leases, loans, and guarantees of third-party financing. Our deferred revenue for products was $3.7 billion as of both July 30, 2011 and July 31, 2010. Technical support services revenue is deferred and 43 Table of Contents recognized ratably over the period during which the services are to be performed, which typically is from one to three years. Advanced services revenue is recognized upon delivery or completion of performance. Our deferred revenue for services was $8.5 billion and $7.4 billion as of July 30, 2011 and July 31, 2010, respectively. We make sales to distributors and retail partners and generally recognize revenue based on a sell-through method using information provided by them. Our distributors and retail partners participate in various cooperative marketing and other programs, and we maintain estimated accruals and allowances for these programs. If actual credits received by our distributors and retail partners under these programs were to deviate significantly from our estimates, which are based on historical experience, our revenue could be adversely affected. Allowances for Receivables and Sales Returns The allowances for receivables were as follows (in millions, except percentages): July 30, 2011 July 31, 2010 Allowance for doubtful accounts $ 204 $ 235 Percentage of gross accounts receivable 4.2 % 4.6 % Allowance for credit loss lease receivables $ 237 $ 207 Percentage of gross lease receivables 7.6 % 8.6 % Allowance for credit loss loan receivables $ 103 $ 73 Percentage of gross loan receivables 7.0 % 5.8 % The allowances are based on our assessment of the collectibility of customer accounts. We regularly review the adequacy of these allowances by considering internal factors such as historical experience, credit quality and age of the receivable balances as well as external factors such as economic conditions that may affect a customer ability to pay, historical default rates, and long-term historical loss rates published by major third-party credit-rating agencies. We also consider the concentration of receivables outstanding with a particular customer in assessing the adequacy of our allowances. In addition, we evaluate the credit quality of our financing receivables and any associated allowance for credit loss by applying the relevant loss factors based on our internal credit risk rating for the respective financing receivables, disaggregated by segment and class. See Note 7 to the Consolidated Financial Statements. Determination of loss factors associated with internal credit risk ratings is complex and subjective. Our ongoing consideration of all these factors could result in an increase in our allowance for credit loss in the future, which could adversely affect our net income. Similarly, if a major customer creditworthiness deteriorates, if actual defaults are higher than our historical experience, or if other circumstances arise, our estimates of the recoverability of amounts due to us could be overstated, and additional allowances could be required, which could have an adverse impact on our revenue. Both accounts receivable and financing receivables are charged off at the point when they are considered uncollectible. The decline in our allowance for doubtful accounts as a percentage of our gross accounts receivable was primarily due to the charge-off of certain uncollectible receivables that had been fully reserved. A reserve for future sales returns is established based on historical trends in product return rates. The reserve for future sales returns as of July 30, 2011 and July 31, 2010 was $106 million and $90 million, respectively, and was recorded as a reduction of our accounts receivable. If the actual future returns were to deviate from the historical data on which the reserve had been established, our revenue could be adversely affected. Inventory Valuation and Liability for Purchase Commitments with Contract Manufacturers and Suppliers Our inventory balance was $1.5 billion and $1.3 billion as of July 30, 2011 and July 31, 2010, respectively. Inventory is written down based on excess and obsolete inventories determined primarily by future demand forecasts. Inventory write-downs are measured as the difference between the cost of the inventory and market, based upon assumptions about future demand, and are charged to the provision for inventory, which is a 44 Table of Contents component of our cost of sales. At the point of the loss recognition, a new, lower cost basis for that inventory is established, and subsequent changes in facts and circumstances do not result in the restoration or increase in that newly established cost basis. We record a liability for firm, noncancelable, and unconditional purchase commitments with contract manufacturers and suppliers for quantities in excess of our future demand forecasts consistent with the valuation of our excess and obsolete inventory. As of July 30, 2011, the liability for these purchase commitments was $168 million, compared with $135 million as of July 31, 2010, and was included in other current liabilities. Our provision for inventory was $196 million, $94 million, and $93 million for fiscal 2011, 2010, and 2009, respectively. The provision for the liability related to purchase commitments with contract manufacturers and suppliers was $114 million, $8 million, and $87 million in fiscal 2011, 2010, and 2009, respectively. The increase in the provision for inventory and the provision for the liability related to purchase commitments with contract manufacturers and suppliers was due in part to charges recorded in connection with the restructuring and realignment of our consumer business. Additionally, the provision for the liability related to purchase commitments with contract manufacturers and suppliers increased due to higher provisions related to certain component supplies that we secured for our extended needs, and due to higher contract manufacturer excess and obsolescence charges. If there were to be a sudden and significant decrease in demand for our products, or if there were a higher incidence of inventory obsolescence because of rapidly changing technology and customer requirements, we could be required to increase our inventory write-downs, and our liability for purchase commitments with contract manufacturers and suppliers, and accordingly gross margin could be adversely affected. We regularly evaluate our exposure for inventory write-downs and the adequacy of our liability for purchase commitments. Inventory and supply chain management remain areas of focus as we balance the need to maintain supply chain flexibility to help ensure competitive lead times with the risk of inventory obsolescence, particularly in light of current macroeconomic uncertainties and conditions and the resulting potential for changes in future demand forecast. Warranty Costs The liability for product warranties, included in other current liabilities, was $342 million as of July 30, 2011, compared with $360 million as of July 31, 2010. See Note 12 to the Consolidated Financial Statements. Our products are generally covered by a warranty for periods ranging from 90 days to five years, and for some products we provide a limited lifetime warranty. We accrue for warranty costs as part of our cost of sales based on associated material costs, technical support labor costs, and associated overhead. Material cost is estimated based primarily upon historical trends in the volume of product returns within the warranty period and the cost to repair or replace the equipment. Technical support labor cost is estimated based primarily upon historical trends in the rate of customer cases and the cost to support the customer cases within the warranty period. Overhead cost is applied based on estimated time to support warranty activities. The provision for product warranties issued during fiscal 2011, 2010, and 2009 was $456 million, $469 million, and $374 million, respectively. If we experience an increase in warranty claims compared with our historical experience, or if the cost of servicing warranty claims is greater than expected, our gross margin could be adversely affected. Share-Based Compensation Expense Share-based compensation expense is presented as follows (in millions): Years Ended July 30, 2011 July 31, 2010 July 25, 2009 Share-based compensation expense $ 1,620 $ 1,517 $ 1,231 Prior to the initial declaration of a quarterly cash dividend on March 17, 2011, the fair value of restricted stock and restricted stock units was measured based on an expected dividend yield of 0% as we did not historically pay 45 Table of Contents cash dividends on our common stock. For awards granted on or subsequent to March 17, 2011, we used an annualized dividend yield based on the per share dividends declared by our Board of Directors. See Note 14 to the Consolidated Financial Statements. The determination of the fair value of employee stock options and employee stock purchase rights on the date of grant using an option-pricing model is affected by our stock price as well as assumptions regarding a number of highly complex and subjective variables. For employee stock options and employee stock purchase rights, these variables include, but are not limited to, the expected stock price volatility over the term of the awards, the risk-free interest rate, and expected dividends as of the grant date. For employee stock options, we used the implied volatility for two-year traded options on our stock as the expected volatility assumption required in the lattice-binomial model. For employee stock purchase rights, we used the implied volatility for traded options (with lives corresponding to the expected life of the employee stock purchase rights) on our stock. The selection of the implied volatility approach was based upon the availability of actively traded options on our stock and our assessment that implied volatility is more representative of future stock price trends than historical volatility. The valuation of employee stock options is also impacted by kurtosis and skewness, which are technical measures of the distribution of stock price returns and the actual and projected employee stock option exercise behaviors. Because share-based compensation expense is based on awards ultimately expected to vest, it has been reduced for forfeitures. If factors change and we employ different assumptions in the application of our option-pricing model in future periods or if we experience different forfeiture rates, the compensation expense that is derived may differ significantly from what we have recorded in the current year. Fair Value Measurements Our fixed income and publicly traded equity securities, collectively, are reflected in the Consolidated Balance Sheets at a fair value of $36.9 billion as of July 30, 2011, compared with $35.3 billion as of July 31, 2010. Our fixed income investment portfolio, as of July 30, 2011, consisted primarily of high quality investment-grade securities. See Note 8 to the Consolidated Financial Statements. As described more fully in Note 9 to the Consolidated Financial Statements, a valuation hierarchy is based on the level of independent, objective evidence available regarding the value of the investments. It encompasses three classes of investments: Level 1 consists of securities for which there are quoted prices in active markets for identical securities; Level 2 consists of securities for which observable inputs other than Level 1 inputs are used, such as quoted prices for similar securities in active markets or quoted prices for identical securities in less active markets and model-derived valuations for which the variables are derived from, or corroborated by, observable market data; and Level 3 consists of securities for which there are unobservable inputs to the valuation methodology that are significant to the measurement of the fair value. Our Level 2 securities are valued using quoted market prices for similar instruments or nonbinding market prices that are corroborated by observable market data. We use inputs such as actual trade data, benchmark yields, broker/dealer quotes, and other similar data, which are obtained from independent pricing vendors, quoted market prices, or other sources to determine the ultimate fair value of our assets and liabilities. We use such pricing data as the primary input, to which we have not made any material adjustments during fiscal 2011 and fiscal 2010, to make our assessments and determinations as to the ultimate valuation of our investment portfolio. We are ultimately responsible for the financial statements and underlying estimates. The inputs and fair value are reviewed for reasonableness, may be further validated by comparison to publicly available information, and could be adjusted based on market indices or other information that management deems material to its estimate of fair value. The assessment of fair value can be difficult and subjective. However, given the relative reliability of the inputs we use to value our investment portfolio, and because substantially all of our valuation inputs are obtained using quoted market prices for similar or identical assets, we do not believe that the nature of estimates and assumptions affected by levels of subjectivity and judgment was 46 Table of Contents material to the valuation of the investment portfolio as of July 30, 2011. Level 3 assets do not represent a significant portion of our total investment portfolio as of July 30, 2011. Other-than-Temporary Impairments We recognize an impairment charge when the declines in the fair values of our fixed income or publicly traded equity securities below their cost basis are judged to be other than temporary. The ultimate value realized on these securities, to the extent unhedged, is subject to market price volatility until they are sold. If the fair value of a debt security is less than its amortized cost, we assess whether the impairment is other than temporary. An impairment is considered other than temporary if (i) we have the intent to sell the security, (ii) it is more likely than not that we will be required to sell the security before recovery of its entire amortized cost basis, or (iii) we do not expect to recover the entire amortized cost of the security. If an impairment is considered other than temporary based on (i) or (ii) described in the prior sentence, the entire difference between the amortized cost and the fair value of the security is recognized in earnings. If an impairment is considered other than temporary based on condition (iii), the amount representing credit loss, defined as the difference between the present value of the cash flows expected to be collected and the amortized cost basis of the debt security, will be recognized in earnings, and the amount relating to all other factors will be recognized in other comprehensive income (OCI). In estimating the amount and timing of cash flows expected to be collected, we consider all available information, including past events, current conditions, the remaining payment terms of the security, the financial condition of the issuer, expected defaults, and the value of underlying collateral. For publicly traded equity securities, we consider various factors in determining whether we should recognize an impairment charge, including the length of time and extent to which the fair value has been less than our cost basis, the financial condition and near-term prospects of the issuer, and our intent and ability to hold the investment for a period of time sufficient to allow for any anticipated recovery in market value. There were no significant impairment charges on our investments in publicly traded equity securities in fiscal 2011 and 2010. There were no impairment charges on investments in fixed income securities in fiscal 2011 and 2010. In fiscal 2009, impairment charges of $258 million for investments in fixed income securities and publicly traded equity securities were recognized in earnings. Our ongoing consideration of all the factors described previously could result in additional impairment charges in the future, which could adversely affect our net income. We also have investments in privately held companies, some of which are in the startup or development stages. As of July 30, 2011, our investments in privately held companies were $796 million, compared with $756 million as of July 31, 2010, and were included in other assets. See Note 6 to the Consolidated Financial Statements. We monitor these investments for events or circumstances indicative of potential impairment and will make appropriate reductions in carrying values if we determine that an impairment charge is required, based primarily on the financial condition and near-term prospects of these companies. These investments are inherently risky because the markets for the technologies or products these companies are developing are typically in the early stages and may never materialize. Our impairment charges on investments in privately held companies were $10 million, $25 million, and $85 million in fiscal 2011, 2010, and 2009, respectively. Goodwill and Purchased Intangible Asset Impairments Our methodology for allocating the purchase price relating to purchase acquisitions is determined through established valuation techniques. Goodwill represents a residual value as of the acquisition date, which in most cases results in measuring goodwill as an excess of the purchase consideration transferred plus the fair value of any noncontrolling interest in the acquired company over the fair value of net assets acquired, including contingent consideration. We perform goodwill impairment tests on an annual basis in the fourth fiscal quarter and between annual tests in certain circumstances for each reporting unit. Effective in fiscal 2010, the assessment 47 Table of Contents of fair value for goodwill and purchased intangible assets is based on factors that market participants would use in an orderly transaction in accordance with the new accounting guidance for the fair value measurement of nonfinancial assets. The goodwill recorded in the Consolidated Balance Sheets as of July 30, 2011 and July 31, 2010 was $16.8 billion and $16.7 billion, respectively. In response to changes in industry and market conditions, we could be required to strategically realign our resources and consider restructuring, disposing of, or otherwise exiting businesses, which could result in an impairment of goodwill. As a result of the pending divestiture of our manufacturing operations in Juarez, Mexico, we recorded an adjustment of $63 million to reduce goodwill associated with these operations. There was no impairment of goodwill resulting from our annual impairment testing in fiscal 2011, 2010 or 2009. The excess of the fair value over the carrying value for each of our reporting units ranged from approximately $7 billion for the Asia Pacific Markets segment to approximately $12 billion for the United States and Canada segment as of July 30, 2011. We performed a sensitivity analysis for goodwill impairment with respect to each of our respective reporting units and determined that a hypothetical 10% decline in the fair value of each reporting unit as of July 30, 2011 would not result in an impairment of goodwill for any reporting unit. We make judgments about the recoverability of purchased intangible assets with finite lives whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that an impairment may exist. Recoverability of purchased intangible assets with finite lives is measured by comparing the carrying amount of the asset to the future undiscounted cash flows the asset is expected to generate. We review indefinite-lived intangible assets for impairment annually or whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying value may not be recoverable. Recoverability of indefinite-lived intangible assets is measured by comparing the carrying amount of the asset to the future discounted cash flows the asset is expected to generate. If the asset is considered to be impaired, the amount of any impairment is measured as the difference between the carrying value and the fair value of the impaired asset. Assumptions and estimates about future values and remaining useful lives of our purchased intangible assets are complex and subjective. They can be affected by a variety of factors, including external factors such as industry and economic trends, and internal factors such as changes in our business strategy and our internal forecasts. Our impairment charges related to purchased intangible assets were $164 million, $28 million, and $95 million during fiscal 2011, 2010, and 2009, respectively. Our ongoing consideration of all the factors described previously could result in additional impairment charges in the future, which could adversely affect our net income. Income Taxes We are subject to income taxes in the United States and numerous foreign jurisdictions. Our effective tax rates differ from the statutory rate, primarily due to the tax impact of state taxes, foreign operations, research and development (R&D) tax credits, tax audit settlements, nondeductible compensation, international realignments, and transfer pricing adjustments. Our effective tax rate was 17.1%, 17.5%, and 20.3% in fiscal 2011, 2010, and 2009, respectively. Significant judgment is required in evaluating our uncertain tax positions and determining our provision for income taxes. Although we believe our reserves are reasonable, no assurance can be given that the final tax outcome of these matters will not be different from that which is reflected in our historical income tax provisions and accruals. We adjust these reserves in light of changing facts and circumstances, such as the closing of a tax audit or the refinement of an estimate. To the extent that the final tax outcome of these matters is different than the amounts recorded, such differences will impact the provision for income taxes in the period in which such determination is made. The provision for income taxes includes the impact of reserve provisions and changes to reserves that are considered appropriate, as well as the related net interest. Significant judgment is also required in determining any valuation allowance recorded against deferred tax assets. In assessing the need for a valuation allowance, we consider all available evidence, including past operating results, estimates of future taxable income, and the feasibility of tax planning strategies. In the event 48 Table of Contents that we change our determination as to the amount of deferred tax assets that can be realized, we will adjust our valuation allowance with a corresponding impact to the provision for income taxes in the period in which such determination is made. Our provision for income taxes is subject to volatility and could be adversely impacted by earnings being lower than anticipated in countries that have lower tax rates and higher than anticipated in countries that have higher tax rates; by changes in the valuation of our deferred tax assets and liabilities; by expiration of or lapses in the R&D tax credit laws; by transfer pricing adjustments including the effect of acquisitions on our intercompany R&D cost-sharing arrangement and legal structure; by tax effects of nondeductible compensation; by tax costs related to intercompany realignments; by changes in accounting principles; or by changes in tax laws and regulations including possible U.S. changes to the taxation of earnings of our foreign subsidiaries, the deductibility of expenses attributable to foreign income, or the foreign tax credit rules. Significant judgment is required to determine the recognition and measurement attributes prescribed in the accounting guidance for uncertainty in income taxes. The accounting guidance for uncertainty in income taxes applies to all income tax positions, including the potential recovery of previously paid taxes, which if settled unfavorably could adversely impact our provision for income taxes or additional paid-in capital. Further, as a result of certain of our ongoing employment and capital investment actions and commitments, our income in certain countries is subject to reduced tax rates and in some cases is wholly exempt from tax. Our failure to meet these commitments could adversely impact our provision for income taxes. In addition, we are subject to the continuous examination of our income tax returns by the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) and other tax authorities. We regularly assess the likelihood of adverse outcomes resulting from these examinations to determine the adequacy of our provision for income taxes. There can be no assurance that the outcomes from these continuous examinations will not have an adverse impact on our operating results and financial condition. Loss Contingencies We are subject to the possibility of various losses arising in the ordinary course of business. We consider the likelihood of loss or impairment of an asset or the incurrence of a liability, as well as our ability to reasonably estimate the amount of loss, in determining loss contingencies. An estimated loss contingency is accrued when it is probable that an asset has been impaired or a liability has been incurred and the amount of loss can be reasonably estimated. We regularly evaluate current information available to us to determine whether such accruals should be adjusted and whether new accruals are required. Third parties, including customers, have in the past and may in the future assert claims or initiate litigation related to exclusive patent, copyright, trademark, and other intellectual property rights to technologies and related standards that are relevant to us. These assertions have increased over time as a result of our growth and the general increase in the pace of patent claims assertions, particularly in the United States. If any infringement or other intellectual property claim made against us by any third party is successful, or if we fail to develop non-infringing technology or license the proprietary rights on commercially reasonable terms and conditions, our business, operating results, and financial condition could be materially and adversely affected. 49 Table of Contents DISCUSSION OF FISCAL 2011, 2010, AND 2009 Fiscal 2011, 2010, and 2009 were 52, 53, and 52-week fiscal years, respectively. Net Sales The following table presents the breakdown of net sales between product and service revenue (in millions, except percentages): Years Ended July 30, 2011 July 31, 2010 Variance in Dollars Variance in Percent July 31, 2010 July 25, 2009 Variance in Dollars Variance in Percent Net sales: Product $ 34,526 $ 32,420 $ 2,106 6.5 % $ 32,420 $ 29,131 $ 3,289 11.3 % Percentage of net sales 79.9 % 81.0 % 81.0 % 80.7 % Service 8,692 7,620 1,072 14.1 % 7,620 6,986 634 9.1 % Percentage of net sales 20.1 % 19.0 % 19.0 % 19.3 % Total $ 43,218 $ 40,040 $ 3,178 7.9 % $ 40,040 $ 36,117 $ 3,923 10.9 % We manage our business primarily on a geographic basis, organized into four geographic segments. Our net sales, which include product and service revenue for each segment are summarized in the following table (in millions, except percentages): Years Ended July 30, 2011 July 31, 2010 Variance in Dollars Variance in Percent July 31, 2010 July 25, 2009 Variance in Dollars Variance in Percent Net sales: United States and Canada $ 23,115 $ 21,740 $ 1,375 6.3 % $ 21,740 $ 19,345 $ 2,395 12.4 % Percentage of net sales 53.5 % 54.3 % 54.3 % 53.5 % European Markets 8,536 8,048 488 6.1 % 8,048 7,683 365 4.8 % Percentage of net sales 19.8 % 20.1 % 20.1 % 21.3 % Emerging Markets 4,966 4,367 599 13.7 % 4,367 3,999 368 9.2 % Percentage of net sales 11.4 % 10.9 % 10.9 % 11.1 % Asia Pacific Markets 6,601 5,885 716 12.2 % 5,885 5,090 795 15.6 % Percentage of net sales 15.3 % 14.7 % 14.7 % 14.1 % Total $ 43,218 $ 40,040 $ 3,178 7.9 % $ 40,040 $ 36,117 $ 3,923 10.9 % Fiscal 2011 Compared with Fiscal 2010 For fiscal 2011, as compared with fiscal 2010, net sales increased by 8%. Within total net sales growth, net product sales increased by 6%, while service revenue increased by 14%. Our product and service revenue totals each reflected sales growth across each of our geographic segments. The sales increase was due to customer acceptance of the new product transitions taking place in our core business, sales growth in our New Products category, and the strong performance of our services solutions. We conduct business globally in numerous currencies. The direct effect of foreign currency fluctuations on sales has not been material because our sales are primarily denominated in U.S. dollars. However, if the U.S. dollar strengthens relative to other currencies, such strengthening could have an indirect effect on our sales to the extent it raises the cost of our products to non-U.S. customers and thereby reduces demand. A weaker U.S. dollar could have the opposite effect. However, the precise indirect effect of currency fluctuations is difficult to measure or predict because our sales are influenced by many factors in addition to the impact of such currency fluctuations. In addition to the impact of macroeconomic factors, including a reduced IT spending environment and budget-driven reductions in spending by government entities, net sales by segment in a particular period may be significantly impacted by several factors related to revenue recognition, including the complexity of transactions 50 Table of Contents such as multiple-element arrangements; the mix of financing arrangements provided to our channel partners and customers; and final acceptance of the product, system, or solution, among other factors. In addition, certain customers tend to make large and sporadic purchases, and the net sales related to these transactions may also be affected by the timing of revenue recognition, which in turn would impact the net sales of the relevant segment. As has been the case in our Emerging Markets segment from time to time, customers require greater levels of financing arrangements, service, and support and this may occur in future periods, which may also impact the timing of the recognition of revenue. Fiscal 2010 Compared with Fiscal 2009 Net sales increased across all of our geographic segments in fiscal 2010 as compared with fiscal 2009. In our view, the sales increase in fiscal 2010 was a result of the global demand recovery during fiscal 2010 in comparison to the weakness we experienced for most of fiscal 2009. We had an increase in both net product sales and service revenue in fiscal 2010 compared with fiscal 2009. From a customer market perspective, in fiscal 2010 we saw an improved demand environment for capital expenditures and balanced growth across all of our customer markets. Net Product Sales by Segment The following table presents the breakdown of net product sales by segment (in millions, except percentages): Years Ended July 30, 2011 July 31, 2010 Variance in Dollars Variance in Percent July 31, 2010 July 25, 2009 Variance in Dollars Variance in Percent Net product sales: United States and Canada $ 17,705 $ 16,915 $ 790 4.7 % $ 16,915 $ 14,866 $ 2,049 13.8 % Percentage of net product sales 51.3 % 52.2 % 52.2 % 51.0 % European Markets 7,200 6,821 379 5.6 % 6,821 6,579 242 3.7 % Percentage of net product sales 20.9 % 21.0 % 21.0 % 22.6 % Emerging Markets 4,174 3,728 446 12.0 % 3,728 3,377 351 10.4 % Percentage of net product sales 12.0 % 11.5 % 11.5 % 11.6 % Asia Pacific Markets 5,447 4,956 491 9.9 % 4,956 4,309 647 15.0 % Percentage of net product sales 15.8 % 15.3 % 15.3 % 14.8 % Total $ 34,526 $ 32,420 $ 2,106 6.5 % $ 32,420 $ 29,131 $ 3,289 11.3 % United States and Canada Fiscal 2011 Compared with Fiscal 2010 For fiscal 2011, as compared with fiscal 2010, net product sales in the United States and Canada segment increased by 5%. Net product sales increased 3% in the United States and increased 31% in Canada. The increase in net product sales was across most of our customer markets in the United States and Canada segment, led by the net product sales growth in our commercial market, followed by smaller increases in net product sales growth in both the service provider and enterprise markets. Net product sales in the consumer market declined during fiscal 2011 as we exited the Flip Video cameras business and experienced weakness in sales of our networked home products. Within the enterprise market, net product sales to the U.S. public sector decreased due to a decrease in sales to the U.S. federal government, while sales to the state and local government submarket were flat. The challenges experienced in fiscal 2011 within the public sector submarket of our enterprise market may continue into fiscal 2012. Fiscal 2010 Compared with Fiscal 2009 Net product sales in the United States and Canada segment increased during fiscal 2010 compared with fiscal 2009 due to the improvement in the economic environment in this segment. The increase in net product sales 51 Table of Contents compared with fiscal 2009 was across all of our customer markets in the United States and Canada segment, led by the commercial and enterprise markets. Within the enterprise market, net product sales to the U.S. federal government increased as compared with fiscal 2009. Our net product sales in the consumer market for fiscal 2010 increased compared with fiscal 2009, primarily due to sales of Flip Video cameras from the acquisition of Pure Digital, which we acquired in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2009. From a product perspective, the increase in fiscal 2010 net product sales in this segment was driven in large part by higher sales of our switching products. European Markets Fiscal 2011 Compared with Fiscal 2010 For fiscal 2011, as compared with fiscal 2010, net product sales in the European Markets segment increased by 6%. The increase in net product sales in the European Markets segment was due to growth in the service provider and enterprise markets. Sales to the commercial market were flat, while sales in the consumer market declined for fiscal 2011, as compared with fiscal 2010. From a country perspective, for fiscal 2011 as compared with fiscal 2010, net product sales increased by approximately 17% in France, 13% in the Netherlands, 2% in Germany, 1% in the United Kingdom, and were flat in Italy. Fiscal 2010 Compared with Fiscal 2009 The slight increase in net product sales in the European Markets segment in fiscal 2010 compared with fiscal 2009 was driven by increased sales across most of our customer markets in this segment, with particular strength in the enterprise and commercial markets. From a country perspective, net product sales increased in the United Kingdom and France while decreasing for both Germany and Italy compared with fiscal 2009. Our European Markets segment grew more slowly relative to other segments on a year-over-year basis, which we believe was attributable in part to the fact that many of the countries in this segment were among the last countries to begin experiencing the economic downturn in fiscal 2009, and consequently some of these countries are recovering later. Product sales growth in this segment began to strengthen in the second half of fiscal 2010. During fiscal 2010 we did not see significant negative effects on our net product sales in the European Markets segment from the economic and financial turmoil related to sovereign debt issues in certain European countries. Emerging Markets Fiscal 2011 Compared with Fiscal 2010 For fiscal 2011, as compared with fiscal 2010, net product sales in the Emerging Markets segment increased by 12%. The net product sales increase was led by a sales increase in the commercial market followed by sales increases in the service provider and enterprise markets. Net product sales in the consumer market declined for fiscal 2011, as compared with fiscal 2010. From a country perspective, net product sales increased by approximately 63% in Russia, 20% in Brazil, and 8% in Mexico. Fiscal 2010 Compared with Fiscal 2009 Net product sales in the Emerging Markets segment increased, primarily as a result of increased product sales across all of our customer markets, with the exception of the consumer market. We experienced a return to stronger year-over-year sales growth in the second half of fiscal 2010, led by Brazil, Mexico, and Russia. Asia Pacific Markets Fiscal 2011 Compared with Fiscal 2010 For fiscal 2011, as compared with fiscal 2010, net product sales in our Asia Pacific Markets segment increased by 10%. The increase was led by sales growth in the commercial and enterprise markets and to a lesser extent sales growth in the service provider market. Net product sales in the consumer market declined for fiscal 2011, as 52 Table of Contents compared with fiscal 2010. During fiscal 2011 we experienced weakness within our public sector market in our Asia Pacific Markets segment. We may continue to experience challenging conditions in the public sector market in fiscal 2012. From a country perspective, net product sales increased by approximately 13% in India, 11% in China, 8% in Australia, and 7% in Japan. Fiscal 2010 Compared with Fiscal 2009 The increase in net product sales in the Asia Pacific Markets segment in fiscal 2010 compared with fiscal 2009 was attributable to increased product sales to our enterprise, commercial, and service provider markets in this segment. In fiscal 2010 we experienced strength in most countries, including China, Australia and Japan, each of which is among the largest countries in this segment. Net Product Sales by Groups of Similar Products In addition to the primary view on a geographic basis, we also prepare financial information related to groups of similar products and customer markets for various purposes. Effective as of the first quarter of fiscal 2011, we have regrouped our presentation of products and technologies formerly grouped as either Advanced Technologies or Other into two new categories called New Products and Other Products. The New Products category includes some products that had previously been grouped in the category called Advanced Technology products and also includes some products that had previously been in the category called Other. The New Products category consists of the following subcategories: video connected home (networked home, Pure Digital products, video systems, and cable products); collaboration (unified communications and Cisco TelePresence); security; wireless; and data center (application networking services, storage, and Cisco Unified Computing System products). The Other Products category consists primarily of optical networking products and emerging technology products. The following table presents net sales for groups of similar products (in millions, except percentages): Years Ended July 30, 2011 July 31, 2010 Variance in Dollars Variance in Percent July 31, 2010 July 25, 2009 Variance in Dollars Variance in Percent Net product sales: Routers $ 7,100 $ 6,728 $ 372 5.5 % $ 6,728 $ 6,521 $ 207 3.2 % Percentage of net product sales 20.6 % 20.8 % 20.8 % 22.4 % Switches 13,418 13,454 (36 ) (0.3 %) 13,454 11,923 1,531 12.8 % Percentage of net product sales 38.9 % 41.5 % 41.5 % 40.9 % New Products 13,025 11,386 1,639 14.4 % 11,386 9,859 1,527 15.5 % Percentage of net product sales 37.7 % 35.1 % 35.1 % 33.8 % Other Products 983 852 131 15.4 % 852 828 24 2.9 % Percentage of net product sales 2.8 % 2.6 % 2.6 % 2.9 % Total $ 34,526 $ 32,420 $ 2,106 6.5 % $ 32,420 $ 29,131 $ 3,289 11.3 % Routers Fiscal 2011 Compared with Fiscal 2010 We categorize our routers primarily as high-end, midrange, and low-end routers. For fiscal 2011 as compared with fiscal 2010, growth in sales of our Routers product category was driven by an 8%, or $334 million, increase in sales of our high-end routers. Within high-end router products, the increase was driven by higher sales of Cisco Aggregation Services Routers (ASR) 5000 products from our December 2009 acquisition of Starent and higher sales of the Cisco ASR 1000 and Cisco ASR 9000 products. These increases were partially offset by lower sales of Cisco 12000 Series Routers and Cisco 7600 Series Routers. For fiscal 2011, midrange and low-end routers each increased sales by 2%, or $16 million, and $30 million, respectively, compared with fiscal 2010. Small office routing experienced a small revenue decline. 53 Table of Contents Fiscal 2010 Compared with Fiscal 2009 Our sales of routers increased in our high-end category in fiscal 2010 by 10%, or $409 million, while sales of routers declined in both the midrange and low-end categories by 11% and 5%, respectively. Within the high-end router category, the increase was driven by higher sales of the Cisco CRS-1 Carrier Routing System, Cisco 7600 Series Routers, and Cisco ASR 1000 and 9000 products, and the inclusion of the Cisco ASR 5000 products from our acquisition of Starent, partially offset by lower sales of Cisco 12000 Series Routers. Our decline in sales of midrange and low-end routers was primarily due to a decline in sales of our integrated services routers. Switches Fiscal 2011 Compared with Fiscal 2010 Net product sales in our Switches product category were relatively flat in fiscal 2011 compared with fiscal 2010, which was due to the combined effect of continuing transitions taking place in our product portfolio, lower public sector spending, and the impact of increased competitive pressures. Since approximately 25% of our switching business is derived from sales to the public sector, reductions in public sector spending in developed markets around the world could continue to present challenges for our switching sales performance. Within our Switches product category, higher sales of LAN fixed-configuration switches partially offset lower sales of modular switches. Sales of LAN fixed-configuration switches increased 3%, or $240 million, while sales of modular switches decreased 4%, or $275 million. The increase in LAN fixed-configuration switches was primarily due to increased sales of Cisco Catalyst 2960 Series Switches and Cisco Nexus 2000 and 5000 Series Switches, partially offset by decreased sales of Cisco Catalyst 3560 and 3750 Series Switches. The decrease in sales of modular switches was primarily due to decreased sales of Cisco Catalyst 6500 Series Switches, partially offset by increased sales of Cisco Nexus 7000 and Cisco Catalyst 4500 Series Switches. Fiscal 2010 Compared with Fiscal 2009 The increase in net product sales related to switches in fiscal 2010 compared with fiscal 2009 was due primarily to higher sales of our modular and LAN fixed-configuration switches of approximately $882 million and $649 million, respectively. The increase in sales of modular switches was primarily due to the increased sales of our Cisco Nexus 7000 and Cisco Catalyst 4500 Series Switches, partially offset by decreased sales of our Cisco Catalyst 6000 Series Switches. The increase in LAN fixed-configuration switches was primarily due to increased sales of Cisco Catalyst 2960 Series Switches and Cisco Nexus 5000 and 2000 Series Switches, partially offset by decreased sales of our Cisco Catalyst 3560 Series Switches. New Products Fiscal 2011 Compared with Fiscal 2010 Sales of collaboration products increased by 31%, or $972 million, primarily due to the inclusion of Tandberg sales within our Cisco TelePresence systems product line following our fiscal 2010 third quarter acquisition of Tandberg, and a 4% increase in sales of unified communications products, primarily IP phones and collaborative web-based offerings. Sales of data center products increased by 44%, or $491 million, due to sales growth of over 273%, or $496 million, of Cisco Unified Computing System products and due to storage sales growth of 9%, or $43 million, attributable to increased sales of our Cisco MDS 9000 product line. These increases were partially offset by a 12% decline in sales of application networking services products. Sales of wireless products increased by 26%, or $303 million, which was primarily due to continued customer adoption of and migration to the Cisco Unified Wireless Network architecture. Sales of video connected home products were relatively flat. Sales of service provider video products increased by 6%, or $208 million, as increased sales of cable and cable modem products of 18% and 54 Table of Contents 55%, respectively, were offset by a sales decline in video systems of 1%. The increased sales of service provider video products were partially offset by lower sales of virtual home products, due to a decline of 26% in sales of networked home products and due to an 11% decline in sales of Flip Video cameras, attributable to our exit of the video camera business in the third quarter of fiscal 2011. Sales of security products decreased by 8%, or $143 million. Our decreased sales of security products were the result of lower sales of module and line cards related to our routers and LAN switches, partially offset by increased sales of our web and email security products. Fiscal 2010 Compared with Fiscal 2009 Sales of video connected home products increased by approximately $359 million due to increased sales of $317 million of Flip Video cameras attributable to our Pure Digital acquisition in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2009, along with a $248 million increase in sales of cable products. These increases were partially offset by a decrease of $133 million in sales of networked home products, primarily due to lower sales of routers and adapters, and due to a decline of $57 million in sales of video systems, primarily attributable to lower sales for digital set-top boxes. Sales of collaboration products increased by approximately $556 million due to an increase of $293 million in sales of unified communications products, primarily due to higher sales of IP phones and associated software, and higher sales of our web-based collaboration offerings. The increase in collaboration products was also due to a sales increase of $263 million in Cisco TelePresence systems products, which was primarily attributable to our acquisition of Tandberg completed at the end of the third quarter of fiscal 2010. Sales of security products increased by approximately $189 million. Our increased sales of security products were a result of increased sales of our web and email security products as well as our security appliance products, each of which integrates multiple technologies (including virtual private network (VPN), firewall, and intrusion-prevention services) on one platform, partially offset by lower sales of module and line-cards related to our routers and LAN switches. Sales of data center products increased by approximately $249 million due to an increase of $181 million in sales of Cisco Unified Computing System products and an increase of $68 million in sales of storage area networking products. The increase in sales of storage products resulted primarily from higher sales of our Cisco MDS 9000 product line. Sales of application networking services declined; however, the decline was offset by higher server virtualization sales. Sales of wireless products increased by approximately $174 million, primarily due to increases in the customer adoption of and migration to the Cisco Unified Wireless Network architecture. Other Products Fiscal 2011 Compared with Fiscal 2010 The increase in Other Product revenue during fiscal 2011, as compared with fiscal 2010, was primarily due to a 19% increase in sales of optical networking products and a 17% increase in emerging technology products. Fiscal 2010 Compared with Fiscal 2009 The increase in Other Products revenue in fiscal 2010 compared with fiscal 2009 was primarily due to a 99% increase in sales of emerging technology products, partially offset by a 1% decline in sales of optical networking products. 55 Table of Contents Net Service Sales by Segment The following table presents the breakdown of service revenue by segment (in millions, except percentages): Years Ended July 30, 2011 July 31, 2010 Variance in Dollars Variance in Percent July 31, 2010 July 25, 2009 Variance in Dollars Variance in Percent Service revenue: United States and Canada $ 5,410 $ 4,825 $ 585 12.1 % $ 4,825 $ 4,479 $ 346 7.7 % Percentage of service revenue 62.2 % 63.3 % 63.3 % 64.1 % European Markets 1,336 1,227 109 8.9 % 1,227 1,104 123 11.1 % Percentage of service revenue 15.4 % 16.1 % 16.1 % 15.8 % Emerging Markets 792 639 153 23.9 % 639 622 17 2.7 % Percentage of service revenue 9.1 % 8.4 % 8.4 % 8.9 % Asia Pacific Markets 1,154 929 225 24.2 % 929 781 148 19.0 % Percentage of service revenue 13.3 % 12.2 % 12.2 % 11.2 % Total $ 8,692 $ 7,620 $ 1,072 14.1 % $ 7,620 $ 6,986 $ 634 9.1 % Fiscal 2011 Compared with Fiscal 2010 Net service revenue increased across all of our geographic segments, with Emerging Markets and Asia Pacific Markets reporting strong revenue growth. Technical support services revenue increased 12%, and advanced services, which relates to consulting support services for specific network needs, experienced 21% revenue growth. Technical support service revenue increased across all of our geographic segments with particular strength in Emerging Markets and Asia Pacific Markets. Growth in each of our United States and Canada and our European Markets segments also contributed to the overall technical support service revenue growth. Renewals and technical support service contract initiations associated with recent product sales have resulted in a new installed base of equipment being serviced, which was the primary driver for these increases. We experienced revenue growth in advanced services across each of our geographic segments, with strong growth in our Asia Pacific Markets, European Markets, and Emerging Markets segments, followed by slower growth in our United States and Canada segment. Total service revenue growth also benefited from a full year of service revenue attributable to our acquisitions of Tandberg and Starent during fiscal 2010. Fiscal 2010 Compared with Fiscal 2009 Net service revenue increased across all of our geographic segments in fiscal 2010, with particular strength in our Asia Pacific Markets. The increase in total service revenue was due to growth from technical support services as well as increased revenue from advanced services. Technical support service revenue increased across all of our geographic segments, with solid growth in our Asia Pacific Markets and European Markets segments. In fiscal 2010, we experienced advanced services revenue growth across each of our geographic segments except for our Emerging Markets segment. Total service revenue growth in fiscal 2010 also benefited from incremental revenue from our acquisitions during fiscal 2010 of Tandberg and Starent. Renewals and technical support service contract initiations associated with product sales during fiscal 2010 have resulted in a new installed base of equipment being serviced, contributing to these increases. 56 Table of Contents Gross Margin The following table presents the gross margin for products and services (in millions, except percentages): AMOUNT PERCENTAGE Years Ended July 30, 2011 July 31, 2010 July 25, 2009 July 30, 2011 July 31, 2010 July 25, 2009 Gross margin: Product $ 20,879 $ 20,800 $ 18,650 60.5 % 64.2 % 64.0 % Service 5,657 4,843 4,444 65.1 % 63.6 % 63.6 % Total $ 26,536 $ 25,643 $ 23,094 61.4 % 64.0 % 63.9 % Product Gross Margin Fiscal 2011 Compared with Fiscal 2010 The following table summarizes the key factors that contributed to the change in product gross margin percentage from fiscal 2010 to fiscal 2011: Product Gross Margin Percentage Fiscal 2010 64.2 % Sales discounts, rebates, and product pricing (2.9 )% Mix of products sold (1.6 )% Amortization of purchased intangible assets (0.6 )% Restructuring and other charges (0.4 )% Overall manufacturing costs 1.4 % Shipment volume, net of certain variable costs 0.4 % Fiscal 2011 60.5 % In fiscal 2011, product gross margin decreased by 3.7 percentage points. The decrease was primarily due to the impact of higher sales discounts, rebates, and unfavorable product pricing which were driven by normal market factors and by the geographic mix of product revenue. These factors impacted most of our customer markets and all of our geographic segments. Additionally, our product gross margin was negatively impacted by the shift in the mix of products sold as a result of revenue declines in our higher margin switching products coupled with revenue increases from our lower margin Cisco Unified Computing System products. Higher year-over-year impairment charges related to acquisition-related intangible assets and higher restructuring and other charges, both primarily in the consumer business, also contributed to the decline in our product gross margin percentage. These negative factors were partially offset by lower overall manufacturing costs and by slightly higher shipment volume. The lower overall manufacturing costs were in part due to favorable component pricing, continued operational efficiency in manufacturing operations, and value engineering. Value engineering is the process by which production costs are reduced through component redesign, board configuration, test processes, and transformation processes. Our future gross margins could be impacted by our product mix and by further growth in sales of products that have lower gross margins, such as Cisco Unified Computing System products. Our gross margins may also be impacted by the geographic mix of our revenue or, as was the case in fiscal 2011 and 2010, by increased sales discounts, rebates, and product pricing, which may be attributable to competitive factors. Additionally, our manufacturing-related costs may be negatively impacted by constraints in our supply chain. If any of the preceding factors that impact our gross margins are adversely affected in future periods, our product and service gross margins could continue to decline. 57 Table of Contents Fiscal 2010 Compared with Fiscal 2009 The following table summarizes the key factors that contributed to the change in product gross margin percentage from fiscal 2009 to fiscal 2010: Product Gross Margin Percentage Fiscal 2009 64.0 % Overall manufacturing costs 1.7 % Shipment volume, net of certain variable costs 0.6 % Mix of products sold 0.1 % Sales discounts, rebates, and product pricing (2.2 )% Fiscal 2010 64.2 % Product gross margin for fiscal 2010 increased by 0.2 percentage points compared with fiscal 2009, due primarily to lower overall manufacturing costs driven by strong operational efficiency in manufacturing operations, value engineering, and a reduction in other manufacturing-related costs. The product gross margin for fiscal 2010 also benefited from the increase in shipment volume. A favorable product mix contributed slightly to the increase in product gross margin percentage. Fiscal 2010 product gross margin was negatively impacted by sales discounts, rebates, and product pricing, which were driven by normal market factors, as well as the geographic mix of product revenue. The impact from sales discounts, rebates and product pricing was within our expected range. Service Gross Margin Fiscal 2011 Compared with Fiscal 2010 Our service gross margin percentage increased by 1.5 percentage points for fiscal 2011, as compared with fiscal 2010, with both technical support services and advanced services experiencing higher gross margins. The increase was primarily due to higher sales volume. Partially offsetting the volume increases were unfavorable mix impacts, primarily due to advanced services representing a higher proportion of service revenue in fiscal 2011 and due to increased service delivery costs. Gross margin in technical support services increased primarily as a result of increased sales volume and lower headcount-related cost impacts. These benefits were partially offset by increased support service delivery costs, particularly from outside services. Advanced services gross margin increased primarily due to strong volume growth partially offset by higher delivery team costs, which were partially headcount related. Our revenue from advanced services may increase to a higher proportion of total service revenue due to our continued focus on providing comprehensive support to our customers networking devices, applications, and infrastructures. Our service gross margin normally experiences some fluctuations due to various factors such as the timing of contract initiations in our renewals, our strategic investments in headcount, and resources to support the overall service business. Other factors include the mix of service offerings, as the gross margin from our advanced services is typically lower than the gross margin from technical support services. Fiscal 2010 Compared with Fiscal 2009 Our service gross margin percentage was unchanged from fiscal 2009 due to higher margins for technical support services offset by a decline in the gross margin for advanced services. The increase in technical support service gross margin in fiscal 2010 from fiscal 2009 was primarily a result of increased volume. Technical support margins will experience some variability due to various factors such as the timing of technical support service contract initiations and renewals as well as the timing of our strategic investments in headcount and resources to support this business. The decrease in advanced services gross margin in fiscal 2010 from fiscal 2009 was primarily due to increased headcount costs, partially offset by higher volume. 58 Table of Contents Gross Margin by Segment The following table presents the total gross margin for each segment (in millions, except percentages): AMOUNT PERCENTAGE Years Ended July 30, 2011 July 31, 2010 July 25, 2009 July 30, 2011 July 31, 2010 July 25, 2009 Gross margin: United States and Canada $ 14,618 $ 14,042 $ 12,660 63.2 % 64.6 % 65.4 % European Markets 5,529 5,425 5,116 64.8 % 67.4 % 66.6 % Emerging Markets 3,067 2,805 2,438 61.8 % 64.2 % 61.0 % Asia Pacific Markets 4,147 3,847 3,272 62.8 % 65.4 % 64.3 % Segment total 27,361 26,119 23,486 63.3 % 65.2 % 65.0 % Unallocated corporate items (1) (825 ) (476 ) (392 ) Total $ 26,536 $ 25,643 $ 23,094 61.4 % 64.0 % 63.9 % (1) The unallocated corporate items include the effects of amortization and impairments of acquisition-related intangible assets, share-based compensation expense, and other asset impairments and restructurings. We do not allocate these items to the gross margin for each segment because management does not include such information in measuring the performance of the operating segments. Fiscal 2011 Compared with Fiscal 2010 For fiscal 2011, as compared with fiscal 2010, the gross margin percentage across all geographic segments declined primarily due to higher sales discounts, rebates, and unfavorable pricing, as well as due to a product mix shift. These declines were partially offset by the impacts from increased shipment volume and lower overall manufacturing costs across all geographic segments. The gross margin percentage for a particular segment may fluctuate, and period-to-period changes in such percentages may or may not be indicative of a trend for that segment. Our product and service gross margins may be impacted by economic downturns or uncertain economic conditions as well as our movement into new market opportunities, and could decline if any of the factors that impact our gross margins are adversely affected in future periods. Fiscal 2010 Compared with Fiscal 2009 In fiscal 2010, the gross margin percentage in the United States and Canada segment declined compared with fiscal 2009, primarily due to higher sales discounts and a lower service gross margin. The decline was partially offset by the impacts from increased shipment volume and lower overall manufacturing costs. The gross margin percentage in the European Markets segment increased during fiscal 2010 compared with fiscal 2009 due primarily to lower overall manufacturing costs, increased shipment volume and favorable product mix. The increase in this segment was partially offset by the impact of higher sales discounts. In fiscal 2010, the gross margin percentage in the Emerging Markets segment increased compared with fiscal 2009 due primarily to lower overall manufacturing costs, partially offset by the impact of higher sales discounts. The gross margin percentage in the Asia Pacific Markets segment increased during fiscal 2010 compared with fiscal 2009, due primarily to higher shipment volume and lower overall manufacturing costs. Gross margin in the Asia Pacific Markets segment also benefited from favorable mix shifts in Japan. Partially offsetting this increase was the impact of higher sales discounts. For each of our segments, the negative impact of sales discounts, rebates and product pricing was driven by normal market factors and was within our expected range. Factors That May Impact Net Sales and Gross Margin Net product sales may continue to be affected by factors, including global economic downturns and related market uncertainty, that have resulted in reduced or cautious spending in our global enterprise, service provider, and commercial markets; changes in the geopolitical environment and global economic conditions; competition, 59 Table of Contents including price-focused competitors from Asia, especially from China; new product introductions; sales cycles and product implementation cycles; changes in the mix of our customers between service provider and enterprise markets; changes in the mix of direct sales and indirect sales; variations in sales channels; and final acceptance criteria of the product, system, or solution as specified by the customer. Sales to the service provider market have been and may be in the future characterized by large and sporadic purchases, especially relating to our router sales and sales of certain products within our New Products category. In addition, service provider customers typically have longer implementation cycles; require a broader range of services, including network design services; and often have acceptance provisions that can lead to a delay in revenue recognition. Certain of our customers in the Emerging Markets segment also tend to make large and sporadic purchases, and the net sales related to these transactions may similarly be affected by the timing of revenue recognition. As we focus on new market opportunities, customers may require greater levels of financing arrangements, service, and support, especially in the Emerging Markets segment, which in turn may result in a delay in the timing of revenue recognition. To improve customer satisfaction, we continue to focus on managing our manufacturing lead-time performance, which may result in corresponding reductions in order backlog. A decline in backlog levels could result in more variability and less predictability in our quarter-to-quarter net sales and operating results. Net product sales may also be adversely affected by fluctuations in demand for our products, especially with respect to telecommunications service providers and Internet businesses, whether or not driven by any slowdown in capital expenditures in the service provider market; price and product competition in the communications and information technology industry; introduction and market acceptance of new technologies and products; adoption of new networking standards; and financial difficulties experienced by our customers. We may, from time to time, experience manufacturing issues that create a delay in our suppliers ability to provide specific components, resulting in delayed shipments. To the extent that manufacturing issues and any related component shortages result in delayed shipments in the future, and particularly in periods when we and our suppliers are operating at higher levels of capacity, it is possible that revenue for a quarter could be adversely affected if such matters are not remediated within the same quarter. For additional factors that may impact net product sales, see Part I, Item 1A. Risk Factors. Our distributors and retail partners participate in various cooperative marketing and other programs. Increased sales to our distributors and retail partners generally result in greater difficulty in forecasting the mix of our products and, to a certain degree, the timing of orders from our customers. We recognize revenue for sales to our distributors and retail partners generally based on a sell-through method using information provided by them, and we maintain estimated accruals and allowances for all cooperative marketing and other programs. Product gross margin may be adversely affected in the future by changes in the mix of products sold, including periods of increased growth of some of our lower margin products; introduction of new products, including products with price-performance advantages; our ability to reduce production costs; entry into new markets, including markets with different pricing structures and cost structures, as a result of internal development or through acquisitions; changes in distribution channels; price competition, including competitors from Asia, especially those from China; changes in geographic mix of our product sales; the timing of revenue recognition and revenue deferrals; sales discounts; increases in material or labor costs, including share-based compensation expense; excess inventory and obsolescence charges; warranty costs; changes in shipment volume; loss of cost savings due to changes in component pricing; effects of value engineering; inventory holding charges; and the extent to which we successfully execute on our strategy and operating plans. Additionally, our manufacturing-related costs may be negatively impacted by constraints in our supply chain. Service gross margin may be impacted by various factors such as the change in mix between technical support services and advanced services; the timing of technical support service contract initiations and renewals; share-based compensation expense; and the timing of our strategic investments in headcount and resources to support this business. 60 Table of Contents Research and Development (R&D), Sales and Marketing, and General and Administrative (G&A) Expenses R&D, sales and marketing, and G&A expenses are summarized in the following table (in millions, except percentages): Years Ended July 30, 2011 July 31, 2010 Variance in Dollars Variance in Percent July 31, 2010 July 25, 2009 Variance in Dollars Variance in Percent Research and development $ 5,823 $ 5,273 $ 550 10.4 % $ 5,273 $ 5,208 $ 65 1.2 % Percentage of net sales 13.5 % 13.2 % 13.2 % 14.4 % Sales and marketing 9,812 8,782 1,030 11.7 % 8,782 8,444 338 4.0 % Percentage of net sales 22.7 % 21.9 % 21.9 % 23.4 % General and administrative 1,908 1,933 (25 ) (1.3 %) 1,933 1,524 409 26.8 % Percentage of net sales 4.4 % 4.8 % 4.8 % 4.2 % Total $ 17,543 $ 15,988 $ 1,555 9.7 % $ 15,988 $ 15,176 $ 812 5.4 % Percentage of net sales 40.6 % 39.9 % 39.9 % 42.0 % Fiscal 2010 had an extra week compared with fiscal 2011 and fiscal 2009. We estimate that the extra week contributed approximately $150 million of additional research and development, sales and marketing, and general and administrative expense in fiscal 2010. In fiscal 2012 we plan to reduce our annualized expense run rate by approximately $1 billion. The year-over-year changes within operating expenses, including the effects of foreign currency exchange rates, net of hedging, are summarized by line item as follows: R&D Expenses Fiscal 2011 Compared with Fiscal 2010 The increase in R&D expenses for fiscal 2011, as compared with fiscal 2010, was primarily due to higher headcount-related expenses, higher contracted services, and increased depreciation and equipment expenditures. The increase in depreciation expense was partially acquisition related. We continue to invest in R&D in order to bring a broad range of products to market in a timely fashion. If we believe that we are unable to enter a particular market in a timely manner with internally developed products, we may purchase or license technology from other businesses, or we may partner with or acquire businesses as an alternative to internal R&D. Fiscal 2010 Compared with Fiscal 2009 The slight increase in R&D expenses for fiscal 2010 was primarily due to higher headcount-related expenses, including increased variable compensation expense and the impact of acquisitions, higher share-based compensation expense, and the impact of the extra week in fiscal 2010. Partially offsetting the increase in R&D expenses in fiscal 2010 were lower acquisition-related compensation expenses associated with milestone achievements from prior period acquisitions, and the absence in fiscal 2010 of the enhanced early retirement and limited workforce reduction charges incurred during fiscal 2009. Sales and Marketing Expenses Fiscal 2011 Compared with Fiscal 2010 Sales and marketing expenses for fiscal 2011 increased compared with fiscal 2010 due to an increase of $851 million in sales expenses and an increase of $179 million in marketing expenses. Both the sales expense and the marketing expense components of the category increased for fiscal 2011 due to higher headcount-related expenses, as well as higher outside services costs, higher depreciation expense, and increased share-based compensation expense. Additionally, marketing expenses for fiscal 2011 increased due to higher advertisement expenses. 61 Table of Contents Fiscal 2010 Compared with Fiscal 2009 Sales and marketing expenses increased in fiscal 2010 compared with fiscal 2009 due to an increase of $222 million in sales expenses and an increase of $116 million in marketing expenses. Both the sales expense and the marketing expense components of the category increased during fiscal 2010 due to higher headcount-related expenses, including higher variable compensation expense, higher share-based compensation expense, and the impact of the extra week in fiscal 2010. G&A Expenses Fiscal 2011 Compared with Fiscal 2010 The decrease in G&A expenses in fiscal 2011, as compared with fiscal 2010, was due to lower real estate-related charges in fiscal 2011 and the absence of non-income tax-related expenses (such as fees and licenses), which were included in fiscal 2010. Partially offsetting these items were higher headcount-related expenses, higher outside services costs for operational support areas, and increased equipment, depreciation, and rent expenses. Fiscal 2010 Compared with Fiscal 2009 The increase in G&A expenses in fiscal 2010, compared with fiscal 2009 was in part attributable to approximately $130 million of higher real estate-related charges related to impairments and other charges related to excess facilities. Additionally, G&A expenses in fiscal 2010 increased due to higher share-based compensation expense, higher headcount-related expenses, acquisition-related expenses, and higher information technology expenses, as well as the impact of the extra week in fiscal 2010. Effect of Foreign Currency In fiscal 2011, foreign currency fluctuations, net of hedging, increased the combined R&D, sales and marketing, and G&A expenses by $53 million, or approximately 0.3%, compared with fiscal 2010. In fiscal 2010, foreign currency fluctuations, net of hedging, increased the combined R&D, sales and marketing, and G&A expenses by $34 million, or approximately 0.2%, compared with fiscal 2009. Headcount Fiscal 2011 Compared with Fiscal 2010 For fiscal 2011, our headcount increased by 1,111 employees, the increase being attributable to targeted hiring as part of our investment in growth initiatives, partially offset by the impacts of our voluntary early retirement program and our restructuring activities, which began to reduce our headcount in late fiscal 2011. We expect our headcount to decrease in the near term as part of targeted cost-cutting initiatives, which include the workforce reduction announced in July 2011. Additionally, we also expect our headcount in fiscal 2012 to decrease by approximately 5,000 employees upon the planned completion in fiscal 2012 of the sale of our Juarez, Mexico manufacturing operations. Fiscal 2010 Compared with Fiscal 2009 For fiscal 2010, our headcount increased by approximately 5,150 employees, which was attributable to the acquisitions of Tandberg and Starent along with targeted hiring as part of our investment in growth initiatives. 62 Table of Contents Share-Based Compensation Expense The following table presents share-based compensation expense (in millions): Years Ended July 30, 2011 July 31, 2010 July 25, 2009 Cost of sales product $ 61 $ 57 $ 46 Cost of sales service 177 164 128 Share-based compensation expense in cost of sales 238 221 174 Research and development 481 450 382 Sales and marketing 651 602 482 General and administrative 250 244 193 Share-based compensation expense in operating expenses 1,382 1,296 1,057 Total share-based compensation expense $ 1,620 $ 1,517 $ 1,231 The increase in share-based compensation expense for fiscal 2011 was due primarily to a change in vesting periods from five to four years for awards granted beginning in fiscal 2009, the timing of annual employee grants, and the overall growth in headcount and number of share-based awards granted on a year-over-year basis. Share-based compensation expense increased for fiscal 2010 compared with fiscal 2009 due primarily to the effects of straight-line vesting compared with accelerated vesting for options granted prior to fiscal 2006, a change in vesting periods from five to four years for awards granted beginning in fiscal 2009, and the impact of the extra week in fiscal 2010. See Note 14 to the Consolidated Financial Statements. Amortization of Purchased Intangible Assets The following table presents the amortization of purchased intangible assets included in operating expenses (in millions): Years Ended July 30, 2011 July 31, 2010 July 25, 2009 Amortization of purchased intangible assets included in operating expenses $ 520 $ 491 $ 533 For fiscal 2011, as compared with fiscal 2010, the increase in the amortization of purchased intangible assets was due to impairment charges included in operating expenses of $92 million in fiscal 2011, partially offset by lower amortization due to certain purchased intangible assets having become fully amortized. The impairment charges were primarily due to declines in estimated fair value as a result of reductions in expected future cash flows associated with certain of our consumer products. For fiscal 2010, the decrease in the amortization of purchased intangible assets included in operating expenses was primarily due to lower impairment charges in fiscal 2010 as compared with fiscal 2009, partially offset by increased amortization of purchased intangible assets from acquisitions completed during fiscal 2010. For additional information regarding purchased intangible assets, see Note 4 to the Consolidated Financial Statements. The fair value of acquired technology and patents, as well as acquired technology under development, is determined at acquisition date primarily using the income approach, which discounts expected future cash flows to present value. The discount rates used in the present value calculations are typically derived from a weighted-average cost of capital analysis and then adjusted to reflect risks inherent in the development lifecycle as appropriate. We consider the pricing model for products related to these acquisitions to be standard within the high-technology communications industry, and the applicable discount rates represent the rates that market participants would use for valuation of such intangible assets. 63 Table of Contents Restructuring and Other Charges In fiscal 2011, we incurred within operating expenses restructuring charges of $799 million. These charges included $453 million related to a voluntary early retirement program for eligible employees in the United States and Canada; $247 million related to employee severance for other employees subject to our reduction of our work force; and $71 million related to the impairment of goodwill and intangible assets, primarily as a result of the pending sale of our Juarez, Mexico manufacturing operations. We also recorded charges within operating expenses of $28 million related to the consolidation of excess facilities and other activities. We announced in July 2011 that we expected to take up to $1.3 billion in pretax charges as part of our expense reduction actions. We incurred charges of $728 million in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2011 (included as part of the $799 million discussed above) related to these announcements. We expect the remaining charges to be incurred during fiscal 2012. Interest and Other Income, Net Interest Income (Expense), Net The following table summarizes interest income and interest expense (in millions): Years Ended July 30, 2011 July 31, 2010 Variance in Dollars July 31, 2010 July 25, 2009 Variance in Dollars Interest income $ 641 $ 635 $ 6 $ 635 $ 845 $ (210 ) Interest expense (628 ) (623 ) (5 ) (623 ) (346 ) (277 ) Interest income (expense), net $ 13 $ 12 $ 1 $ 12 $ 499 $ (487 ) Fiscal 2011 Compared with Fiscal 2010 Interest income increased slightly in fiscal 2011 due to increased income from financing receivables offsetting the effect of lower average interest rates on our portfolio of cash, cash equivalents, and fixed income investments. The increase in interest expense in fiscal 2011, as compared with fiscal 2010, was due to higher average debt balances during fiscal 2011 attributable to our senior debt issuance in March 2011. Partially offsetting the impact of higher average debt balances during fiscal 2011 is the effect of lower average interest rates on our debt during fiscal 2011. Fiscal 2010 Compared with Fiscal 2009 The decrease in interest income in fiscal 2010 compared with fiscal 2009 was due to lower average interest rates, partially offset by higher average total cash and cash equivalents and fixed income security balances in fiscal 2010. The increase in interest expense in fiscal 2010, compared with fiscal 2009, was primarily due to additional interest expense related to our senior debt issuances in November 2009 and February 2009. Other Income (Loss), Net The components of other income (loss), net, are summarized as follows (in millions): Years Ended July 30, 2011 July 31, 2010 Variance in Dollars July 31, 2010 July 25, 2009 Variance in Dollars Gains (losses) on investments, net: Publicly traded equity securities $ 88 $ 66 $ 22 $ 66 $ 86 $ (20 ) Fixed income securities 91 103 (12 ) 103 (110 ) 213 Total available-for-sale investments 179 169 10 169 (24 ) 193 Privately held companies 34 54 (20 ) 54 (56 ) 110 Net gains (losses) on investments 213 223 (10 ) 223 (80 ) 303 Other gains (losses), net (75 ) 16 (91 ) 16 (48 ) 64 Other income (loss), net $ 138 $ 239 $ (101 ) $ 239 $ (128 ) $ 367 64 Table of Contents Fiscal 2011 Compared with Fiscal 2010 The increase in total net gains on available-for-sale investments in fiscal 2011 compared with fiscal 2010 was primarily attributable to higher gains on publicly traded equity securities, partially offset by lower gains on fixed income securities in fiscal 2011. These changes were the result of market conditions and the timing of sales of these securities. See Note 8 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for the unrealized gains and losses on investments. For fiscal 2011 as compared with fiscal 2010, the decline in net gains on investments in privately held companies was due to lower net equity method gains and lower gains on sales. The decline was partially offset by lower impairment charges on investments in privately held companies. Impairment charges on investments in privately held companies were $10 million and $25 million for fiscal 2011 and 2010, respectively. The change in other gains and (losses), net for fiscal 2011 as compared with fiscal 2010 was primarily due to fiscal 2011 experiencing lower gains from customer lease terminations, higher donations expense, and unfavorable foreign exchange impacts. Fiscal 2010 Compared with Fiscal 2009 For fiscal 2010, the increase in net gains on available-for-sale investments was due to the absence of impairment charges on these securities during fiscal 2010. For fiscal 2009, the net gains and losses on fixed income securities included impairment charges of $219 million and net gains on publicly traded equity securities included impairment charges of $39 million. The change in net gains (losses) on investments in privately held companies in fiscal 2010, compared with fiscal 2009, was primarily due to higher realized gains and lower impairment charges in fiscal 2010. Net losses on investments in privately held companies included impairment charges of $25 million in fiscal 2010 compared with $85 million in fiscal 2009. Other gains (losses), net for fiscal 2010 increased due primarily to gains resulting from customer operating lease terminations. Provision for Income Taxes Fiscal 2011 Compared with Fiscal 2010 The provision for income taxes resulted in an effective tax rate of 17.1% for fiscal 2011, compared with 17.5% for fiscal 2010. During fiscal 2010, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit (the Ninth Circuit ) withdrew its prior holding and reaffirmed the 2005 U.S. Tax Court ruling in Xilinx, Inc. v. Commissioner . The net 0.4 percentage point decrease in the effective tax rate between fiscal years was attributable to the absence in fiscal 2011 of this tax benefit of $158 million, or 1.7 percentage points, offset by other items including the tax benefit of $188 million, or 2.5 percentage points, related to the retroactive reinstatement of the U.S. federal R&D credit. Our provision for income taxes is subject to volatility and could be adversely impacted by earnings being lower than anticipated in countries that have lower tax rates and higher than anticipated in countries that have higher tax rates. Our provision for income taxes does not include provisions for U.S. income taxes and foreign withholding taxes associated with the repatriation of undistributed earnings of certain foreign subsidiaries that we intend to reinvest indefinitely in our foreign subsidiaries. If these earnings were distributed to the United States in the form of dividends or otherwise, or if the shares of the relevant foreign subsidiaries were sold or otherwise transferred, we would be subject to additional U.S. income taxes (subject to an adjustment for foreign tax credits) and foreign withholding taxes. Further, as a result of certain of our ongoing employment and capital investment actions and commitments, our income in certain countries is subject to reduced tax rates and in some cases is wholly exempt from tax. Our failure to meet these commitments could adversely impact our provision for income taxes. 65 Table of Contents For a full reconciliation of our effective tax rate to the U.S. federal statutory rate of 35% and for further explanation of our provision for income taxes, see Note 15 to the Consolidated Financial Statements. Fiscal 2010 Compared with Fiscal 2009 The provision for income taxes resulted in an effective tax rate of 17.5% for fiscal 2010, compared with an effective tax rate of 20.3% for fiscal 2009. As discussed above, during fiscal 2010 the Ninth Circuit withdrew its prior holding and reaffirmed the 2005 U.S. Tax Court ruling in Xilinx, Inc. v. Commissioner . This final decision effectively reversed the corresponding tax charge in fiscal 2009. The net 2.8 percentage point decrease in the effective tax rate between fiscal years was primarily attributable to this benefit and the absence in fiscal 2010 of the corresponding charge from fiscal 2009, partially offset by the absence in fiscal 2010 of the fiscal 2009 tax benefit of $106 million, or 1.4 percentage points, related to the retroactive portion of the U.S. federal R&D credit reinstatement. LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES The following sections discuss the effects of changes in our balance sheet, contractual obligations, other commitments, and the stock repurchase program on our liquidity and capital resources. Balance Sheet and Cash Flows Cash and Cash Equivalents and Investments The following table summarizes our cash and cash equivalents and investments (in millions): July 30, 2011 July 31, 2010 Increase Cash and cash equivalents $ 7,662 $ 4,581 $ 3,081 Fixed income securities 35,562 34,029 1,533 Publicly traded equity securities 1,361 1,251 110 Total $ 44,585 $ 39,861 $ 4,724 The increase in cash and cash equivalents and investments was primarily the result of cash provided by operations of $10.1 billion, a slight decrease from $10.2 billion in fiscal 2010, and debt issuances of $1.5 billion, net of repayments. These increases were partially offset by the repurchase of common stock (net of the issuance of common stock related to employee stock incentive plans) of $5.1 billion, capital expenditures of $1.2 billion, and cash dividends paid of $0.7 billion. The slight decrease in cash provided by operating activities in fiscal 2011 was primarily the result of a decrease in net income and the unfavorable impact to cash provided by operating activities from increased financing receivables, partially offset by the favorable impact to cash provided by operating activities from lower accounts receivable. Our total in cash and cash equivalents and investments held outside of the United States in various foreign subsidiaries was $39.8 billion and $33.2 billion as of July 30, 2011 and July 31, 2010, respectively. The remaining balance held in the United States as of July 30, 2011 and July 31, 2010 was $4.8 billion and $6.7 billion, respectively. Under current tax laws and regulations, if cash and cash equivalents and investments held outside the United States were to be distributed to the United States in the form of dividends or otherwise, we would be subject to additional U.S. income taxes and foreign withholding taxes. We maintain an investment portfolio of various holdings, types, and maturities. We classify our investments as short-term investments based on their nature and their availability for use in current operations. We believe the overall credit quality of our portfolio is strong, with our cash equivalents and our fixed income investment 66 Table of Contents portfolio consisting primarily of high quality investment-grade securities. We believe that our strong cash and cash equivalents and investments position allows us to use our cash resources for strategic investments to gain access to new technologies, for acquisitions, for customer financing activities, for working capital needs, and for the repurchase of shares of common stock and dividends. We expect that cash provided by operating activities may fluctuate in future periods as a result of a number of factors, including fluctuations in our operating results, the rate at which products are shipped during the quarter (which we refer to as shipment linearity), the timing and collection of accounts receivable and financing receivables, inventory and supply chain management, deferred revenue, excess tax benefits resulting from share-based compensation, and the timing and amount of tax and other payments. For additional discussion, see Part I, Item 1A. Risk Factors in this report. Accounts Receivable, Net The following table summarizes our accounts receivable, net (in millions), and DSO: July 30, 2011 July 31, 2010 Decrease Accounts receivable, net $ 4,698 $ 4,929 $ (231 ) DSO 38 41 (3 ) Our accounts receivable net, as of July 30, 2011 declined by approximately 5% compared with the end of fiscal 2010. Our DSO as of July 30, 2011 was lower by 3 days compared with the end of fiscal 2010. During the fourth quarter of fiscal 2011, our cash collections were strong, and both product and services billings linearity improved, particularly with respect to the timing of product shipments. Services billings have traditionally had the effect of increasing DSO due in part to the timing of billings which in comparison to product billings, have a larger proportion billed in the latter part of the quarter. As services revenues have increased as a percentage of our total revenue, this has contributed to a higher DSO level in comparison to levels we experienced in past years. We believe that the current DSO level is in line with levels we expect in the near future. Inventories and Purchase Commitments with Contract Manufacturers and Suppliers The following table summarizes our inventories and purchase commitments with contract manufacturers and suppliers (in millions, except annualized inventory turns): July 30, 2011 July 31, 2010 Increase (Decrease) Inventories $ 1,486 $ 1,327 $ 159 Annualized inventory turns 11.8 12.6 (0.8 ) Purchase commitments with contract manufacturers and suppliers $ 4,313 $ 4,319 $ (6 ) Inventories as of July 30, 2011 increased by 12% from our balance at the end of fiscal 2010, while for the same period purchase commitments with contract manufacturers and suppliers were flat. On a combined basis, inventories and purchase commitments with contract manufacturers and suppliers increased by 3% from the balance at the end of fiscal 2010. We believe our inventory and purchase commitments are in line with our current demand forecasts. The inventory increase was due to higher levels of distributor inventory and higher deferred cost of sales. Our inventories have decreased from the levels we experienced in the first half of fiscal 2011. In the third quarter of fiscal 2011 we announced a restructuring of our consumer business, and as a result we lowered inventory levels for our consumer products. We also lowered inventory in certain parts of our cable set-top business. Our finished goods consist of distributor inventory and deferred cost of sales and manufactured finished goods. Distributor inventory and deferred cost of sales are related to unrecognized revenue on shipments to distributors and retail partners as well as shipments to customers. Manufactured finished goods consist primarily of build-to-order and 67 Table of Contents build-to-stock products. All inventories are accounted for at the lower of cost or market. Inventory is written down based on excess and obsolete inventories determined primarily by future demand forecasts. Inventory write-downs are measured as the difference between the cost of the inventory and market, based upon assumptions about future demand, and are charged to the provision for inventory, which is a component of our cost of sales. Our ending balance for purchase commitments with contract manufacturers and suppliers reflects improvement and stabilization in lead times and the mitigation of many of the constraints at our component suppliers that we experienced in fiscal 2010. Due to the earthquake in Japan and resulting industry-wide component supply constraints, we made increased commitments to secure our near-term supply needs. Offsetting these increases in purchase commitments were actions we have taken related to the restructuring of our consumer business. While we may experience longer than normal lead times in the future, our lead times to customers improved on nearly all of our products during fiscal 2011 and as of the end of fiscal 2011 were within a normal range for nearly all of our products. We purchase components from a variety of suppliers and use several contract manufacturers to provide manufacturing services for our products. During the normal course of business, in order to manage manufacturing lead times and help ensure adequate component supply, we enter into agreements with contract manufacturers and suppliers that allow them to procure inventory based upon criteria as defined by us or that establish the parameters defining our requirements and our commitment to securing manufacturing capacity. A significant portion of our reported purchase commitments arising from these agreements are firm, noncancelable, and unconditional commitments. In certain instances, these agreements allow us the option to cancel, reschedule, and adjust our requirements based on our business needs prior to firm orders being placed. Our purchase commitments are for short-term product manufacturing requirements as well as for commitments to suppliers to secure manufacturing capacity. We record a liability, included in other current liabilities, for firm, noncancelable, and unconditional purchase commitments for quantities in excess of our future demand forecasts consistent with the valuation of our excess and obsolete inventory. The purchase commitments for inventory are expected to be primarily fulfilled within one year. Inventory and supply chain management remain areas of focus as we balance the need to maintain supply chain flexibility to help ensure competitive lead times with the risk of inventory obsolescence because of rapidly changing technology and customer requirements. We believe the amount of our inventory and purchase commitments is appropriate for our revenue levels. Financing Receivables and Guarantees We measure our net balance sheet exposure position related to our financing receivables and financing guarantees by reducing the total of gross financing receivables and financing guarantees by the associated allowances for credit loss and deferred revenue. As of July 30, 2011, our net balance sheet exposure position related to financing receivables and financing guarantees was as follows (in millions): FINANCING RECEIVABLES FINANCING GUARANTEES TOTAL July 30, 2011 Lease Receivables Loan Receivables Financed Service Contracts and Other Total Channel Partner End-User Customers Total Gross amount less unearned income $ 2,861 $ 1,468 $ 2,637 $ 6,966 $ 336 $ 277 $ 613 $ 7,579 Allowance for credit loss (237 ) (103 ) (27 ) (367 ) (367 ) Deferred revenue (120 ) (262 ) (2,044 ) (2,426 ) (248 ) (248 ) (496 ) (2,922 ) Net balance sheet exposure $ 2,504 $ 1,103 $ 566 $ 4,173 $ 88 $ 29 $ 117 $ 4,290 Financing Receivables Gross financing receivables less unearned income have increased by 33% compared with the end of fiscal 2010, driven by a 49% increase in gross financed service contracts, a 30% increase in gross lease receivables, and an 18% increase in gross loan receivables. We provide financing to certain end-user customers 68 Table of Contents and channel partners to enable sales of our products, services, and networking solutions. These financing arrangements include leases, financed service contracts, and loans. Arrangements related to leases are generally collateralized by a security interest in the underlying assets. Lease receivables include sales-type and direct-financing leases. We also provide certain qualified customers financing for long-term service contracts, which primarily relate to technical support services. Our loan financing arrangements may include not only financing the acquisition of our products and services but also providing additional funds for other costs associated with network installation and integration of our products and services. We expect to continue to expand the use of our financing programs in the near term. Financing Guarantees In the normal course of business, third parties may provide financing arrangements to our customers and channel partners under financing programs. The financing arrangements to customers provided by third parties are related to leases and loans and typically have terms of up to three years. In some cases, we provide guarantees to third parties for these lease and loan arrangements. The financing arrangements to channel partners consist of revolving short-term financing provided by third parties, generally with payment terms ranging from 60 to 90 days. In certain instances, these financing arrangements result in a transfer of our receivables to the third party. The receivables are de-recognized upon transfer, as these transfers qualify as true sales, and we receive payments for the receivables from the third party based on our standard payment terms. These financing arrangements facilitate the working capital requirements of the channel partners, and in some cases, we guarantee a portion of these arrangements. We could be called upon to make payments under these guarantees in the event of nonpayment by the channel partners or end-user customers. Historically, our payments under these arrangements have been immaterial. Where we provide a guarantee, we defer the revenue associated with the channel partner and end-user financing arrangement in accordance with revenue recognition policies, or we record a liability for the fair value of the guarantees. In either case, the deferred revenue is recognized as revenue when the guarantee is removed. During fiscal 2011, the level of guarantees required by our financing partners decreased, resulting in lower deferred revenue associated with our financing guarantees. Deferred Revenue Related to Financing Receivables and Guarantees The majority of the deferred revenue in the preceding table is related to financed service contracts. The revenue related to financed service contracts, which primarily relates to technical support services, is deferred and included in deferred service revenue. The revenue related to financed service contracts is recognized ratably over the period during which the related services are to be performed. A portion of the revenue related to lease and loan receivables is also deferred and included in deferred product revenue based on revenue recognition criteria. Borrowings Senior Notes The following table summarizes the principal amount of our senior notes (in millions): July 30, 2011 July 31, 2010 Increase (Decrease) Senior notes: Floating-rate notes, due 2014 $ 1,250 $ $ 1,250 5.25% fixed-rate notes, due 2011 3,000 (3,000 ) 2.90% fixed-rate notes, due 2014 500 500 1.625% fixed-rate notes, due 2014 2,000 2,000 5.50% fixed-rate notes, due 2016 3,000 3,000 3.15% fixed-rate notes, due 2017 750 750 4.95% fixed-rate notes, due 2019 2,000 2,000 4.45% fixed-rate notes, due 2020 2,500 2,500 5.90% fixed-rate notes, due 2039 2,000 2,000 5.50% fixed-rate notes, due 2040 2,000 2,000 Total $ 16,000 $ 15,000 $ 1,000 69 Table of Contents Interest is payable semiannually on each class of the senior fixed-rate notes, each of which is redeemable by us at any time, subject to a make-whole premium. Interest is payable quarterly on the floating rate notes. We were in compliance with all debt covenants as of July 30, 2011. In March 2011, we issued $1.25 billion of senior floating interest rate notes due 2014, $2.0 billion of 1.625% fixed-rate senior notes due 2014, and $750 million of 3.15% fixed-rate senior notes due 2017, for an aggregate principal amount of $4.0 billion. To achieve our interest rate risk management objectives, we entered into interest rate swaps with an aggregate notional amount of $2.75 billion designated as fair value hedges of the senior fixed-rate notes included in the March 2011 debt issuance. In effect, these interest rate swaps convert the fixed interest rates of the fixed-rate senior notes to floating interest rates based on LIBOR. The gains and losses related to the changes in the fair value of the interest rate swaps substantially offset changes, attributable to market interest rates, in the fair value of the hedged portion of the underlying debt. In addition, in February 2011 we repaid $3.0 billion of fixed-rate senior notes upon their maturity. Commercial Paper In the third quarter of fiscal 2011 we established a short-term debt financing program of up to $3.0 billion through the issuance of commercial paper notes. As of July 30, 2011, we had commercial paper notes of $500 million outstanding under this program. Other Notes and Borrowings Other notes and borrowings include notes and credit facilities with a number of financial institutions that are available to certain of our foreign subsidiaries. The amount of borrowings outstanding under these arrangements was $88 million and $59 million as of July 30, 2011 and July 31, 2010, respectively. Credit Facility We have a credit agreement with certain institutional lenders that provides for a $3.0 billion unsecured revolving credit facility that is scheduled to expire on August 17, 2012. Any advances under the credit agreement will accrue interest at rates that are equal to, based on certain conditions, either (i) the higher of the Federal Funds rate plus 0.50% or Bank of America prime rate as announced from time to time or (ii) LIBOR plus a margin that is based on our senior debt credit ratings as published by Standard & Poor Ratings Services and Moody Investors Service, Inc. The credit agreement requires that we comply with certain covenants, including that we maintain an interest coverage ratio as defined in the agreement. We may also, upon the agreement of either the then-existing lenders or additional lenders not currently parties to the agreement, increase the commitments under the credit facility by up to an additional $1.9 billion and/or extend the expiration date of the credit facility up to August 15, 2014. As of July 30, 2011, we were in compliance with the required interest coverage ratio and the other covenants, and we had not borrowed any funds under the credit facility. Deferred Revenue The following table presents the breakdown of deferred revenue (in millions): July 30, 2011 July 31, 2010 Increase Service $ 8,521 $ 7,428 $ 1,093 Product 3,686 3,655 31 Total $ 12,207 $ 11,083 $ 1,124 Reported as: Current $ 8,025 $ 7,664 $ 361 Noncurrent 4,182 3,419 763 Total $ 12,207 $ 11,083 $ 1,124 The increase in deferred service revenue reflects the impact of new contract initiations and renewals, partially offset by the ongoing amortization of deferred service revenue. The increase in deferred product revenue was 70 Table of Contents primarily related to an increase in shipments not having met revenue recognition criteria as of July 30, 2011, partially offset by lower unrecognized revenue from two-tier distributors due to the timing of cash receipts from two-tier distributors. Contractual Obligations The impact of contractual obligations on our liquidity and capital resources in future periods should be analyzed in conjunction with the factors that impact our cash flows from operations discussed previously. In addition, we plan for and measure our liquidity and capital resources through an annual budgeting process. The following table summarizes our contractual obligations at July 30, 2011 (in millions): PAYMENTS DUE BY PERIOD July 30, 2011 Total Less than 1 Year 1 to 3 Years 3 to 5 Years More than 5 Years Operating leases $ 1,316 $ 374 $ 445 $ 220 $ 277 Purchase commitments with contract manufacturers and suppliers 4,313 4,313 Purchase obligations 2,473 1,443 779 233 18 Long-term debt 16,000 3,250 3,500 9,250 Other long-term liabilities 459 87 58 314 Total by period $ 24,561 $ 6,130 $ 4,561 $ 4,011 $ 9,859 Other long-term liabilities (uncertainty in the timing of future payments) 1,455 Total $ 26,016 Operating Leases We lease office space in several U.S. locations. Outside the United States, larger leased sites are located in Australia, Belgium, China, Germany, India, Israel, Italy, Japan, Norway, and the United Kingdom. We also lease equipment and vehicles. Operating lease amounts include future minimum lease payments under all our noncancelable operating leases with an initial term in excess of one year. Purchase Commitments with Contract Manufacturers and Suppliers We purchase components from a variety of suppliers and use several contract manufacturers to provide manufacturing services for our products. A significant portion of our reported estimated purchase commitments arising from these agreements are firm, noncancelable, and unconditional commitments. We record a liability for firm, noncancelable, and unconditional purchase commitments for quantities in excess of our future demand forecasts consistent with the valuation of our excess and obsolete inventory. See further discussion in Inventories and Purchase Commitments with Contract Manufacturers and Suppliers. As of July 30, 2011, the liability for these purchase commitments was $168 million and is recorded in other current liabilities and is not included in the preceding table. Purchase Obligations Purchase obligations represent an estimate of all open purchase orders and contractual obligations in the ordinary course of business, other than commitments with contract manufacturers and suppliers, for which we have not received the goods or services. Although open purchase orders are considered enforceable and legally binding, the terms generally allow us the option to cancel, reschedule, and adjust our requirements based on our business needs prior to the delivery of goods or performance of services. Long-Term Debt The amount of long-term debt in the preceding table represents the principal amount of the respective debt instruments. See Note 10 to the Consolidated Financial Statements. Other Long-Term Liabilities Other long-term liabilities include noncurrent income taxes payable, accrued liabilities for deferred compensation, noncurrent deferred tax liabilities, and certain other long-term liabilities. Due to the uncertainty in the timing of future payments, our noncurrent income taxes payable of approximately $1.2 billion and noncurrent deferred tax liabilities of $264 million were presented as one aggregated amount in the total column on a separate line in the preceding table. Noncurrent income taxes payable include uncertain tax positions (see Note 15 to the Consolidated Financial Statements) partially offset by payments. 71 Table of Contents Other Commitments In connection with our business combinations and asset purchases, we have agreed to pay certain additional amounts contingent upon the achievement of agreed-upon technology, development, product, or other milestones or continued employment with us of certain employees of acquired entities. See Note 12 to the Consolidated Financial Statements. We also have certain funding commitments primarily related to our investments in privately held companies and venture funds, some of which are based on the achievement of certain agreed-upon milestones, and some of which are required to be funded on demand. The funding commitments were $192 million as of July 30, 2011, compared with $279 million as of July 31, 2010. Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements We consider our investments in unconsolidated variable interest entities to be off-balance sheet arrangements. In the ordinary course of business, we have investments in privately held companies and provide financing to certain customers. These privately held companies and customers may be considered to be variable interest entities. We evaluate on an ongoing basis our investments in these privately held companies and customer financings and we have determined that as of July 30, 2011 there were no material unconsolidated variable interest entities. In fiscal 2010, Cisco and EMC Corporation ( EMC ), together with VMware, Inc. ( VMware ) formed the Virtual Computing Environment coalition and invested in Acadia Enterprises LLC ( Acadia ), a joint venture with EMC in which VMware and Intel also invested. During fiscal 2011, the Virtual Computing Environment coalition and Acadia were combined into a single entity and renamed the Virtual Computing Environment Company ( VCE ). As of July 30, 2011, our cumulative investment in the combined VCE entity was approximately $100 million and we owned approximately 35% of the outstanding equity. We account for our investment in VCE under the equity method, and accordingly our carrying value in VCE has been reduced by $79 million, which reflects our cumulative share of VCE losses primarily in fiscal 2011. Over the next 12 months, as VCE scales its operations, we expect that we will make additional investments in VCE and may incur additional losses, in proportion to our ownership percentage. On an ongoing basis, we reassess our investments in privately held companies and customer financings to determine if they are variable interest entities and if we would be regarded as the primary beneficiary pursuant to the applicable accounting guidance. As a result of this ongoing assessment, we may be required to make additional disclosures or consolidate these entities. Because we may not control these entities, we may not have the ability to influence these events. We provide financing guarantees, which are generally for various third-party financing arrangements extended to our channel partners and end-user customers. We could be called upon to make payments under these guarantees in the event of nonpayment by the channel partners or end-user customers. See the previous discussion of these financing guarantees under Financing Receivables and Guarantees. Securities Lending We periodically engage in securities lending activities with certain of our available-for-sale investments. These transactions are accounted for as a secured lending of the securities, and the securities are typically loaned only on an overnight basis. The average balance of securities lending for fiscal 2011 and 2010 was $1.6 billion and $1.5 billion, respectively. We require collateral equal to at least 102% of the fair market value of the loaned security and that the collateral be in the form of cash or liquid, high-quality assets. We engage in these secured lending transactions only with highly creditworthy counterparties, and the associated portfolio custodian has agreed to indemnify us against any collateral losses. As of July 30, 2011 and July 31, 2010, we had no 72 Table of Contents outstanding securities lending transactions. We believe these arrangements do not present a material risk or impact to our liquidity requirements. We did not experience any losses in connection with the secured lending of securities during the periods presented. Stock Repurchase Program and Dividends In September 2001, our Board of Directors authorized a stock repurchase program. As of July 30, 2011, our Board of Directors had authorized an aggregate repurchase of up to $82 billion of common stock under this program, and the remaining authorized repurchase amount was $10.2 billion with no termination date. The stock repurchase activity under the stock repurchase program, reported based on the trade date is summarized as follows (in millions, except per-share amounts): Shares Repurchased Weighted- Average Price per Share Amount Repurchased Cumulative balance at July 25, 2009 2,802 $ 20.41 $ 57,179 Repurchase of common stock under the stock repurchase program 325 24.02 7,803 Cumulative balance at July 31, 2010 3,127 $ 20.78 $ 64,982 Repurchase of common stock under the stock repurchase program 351 19.36 6,791 Cumulative balance at July 30, 2011 3,478 $ 20.64 $ 71,773 During fiscal 2011, cash dividends of $0.12 per share, or $658 million, were declared on our outstanding common stock and paid during the same period. Any future dividends will be subject to the approval of our Board of Directors. Liquidity and Capital Resource Requirements Based on past performance and current expectations, we believe our cash and cash equivalents, investments, cash generated from operations and ability to access capital markets and committed credit lines will satisfy, through at least the next 12 months, our liquidity requirements, both in total and domestically, including the following: working capital needs, capital expenditures, investment requirements, stock repurchases, cash dividends, contractual obligations, commitments, principal and interest payments on debt, future customer financings, and other liquidity requirements associated with our operations. There are no other transactions, arrangements, or relationships with unconsolidated entities or other persons that are reasonably likely to materially affect the liquidity and the availability of, as well as our requirements for capital resources. 73 Table of Contents 
