CIK: 87347
Company Name: SCHLUMBERGER LTD NV 
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2005-03-04


Item 7 Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operation The following discussion of results should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements. 2004 Summary Schlumberger consists of two business segments: Oilfield Services and WesternGeco. The year marked the transformation of Schlumberger into a pure oilfield services company with a clear record for growth and technology leadership. Income from continuing operations before income taxes and minority interest was $1.3 billion in 2004 compared to $457 million in 2003. The 2004 and 2003 results include pretax charges of $243 million and $638 million, respectively, which are described in detail on pages 22 to 25. The growth in earnings from continuing operations far exceeded the 15% growth in revenue. Oilfield Services reached new revenue and pretax operating income records of $10.24 billion and $1.80 billion, respectively. Strong growth was experienced in all Areas, but most notably in North America, Middle East and Asia. Pretax return on sales for the full year was 17.6%, considerably higher than the 15% objective set in March of 2003. WesternGeco returned to profitability with pretax operating income of $124 million versus a loss of $20 million in 2003. Our approach has been threefold: to bring capacity and cost down to appropriate levels, to take a cautious approach to new investment in the data library, and to continue aggressive introduction of Q* technology. The keys to success are industry discipline in managing capacity but above all clear demonstration of the differentiation in Q-technology. Q-revenue more than doubled from $79 million in 2003 to $162 million in 2004. Our divestiture program of non-Oilfield businesses is now complete . During 2004, we finalized the sale of SchlumbergerSema, completed the initial public offering of Axalto, and divested of substantially all remaining non-oilfield businesses. As a result net debt fell below $1.5 billion at December 31, 2004 and is at a level consistent with the longer-term capital structure of Schlumberger. In May 2004, Schlumberger completed the acquisition of a 26% equity stake in PetroAlliance, Russia largest independent oilfield service company. A further 25% stake is expected to be acquired in the first half of 2005. We also finalized the acquisition of SGK, a joint venture with which we have been associated with for the past four years in Russia. The market potential in Russia is substantial, and this type of investment will benefit Schlumberger and the Russian oil industry by facilitating growth through access to technology. In June 2004, we outlined our growth strategy with a particular focus on the production-oriented environment. New and increased investment in additional production capacity, largely in the international and deepwater markets where Schlumberger is strongest, 12 coupled with the requirement to prolong production from existing reservoirs, will be reflected in higher levels of oilfield service activity for many years to come. Seventy percent of today oil production comes from fields that have been in production for more than thirty years. As these fields continue to age, their performance declines and remedial actions are required to maintain their output. The significance of this can be seen from the fact that as much as three-quarters of today investment in the upstream industry is directed at such activity with the remaining quarter being spent on developing new sources of oil for the future. There are three key avenues that Schlumberger intends to exploit in addition to maintaining our leading position in exploration and development technology for harsh and complex environments. First, Schlumberger already has broad geographical spread. However, our strong positions in the strategically important areas for new production in the Middle East, the Caspian and in deepwater regions provide a unique growth opportunity. Schlumberger sees the largest opportunity to be in Russia as well as to some extent in China. The second avenue for growth is through technology, both developed internally and acquired externally. A wide range of internally developed products and services has created a portfolio targeted at growth in the production-oriented market. Schlumberger research and engineering expenditures have been relatively constant while the rate of introduction of new products and services is accelerating. We consider complementary technology acquisition with subsequent enhancement and integration into our portfolio to be an on-going feature of our future growth. The third avenue of growth for Schlumberger will be our ability to perform reservoir-oriented project management. Conceived largely as a well construction business, and confirmed by successful execution of projects such as Burgos in Mexico, Integrated Project Management (IPM) is now developing more and more expertise in the execution of projects designed to boost production in mature areas. Early in 2004, we set a number of new financial goals for the Company. These included the anticipation that the compound annual growth rate in revenue would be in double digits throughout the remainder of the decade - although such growth may not be linear as the industry will remain to some extent cyclical; an after-tax return-on-sales target, before minority interests, of 15% -including WesternGeco; and a target return on capital employed consistently in the upper teens. The following discussion and analysis of results of operations should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements . (Stated in millions) 2004 2003 % Change OILFIELD SERVICES Operating Revenue $ 10,239 $ 8,823 16 % Pretax Segment Income 1 $ 1,801 $ 1,537 17 % WESTERNGECO Operating Revenue $ 1,238 $ 1,183 5 % Pretax Segment Income 1 $ 124 $ (20 ) % 1 Pretax segment income represents income before taxes and minority interest, excluding interest income, interest expense, amortization of intangibles and pretax charges of $243 million in 2004 and $638 million in 2003 (see pages 22 to 25 for description of charges). Oilfield Services As the year progressed, oil prices continued to climb, rising from $32.50 per barrel on January 1 st to $38 per barrel at the end of June to a record of over $55 per barrel in late October. Despite oil trading on average some $15 per barrel higher in 2004 than in 2003, robust world demand growth of over 2 million barrels per day continued throughout the second half of 2004. Consumption, especially in the US and China, pushed demand to an average 82.5 million barrels per day in 2004, a year-on-year growth of 3.3% and the sharpest growth rate since 1976. Supply growth in 2004 was restrained by a number of factors that, when added together resulted in an extremely tight supply-demand balance that pushed prices higher than prior year forecasts. The factors that created this tight environment are expected to remain in 2005, including strong oil demand, geopolitical tension, a stretched refining system, relatively low crude and product inventories, limited spare production capacity and a weak US dollar. Accordingly, most forecasts call for some early 2005 softening in prices after a relatively mild winter followed by average oil prices at or slightly above 2004 levels. The main risks to this scenario remain a dramatic slowing of world economic growth and supply side disruption. 13 Upstream exploration and production (E&P) spending trended higher in 2004, up an estimated 13% over 2003. International spending, accounting for over 70% of the total, saw the largest gain of 14%, while North America was up 11%. Exploration spending remained flat in 2004 while development and production saw the majority of the increase as operators focused on maintaining production in aging fields. Worldwide rig counts were up 13% over 2003. The outlook for 2005 remains robust with the industry now clearly focused on the need to build additional supply capacity for both oil and gas. This is evidenced by increased new field development plans, as well as unprecedented efforts to increase production and recovery from existing reservoirs. Exploration, especially in challenging environments such as deep water, should see a substantial increase in 2005. Strong market fundamentals, our extensive technology portfolio and unique global workforce make us ideally placed to grow in this environment. 2004 Results Revenue of $10.24 billion increased 16% in 2004 versus 2003. North America increased 18%, Middle East & Asia increased 19%, and Latin America increased 21%. Europe/CIS/West Africa was up by 4%. Pretax operating income of $1.80 billion in 2004 was 17% higher than in 2003. Activity increased in almost all regions with the largest growth recorded in the GeoMarkets in India; Mexico; Russia; East Africa and the Eastern Mediterranean; and the Caspian. Russia continued to make impressive progress with growth exceeding our expectations despite the absence of any activity for Yuganskneftegas at the end of the year. Demand for all technology services increased, but particularly for Drilling & Measurements technologies including the PowerDrive* and newly introduced PowerV* rotary steerable systems as well as Wireline Analysis Behind Casing and PressureXpress services. Increased demand for Well Services production technologies also contributed significantly to the growth. These technologies included the successful launch of the PowerCLEAN* system, an integrated solution for optimizing production through wellbore fill removal using coiled tubing. The Well Completions & Productivity technology service also showed strong growth for production-based technologies while IPM activity continued its expansion. The rate of new technology introductions is expected to accelerate over the coming two-year period. Offshore and deepwater activity in India utilizing Wireline, Drilling & Measurements and Well Completions & Productivity technologies continued to drive significant year-on-year growth. Growth in India was supported by the award of a completion sales tender for subsurface safety valves and a three-year contract for wireline logging on onshore fields for ONGC valued at more than $125 million. During the year Schlumberger opened a Technology Hub on the campus of the Gubkin Russian State University of Oil and Gas, Russia leading oil and gas educational facility. The Hub complements other Schlumberger research and engineering activities in Russia. Shell International Exploration and Production BV and Schlumberger Information Solutions established an alliance for research and development of next generation Smart Fields hydrocarbon development solutions. North America Revenue of $3.11 billion increased 18% over 2003 led principally by Canada and US Land, which benefited from the strong performance of most technology services, coupled with pricing improvements particularly for Well Services. Growth in Canada was due to increased activity and substantially higher pricing. US Land delivered robust revenue growth primarily due to continued favorable oil and gas industry dynamics, the expansion of the unconventional gas market, an improved pricing environment as a result of tighter resource availability, and strong overall market demand combined with increasing demand for ABC* Analysis Behind Casing technologies, and Drilling & Measurements PowerDrive rotary steerable systems. These technology advances are demonstrating value and are helping drive activity while enabling price increases and efficiency gains. 14 Pretax operating income of $519 million was 42% higher than in 2003 due mainly to increased operating leverage in US Land, with double-digit price improvements in Wireline and Well Services over 2003 averages. In Canada, increased activity coupled with sustained pricing improvements, and the favorable exchange rate effect led to a notable improvement in operating income. At the end of the year, the technology component of turnkey service revenue in the Gulf of Mexico was evaluated against our objectives but proved insufficient to outweigh the risk associated with the turnkey drilling business model. As a result, the decision was made to exit the activity. Latin America Revenue of $1.75 billion grew 21% over 2003 as all the GeoMarkets, except Venezuela, posted revenue increases. Record revenue in Mexico was mainly due to PEMEX drilling activity coupled with higher levels of IPM activity. Increasing demand for Integrated Project Management in Argentina, an increase in Wireline activity associated with the Peruvian jungle operations, and growing demand for rotary steerable systems in Brazil also contributed to the revenue growth. In Venezuela, revenue decreased slightly on lower activity with PDVSA due to ongoing contract negotiation on certain integrated projects. Pretax operating income of $221 million was flat over 2003. The substantial revenue growth did not materialize into higher operating income mainly because of a larger contribution of Schlumberger-managed third-party services on IPM projects in Mexico as well as an unfavorable revenue mix in Mexico. Additionally, throughout the year, certain barges in West Venezuela were partially idled while contractual negotiations continued with PDVSA. A key contract award during the fourth quarter of 2004 included a new 350-well IPM contract in the Burgos Basin for PEMEX in Mexico. The multi-year contract value is estimated at $550 million and will include drilling and completion work for development and appraisal gas wells. Europe/CIS/West Africa Revenue of $2.79 billion increased 7% over 2003 mainly due to Russia, the Caspian and West Africa with gains recorded in all technology services led by Drilling & Measurements and Well Services. CIS reached a new revenue record at $825 million, a 33% increase over 2003. Activity was particularly sustained in Russia mainly due to the continued expansion of the customer base and the deployment of new production-related technologies. The revenue growth was tempered by the halt of activities for Yuganskneftegas in Russia in the fourth quarter. However, successful redeployment of the equipment previously working for Yuganskneftegas was completed by the end of the year. West Africa continued to deliver robust performance achieving record activity levels mainly due to the development of deepwater projects combined with price increases through the introduction of new services and increasing demand for Well Services and Well Completions & Productivity technology services. Pretax operating income of $447 million declined 3% over 2003 mainly due to persistent union strikes in Norway, redeployment costs and associated decreased operating efficiency in Russia, weak results in North Africa, and the appreciation of local currencies against the US dollar. These were partially offset by the continued strengthening of activity in Continental Europe and the Caspian. 15 In Russia, Sibneft awarded Schlumberger a contract for more than $100 million to provide well construction and stimulation services in Western Siberia. Middle East & Asia Revenue in 2004 reached a record of $2.48 billion, increasing 19% over 2003. The GeoMarkets in the Middle East, Malaysia and India primarily drove the growth. Activity in Saudi Arabia was focused on increasing production capacity, which resulted in higher levels of drilling activity throughout the year. This trend is expected to continue in 2005. India reached record revenue with the ramp-up in deepwater activity for ONGC and deepwater exploration activity for Reliance Industries Ltd. Activity in Qatar continued to increase due to ongoing gas development projects in the North Field. Also contributing to the record revenue level was the start of a new fracturing campaign in Oman. Demand for Well Completions & Productivity technologies was particularly strong, mainly in the Gulf from projects with RasGas, in Saudi Arabia from the commissioning of the Abu Safah project, and in Malaysia from higher testing activities and artificial lift sales. Pretax operating income of $649 million increased 27% over 2003 primarily driven by India, due to a substantial increase in deepwater activity combined with strong technology deployment, the ramp up of favorable projects in the Gulf, improved pricing on contract renewals, and new technology introductions. Key technology solutions that were deployed included the CHDT* Cased Hole Dynamic Tester tool, part of the suite of ABC Analysis Behind Casing technology services, was used to identify a high-pressured zone in a depleted reservoir in China; to acquire pressures and fluid samples in Saudi Arabia and Abu Dhabi; and to acquire samples and pressure readings in Malaysia. In the Gulf, demonstrated service quality and the introduction of new technology services led to the award of major contracts in Qatar and Oman. These included a $320 million, multi-year wireline and tubing conveyed perforating contract by Petroleum Development Oman (PDO) for their North and South operations. 2003 Results Revenue of $8.8 billion increased 8% in 2003 versus 2002 led by North America with an increase of 14%; followed by Latin America and Middle East & Asia, which both increased 9%; and Europe/CIS/West Africa, which was up 4%. Pretax operating income of $1.54 billion in 2003 was 20% higher than in 2002, primarily due to strong customer demand resulting from increased E&P expenditures and customer acceptance of new technologies. Overhead cost savings of $67 million generated from restructuring and downsizing efforts, principally in Europe/CIS/West Africa and North & South America, also contributed to the increased profitability during the year. Oilfield Services began the year with relatively flat revenue in the first quarter, then achieved modest, but continuous growth over the following three quarters due to new contracts, the introduction of new technologies, and increased demand for Integrated Project Management. The results were positively impacted by an upturn in natural gas drilling in North America, and increased activity in Mexico, Russia and the Middle East, partially offset by a nationwide strike in Venezuela and unrest in Nigeria. All technology product lines helped drive revenue growth. Well Services and Drilling & Measurements record levels of revenue contributed to more than half of the increase in Oilfield Services revenue. Data & Consulting services drew the award of several contracts for reservoir modeling, field development planning, and production optimization. Integrated Project Management experienced high activity levels principally fueled by Latin America. North America North America revenue of $2.6 billion increased 14% versus 2002. The growth in revenue was mainly due to increased activity in US Land, as well as Canada. Both markets were driven by strong commodity prices, which, in turn, were caused by the record low gas storage levels at the end of the 2003 drawdown season. This growth was not mirrored in the Gulf of Mexico where activity was essentially flat year-on-year. 16 Pretax operating income of $365 million increased 33% over 2002 primarily due to a beneficial fall-through resulting from improved equipment utilization in US Land following asset rationalization and cost containment. Increased demand for Drilling & Measurements, cased hole wireline and hydraulic fracturing solutions, related to increased complexity in developing new gas reserves in US Land, also contributed to profitability improvement. Latin America Latin America revenue of $1.4 billion increased 9% versus 2002 primarily due to substantial increases in Mexico, Brazil and Argentina, partially offset by a significant decline in Venezuela. Large-scale project management contracts substantially accounted for the growth in activity in Mexico. Growth in Brazil was driven by a strong increase in Petrobras exploration activity, and Argentina benefited from the high oil price. The political turmoil in the early part of the year substantially impacted results in Venezuela, however the focus on restoring production favorably drove the revenue in the latter half of the year. The increase in E&P spending in Mexico was driven by the compelling need to satisfy the domestic demand for natural gas, increase the light oil production and ramp-up the oil production potential. Key contracts that contributed to revenue growth included project management of a four-year, $500 million integrated oilfield services project which represents the most significant oil development project in Mexico in the last 20 years. Pretax operating income of $221 million was up 31% year-on-year with all areas excluding Venezuela contributing to improved profitability. There were record levels of Integrated Project Management contracts in Mexico and positive fall-through on incremental revenue in Argentina and Brazil. Europe/CIS/West Africa Revenue of $2.6 billion increased 4% over 2002, primarily in Russia due to growth in E&P spending and continued expansion of the addressable market, which drove increased fracturing activity, high sales of artificial lift pumps, and the adoption of more advanced drilling technologies. CIS reached a record revenue level of $629 million, 22% higher than 2002. An increase in the number of E&P companies entering the development phase of deepwater projects in West Africa during the second half of 2003 also contributed to overall activity improvement in the Area, principally in Well Completions & Productivity and Well Services technologies. These results were partially offset by lower exploration activity by the major oil companies in the North Sea and by production shutdowns in the Western Niger delta in Nigeria due to socio-political unrest. Pretax operating income of $460 million increased 20% over 2002 primarily due to cost savings generated at the beginning of the year, as well as increased activities in West Africa due to deepwater activities moving into a more lucrative development phase. Middle East & Asia Revenue of $2.1 billion increased 9% over 2002 with more than half the growth coming from Saudi Arabia/Kuwait, Egypt and Indonesia. Despite geopolitical uncertainty in the period leading up to the war in Iraq and relative softness in Asia principally caused by the SARS outbreak, revenue showed marked improvement primarily due to higher demand for Drilling & Measurements, Wireline and Well Completion & Productivity technologies in Egypt, Saudi Arabia/Kuwait and Indonesia partially offset by reduced activity in Malaysia /Brunei/Philippines due to the suspension of planned deepwater development work resulting from the deepwater acreage dispute between Malaysia and Brunei. 17 Pretax operating income of $509 million increased 12%, primarily due to the operating leverage on increased revenue across most GeoMarkets, principally caused by increased activity in Indonesia and stimulation activity and artificial lift sales in East Africa. 2002 Results Revenue for 2002 was $8.2 billion versus $8.4 billion in 2001 reflecting reduced activity in North America and Latin America, which was partially mitigated by higher activity in Europe/CIS/W. Africa and the Middle East & Asia. Pretax operating income of $1.3 billion decreased 19% primarily from reduced margins in Wireline and Well Services as activity declined in North America. A sharp fall in revenue at the beginning of 2002 reflected declining activity levels in North America, which remained depressed for the remainder of the year, together with political and economic uncertainty in Latin America. In the second and third quarters, robust activity in Europe/CIS/W. Africa, and signs of a possible recovery in Asia, mitigated the effects of low North American drilling levels resulting in increased revenue. However, this trend was short-lived as slower activity outside North America, due mainly to seasonal influences, coupled with budget cuts, resulted in lower fourth quarter revenue. From a technology standpoint, the strongest performer was Well Completions & Productivity where acquisitions, testing, advanced completions systems and artificial lift technology showed market share gains. During 2002, Schlumberger acquired A. Comeau & Associates Limited, a leading provider of electrical engineering products and services for artificially lifted wells. This addition, combined with the successful integration of Sensa and Phoenix technologies into the Schlumberger Artificial Lift services portfolio, contributed to higher sales in 2002, particularly in the Eastern Hemisphere. The Drilling & Measurements technology service also recorded solid revenue growth fuelled largely by the continued penetration of the PowerDrive475* rotary steerable system into new GeoMarkets. Schlumberger made two further acquisitions during 2002 to bolster its real-time reservoir management suite of services. In January, Schlumberger acquired Norwegian-based Inside Reality AS, providing new 3D virtual reality systems that create a unique and powerful environment for interactive well planning and real-time geosteering analysis. Schlumberger also acquired the software and services business of Technoguide AS, a leader in the reservoir modeling domain. North America Revenue of $2.3 billion decreased 19% versus 2001. A steep revenue decline at the outset of the year reflected a continued lackluster drilling environment and unseasonably mild weather conditions. Throughout the remainder of the year activity levels remained depressed resulting in essentially flat revenue for 2002. Other factors contributing to reduced revenue included lower non-rig related activity resulting in lower Wireline, Well Services, and Well Completions & Productivity revenue, the effects of the tropical storms in the third quarter of 2002 and a slow pick-up in Canadian activity post spring break-up in 2002. Pretax operating income of $274 million decreased from $637 million in 2001 due to pricing pressures across all services, particularly in Well Services and Well Completions & Productivity. Latin America Revenue of $1.3 billion decreased 9% versus 2001. Ongoing political and economic uncertainty in the region continued to affect business conditions, particularly in Venezuela and Argentina. This particularly impacted results in the first half of the year. In sharp contrast, the second half of 2002 saw solid growth partly as a result of higher demand for Drilling & Measurements and Well Completions technologies connected to contracts in the Burgos Basin. 18 Pretax operating income of $169 million declined 8% as a result of decreased activity in Venezuela and Argentina. Europe/CIS/West Africa Revenue of $2.5 billion increased 17% versus 2001. Strong revenue growth was recorded in the first three quarters of 2002 reflecting increased activity levels and market share gains particularly in the Caspian and Russia GeoMarkets in respect to artificial lift and drilling technologies. The Well Completions & Productivity and Drilling & Measurements technologies recorded the strongest growth. This growth was partially mitigated by a steep revenue drop in the fourth quarter of 2002 due to exceptionally severe winter weather conditions in the North Sea and Russia that affected all services. In addition, operator budget cuts in the Nigeria GeoMarket and refocused investment decisions in the UK contributed to lower fourth quarter revenue. Pretax operating income was $383 million compared to $385 million in 2001, with the very slight decrease due to softening in pricing towards the end of the year and restructuring in the region to reduce support infrastructure to match slowing activity levels. Middle East & Asia Revenue of $1.9 billion increased 8% versus 2001. After a decline at the beginning of 2002 resulting from exceptional artificial lift sales at the end of 2001, the Asian market showed signs of recovery highlighted by strong revenue growth in the second quarter. Over the year, the India and Malaysia/Brunei/Philippines GeoMarkets recorded the strongest growth due to increased activity in these countries. In addition, the Wireline and Well Services technologies posted the highest growth. This was partly offset by a slowdown in activity in the second half of 2002 due to a number of major projects nearing completion and lower equipment sales. Pretax operating income of $453 million was up 9% versus 2001. WesternGeco 2004 Results The revenue increase of 5% to $1.24 billion in 2004 from $1.18 billion in 2003 was mainly attributable to the successful expansion of Q-Technology together with strong Multiclient sales. Q-revenue grew from $79 million in 2003 to $162 million in 2004, with a similar growth rate expected in 2005. Multiclient sales increased 24%, to $436 million, mainly in the Gulf of Mexico driven by the renewed interest in the library resulting from a higher oil price environment and an increasing number of blocks in the Gulf of Mexico coming up for renewal. Approximately 47% of the multiclient surveys sold in 2004 had no net book value due to prior amortization of capitalized costs and only 5% of the surveys sold were impaired in 2003 and 2002. Land activity decreased 8% reflecting the completion of some projects in Malaysia and the Middle East, and the shutdown of several crews active in the previous year in Alaska, Mexico and West Africa. Marine activity declined 3% mainly as a result of the decision to reduce the number of vessels in the WesternGeco fleet coupled with adverse weather in Latin America, lower activity in the Caspian and a high number of vessel transits at the end of the year. Marine activity in the first half of 2005 is expected to recover with higher vessel utilization and improved pricing. Data Processing increased 6% reflecting higher acquisition volumes, higher levels of Q-processing, and robust third-party work coupled with improved operational efficiencies. Pretax operating income reached $124 million in 2004 compared to a loss of $20 million in 2003 due to lower amortization cost following the impairments of the Multiclient library in 2003 and 2002 coupled with savings related to restructuring measures taken in 2003, accelerating demand for reservoir-focused Q-Marine activity together with strong Multiclient sales. Data Processing also contributed to this improvement due to better operating efficiency. 19 The WesternGeco backlog at the end of the year reached $670 million, increasing 64% over 2003, of which 86% are committed over the next year. Driven by Q-Marine vessel utilization, WesternGeco decided to convert the Western Regent vessel to Q-technology. The vessel is scheduled for deployment in the first half of 2005. 2003 Results Revenue in 2003 was $1.2 billion versus $1.5 billion in 2002, a 20% decrease which was primarily due to lower land crew activity following the exiting of the North American Land market combined with the completion of some contracts in the Middle East. The decrease in revenue was also due to declines in Multiclient sales principally in North & South America, partially offset by increased Marine activity in Europe, Caspian and the Middle East. Q-Marine continued to gain customer acceptance. The end of 2003 saw a return to traditional seasonal Multiclient revenue levels partially helped by the signing of a long-term business agreement with a major energy company that included the licensing of part of the WesternGeco data library, as well as joint R&D and training on new technology for seismic data processing. Q-Marine continued to command significant pricing premiums as a result of the added value obtained from the delivered product, but pricing across other business segments was flat to down for conventional marine, land and data processing activity due to continued overcapacity in the industry. Q-Marine penetration continued strong, reflected by the doubling of Q-revenue year-on-year. Pretax operating loss was $20 million versus a profit of $71 million in 2002 (excluding Multiclient impairment and other charges in both years described on page 24) mainly due to significantly higher Multiclient amortization charges as a result of lower estimated future revenues. The lower Multiclient sales were primarily due to an overall lessening in interest in the Gulf of Mexico from the major oil companies coupled with an average price reduction of approximately 30% during the year. The WesternGeco backlog at the end of the year reached $408 million. 2002 Results WesternGeco revenue of $1.5 billion decreased 13% compared to 2001, primarily due to decreased activity in North America and Europe/CIS/W. Africa, which were partially offset by increases in Latin America and the Middle East & Asia. The seismic downturn continued throughout 2002 resulting in significantly lower activity levels, a reduction in Multiclient sales, and extreme pricing pressures on all services due to large overcapacity in the seismic industry. Significant workforce reductions were made in the fourth quarter of 2002 as a result of the decision to stop Land acquisition activities in the US lower 48 states and Canada. Pretax operating income of $71 million fell 68% in 2002, primarily due to significantly lower Multiclient sales and decreased activities in North America coupled with Land seismic contract losses in Mexico and Marine seismic contract losses in India, both of which were related to production delays. 20 Research & Engineering Expenditures by business segment were as follows: (Stated in millions) 2004 2003 2002 Oilfield Services $ 416 $ 375 $ 379 WesternGeco 48 52 68 Other 3 4 5 $ 467 $ 431 $ 452 Interest Expense Interest expense in 2004 of $272 million included a pretax charge of $73 million and a pretax credit of $10 million related to US interest rate swaps (see Charges Continuing Operations ). Excluding these items, interest expense decreased $126 million in 2004 due to a $2 billion decrease in average debt balances and a decrease in the weighted average borrowing rates from 4.6% to 3.9%. The decrease in 2003 of $34 million, to $334 million, was due to a decrease in average debt balances of $185 million and a decrease in the weighted average borrowing rates from 4.9% to 4.6%. The decrease in 2002 of $17 million, to $368 million, was due to a decrease in the weighted average borrowing rates from 5.8% to 4.9%, which more than offset a $1 billion increase in average debt balances. Interest Income Interest income of $56 million in 2004 was $4 million higher than 2003. The average return on investment in 2004 was 2%, a reduction of 0.4% compared to 2003, due to lower interest rates. The average investment balance in 2004 was $2.7 billion, an increase of $567 million over 2003 due to cash flow from operations and business divestiture proceeds. The 2003 interest income of $52 million was $16 million lower than 2002. The average return on investment in 2003 decreased by 1.4% to 2.4% compared to 2002 due to lower interest rates. The average investment balance in 2003 was $2.2 billion an increase of $352 million over 2002 due mainly to cash flow generated by operations and the sale of Hanover note. Other Gross margin was 21%, 16% and 18% for 2004, 2003 and 2002, respectively. The charges and credits described in detail on pages 22 to 25 adversely impacted the gross margin by 1%, 5% and 3% in 2004, 2003 and 2002, respectively. As a percentage of revenue, marketing, research and engineering and general and administrative expenses are as follows: 2004 2003 2002 Marketing 0.4 % 0.5 % 0.7 % Research and engineering 4.1 % 4.3 % 4.7 % General and administrative 3.0 % 3.2 % 3.3 % The reported effective tax rate including charges was 20.9% in 2004, 46.0% in 2003 and 38.4% in 2002. The charges and credits described in detail on pages 22 to 25 increased the effective tax rate by 0.4% in 2004, 21.2% in 2003 and 13.7% in 2002. The decrease in the reported effective tax rate between 2004 and 2003 was primarily due to lower non-tax effective charges, including charges related to the extinguishment of European debt in 2003, and the country mix of earnings in WesternGeco. The rate for 2003 was higher than 2002 mainly due to the non-tax effective charges related to the extinguishment of European debt in 2003. 21 Hanover Compressor Company In August 2001, Schlumberger sold its Oilfield Services worldwide gas compression activity to Hanover Compressor Company. The proceeds included 8.7 million shares of Hanover Compressor common stock, with a value at closing of $173 million, which was restricted from sale until August 30, 2004, and a $150 million long-term subordinated note maturing December 15, 2005. Schlumberger investment in Hanover Compressor is classified as an available-for-sale security and is included in Other Assets in the Consolidated Balance Sheet . In the fourth quarter of 2003, Schlumberger sold the subordinated note for $177 million and realized a pretax gain of $32 million. At December 31, 2003 the carrying value of Schlumberger investment in Hanover Compressor common stock exceeded the market value. As the decline in the market value of the Stock was deemed to be other than temporary , Schlumberger wrote down the cost basis of its investment to the fair market value of $91.4 million at December 31, 2003 and recorded a pretax and after-tax charge of $81.2 million in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles (SFAS 115). At December 31, 2004 the market value of Schlumberger investment in Hanover Compressor was $123 million. Charges Continuing Operations Schlumberger recorded the following charges/credits in continuing operations: Debt Extinguishment Costs In June 2004, Schlumberger Technology Corporation bought back and retired $351 million of its outstanding $1 billion 6.5% Notes due 2012. As a result, Schlumberger recorded a pretax charge of $37 million ($23 million after-tax), which included market premium and transaction costs. In March 2004, Schlumberger plc (SPLC) accepted tenders for the outstanding 175 million SPLC 6.50% Guaranteed Bonds due 2032. In addition, Schlumberger SA (SSA) bought back 25 million of the outstanding 274 million SSA 5.25% Guaranteed Bonds due 2008 and 7 million of the outstanding 259 million SSA 5.875% Guaranteed Bonds due 2011. As a result, Schlumberger recorded a pretax and after-tax charge of $77 million, which included market and tender premiums, and transaction costs. Between June 12 and July 22, 2003, subsidiaries of Schlumberger launched and concluded tender offers to acquire three series of outstanding European bonds; $1.3 billion of principal was repurchased for a total cost of $1.5 billion, which included the premium, and issuing and tender costs. The total pretax and after- tax charge on the tenders was $168 million, of which $81.5 million was recorded in the second quarter of 2003, when the first tender closed, with the balance of $86.3 million recorded in the third quarter of 2003. The above pretax charges are classified in Debt extinguishment costs in the Consolidated Statement of Income . Other Charges 2004 Third quarter of 2004: In connection with its ongoing restructuring program to reduce overhead, Schlumberger recorded, a pretax and after-tax charge of $3 million related to employee severance. This charge is classified in Cost of goods sold & services in the Consolidated Statement of Income . 22 Schlumberger recorded a pretax charge of $11 million ($10 million after-tax ) related to an Intellectual Property settlement which is classified in Cost of goods sold & services in the Consolidated Statement of Income . Second quarter of 2004: Schlumberger sold 9.7 million ordinary shares of Atos Origin SA at a price of 48.50 per share. The net proceeds for the sale were $551 million and Schlumberger recorded a pretax and after-tax loss of $7 million on this transaction, which reflects both banking fees and currency effect. The pretax charge is classified in Interest and other income in the Consolidated Statement of Income . As a result of this transaction, Schlumberger does not have any remaining ownership interest in Atos Origin SA. In connection with its continuing restructuring program to reduce overhead, Schlumberger recorded a pretax and after-tax charge of $4 million related to employee severance. This charge is classified in Cost of goods sold & services in the Consolidated Statement of Income . Schlumberger Technology Corporation settled its US Interest Rate Swaps resulting in a pretax gain of $10 million ($6 million after-tax), which is classified in Interest Expense in the Consolidated Statement of Income. Schlumberger recorded a pretax and after-tax charge of $11 million related to a vacated leased facility in the UK, which is classified in Cost of goods sold & services in the Consolidated Statement of Income. Schlumberger recorded a pretax and after-tax credit of $5 million related to the release of a litigation reserve which was no longer required and is classified in Cost of goods sold & services in the Consolidated Statement of Income . First quarter of 2004: Schlumberger Technology Corporation paid off its commercial paper program in the US. As a result, the $500 million US interest-rate swaps that were designated as cash-flow hedges became ineffective. Schlumberger recorded a pretax non-cash charge of $73 million ($46 million after-tax) to recognize unrealized losses previously recorded in Other Comprehensive Income. The pretax charge is classified in Interest expense in the Consolidated Statement of Income . Schlumberger sold 9.6 million ordinary shares of Atos Origin SA at a price of 52.95 per share. The net proceeds for the sale were $625 million and Schlumberger recorded a pretax and after-tax loss of $14 million on this transaction, which reflects both banking fees and currency effect. The pretax charge is classified in Interest and other income in the Consolidated Statement of Income . Schlumberger had commenced a restructuring program in order to reduce overhead. Consequently, a pretax charge of $20 million ($14 million after-tax) was taken in the quarter related to a voluntary early retirement program in the United States and is classified in Cost of goods sold & services in the Consolidated Statement of Income . 23 The following is a summary of the above 2004 charges: (Stated in millions) Pretax Tax Min Int Net Charges & Credits: - Debt extinguishment costs $ 115 $ 14 $ $ 101 - Restructuring program charges 27 6 21 - Intellectual Property settlement charge 11 1 10 - Loss on sale of Atos Origin shares 21 21 - US interest-rate swap settlement gain (10 ) (4 ) (6 ) - Vacated leased facility reserve 11 11 - Litigation reserve release (5 ) (5 ) - Loss recognized on interest-rate swaps 73 27 46 $ 243 $ 44 $ $ 199 2003 In December 2003, Schlumberger recorded a pretax gain of $32 million ($20 million after-tax) resulting from the sale of the Hanover Compressor note. The pretax gain is classified in Interest and other income in the Consolidated Statement of Income . In December 2003, Schlumberger recorded a pretax and after-tax charge of $81 million relating to the write-down to fair market value of Schlumberger investment in Hanover Compressor common stock. This charge is classified in Cost of goods sold and services in the Consolidated Statement of Income . In September 2003, Schlumberger recorded a pretax multiclient library impairment charge of $398 million ($204 million, after a tax credit of $74 million and a minority interest of $120 million), following an evaluation of current and expected future conditions in the seismic sector, a pretax seismic vessel impairment charge of $54 million ($38 million, after a minority interest credit of $16 million) and a $31 million pretax and after-tax gain on the sale of a drilling rig. The pretax amounts are classified in Cost of goods sold and services in the Consolidated Statement of Income . The following is a summary of the above 2003 charges: (Stated in millions) Pretax Tax Min Int Net Charges & Credits: - Debt extinguishment costs $ 168 $ $ $ 168 - Gain on sale of Hanover Compressor note (32 ) (12 ) (20 ) - Write-down of Hanover Compressor stock 81 81 - Multiclient seismic library impairment 398 74 (120 ) 204 - Seismic vessel impairment 54 (16 ) 38 - Gain on sale of rig (31 ) (31 ) $ 638 $ 62 $ (136 ) $ 440 2002 In the fourth quarter of 2002, Schlumberger recorded net pretax charges of $256 million ($182 after-tax and minority interest). Schlumberger recorded severance and other costs in an effort to reduce costs at WesternGeco. These costs related to expenses that offered no future benefit to the ongoing operations of this business. The severance costs related to a reduction in workforce of approximately 1,700 employees. Schlumberger also recorded an impairment charge, to reflect a change in the business projections of the WesternGeco business, related to capitalized multiclient seismic library costs, a valuation allowance against a deferred tax asset in Europe, a gain on the sale of drilling rigs and other costs. These pretax charges are classified in Cost of goods sold and services in the Consolidated Statement of Income . 24 In March 2002, Schlumberger recorded a charge of $26 million (pretax $27 million and minority interest credit of $1 million) related to the financial/economic crisis in Argentina where in January 2002, the government eliminated all US dollar contracts and converted US dollar denominated accounts receivable into pesos. As a result, Schlumberger currency exposure increased significantly. With currency devaluation, an exchange loss (net of hedging) on net assets, primarily customer receivables, was incurred. This pretax charge is classified in Cost of goods sold and services in the Consolidated Statement of Income . The following is a summary of the above 2002 charges: (Stated in millions) Pretax Tax Min Int Net Charges & Credits: - Multiclient seismic library impairment $ 184 $ $ (55 ) $ 129 -WesternGeco severance and other 117 7 (38 ) 72 -Valuation allowance (42 ) 42 - Gain on sale of drilling rigs (87 ) (87 ) - Other 42 16 26 - Argentina exchange loss 27 (1 ) 26 $ 283 $ (19 ) $ (94 ) $ 208 Business Divestitures Discontinued Operations During 2004, Schlumberger divested the following businesses which are accounted for as Discontinued Operations : In January, the sale of the SchlumbergerSema business was completed. Schlumberger received 393 million after adjustments ($495 million) in cash and 19.3 million shares of common stock of Atos Origin with a value of 1.02 billion ($1.27 billion), which represented approximately 29% of the outstanding common shares of Atos Origin after the transaction was completed. The results of SchlumbergerSema include, in the first quarter of 2004, a gain of $26 million on the sale and in the second quarter of 2004, a credit of $15 million related to adjustments to several accruals. The net assets were approximately $2.2 billion, including $1.3 billion of goodwill. On February 2, 2004, Schlumberger sold 9.6 million of the Atos Origin shares for a net consideration of 500 million ($625 million). As a result of this sale, Schlumberger investment was reduced to approximately 15% of the outstanding common shares of Atos Origin. The equity in earnings representing Schlumberger interest in Atos Origin for the four days ending February 2, 2004 was not material. This investment was accounted for using the cost method as of February 2, 2004. On April 30, 2004 Schlumberger sold its remaining holding of 9.7 million Atos Origin shares for consideration of 465 million ($551 million), net of expenses. The losses on the sales of the Atos Origin shares of $21 million are classified in Interest and other income in the Consolidated Statement of Income . In February, Schlumberger sold its Telecom Billing Software business for $37 million in cash, excluding potential future cash proceeds of up to $10 million, of which $7 million was received in the third quarter. A $17 million gain on the sale was recognized in the first quarter of 2004 and a gain of $7 million related to the additional cash proceeds received was recognized in the third quarter. The net assets were approximately $17 million. In March, Schlumberger sold its Infodata business for $104 million in cash. A $48 million gain on the sale was recognized in the first quarter of 2004. The net assets were approximately $47 million, including goodwill of $42 million In April, Schlumberger completed the sale of its Business Continuity (BCO) business for $237 million in cash. A $48 million gain on the sale was recognized in the second quarter of 2004. The net assets were approximately $160 million, including goodwill of $83 million. 25 In May, Schlumberger wholly owned subsidiary Schlumberger BV sold, via a public offering, 34.8 million ordinary shares that it had held in its smart card business Axalto Holding NV, which represented 87% of the total ordinary shares outstanding. The sale price was 14.80 per share, resulting in net proceeds, after expenses, of $606 million, including a subsequent placement of 166,250 shares. A $7 million loss on the sale was recognized in the second quarter of 2004. In the third quarter, a gain of $18 million was recognized consisting of (1) a $9 million gain on the sale of Schlumberger residual investment of 5.1 million shares in Axalto (the sale price was 16.59 per share resulting in net proceeds, after expenses, of $99 million) and (2) a $9 million reversal of a liability related to the sale. The net assets were approximately $700 million, including goodwill of $415 million. In July, Schlumberger completed the sale of its Electricity Metering North America business for $248 million in cash. The results of Electricity Metering North America included a net gain of $25 million, including a US tax valuation allowance release of $49 million related to a tax loss carry forward associated with the sale of SchlumbergerSema (which is also included in Discontinued Operations) in the second quarter of 2004. This transaction allowed for the recognition of a deferred tax asset that was previously offset by a valuation allowance. Excluding the reversal of the valuation allowance, the transaction would have resulted in a loss of $24 million. The net assets were approximately $146 million, including goodwill of $94 million. In July, Schlumberger completed the sale of its Telecom Messaging business for $15 million, consisting of $6 million in cash and $9 million in future payments, of which an initial payment of $3 million was received in November 2004. A $4 million loss on the sale was recognized in the third quarter of 2004. The net assets were approximately $15 million. During the first quarter of 2005, Schlumberger completed the sales of its Global Tel*Link, Public Phones and Essentis activities. The results of these businesses are reported as Discontinued Operations in the Consolidated Statement of Income and, in the fourth quarter of 2004 include accruals of approximately $15 million relating to the net losses on the sale of Public Phones and Essentis and a $17 million impairment charge relating to goodwill and intangible assets associated with the Essentis business. During 2003, Schlumberger divested the following businesses which are accounted for as Discontinued Operations : In July, Schlumberger completed the sale of its NPTest semiconductor testing business to a partnership led by Francisco Partners and Shah Management. The proceeds received were $220 million in cash resulting in a $12 million loss on the sale. Additionally, the partnership has a contingent obligation to make a further payment to Schlumberger under certain circumstances. The net assets were $202 million. In August, Schlumberger completed the sale of its Verification Systems business by a proceed-free management buyout resulting in an $18 million loss on the sale. The net assets were $17 million. In October, Schlumberger completed the sale of its e-City pay & display parking solutions business to Apax Partners. The proceeds received were $84 million in cash resulting in a $56 million loss on the sale. The net assets were $120 million, including $65 million of goodwill. During 2002, Schlumberger divested the following business which was accounted for as Discontinued Operations : In December, Schlumberger completed the sale of its Reed Hycalog drillbits business. The proceeds received included $259 million in cash and 9.7 million shares of Grant Prideco common stock with a value of $103 million, resulting in a $66 million gain on the sale. The net assets were $185 million. 26 The following table summarizes the results of these discontinued operations: (Stated in millions) 2004 2003 2002 Revenues $ 467 $ 4,367 $ 4,311 Income (loss) before taxes $ 63 $ 103 $ (2,844 ) Tax expense 16 32 31 Gains (losses) on disposal, net of tax 162 (86 ) 66 Income (loss) from discontinued operations $ 209 $ (15 ) $ (2,809 ) SchlumbergerSema Goodwill and Other Charges Discontinued operations On December 10, 2002, Schlumberger announced that the Board of Directors had approved an updated strategy for its SchlumbergerSema business segment. The new strategic plan outlook, current business values and the reorganization of SchlumbergerSema constituted significant events that required an impairment analysis to be performed in accordance with SFAS No. 142. SchlumbergerSema was valued on a stand-alone basis; each reporting unit within SchlumbergerSema was valued using a discounted cash flow analysis based on a long-term forecast prepared by SchlumbergerSema management with the assistance of a third party valuation expert. The implied multiples yielded by the discounted cash flow analysis were compared to observed trading multiples of comparable companies and recent transactions in the IT services industry to assess the fair value of the reporting units. The fair value was below the book value. As a result, a $2.638 billion pretax and after-tax goodwill impairment charge was recorded. This impairment reflected the difficulties of the telecommunications industry and the severely depressed market values of the IT companies serving SchlumbergerSema sector at the time of the charge. Certain intangible assets were also identified and written down as part of this process, resulting in a $147 million pretax charge ($132 million after-tax). Additional charges recorded included $97 million ($78 million after-tax) of severance, facility and other costs in an effort to reduce costs at SchlumbergerSema and a $52 million valuation allowance against a deferred tax asset in Europe. The following is a summary of the above 2002 charges included in loss from discontinued operations: (Stated in millions) Pretax Tax Min Int Net Charges & Credits: - Goodwill impairment $ 2,638 $ $ $ 2,638 - Intangibles impairment 147 15 132 - SchlumbergerSema severance and other 97 19 78 - Valuation allowance (52 ) 52 $ 2,882 $ (18 ) $ $ 2,900 Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States requires Schlumberger to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses. The following accounting policies involve critical accounting estimates because they are particularly dependent on estimates and assumptions made by Schlumberger about matters that are inherently uncertain. A summary of all of Schlumberger significant accounting policies, including those discussed below, are included in Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements . Schlumberger bases its estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. 27 Multiclient Seismic Data The WesternGeco segment capitalizes the cost associated with obtaining multiclient seismic data. Such costs are charged to Cost of goods sold and services based on the percentage of the total costs to the estimated total revenue that Schlumberger expects to receive from the sales of such data. However, under no circumstance will an individual survey carry a net book value greater than a 4-year straight-lined amortized value. The carrying value of surveys is reviewed for impairment annually as well as when an event or change in circumstance indicates an impairment may have occurred. Adjustments to the value are recorded when it is determined that estimated future revenues, which involves significant judgment on the part of Schlumberger, would not be sufficient to recover the carrying value of the surveys. Significant adverse changes in Schlumberger estimated future revenues could result in impairment charges in a future period. For purposes of performing the annual impairment test of the multiclient library, future cash flows are analyzed based on two pools of surveys: US and non-US. The US and non-US pools were determined to be the most appropriate level at which to perform the impairment review based upon a number of factors including (i) various macroeconomic factors that influence the ability to successfully market surveys and (ii) the focus of the sales force and related costs. Schlumberger recorded impairment charges relating to the multiclient library of $398 million in 2003 and $184 million in 2002. The carrying value of the library at December 31, 2004 and 2003 was $347 million and $506 million, respectively. Following the 2003 impairment charge, Schlumberger will generally not commence a multiclient project unless the project is significantly pre-funded by one or more customers. The reduction in the carrying value of the library from 2003 to 2004 is primarily attributable to a cautious approach to new investment combined with the significant pre-funding requirement. Allowance for Doubtful Accounts Schlumberger maintains allowances for doubtful accounts for estimated losses resulting from the inability of its customers to make required payments. If the financial condition of Schlumberger customers were to deteriorate, resulting in an impairment of their ability to make payments, additional allowances may be required. Inventory Reserves Schlumberger writes down its inventory for estimated obsolescence or unmarketable inventory equal to the difference between the cost of inventory and the estimated market value based upon assumptions about future demand and market conditions. If actual market conditions are less favorable than those projected by management, additional inventory write-downs may be required. Goodwill, Intangible Assets and Long-Lived Assets Schlumberger records as goodwill the excess of purchase price over the fair value of the tangible and identifiable intangible assets acquired. Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 142, Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets (SFAS 142), requires goodwill to be tested for impairment annually as well as when an event or change in circumstance indicates an impairment may have occurred. Goodwill is tested for impairment using a two-step approach. The first step tests for impairment by comparing the fair value of Schlumberger individual reporting units to their carrying amount to determine if there is a potential goodwill impairment. If the fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying value, an impairment loss is recorded to the extent that the implied fair value of the goodwill of the reporting unit is less than its carrying value. 28 For purposes of performing the impairment test for goodwill as required by SFAS 142 Schlumberger reporting units are the four geographic areas comprising the Oilfield Services segment and the WesternGeco segment. Schlumberger estimates the fair value of these reporting units using a discounted cash flow analysis and/or applying various market multiples. From time to time a third party valuation expert may be utilized to assist in the determination of fair value. Determining the fair value of a reporting unit is judgmental and often involves the use of significant estimates and assumptions. Schlumberger estimates of the fair value of each of its previously mentioned reporting units was significantly in excess of their carrying value during 2004, 2003 and 2002. Long-lived assets, including fixed assets and intangible assets, are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable. In reviewing for impairment, the carrying value of such assets is compared to the estimated undiscounted future cash flows expected from the use of the assets and their eventual disposition. If such cash flows are not sufficient to support the asset recorded value, an impairment charge is recognized to reduce the carrying value of the long-lived asset to its estimated fair value. The determination of future cash flows as well as the estimated fair value of long-lived assets involves significant estimates on the part of management. In order to estimate the fair value of a long-lived asset, Schlumberger may engage a third-part to assist with the valuation. If there is a material change in economic conditions or other circumstances influencing the estimate of future cash flows or fair value, Schlumberger could be required to recognize impairment charges in the future. Schlumberger evaluates the remaining useful life of its intangible assets on a periodic basis to determine whether events and circumstances warrant a revision to the remaining estimated amortization period. Investments Schlumberger and Smith International Inc. operate a drilling fluids joint venture of which Schlumberger owns a 40% interest and records income using the equity method of accounting. Schlumberger investment at December 31, 2004 and 2003 was $716 million and $657 million, respectively. The carrying value of this joint venture is evaluated for impairment annually as well as when an event or change in circumstance indicates that a decline in the fair value of this investment that is other than temporary has occurred. Fair value is generally estimated by comparing the significance of this joint venture to Smith International Inc., a publicly traded company, and then referencing the market capitalization of Smith International Inc. To date, Schlumberger has not recorded any impairment charges relating to this investment as this analysis has indicated that the fair value of this investment is significantly in excess of its carrying value. Losses on Contracts Losses on contracts are provided for when such losses become known and can be reasonably estimated. Historically, losses on contracts that have had a material impact on Schlumberger consolidated results of operations have been rare. Income Taxes Schlumberger tax filings are subject to regular audit by the tax authorities in most of the jurisdictions in which it conducts business. These audits may result in assessments for additional taxes which are resolved with the authorities or, potentially, through the courts. Tax liabilities are recorded based on estimates of additional taxes which will be due upon the conclusion of these audits. Estimates of these tax liabilities are made based upon prior experience and are updated in light of changes in facts and circumstances. However, due to the uncertain and complex application of tax regulations, it is possible that the ultimate resolution of audits may result in liabilities which could be materially different from these estimates. In such an event, Schlumberger will record additional tax expense or tax benefit in the year in which such resolution occurs. 29 Schlumberger had net deferred tax assets of $583 million at December 31, 2004, which excluded $312 million relating to net operating losses in certain countries for which there is a valuation allowance. In assessing the need for valuation allowances, Schlumberger considers the probable likelihood of future taxable income and available tax planning strategies. Contingencies The Consolidated Balance Sheet includes accruals for the estimated future costs associated with certain environmental remediation activities related to the past use or disposal of hazardous material where it is probable that Schlumberger has incurred a liability and such amount can be reasonably estimated. Substantially all such costs relate to divested operations and to facilities or locations that are no longer in operation. Due to a number of uncertainties, including uncertainty of timing, the scope of remediation, future technology, regulatory changes, the risk of personal injury, natural resource or property damage claims and other factors, it is possible that the ultimate remediation costs may exceed the amounts estimated. However, in the opinion of management, such additional costs are not expected to be material relative to consolidated liquidity, financial position or future results of operations. The Consolidated Balance Sheet included accruals for estimated future expenditures associated with business divestitures which have been completed. It is possible that the ultimate expenditures may differ from the amounts recorded. In the opinion of management, such differences are not expected to be material relative to consolidated liquidity, financial position or future results of operations. In December 2004, WesternGeco and Schlumberger received grand jury subpoenas from the US Attorney office in the Southern District of Texas seeking documents relating to possible fraud in obtaining visas for non-US citizens working as crewmembers on vessels operating in the Gulf of Mexico. We are in the process of responding to the investigation, including providing information sought by the subpoenas. Schlumberger is currently unable to predict the outcome of this matter and the related impact it might have on Schlumberger financial position and results of operations. Pension and Postretirement Benefits Schlumberger pension benefit and postretirement medical benefit obligations and related costs are calculated using actuarial concepts, which include critical assumptions related to the discount rate, expected return on plan assets and medical cost trend rates. These assumptions are important elements of expense and/or liability measurement and are updated on an annual basis at the beginning of each fiscal year, or more frequently upon the occurrence of significant events. The discount rate we use reflects the prevailing market rate of a portfolio of high-quality debt instruments with maturities matching the expected timing of the payment of the benefit obligations. The discount rate utilized to determine the projected benefit obligation for Schlumberger US pension plan was reduced from 6.25% at December 31, 2003 to 6.00% at December 31, 2004. The discount rate utilized to determine the projected benefit obligation for Schlumberger UK pension was reduced from 5.60% at December 31, 2003 to 5.40% at December 31, 2004. These changes were made to reflect market interest rate conditions. A lower discount rate increases the present value of benefit obligations and increases pension expense. A change of 25 basis points in the discount rate assumption would have an estimated $12 million impact on annual pension expense. The expected rate of return for our retirement benefit plans represents the average rate of return expected to be earned on plan assets over the period that benefits included in the benefit obligation, are expected to be paid. Schlumberger expected rate of return has been determined based upon expectations regarding future rates of return for the investment portfolio, with consideration given to the distribution of investments by asset class and historical rates of return for each individual asset class. The expected rate of return on plan assets was 8.50% in both 2004 and 2003. A lower expected rate of return would increase pension expense. A change of 25 basis points in the expected rate of return would impact annual pension expense by approximately $4 million. 30 Schlumberger medical cost trend rate assumptions are developed based on historical cost data, the near-term outlook and an assessment of likely long-term trends. The overall medical cost trend rate assumption utilized in 2004 was 10% graded to 5% over the next five years and 5% thereafter. If the assumed medical cost trend rate was increased by one percentage point, health care cost in 2004 would have increased by $15 million, and the accumulated postretirement obligation would have increased by $137 million on December 31, 2004. If the assumed medical cost trend rate was decreased by one percentage point, health care cost in 2004 would have decreased by $13 million, and the accumulated postretirement obligation would have decreased by $113 million on December 31, 2004. Cash Flow In 2004, cash provided by operations was $1.85 billion as net income plus depreciation & amortization and net charges, including the extinguishment of US and European debt, were only partially offset by increases in customer receivables and inventories, due to higher operating revenues. Cash provided by investing activities was $1.68 billion as the proceeds from non-oilfield business divestitures ($1.66 billion) and the proceeds from the sale Schlumberger investment of 19.3 million shares in of Atos Origin ($1.16 billion) was partially offset by investments in fixed assets ($1.22 billion) and multiclient seismic data ($63 million). Cash used in financing activities was $3.59 billion with the proceeds from employee stock plans ($278 million) offset by the payment of dividends to shareholders ($441 million), the costs related to the extinguishment of certain US and European debt ($111 million), the repurchase of 5.15 million shares of Schlumberger stock ($320 million) and an overall reduction in debt of $2.93 billion. Net Debt is gross debt less cash, short-term investments and fixed income investments held to maturity. Management believes that Net Debt provides useful information regarding the level of Schlumberger indebtedness by reflecting cash and investments that could be used to repay debt, and that the level of net debt provides useful information as to the results of Schlumberger deleveraging efforts. Details of the change in Net Debt follows: 31 (Stated in millions) 2004 2003 2002 Net Debt, beginning of year $ (4,176 ) $ (5,021 ) $ (5,037 ) Income from continuing operations 1,014 398 489 Excess of equity income over dividends received (66 ) (75 ) (38 ) Gain on sale of drilling rigs (87 ) Net charges 199 440 295 Depreciation & amortization 1 1,308 1,341 1,309 (Increase) decrease in working capital (492 ) (186 ) (118 ) Proceeds from business divestitures 1,729 299 259 Proceeds from the sale of Axalto shares 99 Proceeds from the sale of Atos Origin shares 1,165 Stock repurchase program (320 ) Proceeds from sale of drilling rigs 58 119 Fixed asset additions 1 (1,279 ) (1,021 ) (1,515 ) Dividends paid (441 ) (437 ) (433 ) US pension plan contributions (254 ) (119 ) Proceeds from employee stock plans 278 172 175 Debt extinguishment costs (111 ) (168 ) Settlement of US interest rate swap (70 ) Sale of Grant Prideco stock 106 Sale of Hanover Compressor note 177 Acquisition of Sema plc (132 ) Other business acquisitions (31 ) (44 ) Acquisition related payments (70 ) Investment in PetroAlliance (12 ) Translation effect on net debt (75 ) (461 ) (507 ) Discontinued operations 41 19 133 Other 35 302 181 Net Debt, end of year $ (1,459 ) $ (4,176 ) $ (5,021 ) 1. Includes Multiclient seismic data costs. Dec. 31 2004 Dec. 31 2003 Dec. 31 2002 Components of Net Debt Cash and short term investments $ 2,997 $ 3,109 $ 1,736 Fixed income investments, held to maturity 204 223 408 Bank loans and current portion of long-term debt (716 ) (1,411 ) (1,136 ) Long-term debt (3,944 ) (6,097 ) (6,029 ) $ (1,459 ) $ (4,176 ) $ (5,021 ) At December 31, 2004, the cash and short-term investments of $3.0 billion and the remaining credit facilities of $4.5 billion are sufficient to meet future business requirements. Summary of Major Contractual Commitments (Stated in millions) Payment Period Contractual Commitments Total 2005 2006 - 2007 2008 - 2009 After 2009 Debt $ 4,660 $ 716 $ 992 $ 1,512 $ 1,440 Operating Leases $ 384 $ 102 $ 151 $ 71 $ 60 Schlumberger has outstanding letters of credit/guarantees which relate to business performance bonds, custom/excise tax commitments, facility lease/rental obligations, etc. These were entered into in the ordinary course of business and are customary practices in the various countries where Schlumberger operates. 32 Common Stock, Market Prices and Dividends Declared per Share Quarterly high and low prices for Schlumberger common stock as reported by the New York Stock Exchange (composite transactions), together with dividends declared per share in each quarter of 2004 and 2003, were: Price Range Dividends Declared High Low 2004 QUARTERS First $ 66.750 $ 52.530 $ 0.1875 Second 64.700 54.750 0.1875 Third 67.850 58.640 0.1875 Fourth 69.890 61.010 0.1875 2003 QUARTERS First $ 43.330 $ 35.620 $ 0.1875 Second 50.150 36.080 0.1875 Third 52.100 44.500 0.1875 Fourth 56.240 45.460 0.1875 The number of holders of record of Schlumberger common stock at December 31, 2004, was approximately 22,500. There are no legal restrictions on the payment of dividends or ownership or voting of such shares, except as to shares held in the Schlumberger Treasury. Under current legislation, US stockholders are not subject to any Netherlands Antilles withholding or other Netherlands Antilles taxes attributable to ownership of such shares. On January 25, 2005, Schlumberger announced that the Board of Directors had approved a 12% increase in the quarterly dividend, to $0.21 per share. The increase is effective commencing with the dividend payable on April 8, 2005. Environmental Matters The Consolidated Balance Sheet includes accruals for the estimated future costs associated with certain environmental remediation activities related to the past use or disposal of hazardous materials. Substantially all such costs relate to divested operations and to facilities or locations that are no longer in operation. Due to a number of uncertainties, including uncertainty of timing, the scope of remediation, future technology, regulatory changes, the risk of personal injury, natural resource or property damage claims and other factors, it is possible that the ultimate remediation costs may exceed the amounts estimated. However, in the opinion of management, such additional costs are not expected to be material relative to consolidated liquidity, financial position or future results of operations. New Accounting Standard In December 2004, the Financial Accounting Standards Board issued SFAS 123R (Share-Based Payment.) The standard amends SFAS 123 ( Accounting for Stock Based Compensation ) and concludes that services received from employees in exchange for stock-based compensation results in a cost to the employer that must be recognized in the financial statements. The cost of such awards should be measured at fair value at the date of grant. SFAS 123R provides public companies with a choice of transition methods to implement the standard. Schlumberger anticipates applying the modified prospective method whereby companies would recognize compensation cost for the unamortized portion of vested awards outstanding at the effective date of SFAS 123R (July 1, 2005 for Schlumberger) and granted after January 1, 1995. Such cost will be recognized in Schlumberger financial statements over the remaining vesting period. As described in Note 19, in 2003 Schlumberger adopted the fair value recognition provisions of SFAS Nos. 123 and 148 on a prospective basis for grants after January 1, 2003. Therefore, effective July 1, 2005, Schlumberger will have to apply the provisions of SFAS 123R to the unvested portion of awards granted during the period of January 1, 1995 to December 31, 2002. The adoption of this standard is currently expected to reduce Schlumberger 2005 diluted earnings per share by approximately $0.03. 33 Forward-looking Statements This report and other statements we make contain forward looking statements, which include any statements that are not historical facts, such as our expectations regarding business outlook; growth for Schlumberger as a whole and for each of Oilfield Services and WesternGeco; oil and natural gas demand and production growth; operating and capital expenditures by Schlumberger and the oil and gas industry; the business strategies of Schlumberger customers; expected depreciation and amortization expense; expected pension funding; and future results of operations. These statements involve risks and uncertainties, including, but not limited to, the global economy; changes in exploration and production spending by Schlumberger customers and changes in the level of oil and natural gas exploration and development; general economic and business conditions in key regions of the world; political and economic uncertainty and socio-political unrest; and other factors detailed in our fourth quarter and full year 2004 earnings release, this Report and other filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission. If one or more of these risks or uncertainties materialize (or the consequences of such a development changes), or should underlying assumptions prove incorrect, actual outcomes may vary materially from those forecasted or expected. Schlumberger disclaims any intention or obligation to update publicly or revise such statements, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise. 
