CIK: 874761
Company Name: AES CORP
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2011-02-28


ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS Overview of Our Business We are a global power company. We operate two primary lines of business. The first is our Generation business, where we own and/or operate power plants to generate and sell power to wholesale customers such as utilities, other intermediaries and certain end-users. The second is our Utilities business, where we own and/or operate utilities to distribute, transmit and sell electricity to end-user customers in the residential, commercial, industrial and governmental sectors within a defined service area. For the year ended December 31, 2010, our Generation and Utilities businesses comprised approximately 45% and 55% of our consolidated revenue, respectively. We are also continuing to expand our wind and solar generation businesses. These initiatives are not material contributors to our operating results at this time, but we believe that certain of these initiatives may become material in the future. For additional information regarding our business, see Item 1. Business of this Form 10-K. Our Organization and Segments. Our management reporting structure is organized along our two lines of business (Generation and Utilities) and three regions: (1) Latin America & Africa; (2) North America; and (3) Europe, Middle East & Asia (collectively EMEA ), each managed by a regional president. The financial reporting segment structure uses our management reporting structure as its foundation and reflects how we manage the business internally. Based on our application of the segment reporting accounting guidance, which provides certain quantitative thresholds and aggregation criteria, we have concluded that the Company has the following six reportable segments: Latin America Generation; Latin America Utilities; North America Generation; North America Utilities; Europe Generation; Asia Generation. We report the Company Europe Utilities, Africa Utilities, Africa Generation, Wind Generation and Climate Solutions operating segments within Corporate and Other because they do not meet the criteria to allow for aggregation with another operating segment or the quantitative thresholds that would require separate disclosure under segment reporting accounting guidance. None of these operating segments are currently material to our financial statement presentation of reportable segments, individually or in the aggregate. Corporate and Other also includes corporate overhead costs which are not directly associated with the operations of our six reportable segments and other intercompany charges such as self-insurance premiums which are fully eliminated in consolidation. During the second quarter of 2010, the Company modified its internal reporting structure to move the management of the Company generation business in Jordan, Amman East, from Asia to Europe. Accordingly, Amman East is now reported within the Europe Generation segment. All prior periods have been retrospectively restated to reflect this change and conform to current period presentation. Key Drivers of Our Results of Operations. Our Generation and Utilities businesses are distinguished by the nature of their customers, operational differences, cost structure, regulatory environment and risk exposure. As a result, each line of business has slightly different drivers which affect operating results. Performance drivers for our Generation businesses include, among other things, plant reliability and efficiency, power prices, volume, 113 Table of Contents management of fixed and variable operating costs, management of working capital including collection of receivables, and the extent to which our plants have hedged their exposure to currency and commodities such as fuel. For our Generation businesses which sell power under short-term contracts or in the spot market, the most crucial factors are the current market price of electricity and the marginal costs of production. Growth in our Generation business is largely tied to securing new PPAs, expanding capacity in our existing facilities and building or acquiring new power plants. Performance drivers for our Utilities businesses include, but are not limited to, reliability of service; management of working capital, including collection of receivables; negotiation of tariff adjustments; compliance with extensive regulatory requirements; and in developing countries, reduction of commercial and technical losses. The operating results of our Utilities businesses are sensitive to changes in economic growth and weather conditions in areas in which they operate. In addition to these drivers, as further explained below, the Company also has exposure to currency exchange rate fluctuations. One of the key factors which affect our Generation business is our ability to enter into contracts for the sale of electricity and the purchase of fuel used to produce that electricity. Long-term contracts are intended to reduce exposure to volatility associated with fuel prices in the market and the price of electricity by fixing the revenue and costs for these businesses. The majority of the electricity produced by our Generation businesses is sold under long-term contracts, or PPAs, to wholesale customers. In turn, most of these businesses enter into long-term fuel supply contracts or fuel tolling arrangements where the customer assumes full responsibility for purchasing and supplying the fuel to the power plant. While these long-term contractual agreements reduce exposure to volatility in the market price for electricity and fuel, the predictability of operating results and cash flows vary by business based on the extent to which a facility generation capacity and fuel requirements are contracted and the negotiated terms of these agreements. Entering into these contracts exposes us to counterparty credit risk. For further discussion of these risks, see Supplier and/or customer concentration may expose the Company to significant financial credit or performance risks in Item 1A. Risk Factors of this Form 10-K. When fuel costs increase, many of our businesses are able to pass these costs on to their customers. Generation businesses with long-term contracts in place do this by including fuel pass-through or fuel indexing arrangements in their contracts. Utilities businesses can pass costs on to their customers through increases in current or future tariff rates. Therefore, in a rising fuel cost environment, the increased fuel costs for these businesses often result in an increase in revenue to the extent these costs can be passed through (though not necessarily on a one-for-one basis). Conversely, in a declining fuel cost environment, the decreased fuel costs can result in a decrease in revenue. Increases or decreases in revenue at these businesses that have the ability to pass through costs to the customer have a corresponding impact on cost of sales, to the extent the costs can be passed through, resulting in a limited impact on gross margin, if any. Although these circumstances may not have a large impact on gross margin, they can significantly affect gross margin as a percentage of revenue. As a result, gross margin as a percentage of revenue is a less relevant measure when evaluating our operating performance. To the extent our businesses are unable to pass through fuel cost increases to their customers, gross margin may be adversely affected. Global diversification also helps us mitigate risk. Our presence in mature markets helps mitigate the exposure associated with our businesses in emerging markets. Additionally, our portfolio employs a broad range of fuels, including coal, gas, fuel oil, water (hydroelectric power), wind and solar, which reduces the risks associated with dependence on any one fuel source. However, to the extent the mix of fuel sources enabling our generation capabilities in any one market is not diversified, the spread in costs of different fuels or the availability of natural resources such as water for hydroelectric power production or wind may also influence the operating performance and the ability of our subsidiaries to compete within that market. For example, in a market where gas prices fall to a low level compared to coal prices, power prices may be set by low gas prices which can affect the profitability of our coal plants in that market. In certain cases, we may attempt to hedge fuel prices to manage this risk, but there can be no assurance that these strategies will be effective. We also attempt to limit risk by hedging much of our interest rate and commodity risk, and by matching the currency of most of our subsidiary debt to the revenue of the underlying business. However, we only hedge a 114 Table of Contents portion of our currency and commodity risks, and our businesses are still subject to these risks, as further described in Item 1A. Risk Factors of this Form 10-K, We may not be adequately hedged against our exposure to changes in commodity prices or interest rates . Commodity and power price volatility could continue to impact our financial metrics to the extent this volatility is not hedged. For a discussion of our sensitivities to commodity, currency and interest rate risk, see Item 7A. Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk in this Form 10-K. Due to our global presence, the Company has significant exposure to foreign currency fluctuations. The exposure is primarily associated with the impact of the translation of our foreign subsidiaries operating results from their local currency to U.S. Dollars that is required for the preparation of our consolidated financial statements. Additionally, there is foreign currency transaction exposure when an entity enters into transactions, including debt agreements, in currencies other than their functional currency. These risks are further described in Item 1A. Risk Factors of this Form 10-K, Our financial position and results of operations may fluctuate significantly due to fluctuations in currency exchange rates experienced at our foreign operations . During 2010, changes in foreign currency exchange rates had a significant impact on our operating results. If the current foreign currency exchange rate volatility continues, our gross margin and other financial metrics could continue to be affected. Another key driver of our results is our ability to bring new businesses into commercial operation successfully. We currently have approximately 1,300 MW of projects under construction in eight countries. Our prospects for improved operating results and cash flows are dependent upon successful completion of these projects on time and within budget. However, as disclosed in Item 1A. Risk Factors of this Form 10-K, Our business is subject to substantial development uncertainties , construction is subject to a number of risks, including risks associated with site identification, financing, permitting and our ability to meet construction deadlines. Delays or the inability to complete projects and commence commercial operations can result in increased costs, impairment of assets and other challenges involving partners and counterparties to our construction agreements, PPAs and other agreements. Our gross margin is also impacted by the fact that in each country in which we conduct business, we are subject to extensive and complex governmental regulations, such as regulations governing the generation and distribution of electricity, and environmental regulations which affect most aspects of our business. Regulations differ on a country by country basis (and even at the state and local municipality levels) and are based upon the type of business we operate in a particular country, and affect many aspects of our operations and development projects. Our ability to negotiate tariffs, enter into long-term contracts, pass through costs related to capital expenditures and otherwise navigate these regulations can have an impact on our revenue, costs and gross margin. Environmental and land use regulations, including existing and proposed regulation of GHG emissions, could substantially increase our capital expenditures or other compliance costs, which could in turn have a material adverse affect on our business and results of operations. For a further discussion of the Regulatory Environment, see Note 12 Contingencies and Commitments Environmental , included in Item 8. Financial Statements, Item 1. Business Regulatory Matters Environmental and Land Use Regulations and Item 1A. Risk Factors Risks Associated with Government Regulation and Laws of this Form 10-K. Key Drivers of Results in 2010 In 2010, the Company gross margin and cash flow from operations increased $531 million and $1.3 billion, respectively, while net income attributable to The AES Corporation decreased $649 million compared to the prior year. During 2010, our North American generation businesses continued to face challenges associated with relatively lower gas prices and a decline in power prices relative to coal and other fuel. In particular, lower gas and power prices have affected the generation volume and financial results of our coal-fired plants in New York and our petroleum coke-fired plant in Texas which are merchant businesses and not subject to PPAs. We expect 115 Table of Contents this trend to continue. In 2010, these challenges were partially mitigated by hedging arrangements. In North America, current dark spreads and the corresponding forward curves do not present a long-term opportunity to engage in hedging activity for 2011 and we have very limited hedges in place. As short-term opportunities occur or should dark spreads improve, the Company may engage in additional hedging in 2011. As a result of these and other challenges that arose from new regulatory concerns, we impaired $1.1 billion of assets and goodwill in North America as described in Impairments below. In addition, AES Thames, our 208 MW coal-fired generation business in Connecticut, filed for bankruptcy protection in January 2011. Despite these challenges, many of our financial measures have improved when compared to 2009. Gross margin increased due to the favorable impact of foreign currency translation caused by a weaker U.S. dollar compared to most foreign currencies in 2010 and better operating performance at certain businesses. For instance, certain of the Company Latin American businesses experienced continued increases in market demand due to the local economic recovery in Latin America. The Company also benefited from higher demand and favorable market conditions at Masinloc, our generation business in the Philippines. Masinloc higher availability enabled the Company to benefit from increased contract and spot market sales and favorable market prices in the Philippines. In addition, cash provided by operating activities increased due to the improved operating results at Latin America generation businesses and Masinloc; contributions from the consolidation of Cartagena and the Ballylumford acquisition in 2010; and changes in working capital in Latin America. Despite the increase in gross margin in 2010, net income attributable to The AES Corporation decreased primarily from the impact of long-lived asset impairments recognized related to four businesses: Eastern Energy in New York, Southland in California, Tisza II in Hungary and Deepwater in Texas. These were partially offset by gains from the sale of our discontinued businesses in Oman and Qatar and a decrease in goodwill impairment charges. In 2011, we expect to face continued challenges in our business, including the trends in North America described above. In addition, the impact of fluctuating foreign exchange rates and commodity prices on our operations may continue into 2011. In 2011, the components of the tariff reset in Brazil and its potential impact on our Brazilian utilities are uncertain at this time and we expect continued challenges in our merchant businesses such as those in the U.S., Hungary and Northern Ireland. However, management expects that improved operating performance at certain businesses and growth from new businesses acquired, that commenced operations in 2010 or are expected to commence operations in 2011, may lessen or offset the impact of these challenges described above, as they did in 2010. However, if these favorable effects do not occur, or if the challenges described above or elsewhere in this section impact us more than we currently anticipate, or if volatile foreign currencies and commodities move unfavorably, then these adverse factors (or other adverse factors unknown to us) may impact our gross margin and net income attributable to The AES Corporation. In addition, we do not expect the trend of an increase in net cash provided by operating activities realized in 2010 to continue in 2011. Such cash flows may be influenced by the operating challenges presented above and will also not include the cash flows from operations which were sold in 2010 or the increases experienced from the cash flows provided by the initial consolidation of Cartagena, the acquisition of Ballylumford and several working capital transactions at our Latin American utilities in 2010 as discussed in Capital Resources and Liquidity . The following briefly describes the key changes in our reported revenue, gross margin, net income attributable to The AES Corporation, diluted earnings per share from continuing operations, Adjusted Earnings per Share (a non-GAAP measure) and net cash provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2010 compared to 2009 and 2008 and should be read in conjunction with our Consolidated Results of Operations and Segment Analysis discussion within Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition . 116 Table of Contents Performance Highlights Year Ended December 31, 2010 2009 2008 (in millions, except per share amounts) Revenue $ 16,647 $ 13,954 $ 15,197 Gross Margin $ 3,964 $ 3,433 $ 3,568 Net Income Attributable to The AES Corporation $ 9 $ 658 $ 1,234 Diluted Earnings (Loss) per Share from Continuing Operations $ (0.11 ) $ 1.06 $ 1.73 Adjusted Earnings Per Share (a non-GAAP measure) (1) $ 0.94 $ 1.06 $ 1.06 Net Cash Provided by Operating Activities $ 3,510 $ 2,202 $ 2,160 (1) See reconciliation and definition below under Non-GAAP Measure . Year Ended December 31, 2010 Revenue increased $2.7 billion, or 19%, to $16.6 billion in 2010 compared with $14.0 billion in 2009. Key drivers of the increase included: the favorable impact of foreign currency of $805 million; increased volume and rates at our Brazilian utilities attributable to increased demand due to the recovery of the local economy and the favorable impact of the June 2009 tariff reset; the impact of the consolidation of Cartagena, in Spain, in accordance with the new consolidation accounting guidance which became effective January 1, 2010; the favorable impact of rates at our generation businesses in Argentina; higher generation rates and volume at Masinloc in the Philippines; higher demand at Gener in Chile; the impact of the Company new business in Northern Ireland, acquired in August 2010; and higher demand and rates at Indianapolis Power and Light. Gross margin increased $531 million, or 15%, to $4.0 billion in 2010 compared with $3.4 billion in 2009. Key drivers of the increase included: the favorable impact of foreign currency of $219 million; an increase in demand at our generation and utilities businesses in Latin America; higher generation rates and volume at Masinloc in the Philippines; and the impact of the consolidation of Cartagena, in Spain, in accordance with the new consolidation accounting guidance which became effective January 1, 2010. These increases were partially offset by: an increase in fixed costs in Latin America, largely driven by bad debt recoveries and a reduction in bad debt expense in Brazil in 2009 that did not recur; and lower rates at our generation businesses in New York. Net income attributable to The AES Corporation decreased $649 million to $9 million in 2010, compared to $658 million in 2009. Key drivers of the decrease included: Impairment losses in New York related to our Eastern Energy facilities, in California related to our Southland (Huntington Beach) generation facility, in Hungary related to our Tisza II generation facility and in Texas related to our Deepwater facility; 117 Table of Contents A decrease in gain on sale of investments due to the sale of our businesses in Northern Kazakhstan which occurred in 2009; and A decrease in other income due to the reduction in interest and penalties in 2009 associated with federal tax debts at Eletropaulo and Sul as a result of the Programa de Recuperacao Fiscal ( REFIS ) program and a favorable court decision in 2009 enabling Eletropaulo to receive reimbursement of excess non-income taxes paid from 1989 to 1992 in the form of tax credits to be applied against future tax liabilities. These decreases were partially offset by: The gain on sale of discontinued operations related to the sale of Barka which occurred in August 2010; An increase in net equity in earnings of affiliates partially offset by income tax expense related to the sale of the Company indirect investment in Companhia Energ tica de Minas Gerais ( CEMIG ); Lower impairment expenses related to a goodwill impairment of our business in Kilroot that occurred in 2009; Lower income tax expense due to 2010 asset impairments primarily recorded at certain U.S. subsidiaries; and An increase in gross margin as described above. Net cash provided by operating activities increased $1.3 billion, or 59%, to $3.5 billion in 2010 compared with $2.2 billion in 2009. This net increase was primarily due to the following: an increase of $837 million at our Latin American Utilities businesses due to increased tax payments in 2009 associated with a tax amnesty program of $326 million, higher working capital requirements during 2009 related to payments on the settlement of swap agreements of $65 million and in 2010, a $50 million decrease in employer contributions to pension plans and lower payments for contingencies; an increase of $215 million at our Latin American Generation businesses due to the higher gross margin in 2010 combined with improved working capital mainly as a result of higher collections of value added taxes and accounts receivable; an increase of $99 million at Masinloc in the Philippines due to higher gross margin; and an increase of $58 million as a result of our consolidation of Cartagena in 2010 and the acquisition of Ballylumford in Northern Ireland. These increases were partially offset by: a decrease of $136 million in operating cash flows from discontinued operations of businesses sold in 2010 compared to 2009. In 2010, net cash provided by operating activities of businesses sold was $33 million and will not recur in 2011. In 2010 the increase in net cash provided by operating activities at our Latin American Utilities businesses included several items such as the tax amnesty program and settlement of swap agreements, as described above, that are not expected to recur. In addition, 2010 net cash provided by operating activities benefited from the one time cash savings related to the utilization of tax credits received as a result of the REFIS program. As such, the Company does not expect the trend of an increase in net cash provided by operating activities realized in 2010 to continue in 2011. 118 Table of Contents Year Ended December 31, 2009 Revenue decreased $1.2 billion, or 8%, to $14.0 billion in 2009 compared with $15.2 billion in 2008. Key drivers of the decrease included: the unfavorable impact of foreign currency of $997 million, largely driven by the Brazilian Real; decreases in volume at Uruguaiana due to the renegotiation of its power sales agreements in 2009 to reduce the energy volume sold, as well as in New York and Hungary and lower dispatch in Northern Ireland due to unfavorable gas prices compared to coal; the impact of lower spot and contract energy prices at our generation business in Chile; and lower energy prices and volume at our generation businesses in the Dominican Republic. These decreases were partially offset by: an increase in tariff rates at our utilities businesses in Latin America primarily reflecting the recovery of energy purchases that were passed through to our customers. Gross margin decreased $135 million, or 4%, to $3.4 billion in 2009 compared with $3.6 billion in 2008. Key drivers of the decrease included: the unfavorable impact of foreign currency of $218 million, largely driven by the Brazilian Real; lower energy prices and higher purchased energy costs at our generation businesses in the Dominican Republic and Argentina; increased pension costs in Brazil and the U.S.; and lower volume in New York due to lower spot market rates. These decreases were partially offset by: improved operating performance at our generation businesses in Chile and the Philippines; higher tariffs in Brazil and El Salvador; and bad debt recoveries and a reduction in bad debt expense in Brazil. Net income attributable to The AES Corporation decreased $576 million to $658 million in 2009, compared to $1.2 billion in 2008. Key drivers of the decrease included: a gain recognized in 2008 from the sale of two wholly-owned subsidiaries in Northern Kazakhstan partially offset by a performance incentive bonus recognized in 2009 for management services provided to these subsidiaries and a settlement upon termination of the management agreement in 2009; the reduction in gross margin in 2009 as described above; and higher impairment expenses in 2009 as a result of an impairment of goodwill at Kilroot in Northern Ireland, and an impairment recognized on our assets in Pakistan which is reflected in discontinued operations, offset by a decline in long-lived asset impairment compared to 2008. These decreases were partially offset by: a reduction in foreign currency transaction losses on net monetary position as a result of reduced losses at our businesses in Chile and the Philippines; a reduction in interest expense due primarily to lower interest rates and debt balances in Brazil and favorable foreign currency translation; and lower income tax expenses driven in part by lower pre-tax income and a decrease in the effective tax rate from 29% in 2008 to 26% in 2009 due, in part, to tax benefits recorded in 2009 upon the release of 119 Table of Contents valuation allowances at U.S. and Brazilian subsidiaries, $165 million of non-taxable income recognized in Brazil as a result of the REFIS program in 2009 and an increase in U.S. taxes on distributions from the Company primary holding company in the second quarter of 2008. In 2008, the $905 million gain recognized on the sale of our two Northern Kazakhstan businesses had a significant impact on net income attributable to The AES Corporation. In 2009, the Company recognized a performance incentive bonus of $80 million in the first quarter for management services provided to these sold businesses, reflected as other income. Additionally, in the second quarter of 2009, the Company recognized an additional gain on the sale of the businesses of $98.5 million upon the termination of the management agreement. While the Company engages in the sale of assets and businesses from time to time, the gain or loss recognized in any such sale will depend on a number of factors related to the asset or business that may be sold. Therefore, the Company does not believe that the decline in net income between 2008 and 2009 represents a trend. All of the amounts related to our two Northern Kazakhstan businesses were reported in continuing operations and will not recur in 2010 or future years. Net cash from operating activities increased $42 million, or 2%, to $2.2 billion in 2009 compared with $2.2 billion in 2008. This net increase was primarily due to the following: an increase of $238 million at our Latin American Generation businesses due to improved working capital management; an increase of $148 million at our Asia Generation businesses due to improved working capital management and improved gross margin; and an increase of $115 million at our Europe Generation businesses primarily due to the collection of the $80 million Kazakhstan management performance incentive bonus in the first quarter 2009. These increases were partially offset by: a decrease of $391 million at our Latin American Utilities businesses due to increased working capital requirements, including the payment of the settlement of a swap agreement, increased tax payments associated with a tax amnesty program and increased payments related to the settlement of contingencies and energy purchases, partially offset by increased operating results; and a decrease of $77 million at our North America Generation businesses, primarily due to reduced operating results. Non-GAAP Measure We define adjusted earnings per share ( Adjusted EPS ) as diluted earnings per share from continuing operations excluding gains or losses of the consolidated entity due to (a) mark-to-market amounts related to derivative transactions, (b) unrealized foreign currency gains or losses, (c) significant gains or losses due to dispositions and acquisitions of business interests, (d) significant losses due to impairments, and (e) costs due to the early retirement of debt. The GAAP measure most comparable to Adjusted EPS is diluted earnings per share from continuing operations. AES believes that Adjusted EPS better reflects the underlying business performance of the Company and is considered in the Company internal evaluation of financial performance. Factors in this determination include the variability due to mark-to-market gains or losses related to derivative transactions, currency gains or losses, losses due to impairments and strategic decisions to dispose or acquire business interests or retire debt, which affect results in a given period or periods. Adjusted EPS should not be construed as an alternative to diluted earnings per share from continuing operations, which is determined in accordance with GAAP. For the year ended December 31, 2010, the Company reported a loss from continuing operations of $0.11 per share. For purposes of measuring loss per share under GAAP, common stock equivalents were excluded from weighted average shares as their inclusion would be antidilutive. However, for purposes of computing Adjusted 120 Table of Contents EPS (a non-GAAP measure), the Company has included the impact of dilutive common stock equivalents as the inclusion of the defined adjustments result in income for Adjusted EPS. The table below reconciles the weighted average shares used in GAAP diluted earnings per share to the weighted average shares used in calculating the non-GAAP measure of Adjusted EPS: Year Ended December 31, 2010 Reconciliation of Denominator used for Adjusted Earnings Per Share Loss Shares $ per Share GAAP DILUTED EARNINGS PER SHARE Loss from continuing operations attributable to The AES Corporation common stockholders $ (86 ) 769 $ (0.11 ) EFFECT OF DILUTIVE SECURITIES Stock options 2 Restricted stock units 3 NON-GAAP DILUTED EARNINGS (LOSS) PER SHARE $ (86 ) 774 $ (0.11 ) Year Ended December 31, Reconciliation of Adjusted Earnings Per Share 2010 2009 2008 Diluted earnings (loss) per share from continuing operations $ (0.11 ) $ 1.06 $ 1.73 Derivative mark-to-market (gains) losses (1) (0.01 ) 0.02 0.05 Currency transaction (gains) losses (2) (0.04 ) (0.04 ) 0.17 Disposition/acquisition (gains) losses (3) (0.19 ) (4) (1.27 ) (5) Impairment losses 1.07 (6) 0.21 (7) 0.13 (8) Debt retirement (gains) losses 0.03 (9) 0.25 (10) Adjusted earnings per share $ 0.94 $ 1.06 $ 1.06 (1) Derivative mark-to-market (gains) losses were net of income tax per share of $0.00, $0.01 and $0.00 in 2010, 2009 and 2008, respectively. (2) Unrealized foreign currency transaction (gains) losses were net of income tax per share of $0.00, $0.01 and $0.00 in 2010, 2009 and 2008, respectively. (3) The Company has not adjusted for the gain or the related tax effect from the sale of its indirect investment in CEMIG, disclosed in Note 7 Investments in and Advances to Affiliates , in its determination of Adjusted EPS because the gain was recognized by an equity method investee. The Company does not adjust for transactions of its equity method investees in its determination of adjusted EPS. (4) Amount includes: Kazakhstan gain of $98 million, or $0.15 per share, related to the termination of a management agreement as well as a gain of $13 million, or $0.02 per share, related to the reversal of a withholding tax contingency. In addition, there was a gain on sale associated with the shutdown of the Hefei plant in China of $14 million, or $0.02 per share. There were no taxes associated with any of these transactions. (5) Amount includes: Net gain on Kazakhstan sale of $905 million, or $1.31 per share, and net loss on sale of subsidiary interests in Gener of $31 million, or $0.04 per share. There was no income tax impact associated with these transactions. (6) Amount primarily includes asset impairments at Eastern Energy of $827 million, Southland (Huntington Beach) of $200 million, Tisza of $85 million, and Deepwater of $79 million ($537 million, or $0.69 per share, $130 million, or $0.17 per share, $69 million, or $0.09 per share, and $51 million, or $0.07 per share, net of income tax, respectively) and goodwill impairment at Deepwater of $18 million (or $0.02 per share, with no income tax impact). (7) Amount includes: Goodwill impairments at Kilroot of $118 million, or $0.18 per share, and in the Ukraine of $4 million, or $0.01 per share; write-off of development project costs in Latin America and Asia of $19 million ($11 million net of noncontrolling interests, or $0.01 per share) and an impairment of $10 million, or $0.01 per share, of the Company investment in a company developing blue gas (coal to gas) technology. There was no income tax impact associated with any of these transactions. 121 Table of Contents (8) Amount includes: Impairment charges primarily associated with development projects in North America of $75 million ($34 million net of noncontrolling interests and income tax, or $0.06 per share); Uruguaiana asset write-down of $36 million ($17 million net of noncontrolling interest, or $0.02 per share); South Africa peaker development cost write-off of $31 million ($28 million net of income tax, or $0.04 per share) and a nontaxable impairment of the Company investment in blue gas (coal to gas) technology of $10 million, or $0.01 per share. Impairment losses are net of an income tax benefit of $0.02 per share in 2008. (9) Amount includes loss on retirement of debt at the Parent Company of $15 million, at Andres of $10 million, and at Itabo of $8 million ($10 million, or $0.01 per share, net of income tax at the Parent Company, $0.01 per share at Andres, and $4 million, or $0.01 per share, net of noncontrolling interest at Itabo). (10) Amount includes: $55 million ($34 million net of income tax, or $0.05 per share) loss on the retirement of Parent Company debt; $131 million, or $0.19 per share, which represented the tax impact on the repatriation of a portion of the Kazakhstan sale proceeds that were used to fund the early retirement of Parent Company debt; and $14 million ($9 million net of income tax, or $0.01 per share) of debt refinancing at IPALCO. Debt retirement (gains) losses are net of an income tax benefit of $0.04 per share in 2008. Management Priorities Management continues to focus on the following priorities: Execution of our balanced capital allocation strategy including funds received in 2010 from asset and equity sales: investing in value-accretive projects; delevering to increase financial flexibility, reduce risk and to create future borrowing capacity; and executing its stock repurchase program; from July through December 2010 we have repurchased a total of $99 million, or approximately 8.4 million shares of AES common stock, at an average price per share of $11.86, including commissions. Improvement of operations in the existing portfolio; Achieve cost savings through the alignment of overhead costs with business requirements, systems automation and optimal allocation of business development spending; Strategic portfolio management of existing projects including restructuring and potential sales of certain North American generation subsidiaries; Completion of an approximately 1,300 MW active construction program on time and within budget; Achieving commercial operation at Maritza in Bulgaria. At the end of 2010, the Company experienced certain commissioning delays, as further described in Key Trends and Uncertainties Development below; and 122 Table of Contents Integration of new projects. During 2010, the following projects were acquired or commenced commercial operations: Project Location Fuel Gross MW AES Equity Interest (Percent, Rounded) Ballylumford United Kingdom Gas 1,246 100 % JHRH (1) China Hydro 379 35 % Nueva Ventanas Chile Coal 272 71 % St. Nikola Bulgaria Wind 156 89 % Guacolda 4 (2) Chile Coal 152 35 % Dong Qi (3) China Wind 49 49 % Huanghua II (3) China Wind 49 49 % St. Patrick France Wind 35 100 % North Rhins Scotland Wind 22 100 % Kepezkaya Turkey Hydro 28 51 % Damlapinar (4) Turkey Hydro 16 51 % (1) Jianghe Rural Electrification Development Co. Ltd. ( JHRH ) and AES China Hydropower Investment Co. Ltd. entered into an agreement to acquire a 49% interest in this joint venture in June 2010. Acquisition of 35% ownership was completed in June 2010 and the transfer of the remaining 14% ownership, which is subject to approval by the Chinese government, is expected to be completed in May 2011. (2) Guacolda is an equity method investment indirectly held by AES through Gener. The AES equity interest reflects the 29% noncontrolling interests in Gener. (3) Joint venture with Guohua Energy Investment Co. Ltd. (4) Joint Venture with I.C. Energy. Key Trends and Uncertainties Our operations continue to face many risks as discussed in Item 1A. Risk Factors of this Form 10-K. Some of these challenges are also described above in Key Drivers of Results in 2010. We continue to monitor our operations and address challenges as they arise. Development. During the past year, the Company has successfully acquired and completed construction of a number of projects, totaling approximately 2,404 MW, including the acquisition of Ballylumford in the United Kingdom and completion of construction of a number of projects in Europe, Chile and China. However, as discussed in Item 1A. Risk Factors Our business is subject to substantial development uncertainties of this Form 10-K, our development projects are subject to uncertainties. Certain delays have occurred at the 670 MW Maritza coal-fired project in Bulgaria, and the project has not yet begun commercial operations. As noted in Note 10 Debt included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K, as a result of these delays the project debt is in default and the Company is working with its lenders to resolve the default. In addition, as noted in Item 3. Legal Proceedings, the Company is in litigation with the contractor regarding the cause of delays. At this time, we believe that Maritza will commence commercial operations for at least some of the project capacity by the second half of 2011. However, commencement of commercial operations could be delayed beyond this time frame. There can be no assurance that Maritza will achieve commercial operations, in whole or in part, by the second half of 2011, resolve the default with the lenders or prevail in the litigation referenced above, which could result in the loss of some or all of our investment or require additional funding for the project. Any of these events could have a material adverse effect on the Company operating results or financial position. Global Economic Conditions. During the past few years, economic conditions in some countries where our subsidiaries conduct business have deteriorated. Although the economic conditions in several of these countries have improved in recent months, our businesses could be impacted in the event these recent trends do not continue. 123 Table of Contents Our business or results of operations could be impacted if our subsidiaries are unable to access the capital markets on favorable terms or at all, are unable to raise funds through the sale of assets or are otherwise unable to finance or refinance their activities. The Company could also be adversely affected if capital market disruptions result in increased borrowing costs (including with respect to interest payments on the Company or our subsidiaries variable rate debt) or if commodity prices affect the profitability of our plants or their ability to continue operations. Additionally, the Company could be adversely affected if general economic or political conditions in the markets where our subsidiaries operate deteriorate, resulting in a reduction in cash flow from operations, a reduction in the availability and/or an increase in the cost of capital, or if the value of our assets remain depressed or decline further. Any of the foregoing events or a combination thereof could have a material impact on the Company, its results of operations, liquidity, financial covenants, and/or its credit rating. Our subsidiaries are subject to credit risk, which includes risk related to the ability of counterparties (such as parties to our PPAs, fuel supply agreements, hedging agreements and other contractual arrangements) to deliver contracted commodities or services at the contracted price or to satisfy their financial or other contractual obligations. The Company has not suffered any material effects related to its counterparties during 2010. However, if macroeconomic conditions impact our counterparties, they may be unable to meet their commitments which could result in the loss of favorable contractual positions, which could have a material impact on our business. In addition, during the past year, certain European countries have faced a sovereign debt crisis and it is possible that other nations could be affected. This crisis has resulted in an increased risk of default by governments and the implementation of austerity measures in countries. If the crisis continues, worsens, or spreads, there could be a material adverse impact on the Company. Our businesses may be impacted if they are unable to access the capital markets, face increased taxes or labor costs, or if governments fail to fulfill their obligations to us or adopt austerity measures which adversely impact our projects. In addition, as noted in the Risk Factor entitled, Our renewable energy projects and other initiatives face considerable uncertainties including development, operational and regulatory challenges , our renewables businesses are dependent on favorable regulatory incentives, including subsidies, which are provided by sovereign governments. If these subsidies or other incentives are reduced or repealed, or sovereign governments are unable or unwilling to fulfill their commitments or maintain favorable regulatory incentives for renewables, in whole or in part, this could impact the ability of the affected businesses to continue to grow their operations. For example, the Spanish government recently issued a decree which limits the feed-in-tariff and number of photovoltaic hours eligible for the tariff, which could adversely impact AES Solar in Spain. For further information on the decree see Item 1. Regulatory Spain of this Form 10-K. In addition, any of the foregoing could also impact contractual counterparties of our subsidiaries in core power or renewables. If such counterparties are adversely impacted, then they may be unable to meet their commitments to our subsidiaries. For further information on the importance of long-term contracts and our counterparty credit risk, see the Risk Factor from this Form 10-K titled, We may not be able to enter into long-term contracts, which reduce volatility in our results of operations . As a result of any of the foregoing events, we may have to provide loans or equity to support affected businesses or projects, restructure them, write down their value and/or face the possibility that these projects cannot continue operations or provide returns consistent with our expectations, any of which could have a material impact on the Company. The Company investment in AES Solar, whose primary operations are in Europe, at December 31, 2010 was $312 million. For a discussion of the risks associated with commodity prices, see We may not be adequately hedged against our exposure to changes in commodity prices or interest rates in Item 1A. Risk Factors of this Form 10-K. It is also possible that commodity or power price volatility could continue to impact our financial results. As noted in Key Drivers of Results in 2010 , and Item 7A. Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk Commodity Price Risk of this Form 10-K, the Company North American businesses continue to face pressure as a result of high coal prices relative to natural gas, which has affected the results of certain of our coal plants in the region, particularly those which are merchant plants that are exposed to market risk and those that have hybrid merchant risk, meaning those businesses that have a PPA in place, but purchase 124 Table of Contents fuel at market prices or under short term contracts. If these conditions continue or worsen, these businesses may need to restructure their obligations or seek additional funding (including from the Parent) or face the possibility that they may be unable to meet their obligations and continue operations. Presently, Eastern Energy, Deepwater and Thames are seeking to restructure their financial obligations and/or place certain of their plants in protective layup status to mitigate operating risks caused by high fuel costs and other competitive pressures. There can be no assurance the Company will be successful in these efforts. The Company presently manages its commodity risk with hedging activities to mitigate earnings volatility. However, at present in North America, dark spreads and the corresponding forward curves do not currently present an opportunity to engage in additional hedging activity for 2011. As a result, there are hedging arrangements in place for only a relatively small portion of 2011. As short-term opportunities occur or should dark spreads improve, the Company may engage in additional hedging in 2011. Specifically, the operating results of the Company Eastern Energy generation business in New York could be adversely impacted by continued higher coal prices relative to electricity prices if hedging continues to be uneconomic. If global economic conditions worsen, it could also affect the rates we receive for the electricity we generate or transmit. Utility regulators or parties to our generation contracts may seek to lower our rates based on prevailing market conditions as PPAs, concession agreements or other contracts come up for renewal or reset. In addition, rising fuel and other costs coupled with contractual rate or tariff decreases could restrict our ability to operate profitably in a given market. Each of these factors, as well as those discussed above, could result in a decline in the value of our assets including those at the businesses we operate, our equity investments and projects under development and could result in asset impairments that could be material to our operations. We continue to monitor our projects and businesses. Impairments. Long-lived assets. The global economic conditions and other adverse factors discussed above heighten the risk of a significant asset impairment. Examples of conditions that could be indicative of impairment which would require us to evaluate the recovery of a long-lived asset or asset group include: current period operating or cash flow losses combined with a history of operating or cash flow losses or a projection that demonstrates continuing losses associated with the use of a long-lived asset group; a significant adverse change in legal factors, including changes in environmental or other regulations or in the business climate that could affect the value of a long-lived asset group, including an adverse action or assessment by a regulator; and a significant adverse change in the extent or manner in which a long-lived asset group is being used or in its physical condition. As further described in Item 1. Regulatory Matters United Kingdom, the Northern Ireland Authority for Utility Regulation ( NIAUR ) had the right to require the termination of the long-term PPAs under which Kilroot, our generation business in the United Kingdom, supplies electricity to NIE Energy as early as 2010. One of the conditions to the early termination was 180 days notice, which was provided to Kilroot on April 30, 2010. At March 31, 2010, management evaluated Kilroot long-lived assets for potential impairment assuming the early termination of the PPA and concluded that no impairment existed at that time. On October 28, 2010, Kilroot received final notice from NIAUR directing Kilroot and NIE Energy to terminate the PPA effective November 1, 2010. Kilroot may not be able to replace the contract on competitive terms and, upon cancellation of the PPA effective November 1, 2010, became a merchant plant. It will operate under the gross mandatory pool of the SEM in Northern Ireland. There have been no additional impairment indicators since March 31, 2010. AES Eastern Energy ( AEE ) operates four coal-fired power plants: Cayuga, Greenidge, Somerset and Westover, representing generation capacity of 1,169 MW in the western New York power market. During 2010, the power prices in the New York power market trended downward, similar to North America natural gas prices. 125 Table of Contents The New York Independent System Operator ( NYISO ) continues to move forward with the potential addition of a new capacity zone, which is expected to put further downward pressure on the capacity prices paid to the AEE facilities. In November 2010, legislation was proposed in the state of New Jersey for the addition of state subsidized capacity additions serving to lower PJM capacity price expectations. Similar changes to capacity pricing may be made in the future in New York. Continued pressure on energy prices, driven by falling natural gas prices and state actions, indicate that capacity prices are unlikely to reach levels significantly in excess of those achieved historically. Accordingly, management view of long-term capacity markets in western New York was revised downward. In December 2010, management revised its cash flow forecasts based on these developments and forecasted continuing negative operating cash flow and losses through 2034. The forecasted energy prices are such that a hedge strategy significantly beyond those in place at December 31, 2010 would not be economical. Additionally, on November 15, 2010, Standard & Poor downgraded the bond rating of AEE from BB to B+. Collectively, in the fourth quarter of 2010, these events were considered an impairment indicator for the AES New York asset group, of which AEE is the most significant component and necessitated an impairment evaluation of the asset group. The long-lived asset group subject to the impairment evaluation was determined to include all of the generating plants of AEE. This determination was based on the assessment of the plants inability to generate independent cash flow. When the recoverability test of the asset group was performed, management concluded that, on an undiscounted cash flow basis, the carrying amount of the asset group was not recoverable. To measure the amount of impairment loss, management was required to determine the fair value of the asset group. To this end, an independent valuation firm was engaged to assist management in its estimation of fair value. Cash flow forecasts and the underlying assumptions for the valuation were developed by management. While there were numerous assumptions that impact the fair value, potential state actions that impact capacity pricing and forward energy prices were the most significant. In determining the fair value of the asset group, the three valuation approaches prescribed by the fair value measurement accounting guidance were considered. The fair value under the income approach was considered the most appropriate and resulted in a zero fair value. Any salvage value of the asset group is expected to be offset by environmental and other remediation costs. Accordingly, the long-lived asset group was considered fully impaired and $827 million of impairment expense was recognized in the fourth quarter of 2010. In March 2010, Deepwater, our 160 MW petroleum coke ( pet coke )-fired merchant power plant located in Texas, experienced deteriorating market conditions due to increasing pet coke prices and diminishing power prices. As a result, Deepwater incurred an operating loss for the period and forecasted short term losses. These conditions gradually worsened in the second quarter of 2010 and management determined it could not operate the plant at certain times during the year without generating negative operating margin. As the contraction of energy margin continued in the second quarter of 2010, management determined the collective events to be an indicator of impairment and performed an impairment evaluation of Deepwater goodwill and recoverability test for the long-lived asset group. Based on the results of these tests, in the second quarter of 2010, management concluded no impairment was necessary. In the third quarter of 2010, these downward trends continued and management, after determining that there was an indicator of impairment, performed another impairment evaluation of Deepwater goodwill and a recoverability test of the long-lived asset group. The results in the third quarter indicated no impairment was necessary for the asset group, but the goodwill associated with the reporting unit was deemed to be impaired and the $18 million goodwill balance was written-off during the quarter ended September 30, 2010. In the fourth quarter of 2010, further adverse trends in energy and pet coke pricing curves were observed in management review of external market analyses. The most significant impact on the forecasted energy prices reviewed by management in November 2010 related to the general external market consensus that Federal CO 2 cap and trade legislation was less likely, resulting in a drop in long-term energy price projections. At that time, Deepwater revised forecasts indicated that Deepwater would have operating losses which would extend beyond 126 Table of Contents 2020 and negative cash flows through 2019. Management concluded that, on an undiscounted cash flow basis, the carrying amount of the asset group was no longer recoverable. To measure the amount of impairment loss, management was required to determine the fair value of the asset group. To this end, an independent valuation firm was engaged to assist management in its estimation of fair value. Cash flow forecasts and the underlying assumptions for the valuation were developed by management. In determining the fair value of the asset group, all three valuation approaches described by the fair value measurement accounting guidance were considered. The fair value under the income approach was considered most appropriate. On that basis, the carrying value of the asset group was determined to be impaired and $79 million of impairment expense was recognized in the fourth quarter of 2010. In May 2010, the California State Water Board approved a policy to reduce the number of marine animals killed by seawater cooling systems in coastal power plants in California. At that time, since the policy required the approval of California Office of Administrative Law, it was unclear whether the policy would be approved and what form the regulations would take. In September 2010, the Office of Administrative Law in California approved the policy that will require the Company to change the process through which it uses ocean water to cool the generation turbines at its Alamitos, Huntington Beach and Redondo Beach (collectively Southland ) gas-fired generation facilities in California. The policy requires compliance with the new regulations by December 31, 2020. The change in the water cooling process will result in significant future capital expenditures to ensure compliance with the new regulations. This was considered as an impairment indicator for the long-lived asset groups. The recoverability test of the long-lived asset groups indicated that the carrying amount of the Huntington Beach asset group was not recoverable on an undiscounted cash flows basis. To assist management in determining the fair value of the asset group, an independent valuation firm was engaged. Cash flow forecasts and the underlying assumptions for the valuation were developed by management. The carrying amount of the Huntington Beach asset group exceeded its fair value by $200 million which was recognized as an impairment expense. The carrying amounts of the Alamitos and Redondo Beach long-lived asset groups were determined to be recoverable on an undiscounted cash flows basis at September 30, 2010 and no impairment was necessary. During the third quarter of 2010, we also recognized impairment on the long-lived assets at our Tisza II generation plant in Hungary. Tisza II operates under an annual contract with an off-taker. In the third quarter of 2010, when Tisza II began the negotiation of its 2011 contract, future undiscounted cash flows of the plant were no longer expected to recover the long-lived assets group carrying amount due to prevailing market rates, higher generation costs and lower demand expectations. Accordingly, the Company measured the fair value of the long-lived asset group and recorded an impairment expense of $85 million, representing the excess of carrying amount over the fair value at September 30, 2010. Goodwill. The Company seeks business acquisitions as one of its growth strategies. We have achieved significant growth in the past as a result of several business acquisitions, which also resulted in the recognition of goodwill. As noted in Item 1A. Risk Factors of this Form 10-K, there is always a risk that Our acquisitions may not perform as expected . The benefits of goodwill are typically realized through the future operating results of an acquired business. Management believes that the recoverability of goodwill is positively correlated with the economic environments in which our acquired businesses operate and a severe economic downturn could negatively impact the recoverability of goodwill. Also, the evolving environmental regulations, including GHG regulations, around the globe continue to increase the operating costs of our generation businesses. In extreme situations, the environmental regulations could even make a once profitable business uneconomical. In addition, most of our generation businesses have a finite life and as the acquired businesses reach the end of their finite lives, the carrying amount of goodwill is gradually recovered through their periodic operating results. The accounting guidance, however, prohibits the systematic amortization of goodwill and rather requires an annual impairment evaluation. Thus, as some of our acquired businesses approach the end of their finite lives, they may incur goodwill impairment charges even if there are no discrete adverse changes in the economic environment. As noted in Long-lived assets above, adverse market conditions at Deepwater were also considered an interim impairment indicator for its goodwill. Accordingly, in the second and third quarters of 2010, interim 127 Table of Contents goodwill impairment evaluations were performed at the Deepwater reporting unit level. The reporting unit passed Step 1 of goodwill impairment evaluation in the second quarter and no impairment was recognized. In the third quarter, however, the reporting unit failed Step 1 of goodwill impairment evaluation. Upon measurement of impairment loss in Step 2, the entire $18 million goodwill balance was considered impaired and recognized as goodwill impairment. In the fourth quarter of 2010, the Company completed its annual goodwill impairment evaluation and did not have any reporting units that were considered at risk. A reporting unit is considered at risk when its fair value is not higher than its carrying amount by more than 10%. While there were no potential impairment indicators that could result in the recognition of goodwill impairment for any of these reporting units, it is possible we may incur goodwill impairment on these reporting units in future years if any of the following events occur: a significant adverse change in business climate or legal factors, an adverse action or assessment by a regulator, a sale of assets at less than carrying amount, unanticipated competition, a loss of key personnel, an acquisition not performing as expected, changing environmental regulations that significantly increase the cost of doing business, or a business reaches the end of its finite life. The likelihood of the occurrence of these events may increase because of the challenging global macroeconomic conditions. Regulatory Environment. The Company faces certain risks and uncertainties related to numerous environmental laws and regulations, including existing and potential GHG legislation or regulations, and actual or potential laws and regulations pertaining to water discharges, waste management (including disposal of coal combustion byproducts), and certain air emissions, such as SO 2 , NO x , particulate matter and mercury. For a description of material regulations faced by the Company, see Item 1. Business Regulatory Matters. Such risks and uncertainties could result in increased capital expenditures or other compliance costs which could have a material adverse effect on certain of our United States or international subsidiaries and our consolidated results of operations. For further information about these risks, see Item 1A. Risk Factors, Our businesses are subject to stringent environmental laws and regulations , Our businesses are subject to enforcement initiatives from environmental regulatory agencies and Regulators, politicians, non-governmental organizations and other private parties have expressed concern about greenhouse gas, or GHG, emissions and the potential risks associated with climate change and are taking actions which could have a material adverse impact on our consolidated results of operations, financial condition and cash flows set forth in this Form 10-K. Recent Events Subsequent to December 31, 2010, the Company continued to repurchase stock under the stock repurchase program announced on July 7, 2010. The Company has repurchased 1,026,610 shares at a cost of $13 million in 2011, bringing the cumulative total through February 22, 2010 to 9,409,435 shares at a total cost of $112 million (average price of $11.92 per share including commissions). As of February 25, 2011, $388 million of the $500 million authorized remained available under the stock repurchase program. For additional information, see Note 14 Equity . On February 1, 2011, AES Thames, LLC ( Thames ), our 208 MW coal-fired plant in Connecticut, filed petitions for bankruptcy protection under Chapter 11 in the U. S. Bankruptcy Court. The bankruptcy is due, in part, to the increased cost of energy production. The bankruptcy protection is not expected to have a material impact on the Company financial position or the results of operations. 128 Table of Contents Consolidated Results of Operations Year Ended December 31, Results of operations 2010 2009 2008 $ change 2010 vs. 2009 $ change 2009 vs. 2008 (in millions, except per share amounts) Revenue: Latin America Generation $ 4,281 $ 3,651 $ 4,468 $ 630 $ (817 ) Latin America Utilities 7,222 6,092 5,907 1,130 185 North America Generation 1,972 1,940 2,234 32 (294 ) North America Utilities 1,145 1,068 1,079 77 (11 ) Europe Generation 1,362 820 1,143 542 (323 ) Asia Generation 618 375 345 243 30 Corporate and Other (1) 1,066 870 1,012 196 (142 ) Eliminations (2) (1,019 ) (862 ) (991 ) (157 ) 129 Total Revenue $ 16,647 $ 13,954 $ 15,197 $ 2,693 $ (1,243 ) Gross Margin: Latin America Generation $ 1,497 $ 1,357 $ 1,398 $ 140 $ (41 ) Latin America Utilities 1,072 918 886 154 32 North America Generation 435 477 660 (42 ) (183 ) North America Utilities 249 239 261 10 (22 ) Europe Generation 268 212 273 56 (61 ) Asia Generation 240 93 (10 ) 147 103 Corporate and Other (3) 186 117 62 69 55 Eliminations (4) 17 20 38 (3 ) (18 ) General and administrative expenses (392 ) (339 ) (368 ) (53 ) 29 Interest expense (1,526 ) (1,485 ) (1,770 ) (41 ) 285 Interest income 411 348 519 63 (171 ) Other expense (239 ) (111 ) (161 ) (128 ) 50 Other income 108 465 375 (357 ) 90 Gain on sale of investments 131 909 (131 ) (778 ) Loss on sale of subsidiary stock (31 ) 31 Goodwill impairment (21 ) (122 ) 101 (122 ) Asset impairment expense (1,221 ) (25 ) (175 ) (1,196 ) 150 Foreign currency transaction gains (losses) on net monetary position (33 ) 33 (184 ) (66 ) 217 Other non-operating expense (7 ) (12 ) (15 ) 5 3 Income tax expense (307 ) (599 ) (771 ) 292 172 Net equity in earnings of affiliates 183 92 33 91 59 Income from continuing operations 920 1,809 1,929 (889 ) (120 ) Income from operations of discontinued businesses 75 96 97 (21 ) (1 ) Gain (loss) from disposal of discontinued businesses 64 (150 ) 6 214 (156 ) Net income 1,059 1,755 2,032 (696 ) (277 ) Noncontrolling interests: Income from continuing operations attributable to noncontrolling interests (1,006 ) (1,099 ) (759 ) 93 (340 ) (Income) loss from discontinuing operations attributable to noncontrolling interests (44 ) 2 (39 ) (46 ) 41 Net income attributable to The AES Corporation $ 9 $ 658 $ 1,234 $ (649 ) $ (576 ) Per Share Data: Basic income per share from continuing operations $ (0.11 ) $ 1.06 $ 1.75 $ (1.17 ) $ (0.69 ) Diluted income per share from continuing operations $ (0.11 ) $ 1.06 $ 1.73 $ (1.17 ) $ (0.67 ) (1) Corporate and Other includes revenue from our generation and utilities businesses in Africa, utilities businesses in Europe, Wind Generation and other renewables initiatives. (2) Represents inter-segment eliminations of revenue related to transfers of electricity from Tiet (generation) to Eletropaulo (utility). ( 3 ) Corporate and Other gross margin includes gross margin from our generation and utilities businesses in Africa, utilities businesses in Europe, Wind Generation and other renewables initiatives. ( 4 ) Represents inter-segment eliminations of gross margin related to corporate charges for self insurance premiums. 129 Table of Contents Segment Analysis Latin America Generation The following table summarizes revenue and gross margin for our Generation segment in Latin America for the periods indicated: For the Years Ended December 31, 2010 2009 2008 % Change 2010 vs. 2009 % Change 2009 vs. 2008 ($ in millions) Latin America Generation Revenue $ 4,281 $ 3,651 $ 4,468 17 % -18 % Gross Margin $ 1,497 $ 1,357 $ 1,398 10 % -3 % Fiscal Year 2010 versus 2009 Excluding the favorable impact of foreign currency translation and remeasurement of $133 million, generation revenue for 2010 increased $497 million, or 14%, from 2009 primarily due to: higher spot prices of $221 million associated with increased fuel prices in Argentina; higher volume of $139 million at Gener in Chile due to higher demand; higher volume and ancillary services of $115 million, and higher contract prices from PPAs indexed to gas and higher spot prices of $27 million in the Dominican Republic; higher contract prices of $58 million in Colombia and Tiet in Brazil; the positive impact of $28 million resulting from the final settlement of the power sales agreement between Sul and Uruguaiana, our businesses in Brazil; and higher volume of $21 million in Panama due to higher water inflows into the system. These increases were partially offset by: lower volume sold at Uruguaiana of $53 million as a result of renegotiation of its power sales agreements; lower volume due to unfavorable hydrology in Colombia and Argentina of $41 million; lower contract prices at Gener of $32 million; and lower contract prices on PPAs indexed to international coal prices in the Dominican Republic of $22 million. Excluding the favorable impact of foreign currency translation and remeasurement of $106 million, generation gross margin for 2010 increased $34 million, or 3%, from 2009 primarily due to: higher spot prices in Argentina of $69 million; higher volume and ancillary services in the Dominican Republic of $55 million; higher contract prices of $33 million in Colombia; the positive impact of $28 million resulting from the final settlement of the power sales agreement between Sul and Uruguaiana, as mentioned above; and higher volume of $23 million in Panama. These increases were partially offset by: higher fuel and purchased energy prices at Gener of $48 million; the net effect of lower PPA prices and higher fuel costs in the Dominican Republic of $38 million; 130 Table of Contents the impact of a reversal of bad debt expense during the first quarter of 2009 of $36 million at Uruguaiana as a result of the renegotiation of one of its power sales agreements; and higher fixed costs of $30 million at Gener primarily due to higher employee costs, increased maintenance expenses and costs incurred due to construction delays at Campiche. For the year ended December 31, 2010, revenue increased 17% while gross margin increased 10%, primarily due to higher spot purchases and fuel prices at Gener and the reversal of bad debt expense as a result of the renegotiation of one of the power sales agreements at Uruguaiana in the first quarter of 2009. Fiscal Year 2009 versus 2008 Excluding the unfavorable impact of foreign currency translation and remeasurement of $181 million, driven by Brazil and Argentina, generation revenue for 2009 decreased $636 million, or 14%, from 2008 primarily due to: lower spot and contract prices of $295 million at Gener; lower volume of $227 million at Uruguaiana as a result of the renegotiation of its power sales agreements in 2009 to reduce the energy volume sold; and lower energy prices and volume of $174 million in the Dominican Republic. These decreases were partially offset by: and increase of $100 million due to fewer outages at Gener and in Argentina in 2009; and higher prices of energy sold of $66 million at Tiet . Excluding the unfavorable impact of foreign currency translation and remeasurement of $94 million, driven by Brazil and Argentina, generation gross margin for 2009 increased $53 million, or 4%, from 2008 primarily due to: higher prices of energy sold of $66 million at Tiet ; fewer outages of $60 million at Gener and in Argentina; lower diesel consumption, partially offset by higher energy purchases and higher gas consumption, at Gener of $47 million; lower volume of energy purchased at Uruguaiana of $44 million as a result of the renegotiated power sales agreements; and the favorable impact of $28 million of a decrease in bad debt expense at Uruguaiana as a result of the renegotiated power sales agreements. These increases were partially offset by: the unfavorable impact of lower energy prices of $75 million in the Dominican Republic; lower volume and energy prices of $66 million in Argentina; higher purchased energy prices of $48 million at Uruguaiana; and lower spot sales of $48 million at Panama. For the year ended December 31, 2009, revenue decreased by 18% while gross margin decreased 3%, primarily due to reduced energy purchases, fewer outages and lower bad debt expense. 131 Table of Contents Latin America Utilities The following table summarizes revenue and gross margin for our Utilities segment in Latin America for the periods indicated: For the Years Ended December 31, 2010 2009 2008 % Change 2010 vs. 2009 % Change 2009 vs. 2008 ($ in millions) Latin America Utilities Revenue $ 7,222 $ 6,092 $ 5,907 19 % 3 % Gross Margin $ 1,072 $ 918 $ 886 17 % 4 % Fiscal Year 2010 versus 2009 Excluding the favorable impact of foreign currency translation of $697 million, primarily in Brazil, utilities revenue for 2010 increased $433 million, or 7%, from 2009 primarily due to: increased volume of $316 million, primarily in Brazil, due to increased market demand; and higher tariffs of $114 million primarily related to the July 2009 tariff reset in Brazil partially offset by the unfavorable impact on rates at Eletropaulo in Brazil of a cumulative adjustment to regulatory liabilities and higher energy prices across our Latin America utility businesses associated with energy purchases passed through to customers of $97 million. Excluding the favorable impact of foreign currency translation of $107 million, primarily in Brazil, utilities gross margin for 2010 increased $47 million, or 5%, from 2009 primarily due to: increased volume of $163 million, primarily in Brazil, due to the increased market demand; and lower contingencies of $142 million in Eletropaulo primarily related to labor contingencies which included a one-time reversal, reflecting an agreement with Funda o CESP, the pension plan administrator, of $51 million associated with claims for past benefit obligations which will now be accounted for as a component of the pension plan. These increases were partially offset by: higher fixed costs of $238 million primarily due to the recovery in 2009 of a municipality receivable previously written off in Brazil and higher salaries and other employee related costs, provisions for commercial losses, regulatory penalties and maintenance costs; and $28 million related to the final settlement of the power sales agreement between Sul and Uruguaiana. Fiscal Year 2009 versus 2008 Excluding the unfavorable impact of foreign currency translation of $442 million, primarily in Brazil, utilities revenue for 2009 increased $627 million, or 11%, from 2008 primarily due to: higher tariffs of $560 million reflecting the recovery of energy purchases of $453 million that were passed through to customers at our utilities in Brazil and El Salvador; and higher volume in Brazil of $62 million. Excluding the unfavorable impact of foreign currency translation of $62 million, primarily in Brazil, utilities gross margin for 2009 increased $94 million, or 11%, from 2008 primarily due to: higher tariffs of $107 million in El Salvador and Brazil; a $64 million recovery of a municipality receivable previously written off; 132 Table of Contents a non-recurring PIS/COFINS fine in 2008 of $33 million; and higher volume of $32 million across the region. These increases were partially offset by: the unfavorable impact of higher fixed costs of $120 million mainly related to pension expense, labor contingencies and maintenance costs in Brazil. North America Generation The following table summarizes revenue and gross margin for our Generation segment in North America for the periods indicated: For the Years Ended December 31, 2010 2009 2008 % Change 2010 vs. 2009 % Change 2009 vs. 2008 ($ in millions) North America Generation Revenue $ 1,972 $ 1,940 $ 2,234 2 % -13 % Gross Margin $ 435 $ 477 $ 660 -9 % -28 % Fiscal Year 2010 versus 2009 Excluding the favorable impact of foreign currency translation of $19 million, generation revenue for 2010 increased $13 million, or 1%, from 2009 primarily due to: increased rates, volume and an availability bonus at TEG/TEP in Mexico of $41 million; higher volume, primarily due to fewer outages and higher rates, of $22 million at Merida in Mexico; higher volume of $19 million at Warrior Run in Maryland due to fewer outages; and an increase of $13 million in New York due to the favorable impact of mark-to-market derivative adjustments. These increases were partially offset by: a net decrease of $50 million in New York due to lower rates partially offset by higher volume of electricity sold due to fewer outages; a net decrease of $18 million at Deepwater in Texas primarily due to lower volume; and a net decrease of $14 million in Puerto Rico primarily due to a penalty from a forced outage. Excluding the favorable impact of foreign currency translation of $3 million, generation gross margin for 2010 decreased $45 million, or 9%, from 2009 primarily due to: a net decrease of $94 million in New York due to lower rates and higher coal prices partially offset by higher volume of electricity sold due to fewer outages; a decrease of $16 million at Deepwater due to lower volume and rates; a net decrease of $11 million in Puerto Rico primarily due to a penalty from a forced outage; a decrease of $9 million in Hawaii due to an unfavorable impact of mark-to-market derivatives; and a decrease of $7 million in Puerto Rico due to higher fixed costs. These decreases were partially offset by: an increase of $39 million in New York primarily due to lower fixed costs as a result of lower contract and maintenance costs, and other employee related costs; 133 Table of Contents a net increase of $26 million at TEG/TEP due to a current year availability bonus and fewer outages partially offset by higher fuel prices; higher volume of $14 million at Warrior Run due to fewer outages; and an increase of $13 million in New York due to the favorable impact of mark-to-market derivative adjustments. For the year ended December 31, 2010, revenue increased by 2% while gross margin decreased 9%, primarily due to the change in rates in New York having a greater impact on gross margin than revenue. Fiscal Year 2009 versus 2008 Excluding the unfavorable impact of foreign currency translation of $44 million, primarily in Mexico, generation revenue for 2009 decreased $250 million, or 11%, from 2008 primarily due to: a net decrease of $107 million in New York due to a reduction in the volume of electricity sold in the spot market as a result of lower spot rates, partially offset by a rate increase on electricity sold under favorable contracts; a decrease of $80 million due to a reduction in natural gas prices at Merida; increased outages of $22 million, $21 million and $17 million at Warrior Run, TEG/TEP and New York, respectively; lower rates of $20 million at Deepwater; the unfavorable impact of commodity derivatives in New York of $11 million; and the unfavorable impact in 2009 of derivative amortization at Warrior Run of $9 million. These decreases were partially offset by: a $15 million revenue adjustment at Merida in 2008. Excluding the unfavorable impact of foreign currency translation of $9 million, generation gross margin for 2009 decreased $174 million, or 26%, from 2008 primarily due to: a net decrease of $72 million in New York driven by a reduction in the volume of electricity sold in the spot market as a result of lower spot rates, partially offset by a rate increase on electricity sold under favorable contracts; a $29 million unfavorable impact of mark-to-market derivative adjustments on coal supply contracts in Hawaii as a result of a gain of $22 million in 2008 compared to a loss of $7 million in 2009; an increase in outages of $22 million and $6 million at Warrior Run and in New York, respectively; the unfavorable impact of commodity derivatives of $11 million and higher emission allowance purchases of $13 million in New York; and the unfavorable impact of $9 million in 2009 of derivative amortization at Warrior Run. These decreases were partially offset by: a $15 million revenue adjustment at Merida in 2008. For the year ended December 31, 2009, revenue decreased by 13% while gross margin decreased 28%, primarily due to the increase in coal prices in New York and the unfavorable impact of derivatives in 2009 in Hawaii that had no corresponding impact on revenue. 134 Table of Contents North America Utilities The following table summarizes revenue and gross margin for our Utilities segment in North America for the periods indicated: For the Years Ended December 31, 2010 2009 2008 % Change 2010 vs. 2009 % Change 2009 vs. 2008 ($ in millions) North America Utilities Revenue $ 1,145 $ 1,068 $ 1,079 7 % -1 % Gross Margin $ 249 $ 239 $ 261 4 % -8 % Fiscal Year 2010 versus 2009 Utilities revenue for 2010 increased $77 million, or 7%, from 2009 primarily due to: higher retail demand of $64 million as a result of warmer weather and higher fuel adjustment charges; and increased wholesale revenue of $11 million primarily due to higher prices. Utilities gross margin for 2010 increased $10 million, or 4%, from 2009 primarily due to: higher retail margin of $20 million due to increased demand; lower pension expense of $12 million; and lower emission allowance expense of $5 million. These increases were partially offset by: increased maintenance expenses of $16 million due to the timing of major generating unit overhauls; and increased fixed costs of $14 million. For the year ended December 31, 2010, revenue increased by 7% while gross margin increased 4%, primarily due to increased fuel and maintenance costs. Fiscal Year 2009 versus 2008 Utilities revenue for 2009 decreased $11 million, or 1%, from 2008 primarily due to: lower retail volume of $31 million due primarily to milder weather and the economic recession; and decreased wholesale revenue of $7 million driven by lower market prices. These decreases were partially offset by: $32 million of voluntary credits IPL provided to retail customers in 2008. See Item 1. Business Regulatory Matters North America of this Form 10-K for further information regarding these credits. Utilities gross margin for 2009 decreased $22 million, or 8%, from 2008 primarily due to: decreased wholesale margin of $16 million due to unfavorable prices; and increased pension expense of $25 million largely due to the decline in market value of IPL pension assets during 2008. 135 Table of Contents These decreases were partially offset by: increased retail margin of $15 million, primarily due to the $32 million of voluntary customer credits IPL issued to its retail customers in 2008, partially offset by lower retail sales volumes in 2009; and decreased property tax expense of $5 million. For the year ended December 31, 2009, revenue decreased by 1% while gross margin decreased 8%, primarily due to the $25 million increase in pension expense and the $32 million of voluntary customer credits IPL issued to its retail customers in 2008, both of which had an unfavorable impact on gross margin. Europe Generation The following table summarizes revenue and gross margin for our Generation segment in Europe for the periods indicated: For the Years Ended December 31, 2010 2009 2008 % Change 2010 vs. 2009 % Change 2009 vs. 2008 ($ in millions) Europe Generation Revenue $ 1,362 $ 820 $ 1,143 66 % -28 % Gross Margin $ 268 $ 212 $ 273 26 % -22 % Fiscal Year 2010 versus 2009 Excluding the unfavorable impact of foreign currency translation of $41 million, generation revenue for 2010 increased $583 million, or 71%, from 2009 primarily due to: $409 million from the adoption of new accounting guidance on the consolidation of variable interest entities ( VIEs ) which resulted in the consolidation of Cartagena in Spain, a generation business previously accounted for under the equity method of accounting; $117 million from the operations of Ballylumford in the United Kingdom, which was acquired in August 2010; $16 million from a full year of combined cycle operations at our Amman East plant in Jordan, which was single cycle until August 2009; higher tariffs of $16 million at Altai in Kazakhstan; higher volume of $15 million at Kilroot in the United Kingdom largely driven by coal pass-through and increased demand, partially offset by lower capacity revenue due to the termination of the long term PPA and related supplementary agreements. These increases were partially offset by: lower volume and sales of emissions allowances in Hungary of $16 million. Excluding the unfavorable impact of foreign currency translation of $1 million, generation gross margin for 2010 increased $57 million, or 27%, from 2009 primarily due to: $62 million from the consolidation of Cartagena as discussed above; higher tariffs and lower fixed costs at Altai of $29 million; and $13 million from the operations of Ballylumford since its acquisition. 136 Table of Contents These increases were partially offset by: lower gross margin of $28 million primarily from the termination of the long-term PPA at Kilroot; and lower gross margin of $20 million in Hungary primarily attributable to higher fuel costs that could not be passed through and lower sales of emission allowances. For the year ended December 31, 2010, revenue increased 66% while gross margin increased 26%, primarily due to the consolidation of Cartagena and acquisition of Ballylumford that have a larger positive impact on revenue than gross margin, and the positive impact of higher energy revenue at Kilroot, which as a pass-through had no corresponding impact on gross margin. Fiscal Year 2009 versus 2008 Excluding the unfavorable impact of foreign currency translation of $146 million, driven mainly by Kilroot, Hungary and Kazakhstan, generation revenue for 2009 decreased $177 million, or 15%, from 2008 primarily due to: lower revenue of $101 million as a result of the sale of Ekibastuz and Maikuben in May 2008; lower volume of $81 million in Hungary due to the combined impact of the cancellation of one of our PPAs and reduced demand; and lower volume of $67 million at Kilroot, a coal-fired plant, mainly driven by lower dispatch due to favorable gas prices compared to coal. These decreases were partially offset by: the benefit of new business of $50 million at Amman East, which commenced single cycle operations in July 2008; and higher rates of $15 million in Kazakhstan. Excluding the unfavorable impact of foreign currency translation of $35 million, driven mainly by Kilroot and Kazakhstan, generation gross margin for 2009 decreased $26 million, or 10%, from 2008 primarily due to: lower gross margin of $41 million as a result of the sale of Ekibastuz and Maikuben in May 2008; lower demand of $12 million in Hungary; and an overall increase of $22 million in fixed costs across the region. These decreases were partially offset by: higher capacity revenue at Kilroot; higher energy prices in Kazakhstan; and the benefit of new business at Amman East. Asia Generation The following table summarizes revenue and gross margin for our Generation segment in Asia for the periods indicated: For the Years Ended December 31, 2010 2009 2008 % Change 2010 vs. 2009 % Change 2009 vs. 2008 ($ in millions) Asia Generation Revenue $ 618 $ 375 $ 345 65 % 9 % Gross Margin $ 240 $ 93 $ (10 ) 158 % 1030 % 137 Table of Contents Fiscal Year 2010 versus 2009 Excluding the favorable impact of foreign currency translation of $28 million, generation revenue for 2010 increased $215 million, or 57%, from 2009 primarily due to: favorable generation rates and volume of $210 million at Masinloc in the Philippines as a result of increased market demand and improved plant availability subsequent to the completion of its overhaul at the beginning of 2010; and higher demand from both new and existing contract and spot customers as a result of lower supply shortages in the Philippines power market due to a strong energy growth rate. Excluding the favorable impact of foreign currency translation of $13 million, generation gross margin for 2010 increased $134 million, or 144%, from 2009 primarily due to a combination of higher availability attributable to improved plant operations, higher market demand and favorable spot prices at Masinloc. For the year ended December 31, 2010, revenue increased 65% while gross margin increased 158%, primarily due to the positive influence on gross margin due to favorable spot rates and operational efficiencies resulting from the Masinloc plant overhauls in late 2009 and early 2010, which led to higher availability and allowed for more efficient operations that have materially improved the operating results for 2010 as compared to 2009. Fiscal Year 2009 versus 2008 Excluding the unfavorable impact of foreign currency translation of $23 million, primarily in the Philippines and Sri Lanka, generation revenue for 2009 increased $53 million, or 15%, from 2008 primarily due to: the benefit of $46 million of our new business Masinloc, which was acquired in April 2008; increased revenue of $70 million in 2009 at Masinloc due to improved rates and volume as a result of improved availability and new customer contracts; and $18 million from a one-time favorable energy sales settlement at Masinloc. These increases were partially offset by: the decrease in revenue of $71 million at Kelanitissa in Sri Lanka primarily due to a decline in fuel costs which are largely passed through to the customer and higher outages in 2009 as compared to 2008 partially offset by higher capacity revenue. Excluding the unfavorable impact of foreign currency translation of $6 million, primarily in the Philippines, generation gross margin for 2009 increased $109 million, or 1,090%, from 2008 primarily due to: the impact of our new business at Masinloc of $23 million; a $91 million increase at Masinloc due to higher contract sales, where margins are more favorable than spot sales, lower fuel prices, improved availability and the favorable energy sales settlement described above; and higher capacity revenue at Kelanitissa of $10 million. These increases were partially offset by: higher fixed costs of $20 million at Masinloc. For the year ended December 31, 2009, revenue increased 9% while gross margin increased 1,030%, primarily due to higher contract margins at Masinloc as a result of improved operations, availability and lower fuel prices, as well as the larger relative impact on gross margin from the one-time favorable energy sales settlement described above. 138 Table of Contents Corporate and Other Corporate and other includes the net operating results from our generation and utilities businesses in Africa, utilities businesses in Europe, AES Wind Generation and renewables projects which are immaterial for the purposes of separate segment disclosure. The following table excludes inter-segment activity and summarizes revenue and gross margin for Corporate and Other entities for the periods indicated: For the Years Ended December 31, 2010 2009 2008 % Change 2010 vs. 2009 % Change 2009 vs. 2008 ($ in millions) Revenue Europe Utilities $ 356 $ 286 $ 403 24 % -29 % Africa Utilities 422 370 379 14 % -2 % Africa Generation 61 65 65 -6 % 0 % Wind Generation 202 133 128 52 % 4 % Corp/Other 25 16 37 56 % -57 % Total Corporate and Other $ 1,066 $ 870 $ 1,012 23 % -14 % Gross Margin Europe Utilities $ 21 $ 16 $ 34 31 % -53 % Africa Utilities 65 71 30 -8 % 137 % Africa Generation 54 41 28 32 % 46 % Wind Generation 44 11 19 300 % -42 % Corp/Other 2 (22 ) (49 ) -109 % -55 % Total Corporate and Other $ 186 $ 117 $ 62 59 % 89 % Fiscal Year 2010 versus 2009 Excluding the unfavorable impact of foreign currency translation of $30 million, primarily in Cameroon, Corporate and Other revenue increased $226 million for 2010, or 26% from 2009. The increase was primarily due to: higher volume at our utility businesses in Ukraine driven by an overall increase in market demand; higher volume and utility tariffs at Sonel in Cameroon driven by an increase in market demand; and incremental revenue from new wind generation projects that commenced operations during the year and an overall volume increase across our wind businesses. Excluding the unfavorable impact of foreign currency translation of $8 million, primarily in Cameroon, Corporate and Other gross margin increased $77 million for 2010, or 66% from 2009. The increase was primarily due to: an increase in gross margin from our new wind generation projects and higher volume, as discussed above; and an increase in volume at Dibamba, our generation business, in Cameroon. These increases were partially offset by: an increase in fixed costs at Sonel. 139 Table of Contents Fiscal Year 2009 versus 2008 Excluding the unfavorable impact of foreign currency translation of $162 million, primarily in Ukraine, Corporate and Other revenue increased $20 million for 2009, or 2%, from 2008. The increase was primarily due to: higher tariffs in Ukraine of $27 million. Excluding the unfavorable impact of foreign currency translation of $12 million, primarily in Ukraine, Corporate and Other gross margin increased $67 million for 2009, or 108%, from 2008. The increase was primarily due to: a decrease in fixed costs across the Africa region. The increase was partially offset by: higher fuel consumption attributable to lower hydrology at Sonel. General and Administrative Expense General and administrative expense includes those expenses related to corporate and region staff functions and/or initiatives, executive management, finance, legal, human resources, information systems, and development costs. General and administrative expenses increased $53 million, or 16%, to $392 million in 2010 from 2009. The increase is primarily related to business development costs associated with increased development efforts, primarily in Europe, Turkey and India. General and administrative expenses decreased $29 million, or 8%, to $339 million in 2009 from 2008. The decrease is primarily related to 2008 professional fees associated with remediation efforts and a reduction in business development costs. The favorable variance is partially offset by an increase in costs associated with the worldwide implementation of SAP. Interest expense Interest expense increased $41 million, or 3%, to $1.5 billion in 2010 from 2009. This increase was primarily due to interest expense at Cartagena which is now a consolidated entity, higher interest rates at Tiet , increased debt principal at Eletropaulo and interest being expensed related to St. Nikola, our wind project in Bulgaria, due to commencement of operations in 2010. These increases were partially offset by reduced debt principal at the Parent Company. Interest expense decreased $285 million, or 16%, to $1.5 billion in 2009 from 2008. This decrease was primarily due to lower interest rates globally due to economic conditions and inflationary adjustments to the market price index in Brazil. In addition, interest expense decreased as a result of favorable foreign currency translation, mainly in Brazil and lower interest expenses associated with decreased debt balances at Eletropaulo. These decreases were partially offset by higher interest expense at Masinloc in the Philippines which was acquired in April 2008, and interest expense at Infovias in Brazil where a fee on a non-exercised credit line was written off. Interest income Interest income increased $63 million, or 18%, to $411 million in 2010 from 2009. This increase was primarily due to a higher average balance in short term investments at Eletropaulo and the favorable impact of 140 Table of Contents foreign currency translation in Brazil as well as the settlement of a dispute related to inflation adjustments for energy sales at Tiet . These increases were partially offset by reduced interest income from a loan to a wind development project in Brazil which was repaid in June 2010. Interest income decreased $171 million, or 33%, to $348 million in 2009 from 2008. This decrease was primarily due to lower interest rates and lower investment balances in Brazil, unfavorable foreign currency translation in Brazil, the impact of decreased interest rates and inflationary adjustments on accounts receivable in 2008 at Gener in Chile and a decreased cash balance at the Parent Company. Other income Years Ended December 31, 2010 2009 2008 (in millions) Gain on extinguishment of tax and other liabilities $ 65 $ 168 $ 199 Tax credit settlement 129 Performance incentive fee 80 Insurance proceeds 40 Gain on sale of assets 12 14 34 Other 31 74 102 Total other income $ 108 $ 465 $ 375 Other income of $108 million for the year ended December 31, 2010 was primarily related to the extinguishment of a swap liability owed by two of our Brazilian subsidiaries, resulting in the recognition of a $62 million gain. The net impact to the Company after taxes and noncontrolling interest was $9 million. Other income also included a gain on sale of assets at Eletropaulo. Other income of $465 million for the year ended December 31, 2009 included $165 million from the reduction in interest and penalties associated with federal tax debts at Eletropaulo and Sul as a result of the REFIS program and a $129 million gain related to a favorable court decision enabling Eletropaulo to receive reimbursement of excess non-income taxes paid from 1989 to 1992 in the form of tax credits to be applied against future tax liabilities. The net impact to the Company after income taxes and noncontrolling interests for these items was $44 million. In addition, the Company recognized income in 2009 of $80 million from a performance incentive bonus for management services provided to Ekibastuz and Maikuben in 2008. The management agreement was related to the sale of these businesses in Kazakhstan in May 2008; see further discussion of this transaction in Note 22 Acquisitions and Dispositions, to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K. Other income of $375 million for the year ended December 31, 2008 included gains on the extinguishment of a gross receipts tax liability and a legal contingency at Eletropaulo of $117 million and $75 million, respectively, $32 million of cash proceeds related to a favorable legal settlement at Southland in California, $29 million of insurance recoveries for damaged turbines at Uruguaiana, $23 million of gains associated with a sale of land at Eletropaulo and sales of turbines at Itabo, and compensation of $18 million for the impairment associated with the settlement agreement to shut down Hefei. 141 Table of Contents Other expense Years Ended December 31, 2010 2009 2008 (in millions) Loss on sale and disposal of assets $ 84 $ 42 $ 34 Gener gas settlement 72 Loss on extinguishment of debt 37 70 AES Wind transaction costs 22 Other 24 69 57 Total other expense $ 239 $ 111 $ 161 Other expense of $239 million for the year ended December 31, 2010 included $72 million for a settlement agreement of gas transportation contracts at Gener. There were also previously capitalized transaction costs of $22 million that were incurred in connection with the preparation for the sale of a noncontrolling interest in our Wind Generation business which were written off upon the expiration of the letter of intent in June 2010. In addition, there were losses on the disposal of assets at Eletropaulo, Panama, and Gener, an $18 million loss on debt extinguishment at Andres and Itabo and a $15 million loss at the Parent Company from the retirement of senior notes. Other expense of $111 million for the year ended December 31, 2009 included a $13 million loss recognized when three of our businesses in the Dominican Republic received $110 million par value bonds issued by the Dominican Republic government to settle existing accounts receivable for the same amount from the government-owned distribution companies. The loss represented an adjustment to reflect the fair value of the bonds on the date received. Other expense also included losses on the disposal of assets at Eletropaulo and Andres and contingencies at our businesses in Kazakhstan and Alicura in Argentina. Other expense of $161 million for the year ended December 31, 2008 included $69 million of losses on the retirement of debt at the Parent Company in connection with the refinancing in June 2008 and IPALCO associated with a $375 million refinancing in April 2008 and losses on disposal of assets primarily at Eletropaulo. Goodwill Impairment In 2010, the Company recognized goodwill impairment expense of $21 million. During the third quarter of 2010, Deepwater, our pet coke-fired merchant generation facility in Texas, determined that there was an interim impairment indicator for its goodwill. This determination was primarily based on management decision not to operate the plant for more than 30 days in the third quarter of 2010, current operating and cash flow losses, and forecasted operating and cash flow losses for the remainder of 2010 through 2014 as a result of declining trends in energy pricing curves and increasing pet coke prices. As a result, Deepwater recognized a goodwill impairment of $18 million. Deepwater is reported in the North America Generation segment. In 2009, the Company recognized goodwill impairment expense of $122 million. This was a result of impairment at certain of our businesses in the United Kingdom and Ukraine as a result of the Company annual goodwill impairment evaluation as of October 1. The most significant goodwill impairment was at Kilroot, our generation business in the United Kingdom. Factors contributing to the recognition of impairment included: reduced profit expectations based on latest estimates of future commodity prices and reduced expectations on the recovery of cash flows on the existing plant following the Company decision to forgo capital expenditures to meet emission allowance requirements taking effect in 2024. The fair value of the Company reporting units are inherently sensitive to the assumptions underlying the estimates of fair value. Note 1 General and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, Fair Value, Goodwill and Intangibles in Item 8 of this Form 10-K provides a 142 Table of Contents more detailed discussion of those assumptions. As discussed in Key Trends and Uncertainties , in the future, the fair values of the Company reporting units might decline as a result of adverse changes in their operating environments or the businesses reaching the end of their finite lives, which could require the Company to record additional goodwill impairment charges. The Company did not incur any goodwill impairment charges in 2008. Asset Impairment Expense As discussed in Note 19 Impairment Expense to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K, asset impairment expense for the year 2010 was $1,221 million and consisted primarily of the following: Eastern Energy AEE operates four coal-fired power plants: Cayuga, Greenidge, Somerset and Westover, representing generation capacity of 1,169 MW in the western New York power market. During 2010, the power prices in the New York power market trended downward, similar to North America natural gas prices. The New York Independent System Operator ( NYISO ) continues to move forward with the potential addition of a new capacity zone, which is expected to put further downward pressure on the capacity prices paid to the AEE facilities. In November 2010, legislation was proposed in the state of New Jersey for the addition of state subsidized capacity additions serving to lower PJM capacity price expectations. Similar changes to capacity pricing may be made in the future in New York. Continued pressure on energy prices, driven by falling natural gas prices and state actions, indicate that capacity prices are unlikely to reach levels significantly in excess of those achieved historically. Accordingly, management view of long-term capacity markets in western New York was revised downward. In December 2010, management revised its cash flow forecasts based on these developments and forecasted continuing negative operating cash flow and losses through 2034. The forecasted energy prices are such that a hedge strategy significantly beyond those in place at December 31, 2010 would not be economical. Additionally, on November 15, 2010, Standard & Poor downgraded the bond rating of AEE from BB to B+. Collectively, in the fourth quarter of 2010, these events were considered an impairment indicator for the AES New York asset group, of which AEE is the most significant component and necessitated a recoverability test of the asset group. The long-lived asset group subject to the impairment evaluation was determined to include all of the generating plants of AEE. This determination was based on the assessment of the plants inability to generate independent cash flow. When the recoverability test of the asset group was performed, management concluded that, on an undiscounted cash flow basis, the carrying amount of the asset group was not recoverable. To measure the amount of impairment loss, management was required to determine the fair value of the asset group. To this end, an independent valuation firm was engaged to assist management in its estimation of fair value. Cash flow forecasts and the underlying assumptions for the valuation were developed by management. While there were numerous assumptions that impact the fair value, potential state actions that impact capacity pricing and forward energy prices were the most significant. In determining the fair value of the asset group, the three valuation approaches prescribed by the fair value measurement accounting guidance were considered. The fair value under the income approach was considered the most appropriate and resulted in a zero fair value. Any salvage value of the asset group is expected to be offset by environmental and other remediation costs. Accordingly, the long-lived asset group was considered fully impaired and $827 million of impairment expense was recognized in the fourth quarter of 2010. Southland In May 2010, the California State Water Board approved a policy to reduce the number of marine animals killed by seawater cooling systems in coastal power plants in California. At that time since the policy required the approval of California Office of Administrative Law, it was unclear whether the policy would be approved and the exact form the regulations would take. In September 2010, the Office of Administrative Law in California approved the policy that will require the Company to change the process 143 Table of Contents through which it uses ocean water to cool the generation turbines at its Alamitos, Huntington Beach and Redondo Beach (collectively Southland ) gas-fired generation facilities in California. The policy requires compliance with the new regulations by December 31, 2020. The change in the water cooling process will result in significant future capital expenditures to ensure compliance with the new regulations and the Company determined that an indicator of impairment existed at September 30, 2010. The Company performed an asset impairment test in accordance with the accounting guidance on property, plant and equipment. The asset group was determined to be at the individual plant level and based on the undiscounted cash flow analysis, the Company determined that the Huntington Beach asset group was not recoverable. The fair value of the Huntington Beach asset group was then determined using a discounted cash flow analysis. To assist management in determining the fair value of the asset group, an independent valuation firm was engaged. Cash flow forecasts and the underlying assumptions for the valuation were developed by management. The carrying value of the Huntington Beach plant of $288 million exceeded the fair value of $88 million resulting in the recognition of asset impairment expense of $200 million. The undiscounted cash flows of the Alamitos and Redondo Beach generation facilities exceeded their respective carrying values and resulted in no impairment. Huntington Beach is reported in the North America Generation reportable segment. Tisza II During the third quarter of 2010, the Company entered into annual negotiations with the offtaker of its Tisza II generation plant in Hungary. As a result of these preliminary negotiations, as well as the further deterioration of the economic environment in Hungary, the Company determined that an indicator of impairment existed at September 30, 2010. Thus, the Company performed an asset impairment test in accordance with the accounting guidance on property, plant and equipment and determined that based on the undiscounted cash flow analysis, the carrying amount of the Tisza II asset group was not recoverable. The fair value of the asset group was then determined using a discounted cash flow analysis. The carrying value of the Tisza II asset group of $160 million exceeded the fair value of $75 million resulting in the recognition of asset impairment expense of $85 million. Tisza II is reported in the Europe Generation reportable segment. Deepwater In March 2010, Deepwater, our 160 MW pet coke-fired merchant power plant located in Texas, experienced deteriorating market conditions due to increasing pet coke prices and diminishing power prices. As a result, Deepwater incurred an operating loss for the period and forecasted short term losses. These conditions gradually worsened in the second quarter of 2010 and management determined it could not operate the plant at certain times during the year without generating negative operating margin. As the contraction of energy margin continued in the second quarter of 2010, management determined the collective events to be an indicator of impairment and performed an impairment evaluation of Deepwater goodwill and recoverability test for the long-lived asset group. Based on the results of these tests, in the second quarter of 2010, management concluded no impairment was necessary. In the third quarter of 2010, these downward trends continued and management, after determining that there was an indicator of impairment, performed another impairment evaluation of Deepwater goodwill and recoverability test of the long-lived asset group. The results in the third quarter indicated no impairment was necessary for the asset group, but the goodwill associated with the reporting unit was deemed to be impaired and the $18 million goodwill balance was written off during the quarter ended September 30, 2010. In the fourth quarter of 2010, further adverse trends in energy and pet coke pricing curves were observed in management review of external market analyses. The most significant impact on the forecasted energy prices reviewed by management in November 2010 related to the general external market consensus that Federal CO 2 cap and trade legislation was less likely, resulting in a drop in long-term energy price projections. At that time, Deepwater revised forecasts indicated that Deepwater would have operating losses which would extend beyond 2020 and negative cash flows through 2019. Management concluded that, on an undiscounted cash flow basis, the carrying amount of the asset group was no longer recoverable. To measure the amount of impairment loss, management was required to determine the fair value of the asset group. To this end, an independent valuation firm was engaged to assist management in its estimation of fair value. Cash flow forecasts and the underlying assumptions for the valuation were developed by management. In determining the fair value of the asset group, 144 Table of Contents all three valuation approaches described by the fair value measurement accounting guidance were considered. The fair value under the income approach was considered most appropriate. On that basis, the carrying value of the asset group was determined to be impaired and $79 million of impairment expense was recognized in the fourth quarter of 2010. Asset impairment expense for the year 2009 was $25 million. In 2009, the Company recognized a pre-tax long-lived asset impairment charge of $11 million related to the Company Piabanha hydro project in Brazil. The Company determined that the carrying value exceeded the future discounted cash flows and abandoned the project. Asset impairment expense for the year 2008 was $175 million. In the fourth quarter of 2008, and in response to the financial market crisis, the Company reviewed and prioritized projects in the development pipeline. From this review, the Company determined that the carrying value exceeded the future discounted cash flows for certain projects. As a result, the Company recorded an impairment charge of $75 million ($34 million, net of noncontrolling interests and income taxes) related to two liquefied natural gas projects in North America and a non-power development project at one of our facilities in North America. During 2008, the Company recognized additional impairment charges of $36 million related to long-lived assets at Uruguaiana. The impairment was triggered by a combination of gas curtailments and increases in the spot market price of energy in 2007 that continued in 2008. Following an initial impairment charge in the fourth quarter of 2007, further charges were incurred in 2008 due to fixed asset purchase agreements in place. During the first half of 2008, the Company withdrew from projects in South Africa and Israel which resulted in impairment charges of $36 million. The Company also recognized an impairment of $18 million related to the shutdown of the Hefei plant in China. Gain on sale of investments There was no gain on sale of investments in 2010. Gain on sale of investments of $131 million in 2009 consisted primarily of $98 million recognized in May 2009 related to the termination of the management agreement between the Company and Kazakhmys PLC for Ekibastuz and Maikuben, a gain of $14 million from the sale of the remaining assets associated with the shutdown of the Hefei plant in China and $13 million from the reversal of a contingent liability related to the Kazakhstan sale in 2008. Gain on sale of investments of $909 million in 2008 consisted primarily of the sale in May 2008 of two wholly owned subsidiaries in Kazakhstan, Ekibastuz and Maikuben for a net gain of $905 million. Loss on sale of subsidiary stock There was no loss on sale of subsidiary stock in 2010 or 2009. Loss on sale of subsidiary stock of $31 million in 2008 was the result of sales of AES Gener shares made by our wholly owned subsidiary Cachagua. In November 2008, Cachagua sold 9.6% of its ownership in Gener to a third party reducing its ownership in Gener to 70.6%. 145 Table of Contents Foreign currency transaction gains (losses) on net monetary position The following table summarizes the gains (losses) on the Company net monetary position from foreign currency transaction activities: Years Ended December 31, 2010 2009 2008 (in millions) AES Corporation $ (50 ) $ 13 $ 38 Chile 8 65 (96 ) Philippines 8 15 (57 ) Brazil (6 ) (9 ) (44 ) Argentina 12 (10 ) (28 ) Kazakhstan 1 (24 ) 14 Colombia (4 ) (11 ) 5 Other (2 ) (6 ) (16 ) Total (1) $ (33 ) $ 33 $ (184 ) (1) Includes (losses) gains of $(10) million, $(39) million and $10 million on foreign currency derivative contracts for the years ended December 31, 2010, 2009 and 2008, respectively. The Company recognized foreign currency transaction losses of $33 million for the year ended December 31, 2010. These losses consisted primarily of losses at The AES Corporation partially offset by gains in Argentina. Losses of $50 million at The AES Corporation were primarily due to the devaluation of notes receivable resulting from the weakening of the Euro and British Pound, and losses on foreign exchange swaps and options, partially offset by gains on cash balances and debt denominated in British Pounds. Gains of $12 million in Argentina were primarily due to a gain on a foreign currency embedded derivative related to government receivables, partially offset by losses due to the devaluation of the Argentine Peso by 5%, resulting in losses at Alicura (an Argentine Peso functional currency subsidiary) associated with its U.S. Dollar denominated debt. The Company recognized foreign currency transaction gains of $33 million for the year ended December 31, 2009. These gains consisted primarily of gains in Chile, the Philippines and at The AES Corporation partially offset by losses in Kazakhstan, Colombia, Argentina and Brazil. Gains of $65 million in Chile were primarily due to the appreciation of the Chilean Peso of 20% resulting in gains at Gener (a U.S. Dollar functional currency subsidiary) associated with its net working capital denominated in Chilean Peso, mainly cash and accounts receivables. This gain was partially offset by $14 million in losses on foreign currency derivatives. Gains of $15 million in the Philippines were primarily due to the appreciation of the Philippine Peso of 3%, resulting in gains at Masinloc (a Philippine Peso functional currency subsidiary) on the remeasurement of U.S. Dollar denominated debt. Gains of $13 million at The AES Corporation were primarily due to the settlement of the senior unsecured credit facility and the revaluation of notes receivable denominated in the Euro, partially offset by losses on debt denominated in British Pounds. Losses of $24 million in Kazakhstan were primarily due to net foreign currency transaction losses of $12 million related to energy sales denominated and fixed in the U.S. Dollar and $12 million of foreign currency transaction losses on debt and other liabilities denominated in currencies other than the Kazakh Tenge. 146 Table of Contents Losses of $11 million in Colombia were primarily due to the appreciation of the Colombian Peso of 9%, resulting in losses at Chivor (a U.S. Dollar functional currency subsidiary) associated with its Colombian Peso denominated debt and losses on foreign currency derivatives. Losses of $10 million in Argentina were primarily due to the devaluation of the Argentine Peso of 10% in 2009, resulting in losses at Alicura (an Argentine Peso functional currency subsidiary) associated with its U.S. Dollar denominated debt, partially offset by derivative gains. Losses of $9 million in Brazil were primarily due to energy purchases made by Eletropaulo denominated in U.S. Dollar, resulting in foreign currency transaction losses of $18 million, partially offset by gains of $9 million due to the appreciation in 2009 of the Brazilian Real of 25%, resulting in gains at Sul and Uruguaiana associated with U.S. Dollar denominated liabilities. The Company recognized foreign currency transaction losses of $184 million for the year ended December 31, 2008. These losses consisted primarily of losses in Chile, the Philippines, Brazil and Argentina partially offset by gains at The AES Corporation and in Kazakhstan. Losses of $96 million in Chile were primarily due to the devaluation of the Chilean Peso of 28% in 2008, resulting in losses at Gener (a U.S. Dollar functional currency subsidiary) associated with its net working capital denominated in Chilean Pesos, mainly cash, accounts receivable and value added tax ( VAT ) receivables. Losses of $57 million in the Philippines were primarily due to remeasurement losses at Masinloc (a Philippine Peso functional currency subsidiary) on U.S. Dollar denominated debt resulting from depreciation of the Philippine Peso of 14% in 2008. Losses of $44 million in Brazil were primarily due to the realization of deferred exchange variance on past energy purchases made by Eletropaulo denominated in U.S. Dollar. Losses of $28 million in Argentina were primarily due to the devaluation of the Argentine Peso of 10% in 2008, resulting in losses at Alicura (an Argentine Peso functional currency subsidiary) associated with its U.S. Dollar denominated debt. Gains of $38 million at The AES Corporation were primarily due to debt denominated in British Pounds and gains on foreign exchange derivatives, partially offset by losses on notes receivable denominated in the Euro. Gains of $14 million in Kazakhstan were primarily due to net foreign currency transaction gains of $16 million related to energy sales denominated and fixed in the U.S. Dollar, offset by $5 million of foreign currency transaction losses on external and intercompany debt denominated in other than the Kazakh Tenge functional currency. Income taxes Income tax expense on continuing operations decreased $292 million, or 49%, to $307 million in 2010. The Company effective tax rates were 29% for 2010 and 26% for 2009. The net increase in the 2010 effective tax rate was primarily due to tax expense recorded in the second quarter of 2010 relating to the CEMIG sale transaction, tax benefit recorded in 2009 upon the release of valuation allowances at certain U.S. and Brazilian subsidiaries, and $165 million of non-taxable income recorded in 2009 at Brazil as a result of the REFIS program. These items were offset by income tax benefits related to a reversal of withholding tax liabilities at certain Chilean subsidiaries and 2010 asset impairments primarily recorded at certain U.S. subsidiaries. Included in the net tax expense related to the CEMIG sale transaction is tax expense on the equity earnings associated with the reversal of the net long-term liability and tax benefit related to release of a valuation allowance against certain deferred tax assets. 147 Table of Contents Income tax expense on continuing operations decreased $172 million, or 22%, to $599 million in 2009. The Company effective tax rates were 26% for 2009 and 29% for 2008. The net decrease in the 2009 effective tax rate was primarily due to tax benefit recorded in 2009 upon the release of valuation allowance at certain U.S. and Brazilian subsidiaries, $165 million of non-taxable income recorded at Brazil as a result of the REFIS program in 2009 and an increase in U.S. taxes on distributions from the Company primary holding company in the second quarter of 2008. Net equity in earnings of affiliates Net equity in earnings of affiliates increased $91 million, or 99%, to $183 million in 2010 from $92 million in 2009. This increase was primarily due to a gain recognized upon the sale of our interest in CEMIG during the second quarter of 2010, partially offset by 2009 equity in earnings of Cartagena which was accounted for as a consolidated entity in 2010 and thus reported directly within revenues and expenses. Net equity in earnings of affiliates increased $59 million, or 179%, to $92 million in 2009 from $33 million in 2008. This increase was primarily due to a cash settlement received by Cartagena, in Spain, in June 2009 for liquidated damages received related to a construction delay from December 2005 to November 2006; increased earnings at Guacolda in Chile mainly due to lower cost of coal; increased earnings of Chigen affiliates from higher tariffs partially offset by lower volume and a valuation write-off in 2008 at an affiliate in Turkey. These increases were partially offset by decreased earnings at OPGC, in India, mainly due to lower tariff and a dividend distribution tax in March 2009 and increased expenses for an equipment overhaul at Elsta in the Netherlands. Income from continuing operations attributable to noncontrolling interests Income from continuing operations attributable to noncontrolling interests decreased $93 million, or 8%, to $1.0 billion in 2010 from $1.1 billion in 2009. This decrease was primarily due to decreased earnings at Eletropaulo as a result of the absence of legal settlement income present in 2009, a loss on legal settlement at Gener and reduced revenues due to decreased coal prices along with higher electricity purchases at Itabo. These decreases were partially offset by the appreciation of the Brazilian Real. Income from continuing operations attributable to noncontrolling interests increased $340 million, or 45%, to $1.1 billion in 2009 from $0.8 billion in 2008. This increase was primarily due to increases in gross margin and other income, lower interest expense and a decrease in impairments in 2009 at our Brazilian businesses, and increases in gross margin and foreign currency transaction gains at our businesses in Chile. In addition, in the fourth quarter of 2009, income from continuing operations attributable to noncontrolling interests increased $44 million at certain of our wind generation businesses as a result of a charge related to the potential future taxes that could be deemed due in the calculation of the hypothetical liquidation value of certain of our wind tax equity partnerships. Discontinued operations As further discussed in Note 21 Discontinued Operations and Held for Sale Businesses to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K, Discontinued Operations includes the results of five businesses: Ras Laffan, a generation business in Qatar (sold in October 2010); Barka, a generation business in Oman, (sold in August 2010); Lal Pir and Pak Gen, generation businesses in Pakistan, (sold in June 2010); and Jiaozuo, a generation business in China, (sold in December 2008). Prior periods have been restated to reflect these businesses within Discontinued Operations for all periods presented. In 2010, income from operations of discontinued businesses, net of tax and income attributable to noncontrolling interests, was $39 million and reflected the operations of our 55% stake in Ras Laffan, a combined cycle gas facility and water desalination plant in Qatar, our 35% stake in Barka, a combined cycle gas 148 Table of Contents facility and water desalination plant in Oman and our 55% stake in Lal Pir and Pak Gen, two oil-fired facilities in Pakistan. The sale of Lal Pir and Pak Gen closed in June 2010, resulting in additional impairment expense and a loss on the sale in 2010 of $14 million, net of tax and noncontrolling interests. The Barka plant was sold in August 2010, resulting in a gain on sale of $63 million, net of tax and noncontrolling interests. The sale of Ras Laffan closed in October 2010, resulting in a gain on sale of $6 million, net of tax. In 2009, income from operations of discontinued businesses, net of tax and income attributable to noncontrolling interests, was $54 million and reflected the operations of Ras Laffan, Barka, Lal Pir and Pak Gen. Loss on disposal of discontinued businesses, net of tax and loss attributable to noncontrolling interests was $105 million and represented the difference between the net book value of the Company interests in its Pakistan businesses and their estimated fair value. In 2008, income from operations of discontinued businesses, net of tax and income attributable to noncontrolling interests, was $60 million and reflected the operations of Ras Laffan, Barka, Lal Pir, Pak Gen and Jiaozuo, a coal-fired generation facility in China sold in December 2008. The Company received $73 million for its 70% interest in the business. The net gain on the disposition was $7 million. Critical Accounting Estimates The Consolidated Financial Statements of AES are prepared in conformity with GAAP, which requires the use of estimates, judgments and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the periods presented. AES significant accounting policies are described in Note 1 General and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K. An accounting estimate is considered critical if: the estimate requires management to make assumptions about matters that were highly uncertain at the time the estimate was made; different estimates reasonably could have been used; or the impact of the estimates and assumptions on financial condition or operating performance is material. Management believes that the accounting estimates employed are appropriate and the resulting balances are reasonable; however, actual results could materially differ from the original estimates, requiring adjustments to these balances in future periods. Management has discussed these critical accounting policies with the Audit Committee, as appropriate. Listed below are the Company most significant critical accounting estimates and assumptions used in the preparation of the Consolidated Financial Statements. Income Tax Reserves We are subject to income taxes in both the United States and numerous foreign jurisdictions. Our worldwide income tax provision requires significant judgment and is based on calculations and assumptions that are subject to examination by the Internal Revenue Service and other taxing authorities. The Company and certain of its subsidiaries are under examination by relevant taxing authorities for various tax years. The Company regularly assesses the potential outcome of these examinations in each of the tax jurisdictions when determining the adequacy of the provision for income taxes. Accounting guidance for uncertainty in income taxes prescribes a more-likely-than-not recognition threshold. Tax reserves have been established, which the Company believes to be adequate in relation to the potential for additional assessments. Once established, reserves are adjusted only when there is more information available or when an event occurs necessitating a change to the reserves. While the Company believes that the amounts of the tax estimates are reasonable, it is possible that the ultimate outcome of current or future examinations may exceed current reserves in amounts that could be material. 149 Table of Contents On December 17, 2010, President Obama signed into law the Tax Relief Unemployment Insurance Reauthorization and Job Creation Act of 2010 ( the Act ). The Act includes several provisions which provide for tax relief for businesses by extending certain tax benefits and credits, including the Subpart F exception for active financing income and the Controlled Foreign Corporation look-through provisions of Subpart F. This legislation resulted in a benefit for the Company 2010 provision for income taxes; however, there can be no assurances that the benefits of this legislation will extend beyond 2011, when it is currently scheduled to expire. Impairments Our accounting policies on goodwill and long-lived assets are described in detail in Note 1 General and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, Goodwill and Other Intangibles and Long-lived Assets, respectively, included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K. Goodwill is tested annually for impairment at the reporting unit level on October 1. In addition, goodwill is tested for impairment whenever events or circumstances indicate that it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit has been reduced below its carrying amount. A long-lived asset (asset group) will be tested for recoverability whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that its carrying amount may not be recoverable, i.e., the future undiscounted cash flows associated with the asset are less than its carrying amount. In the event that the carrying amount of the long-lived asset (asset group) is not recoverable, an impairment evaluation is performed, in which the fair value of the asset is estimated and compared to the carrying amount. Examples of indicators that would result in an impairment test for goodwill and a recoverability test for long-lived assets include, but are not limited to, a significant adverse change in the business climate, legislation changes or a change in the extent or manner in which a long-lived asset is being used or in its physical condition. Throughout the impairment evaluation process, management makes considerable judgments; however, the fair value determination is typically the most judgmental part of an impairment evaluation. The Company determines the fair value of a reporting unit or a long-lived asset (asset group) by applying the approaches prescribed under the fair value measurement accounting framework. Generally, the market approach and income approach are most relevant in the fair value measurement of our reporting units and long-lived assets; however, due to the lack of available relevant observable market information in many circumstances, the Company often relies on the income approach. The Company may engage an independent valuation firm to assist management with the valuation. The decision to engage an independent valuation firm considers all relevant facts and circumstances, including a cost/benefit analysis and the Company internal valuation knowledge of the long-lived asset (asset group) or business. The Company develops the underlying assumptions consistent with its internal budgets and forecasts for such valuations. Additionally, the Company uses an internal discounted cash flow valuation model (the DCF model ), based on the principles of present value techniques, to estimate the fair value of its reporting units or long-lived assets under the income approach. The DCF model estimates fair value by discounting our internal budgets and cash flow forecasts, adjusted to reflect market participant assumptions, to the extent necessary, at an appropriate discount rate. Management applies considerable judgment in selecting several input assumptions during the development of our internal budgets and cash flow forecasts. Examples of the input assumptions that our budgets and forecasts are sensitive to include macroeconomic factors such as growth rates, industry demand, inflation, exchange rates, power prices and commodity prices. Whenever appropriate, management obtains these input assumptions from observable market data sources and extrapolates the market information if an input assumption is not observable for the entire forecast period. Many of these input assumptions are dependent on other economic assumptions, which are often derived from statistical economic models with inherent limitations such as estimation differences. Further, several input assumptions are based on historical trends which often do not recur. The input assumptions most significant to our budgets and cash flows are based on expectations of macroeconomic factors which have been volatile recently. It is not uncommon that different market data sources have different views of the macroeconomic factors expectations and related assumptions. As a result, macroeconomic factors and related assumptions are often available in a narrow range; however, in some situations these ranges become wide and the use of a different set of input assumptions could produce significantly different budgets and cash flow forecasts. 150 Table of Contents A considerable amount of judgment is also applied in the estimation of the discount rate used in the DCF model. To the extent practical, inputs to the discount rate are obtained from market data sources (e.g., Bloomberg, Capital IQ, etc.). The Company selects and uses a set of publicly traded companies from the relevant industry to estimate the discount rate inputs. Management applies judgment in the selection of such companies based on its view of the most likely market participants. It is reasonably possible that the selection of a different set of likely market participants could produce different input assumptions and result in the use of a different discount rate. Fair value of a reporting unit or a long-lived asset (asset group) is sensitive to both input assumptions to our budgets and cash flow forecasts and the discount rate. Further, estimates of long-term growth and terminal value are often critical to the fair value determination. As part of the impairment evaluation process, management analyzes the sensitivity of fair value to various underlying assumptions. The level of scrutiny increases as the gap between fair value and carrying amount decreases. Changes in any of these assumptions could result in management reaching a different conclusion regarding the potential impairment, which could be material. Our impairment evaluations inherently involve uncertainties from uncontrollable events that could positively or negatively impact the anticipated future economic and operating conditions. Further discussion of the impairment charges recognized by the Company can be found within Management Discussion and Analysis, Consolidated Results of Operations Goodwill Impairment and Asset Impairment Expense and Note 19 Impairment Expense and Note 8 Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K. Fair Value Fair Value of Financial Instruments A significant number of the Company financial instruments are carried at fair value with changes in fair value recognized in earnings or other comprehensive income each period. The Company makes estimates regarding the valuation of assets and liabilities measured at fair value in preparing the Consolidated Financial Statements. These assets and liabilities include short and long-term investments in debt and equity securities, included in the balance sheet line items Short-term investments and Other assets (Noncurrent) , derivative assets, included in Other current assets and Other assets (Noncurrent) and derivative liabilities, included in Accrued and other liabilities (current) and Other long-term liabilities . The Company uses valuation techniques and methodologies that maximize the use of observable inputs and minimize the use of unobservable inputs. Where available, fair value is based on observable market prices or parameters or derived from such prices or parameters. Where observable prices are not available, valuation models are applied to estimate the fair value using the available observable inputs. The valuation techniques involve some level of management estimation and judgment, the degree of which is dependent on the price transparency for the instruments or market and the instruments complexity. Investments are generally fair valued based on quoted market prices or other observable market data such as interest rate indices. The Company investments are primarily certificates of deposit, government debt securities and money market funds. Derivatives are valued using observable data as inputs into internal valuation models. The Company derivatives primarily consist of interest rate swaps, foreign currency instruments, and commodity and embedded derivatives. Additional discussion regarding the nature of these financial instruments and valuation techniques can be found in Note 4 Fair Value in Item 8 of this Form 10-K. Accounting for Derivative Instruments and Hedging Activities We enter into various derivative transactions in order to hedge our exposure to certain market risks. We primarily use derivative instruments to manage our interest rate, commodity and foreign currency exposures. We do not enter into derivative transactions for trading purposes. In accordance with the accounting standards for derivatives and hedging, we recognize all derivatives as either assets or liabilities in the balance sheet and measure those instruments at fair value except where 151 Table of Contents derivatives qualify and are designated as normal purchase/normal sale transactions. Changes in fair value of derivatives are recognized in earnings unless specific hedge criteria are met. Income and expense related to derivative instruments are recognized in the same category as generated by the underlying asset or liability. The accounting standards for derivatives and hedging enable companies to designate qualifying derivatives as hedging instruments based on the exposure being hedged. These hedge designations include fair value hedges and cash flow hedges. Changes in the fair value of a derivative that is highly effective and is designated and qualifies as a fair value hedge, are recognized in earnings as offsets to the changes in fair value of the exposure being hedged. The Company has no fair value hedges at this time. Changes in the fair value of a derivative that is highly effective and is designated as and qualifies as a cash flow hedge, are deferred in accumulated other comprehensive income and are recognized into earnings as the hedged transactions occur. Any ineffectiveness is recognized in earnings immediately. For all hedge contracts, the Company provides formal documentation of the hedge and effectiveness testing in accordance with the accounting standards for derivatives and hedging. The fair value measurement accounting standard provides additional guidance on the definition of fair value and defines fair value as the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date, or exit price. The fair value measurement standard requires the Company to consider and reflect the assumptions of market participants in the fair value calculation. These factors include nonperformance risk (the risk that the obligation will not be fulfilled) and credit risk, both of the reporting entity (for liabilities) and of the counterparty (for assets). Due to the nature of the Company interest rate swaps, which are typically associated with non-recourse debt, credit risk for AES is evaluated at the subsidiary level rather than at the Parent Company level. Nonperformance risk on the Company derivative instruments is an adjustment to the initial asset/liability fair value position that is derived from internally developed valuation models that utilize observable market inputs. As a result of uncertainty, complexity and judgment, accounting estimates related to derivative accounting could result in material changes to our financial statements under different conditions or utilizing different assumptions. As a part of accounting for these derivatives, we make estimates concerning nonperformance, volatilities, market liquidity, future commodity prices, interest rates, credit ratings (both ours and our counterparty s) and exchange rates. The fair value of our derivative portfolio is generally determined using internal valuation models, most of which are based on observable market inputs including interest rate curves and forward and spot prices for currencies and commodities. The Company derives most of its financial instrument market assumptions from market efficient data sources (e.g., Bloomberg and Platt s). In some cases, where market data is not readily available, management uses comparable market sources and empirical evidence to derive market assumptions to determine a financial instrument fair value. In certain instances, the published curve may not extend through the remaining term of the contract and management must make assumptions to extrapolate the curve. Additionally, in the absence of quoted prices, we may rely on indicative pricing quotes from financial institutions to input into our valuation model for certain of our foreign currency swaps. These indicative pricing quotes do not constitute either a bid or ask price and therefore are not considered observable market data. For individual contracts, the use of different valuation models or assumptions could have a material effect on the calculated fair value. Fair Value of Nonfinancial Assets and Liabilities The Company adopted the fair value measurement accounting guidance for nonfinancial assets and liabilities effective January 1, 2009. The most significant of these estimates surround the fair value measurement of long-lived tangible and intangible assets when tested for impairment upon a triggering event or during the annual impairment evaluation for indefinite-lived intangible assets, including goodwill. These estimates include making assumptions regarding useful life, the impact of economic obsolescence and expected future cash flows. Additional factors are discussed above in the Impairments section. 152 Table of Contents Fair Value Hierarchy The Company uses valuation techniques and methodologies that maximize the use of observable inputs and minimize the use of unobservable inputs. Where available, fair value is based on observable market prices or parameters or derived from such prices or parameters. Where observable prices are not available, valuation models are applied to estimate the fair value using the available observable inputs. The valuation techniques involve some level of management estimation and judgment, the degree of which is dependent on the price transparency for the instruments or market and the instruments complexity. To increase consistency and enhance disclosure of the fair value of financial instruments, the fair value measurement standard creates a fair value hierarchy to prioritize the inputs used to measure fair value into three categories. A financial instrument level within the fair value hierarchy is based on the lowest level of input significant to the fair value measurement, where Level 1 is the highest and Level 3 is the lowest. For more information regarding the fair value hierarchy, see Note 1 General and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this Form 10-K. Regulatory Assets and Liabilities The Company accounts for certain of its regulated operations in accordance with the regulatory accounting standards. As a result, AES recognizes assets and liabilities that result from the regulated ratemaking process that would not be recognized under GAAP for non-regulated entities. Regulatory assets generally represent incurred costs that have been deferred because such costs are probable of future recovery through customer rates. Regulatory liabilities generally represent obligations to make refunds to customers for previous collections for costs that are not likely to be incurred or included in future rate initiatives. Management continually assesses whether the regulatory assets are probable of future recovery by considering factors such as applicable regulatory changes, recent rate orders applicable to other regulated entities and the status of any pending or potential deregulation legislation. If future recovery of costs ceases to be probable, any asset write-offs would be required to be recognized in operating income. New Accounting Pronouncements Adopted Effective January 1, 2010, we adopted new accounting provisions related to the following topics as a result of new accounting guidance issued by the Financial Accounting Standards Board ( FASB ). The financial statement impact of these new accounting pronouncements is included in Note 1 General and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K. Consolidations, Improvements to Financial Reporting by Enterprises Involved with Variable Interest Entities ( VIEs ). The new accounting guidance on the consolidation of VIEs requires an entity to qualitatively, rather than quantitatively, assess the determination of the primary beneficiary of a VIE. This determination is based on whether the entity has the power to direct the activities that most significantly impact the economic performance of the VIE and the obligation to absorb losses or the right to receive benefits of the VIE that could potentially be significant to the VIE. Other key changes include: a requirement for the ongoing reconsideration of the primary beneficiary, the criteria for determining whether service provider or decision maker contracts are variable interests, the consideration of kick-out and removal rights in determining whether an entity is a VIE, the types of events that trigger the reassessment of whether an entity is a VIE and the expansion of the disclosures previously required. The adoption of the new accounting guidance on the consolidation of VIEs resulted in the deconsolidation of certain immaterial VIEs previously consolidated. Additionally, assets, liabilities and operating results of two of the Company VIEs, previously accounted for under the equity method of accounting, were required to be consolidated. Cartagena, a 71% owned generation business in Spain, and Cili, a 51% owned generation business in China, were consolidated under the new guidance. Accounting for Transfers of Financial Assets. The new accounting guidance on transfers of financial assets, among other things: removes the concept of a qualifying special purpose entity; introduces the 153 Table of Contents concept of participating interests and specifies that in order to qualify for sale accounting a partial transfer of a financial asset or a group of financial assets should meet the definition of a participating interest; clarifies that an entity should consider all arrangements made contemporaneously with or in contemplation of a transfer and requires enhanced disclosures to provide financial statement users with greater transparency about transfers of financial assets and a transferor continuing involvement with transfers of financial assets accounted for as sales. Upon adoption on January 1, 2010, the Company recognized $40 million as accounts receivable and as an associated secured borrowing on its Consolidated Balance Sheet; both of which have since increased to $50 million as of December 31, 2010, as additional interests in receivables have been sold. While securitizing these accounts receivable through IPL Funding, a special purpose entity, IPL, the Company integrated utility in Indianapolis, had previously recognized the transaction as a sale, but had not recognized the accounts receivable and secured borrowing on its balance sheet. Accounting Pronouncements Issued But Not Yet Effective The following accounting standards have been issued, but as of December 31, 2010 are not yet effective for and have not been adopted by AES. Accounting Standards Update ( ASU ) No. 2010-28, Intangibles Goodwill and Other (Topic 350), When to Perform Step 2 of the Goodwill Impairment Test for Reporting Units with Zero or Negative Carrying Amounts In December 2010, the FASB issued ASU No. 2010-28, which amends the accounting guidance related to goodwill. The amendments in ASU No. 2010-28 modify Step 1 of the goodwill impairment test for reporting units with zero or negative carrying amounts. For those reporting units, an entity is required to perform Step 2 of the goodwill impairment test if it is more likely than not that a goodwill impairment exists, eliminating an entity ability to assert that a reporting unit is not required to perform Step 2 because the carrying amount of the reporting unit is zero or negative despite the existence of qualitative factors that indicate the goodwill is more likely than not impaired. In determining whether it is more likely than not that a goodwill impairment exists, an entity should consider whether there are any adverse qualitative factors indicating that an impairment may exist. ASU No. 2010-28 is effective for fiscal years, and interim periods within those years, beginning after December 15, 2010, or January 1, 2011 for AES. Early adoption is prohibited. The adoption is not expected to have a material impact on the Company financial position, results of operations or cash flows. Capital Resources and Liquidity Overview. In November 2009, the Company announced a binding stock purchase agreement with CIC, to sell 125.5 million shares of AES stock to CIC, representing a 15% ownership stake in the Company. The transaction closed in March 2010 and generated $1.58 billion of new equity to fund future growth opportunities. During 2010, the Company redeemed $690 million aggregate principal of its outstanding 8.75% Second Priority Senior Secured Notes due 2013. The Notes were redeemed in May and October 2010 at a redemption price equal to 101.458% of the principal amount redeemed. As of December 31, 2010, the Company had unrestricted cash and cash equivalents of $2.6 billion, of which approximately $1.1 billion is held at the Parent Company and qualified holding companies, and short term investments of $1.7 billion. In addition, we had restricted cash and debt service reserves of $1.3 billion. The Company also had non-recourse and recourse aggregate principal amounts of debt outstanding of $15.1 billion and $4.6 billion, respectively. Of the approximately $2.6 billion of our short-term non-recourse debt, $1.2 billion is presented as current because it is due in the next twelve months and $1.4 billion relates to defaulted debt. We expect such current maturities will be repaid from net cash provided by operating activities of the subsidiary to which the debt relates or through opportunistic refinancing activity or some combination thereof. Approximately $463 million of our recourse debt matures within the next twelve months, which we expect to repay using cash on hand at the Parent Company or through net cash provided by operating activities. See further discussion of Parent Company Liquidity below. 154 Table of Contents The Company has two types of debt reported on its consolidated balance sheet: non-recourse and recourse debt. Non-recourse debt is used to fund investments and capital expenditures for construction and acquisition of our electric power plants, wind projects and distribution facilities at our subsidiaries. Non-recourse debt is generally secured by the capital stock, physical assets, contracts and cash flows of the related subsidiary. The default risk is limited to the respective business and is without recourse to the Parent Company and other subsidiaries. Recourse debt is direct borrowings by the Parent Company and is used to fund development, construction or acquisitions, including funding for equity investments or to provide loans to the Parent Company subsidiaries or affiliates. This Parent Company debt is with recourse to the Parent Company and is structurally subordinated to the debt of the Parent Company subsidiaries or affiliates, except to the extent such subsidiaries or affiliates guarantee the Parent Company debt. We rely mainly on long-term debt obligations to fund our construction activities. We have, to the extent available at acceptable terms, utilized non-recourse debt to fund a significant portion of the capital expenditures and investments required to construct and acquire our electric power plants, distribution companies and related assets. Our non-recourse financing is designed to limit cross default risk to the Parent Company or other subsidiaries and affiliates. Our non-recourse long-term debt is a combination of fixed and variable interest rate instruments. Generally, a portion or all of the variable rate debt is fixed through the use of interest rate swaps. In addition, the debt is typically denominated in the currency that matches the currency of the revenue expected to be generated from the benefiting project, thereby reducing currency risk. In certain cases, the currency is matched through the use of derivative instruments. The majority of our non-recourse debt is funded by international commercial banks, with debt capacity supplemented by multilaterals and local regional banks. For more information on our long-term debt, see Note 10 Debt of the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8. of this Form 10-K. Given our long-term debt obligations, the Company is subject to interest rate risk on debt balances that accrue interest at variable rates. When possible, the Company will borrow funds at fixed interest rates or hedge its variable rate debt to fix its interest costs on such obligations. In addition, the Company has historically tried to maintain at least 70% of its consolidated long-term obligations at fixed interest rates, including fixing the interest rate through the use of interest rate swaps. These efforts apply to the notional amount of the swaps compared to the amount of related underlying debt. While the Company believes that this represents an economic hedge, the Company is required to mark-to-market all of these interest rate swaps and other derivatives. Presently, the Parent Company only direct exposure to variable interest rate debt relates to indebtedness under its senior secured credit facility. On a consolidated basis, of the Company $19.7 billion of total debt outstanding as of December 31, 2010, approximately $5.0 billion bore interest at variable rates that were not subject to a derivative instrument which fixed the interest rate. In addition to utilizing non-recourse debt at a subsidiary level when available, the Parent Company provides a portion, or in certain instances all, of the remaining long-term financing or credit required to fund development, construction or acquisition of a particular project. These investments have generally taken the form of equity investments or intercompany loans, which are subordinated to the project non-recourse loans. We generally obtain the funds for these investments from our cash flows from operations, proceeds from the sales of assets and/or the proceeds from our issuances of debt, common stock and other securities. Similarly, in certain of our businesses, the Parent Company may provide financial guarantees or other credit support for the benefit of counterparties who have entered into contracts for the purchase or sale of electricity, equipment or other services with our subsidiaries or lenders. In such circumstances, if a business defaults on its payment or supply obligation, the Parent Company will be responsible for the business obligations up to the amount provided for in the relevant guarantee or other credit support. At December 31, 2010, the Parent Company had provided outstanding financial and performance-related guarantees or other credit support commitments to or for the benefit of our businesses, which were limited by the terms of the agreements, of approximately $415 million in aggregate (excluding investment commitments and those collateralized by letters of credit and other obligations discussed below). 155 Table of Contents As a result of the Parent Company below investment grade rating, counterparties may be unwilling to accept our general unsecured commitments to provide credit support. Accordingly, with respect to both new and existing commitments, the Parent Company may be required to provide some other form of assurance, such as a letter of credit, to backstop or replace our credit support. The Parent Company may not be able to provide adequate assurances to such counterparties. To the extent we are required and able to provide letters of credit or other collateral to such counterparties, this will reduce the amount of credit available to us to meet our other liquidity needs. At December 31, 2010, we had $85 million in letters of credit outstanding, which operate to guarantee performance relating to certain project development activities and business operations. These letters of credit were provided under the senior secured credit facility. During the year ended December 31, 2010, the Company paid letter of credit fees ranging from 3.19% to 3.75% per annum on the outstanding amounts. We expect to continue to seek, where possible, non-recourse debt financing in connection with the assets or businesses that we or our affiliates may develop, construct or acquire. However, depending on local and global market conditions and the unique characteristics of individual businesses, non-recourse debt may not be available on economically attractive terms or at all. See Global Economic Conditions discussion above. If we decide not to provide any additional funding or credit support to a subsidiary project that is under construction or has near-term debt payment obligations and that subsidiary is unable to obtain additional non-recourse debt, such subsidiary may become insolvent, and we may lose our investment in that subsidiary. Additionally, if any of our subsidiaries lose a significant customer, the subsidiary may need to withdraw from a project or restructure the non-recourse debt financing. If we or the subsidiary choose not to proceed with a project or are unable to successfully complete a restructuring of the non-recourse debt, we may lose our investment in that subsidiary. Many of our subsidiaries depend on timely and continued access to capital markets to manage their liquidity needs. The inability to raise capital on favorable terms, to refinance existing indebtedness or to fund operations and other commitments during times of political or economic uncertainty may have material adverse effects on the financial condition and results of operations of those subsidiaries. In addition, changes in the timing of tariff increases or delays in the regulatory determinations under the relevant concessions could affect the cash flows and results of operations of our businesses. As of December 31, 2010, the Company had approximately $347 million of trade accounts receivable related to certain of its generation and utility businesses in Latin America classified as other long-term assets. These consist primarily of trade accounts receivable that, pursuant to amended agreements or government resolutions, have collection periods that extend beyond December 31, 2011, or one year past the balance sheet date. The Company is actively collecting these receivables and does not expect any significant collection issues. Additionally, the current portion of these trade accounts receivable was $101 million at December 31, 2010. Capital Expenditures The Company spent $2.3 billion, $2.5 billion and $2.9 billion on capital expenditures in 2010, 2009 and 2008, respectively. A significant majority of these costs were funded with non-recourse debt consistent with our financial strategy. At December 31, 2010, the Company had a total of $432 million of availability under long-term non-recourse construction credit facilities. As more fully described in Key Trends and Uncertainties above, we have taken steps to decrease the amount of new discretionary capital spending. We expect to continue funding projects that are currently in the construction phase using existing capital provided by these non-recourse credit facilities as supplemented by internally generated cash flows, Parent Company liquidity, contribution from existing or new partners and other funding sources. As a result, property, plant and equipment and long-term non-recourse debt are expected to increase over the next few years even though the rate of discretionary spending has decreased. While we believe we have the resources to continue funding the projects in construction, there can be no assurances that we will continue to fund all these existing construction efforts. As of December 31, 2010, the Company had $66 million of commitments to invest in subsidiaries under construction and to purchase related equipment, excluding $26 million of such obligations already included in the 156 Table of Contents letters of credit discussed above. The Company expects to fund these net investment commitments in 2011. The exact payment schedules will be dictated by the construction milestones. We expect to fund these commitments from a combination of current liquidity and internally generated Parent Company cash flow. Environmental Capital Expenditures The Company continues to assess the possible need for capital expenditures associated with international, federal, regional and state regulation of GHG emissions from electric power generation facilities. Currently in the United States there is no Federal legislation establishing mandatory GHG emissions reduction programs (including CO 2 ) affecting the electric power generating facilities of the Company subsidiaries. There are numerous state programs regulating GHG emissions from electric power generation facilities and there is a possibility that federal GHG legislation will be enacted within the next several years. Further, the EPA has adopted regulations pertaining to GHG emissions and has announced its intention to propose new regulations for electric generating units under Section 111 of the CAA. The EPA regulations and any subsequent Federal legislation, if enacted, may place significant costs on GHG emissions from fossil fuel-fired electric power generation facilities, particularly coal-fired facilities, and in order to comply, CO 2 emitting facilities may be required to purchase additional GHG emissions allowances or offsets under cap-and-trade programs, pay a carbon tax or install new emission reduction equipment to capture or reduce the amount of GHG emitted from the facilities, in the event that reliable technology to do so is developed. The capital expenditures required to comply with any future GHG legislation or any GHG regulations could be significant and unless such costs can be passed on to customers or counterparties, such regulations could impair the profitability of some of the electric power generation facilities operated by our subsidiaries or render certain of them uneconomical to operate, either of which could have a material adverse effect on our consolidated results of operations and financial condition. With respect to our operations outside the United States, certain of the businesses operated by the Company subsidiaries are subject to compliance with EU ETS and the Kyoto Protocol in certain countries and other country-specific programs to regulate GHG emissions. To date, compliance with the Kyoto Protocol and EU ETS has not had a material adverse effect on the Company consolidated results of operations, financial condition and cash flows because of, among other factors, the cost of GHG emission allowances and/or the ability of our businesses to pass the cost of purchasing such allowances on to customers or counterparties. However, in the event that such counterparties or regulatory authorities challenge our ability to pass these costs on, there can be no assurance that the Company and/or the relevant subsidiary would prevail in any such dispute. Furthermore, even if the Company and/or the relevant subsidiary does prevail, it would be subject to the cost and administrative burden associated with such dispute. As discussed in Item 1. Business Regulatory Matters Environmental and Land Use Regulations , in the United States there presently is no federal legislation establishing mandatory GHG emission reduction programs. In 2010, the Company subsidiaries operated businesses which had total approximate CO 2 emissions of 77.2 million metric tonnes (ownership adjusted). Approximately 40 million metric tonnes of the 77.2 million metric tonnes were emitted in the United States (both figures ownership adjusted). Approximately 11.3 million metric tonnes were emitted in United States states participating in the RGGI. We believe that legislative or regulatory actions, if enacted, may require a material increase in capital expenditures at our subsidiaries. In the future the actual impact on our subsidiaries capital expenditures from any potential federal program to regulate and reduce GHG emissions, if enacted, and the state and regional programs developed or in the process of development, or any EPA regulation of GHG emissions, will depend on a number of factors, including among others, the GHG reductions required under any such legislation or regulations, the cost of emissions reduction equipment, the price and availability of offsets, the extent to which our subsidiaries would be entitled to receive GHG emission allowances without having to purchase them, the quantity of allowances which our subsidiaries would have to purchase, the price of allowances, and our subsidiaries ability to recover or pass-through costs incurred to comply with any legislative or regulatory requirements that are ultimately imposed and the use of market-based compliance options such as cap-and-trade programs. 157 Table of Contents Income Taxes We recognized tax expense of $307 million for the year ended December 31, 2010, while our cash payments for income taxes, net of refunds, totaled $698 million. The difference resulted primarily from impairment charges recognized at certain subsidiaries in the United States, for which we recognized a benefit in our domestic tax provision. As a result, global cash tax payments exceeded the consolidated tax provision. Consolidated Cash Flows At December 31, 2010, cash and cash equivalents increased $772 million from December 31, 2009 to $2.6 billion. The increase in cash and cash equivalents was due to $3.5 billion of cash provided by operating activities, $2.0 billion of cash used for investing activities, $706 million of cash used for financing activities and the favorable effect of foreign currency exchange rates on cash of $8 million. At December 31, 2009, cash and cash equivalents increased $917 million from December 31, 2008 to $1.8 billion. The increase in cash and cash equivalents was due to $2.2 billion of cash provided by operating activities, $1.9 billion of cash used for investing activities, $610 million of cash provided by financing activities and the favorable effect of foreign currency exchange rates on cash of $22 million. $ Change 2010 2009 2008 2010 vs. 2009 2009 vs. 2008 (in millions) Net cash provided by operating activities $ 3,510 $ 2,202 $ 2,160 $ 1,308 $ 42 Net cash used in investing activities $ 2,040 $ 1,917 $ 3,581 $ 123 $ (1,664 ) Net cash (used in) provided by financing activities $ (706 ) $ 610 $ 362 $ (1,316 ) $ 248 Operating Activities Net cash provided by operating activities increased $1.3 billion, or 59%, to $3.5 billion during 2010 compared to 2009. This net increase was primarily due to the following: an increase of $837 million at our Latin American Utilities businesses due to increased tax payments in 2009 associated with a tax amnesty program of $326 million, higher working capital requirements during 2009 related to payments on the settlement of swap agreements of $65 million and in 2010, a $50 million decrease in employer contributions to pension plans and lower payments for contingencies; an increase of $215 million at our Latin American Generation businesses due to the higher gross margin in 2010 combined with improved working capital mainly as a result of higher collections of value added taxes and accounts receivable; an increase of $99 million at Masinloc in the Philippines due to higher gross margin; and an increase of $58 million as a result of our consolidation of Cartagena in 2010 and the acquisition of Ballylumford in Northern Ireland. These increases were partially offset by: a decrease of $136 million in operating cash flows from discontinued operations of businesses sold in 2010 compared to 2009. In 2010, net cash provided by operating activities of businesses sold was $33 million and will not recur in 2011. In 2010 the increase in net cash provided by operating activities at our Latin American Utilities businesses included several items such as the tax amnesty program and settlement of swap agreements, as described above, that are not expected to recur. In addition, 2010 net cash provided by operating activities benefited from the one time cash savings related to the utilization of tax credits received as a result of the REFIS program. As such, the Company does not expect the trend of an increase in net cash provided by operating activities realized in 2010 to continue in 2011. 158 Table of Contents Investing Activities Net cash used for investing activities increased $123 million, or 6%, to $2.0 billion during 2010 compared to 2009. This increase was largely attributable to the following: an increase in the purchase of short-term investments of $1.6 billion during 2010 compared to 2009 primarily due to the investment of cash proceeds from debt issuances at our Brazilian subsidiaries and the purchase of time deposits at Gener in 2010. Purchases were offset by an increase in sales of short-term investments of $1.3 billion mainly due to the use of proceeds from investments for the repayment of debt instruments and dividend distributions at our Brazilian subsidiaries and the sales of time deposits at Gener; an increase of $406 million in funding requirements for restricted cash balances during 2010 compared to 2009. During 2010, $104 million of funds were transferred to restricted cash balances while during 2009, $302 million was transferred out of restricted cash; an increase of $254 million for acquisitions, net of cash acquired, primarily due to $138 million related to the acquisition of Ballylumford in Northern Ireland, $65 million related to the purchase of three wind development pipelines in the U.K. and Poland, $35 million related to the acquisition of JHRH, and $11 million related to the buyout of noncontrolling interests at Changuinola; an increase of $241 million in debt service reserves during 2010 compared to 2009. During 2010, $56 million of funds were transferred to debt service reserves while during 2009, $185 million was utilized for debt maturities; partially offset by an increase of $593 million in proceeds from the sale of businesses primarily due to proceeds of $226 million related to the sale in October 2010 of Ras Laffan in Qatar, $170 million related to the sale in August 2010 of Barka in Oman, the final settlement proceeds of $99 million received in January 2010 from the termination of a management agreement with Kazakhmys in Kazakhstan related to Ekibastuz and Maikuben which were sold in May 2008, and the net proceeds from the sale of Lal Pir and Pak Gen in Pakistan in June 2010 of $100 million; a decrease of $210 million in capital expenditures to $2.3 billion primarily due to a decrease in expenditures of $298 million at Gener and $250 million at our Europe Wind generation projects. These decreases were partially offset by a net increase in capital expenditures of $261 million at our Brazilian subsidiaries, $66 million at Maritza in Bulgaria, and $16 million at our U.S. Wind generation projects; and an increase of $132 million in proceeds related to the repayment of the loan receivable from a wind development project in Brazil. There were no proceeds from loan repayments during 2009. Financing Activities Net cash used for financing activities increased $1,316 million, or 216%, to $706 million during 2010 compared to net cash provided by financing activities of $610 million during 2009. This increase was primarily attributable to the following: a $1.7 billion increase in repayments of recourse and non-recourse debt, predominately due to increases of $760 million of recourse debt repayments at the Parent Company, $706 million at our Brazilian businesses, $279 million at our businesses in the Dominican Republic, $55 million at Masinloc in the Philippines, $44 million at New York, $40 million at our European wind businesses, $31 million at Chigen and $30 million at Cartagena, partially offset by decreases of $132 million at IPALCO and $115 at Armenia Mountain; a $560 million decrease in proceeds from issuances of recourse and non-recourse debt primarily due to decreases of $503 million of recourse debt at the Parent Company, $286 million at Gener, $209 million at Armenia Mountain , $208 million at our European wind businesses, $123 million at Sonel and $122 million at IPALCO, partially offset by increases of $604 million at our Brazilian businesses and $294 million at our businesses in the Dominican Republic; 159 Table of Contents a $399 million increase in distributions to noncontrolling interests, primarily due to $245 million at our Brazilian businesses, $84 million related to distributions in connection with the sale of discontinued operations and $69 million at Armenia Mountain; a $190 million decrease in contributions from noncontrolling interests primarily due to a reduction of $117 million at Armenia Mountain and $71 million at Gener; and a $99 million acquisition of treasury stock. These decreases were partially offset by: a $1.6 billion issuance of common stock net of transaction costs to CIC; and a $67 million increase in net borrowings under revolving credit facilities primarily due to decreased repayments attributable to discontinued operations sold in 2010. Contractual Obligations A summary of our contractual obligations, commitments and other liabilities as of December 31, 2010 is presented in the table below (in millions): Contractual Obligations Total Less than 1 year 1-3 years 4-5 years 5 years and more Other Footnote Reference (10) Debt Obligations (1) $ 19,653 $ 3,026 $ 1,591 $ 3,963 $ 11,073 $ 10 Interest Payments on Long- Term Debt (2) 9,533 1,358 2,531 2,055 3,589 n/a Capital Lease Obligations (3) 206 17 26 21 142 11 Operating Lease Obligations (4) 919 56 111 104 648 11 Sale/Leaseback Obligations (5) 664 43 90 94 437 11 Electricity Obligations (6) 52,160 3,055 6,118 5,211 37,776 11 Fuel Obligations (7) 8,871 1,587 1,887 1,006 4,391 11 Other Purchase Obligations (8) 21,040 1,628 2,603 2,752 14,057 11 Other Long-term Liabilities Reflected on AES Consolidated Balance Sheet under GAAP (9) 625 4 93 94 298 136 n/a Total $ 113,671 $ 10,774 $ 15,050 $ 15,300 $ 72,411 $ 136 (1) Includes recourse and non-recourse debt presented on the Consolidated Balance Sheet. Non-recourse debt borrowings are not a direct obligation of AES, the Parent Company. Recourse debt represents the direct borrowings of AES, the Parent Company. See Note 10 Debt to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K which provides additional disclosure regarding these obligations. These amounts exclude capital lease obligations which are included in the capital lease category, see (3) below. (2) Interest payments are estimated based on final maturity dates of debt securities outstanding at December 31, 2010 and do not reflect anticipated future refinancing, early redemptions or new debt issuances. Variable rate interest obligations are estimated based on rates as of December 31, 2010. (3) Several AES subsidiaries have leases for operating and office equipment and vehicles that are classified as capital leases within Property, Plant and Equipment. Minimum contractual obligations include $127 million of imputed interest. (4) The Company was obligated under long-term noncancelable operating leases, primarily for office rental and site leases. These amounts exclude amounts related to the sale/leaseback discussed below in item (5). (5) Sale/Leaseback Obligations represent a sales/leaseback with operating lease treatment at one of our New York subsidiaries. (6) Operating subsidiaries of the Company have entered into contracts for the purchase of electricity from third parties. 160 Table of Contents (7) Operating subsidiaries of the Company have entered into fuel purchase contracts subject to termination only in certain limited circumstances. (8) Amounts relate to other contractual obligations where the Company has an enforceable and legally binding agreement to purchase goods or services that specifies all significant terms, including: quantity, pricing, and approximate timing. These amounts include planned capital expenditures that are contractually obligated. (9) These amounts do not include current liabilities on the Consolidated Balance Sheet except for the current portion of uncertain tax obligations. Noncurrent uncertain tax obligations are reflected in the Other column of the table above as the Company is not able to reasonably estimate the timing of the future payments. In addition, the amounts do not include: (1) regulatory liabilities (See Note 9 Regulatory Assets and Liabilities), (2) contingencies (See Note 12 Contingencies), (3) pension and other post retirement employee benefit liabilities (see Note 13 Benefit Plans) or (4) any taxes (See Note 20 Income Taxes) except for uncertain tax obligations, as the Company is not able to reasonably estimate the timing of future payments. See the indicated notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K for additional information on the items excluded. Derivatives (See Note 6 Derivative Instruments and Hedging Activities) and incentive compensation are excluded as the Company is not able to reasonably estimate the timing or amount of the future payments. (10) For further information see the note referenced below in Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data . Parent Company Liquidity The following discussion of Parent Company Liquidity has been included because we believe it is a useful measure of the liquidity available to The AES Corporation, or the Parent Company, given the non-recourse nature of most of our indebtedness. Parent Company liquidity as outlined below is a non-GAAP measure and should not be construed as an alternative to cash and cash equivalents which are determined in accordance with GAAP, as a measure of liquidity. Cash and cash equivalents are disclosed in the Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows and the Parent Only Unconsolidated Statements of Cash Flows in Schedule I of this Form 10-K. Parent Company liquidity may differ from similarly titled measures used by other companies. The principal sources of liquidity at the Parent Company level are: dividends and other distributions from our subsidiaries, including refinancing proceeds; proceeds from debt and equity financings at the Parent Company level, including availability under our credit facilities; and proceeds from asset sales. Cash requirements at the Parent Company level are primarily to fund: interest; principal repayments of debt; acquisitions; construction commitments; other equity commitments; equity repurchases; taxes; and Parent Company overhead and development costs. The Company defines Parent Company Liquidity as cash available to the Parent Company plus available borrowings under existing credit facilities. The cash held at qualified holding companies represents cash sent to subsidiaries of the Company domiciled outside of the U.S. Such subsidiaries have no contractual restrictions on their ability to send cash to the Parent Company. Parent Company Liquidity is reconciled to its most directly 161 Table of Contents comparable U.S. GAAP financial measure, cash and cash equivalents at December 31, 2010 and 2009 as follows: Parent Company Liquidity 2010 2009 (in millions) Cash and cash equivalents $ 2,554 $ 1,782 Less: Cash and cash equivalents at subsidiaries (1,432 ) (1,105 ) Parent and qualified holding companies cash and cash equivalents 1,122 677 Commitments under Parent credit facilities 800 785 Less: Borrowings and letters of credit under the credit facilities (85 ) (204 ) Borrowings available under Parent credit facilities 715 581 Total Parent Company Liquidity $ 1,837 $ 1,258 Recourse Debt Transactions: During 2010, the Company redeemed $690 million aggregate principal of its 8.75% Second Priority Senior Secured Notes due 2013 ( the 2013 Notes ). The 2013 Notes were redeemed at a redemption price equal to 101.458% of the principal amount redeemed. The Company recognized a pre-tax loss on the redemption of the 2013 Notes of $15 million for the year ended December 31, 2010, which is included in Other expense in the accompanying Consolidated Statement of Operations. On July 29, 2010, the Company entered into an Amendment No. 2 (the Amendment No. 2 ) to the Fourth Amended and Restated Credit and Reimbursement Agreement, dated as of July 29, 2008, among the Company, various subsidiary guarantors and various lending institutions (the Existing Credit Agreement ) that amends and restates the Existing Credit Agreement (as so amended and restated by the Amendment No. 2, the Fifth Amended and Restated Credit Agreement ). The Fifth Amended and Restated Credit Agreement adjusted the terms and conditions of the Existing Credit Agreement, including the following changes: the aggregate commitment for the revolving credit loan facility was increased to $800 million; the final maturity date of the revolving credit loan facility was extended to January 29, 2015; there were changes to the facility fee applicable to the revolving credit loan facility; the interest rate margin applicable to the revolving credit loan facility is now based on the credit rating assigned to the loans under the credit agreement, with pricing currently at LIBOR + 3.00%; there is an undrawn fee of 0.625% per annum; the Company may incur a combination of additional term loan and revolver commitments so long as total term loan and revolver commitments (including those currently outstanding) do not exceed $1.4 billion; and the negative pledge (i.e., a cap on first lien debt) of $3.0 billion. Recourse Debt: Our recourse debt at year-end was approximately $4.6 billion and $5.5 billion in 2010 and 2009, respectively. The following table sets forth our Parent Company contingent contractual obligations as of December 31, 2010: Contingent contractual obligations Amount Number of Agreements Maximum Exposure Range for Each Agreement (in millions) (in millions) Guarantees $ 415 24 <$ 1 - $62 Letters of credit under the senior secured credit facility 85 30 <$ 1 - $26 Total $ 500 54 162 Table of Contents As of December 31, 2010, the Company had $66 million of commitments to invest in subsidiaries under construction and to purchase related equipment, excluding $26 million of such obligations already included in the letters of credit discussed above. The Company expects to fund these net investment commitments in 2011. The exact payment schedules will be dictated by the construction milestones. We expect to fund these commitments from a combination of current liquidity and internally generated Parent Company cash flow. We have a diverse portfolio of performance related contingent contractual obligations. These obligations are designed to cover potential risks and only require payment if certain targets are not met or certain contingencies occur. The risks associated with these obligations include change of control, construction cost overruns, subsidiary default, political risk, tax indemnities, spot market power prices, sponsor support and liquidated damages under power sales agreements for projects in development, in operation and under construction. While we do not expect that we will be required to fund any material amounts under these contingent contractual obligations during 2011 or beyond, many of the events which would give rise to such obligations are beyond our control. We can provide no assurance that we will be able to fund our obligations under these contingent contractual obligations if we are required to make substantial payments thereunder. While we believe that our sources of liquidity will be adequate to meet our needs for the foreseeable future, this belief is based on a number of material assumptions, including, without limitation, assumptions about our ability to access the capital markets (see Key Trends and Uncertainties and Global Economic Conditions ), the operating and financial performance of our subsidiaries, currency exchange rates, power market pool prices, and the ability of our subsidiaries to pay dividends. In addition, our subsidiaries ability to declare and pay cash dividends to us (at the Parent Company level) is subject to certain limitations contained in loans, governmental provisions and other agreements. We can provide no assurance that these sources will be available when needed or that the actual cash requirements will not be greater than anticipated. We have met our interim needs for shorter-term and working capital financing at the Parent Company level with our senior secured credit facility. See Item 1A. Risk Factors, The AES Corporation is a holding company and its ability to make payments on its outstanding indebtedness, including its public debt securities, is dependent upon the receipt of funds from its subsidiaries by way of dividends, fees, interest, loans or otherwise . of this Form 10-K. Various debt instruments at the Parent Company level, including our senior secured credit facility, contain certain restrictive covenants. The covenants provide for, among other items: limitations on other indebtedness, liens, investments and guarantees; limitations on dividends, stock repurchases and other equity transactions; restrictions and limitations on mergers and acquisitions, sales of assets, leases, transactions with affiliates and off-balance sheet and derivative arrangements; maintenance of certain financial ratios; and financial and other reporting requirements. As of December 31, 2010, we were in compliance with these covenants at the Parent Company level. Non-Recourse Debt: While the lenders under our non-recourse debt financings generally do not have direct recourse to the Parent Company, defaults thereunder can still have important consequences for our results of operations and liquidity, including, without limitation: reducing our cash flows as the subsidiary will typically be prohibited from distributing cash to the Parent Company during the time period of any default; triggering our obligation to make payments under any financial guarantee, letter of credit or other credit support we have provided to or on behalf of such subsidiary; 163 Table of Contents causing us to record a loss in the event the lender forecloses on the assets; and triggering defaults in our outstanding debt at the Parent Company. For example, our senior secured credit facilities and outstanding debt securities at the Parent Company include events of default for certain bankruptcy related events involving material subsidiaries. In addition, our revolving credit agreement at the Parent Company includes events of default related to payment defaults and accelerations of outstanding debt of material subsidiaries. Some of our subsidiaries are currently in default with respect to all or a portion of their outstanding indebtedness. The total non-recourse debt classified as current in the accompanying Consolidated Balance Sheets amounts to $2.6 billion. The portion of current debt related to such defaults was $1.4 billion at December 31, 2010, all of which was non-recourse debt related to four subsidiaries Maritza, Sonel, Kelanitissa and Aixi. None of the subsidiaries that are currently in default are subsidiaries that met the applicable definition of materiality under AES corporate debt agreements as of December 31, 2010 in order for such defaults to trigger an event of default or permit acceleration under such indebtedness. However, as a result of additional dispositions of assets, other significant reductions in asset carrying values or other matters in the future that may impact our financial position and results of operations or the financial position of the individual subsidiary, it is possible that one or more of these subsidiaries could fall within the definition of a material subsidiary and thereby upon an acceleration trigger an event of default and possible acceleration of the indebtedness under the AES Parent Company outstanding debt securities. Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements In May 1999, our subsidiary in New York acquired six electric generating plants from New York State Electric and Gas. Concurrently, the subsidiary sold two of the plants to unrelated third parties for $666 million and simultaneously entered into a leasing arrangement with the unrelated parties. In May 2007, the subsidiary purchased 37.5% interest in a trust estate that holds the leased plants. Future minimum lease commitments under the lease agreement have been reduced by the subsidiary interest in the plants. We have accounted for this sale/leaseback transaction as an operating lease. We amortize the off-balance sheet lease obligation reduced by the subsidiary interest over the life of the lease, which resulted in the recognition of expense of $34 million for each of the years ended December 31, 2010, 2009 and 2008, respectively. AES is not subject to any additional liabilities or contingencies if the arrangement terminates and we believe that the dissolution of the off-balance sheet arrangement would have minimal effects on our operating cash flows. The terms of Eastern Energy credit facility include restrictive covenants such as the maintenance of certain coverage ratios. Historically, the plants have satisfied the restrictive covenants of the credit facility; however as a result of the continued pressure on energy prices and negative forecasted operating cash flow and losses previously discussed under Key Trends and Uncertainties , management does not believe that cash flow from operations, together with amounts available under existing credit facilities, will be sufficient to cover expected capital requirements over the terms of the leases. Management is exploring revenue enhancements as well as reviewing cost and debt structure for meaningful reductions that could be implemented in the future; however, in the event of a default Eastern Energy could be subject to full payment of the outstanding principal, accrued interest and termination costs under its lease arrangements and existing $200 million credit facility. In addition, the subsidiary lessor could be subject to full payment of the outstanding principal, accrued interest and make-whole premiums under its bond indenture. Also, a default by Eastern Energy or its related subsidiaries could result in the loss of AES ownership interest in Eastern Energy and related subsidiaries. See Note 11 Commitments to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K for further discussion of this transaction. 164 Table of Contents 
