CIK: 874766
Company Name: HARTFORD FINANCIAL SERVICES GROUP INC DE
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2005-02-28


Item 7. MANAGEMENT S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS (Dollar amounts in millions, except for per share data, unless otherwise stated) Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations ( MD&A ) addresses the financial condition of The Hartford Financial Services Group, Inc. and its subsidiaries (collectively, The Hartford or the Company ) as of December 31, 2004, compared with December 31, 2003, and its results of operations for each of the three years in the period ended December 31, 2004. This discussion should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and related Notes beginning on page F-1. Certain reclassifications have been made to prior year financial information to conform to the current year presentation. Certain of the statements contained herein are forward-looking statements. These forward-looking statements are made pursuant to the safe harbor provisions of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 and include estimates and assumptions related to economic, competitive and legislative developments. These forward-looking statements are subject to change and uncertainty which are, in many instances, beyond the Company control and have been made based upon management expectations and beliefs concerning future developments and their potential effect upon the Company. There can be no assurance that future developments will be in accordance with management expectations or that the effect of future developments on The Hartford will be those anticipated by management. Actual results could differ materially from those expected by the Company, depending on the outcome of various factors. These factors include: the difficulty in predicting the Company potential exposure for asbestos and environmental claims and related litigation; the possible occurrence of terrorist attacks; the response of reinsurance companies under reinsurance contracts and the availability, pricing and adequacy of reinsurance to protect the Company against losses; changes in the stock markets, interest rates or other financial markets, including the potential effect on the Company statutory capital levels; the inability to effectively mitigate the impact of equity market volatility on the Company financial position and results of operations arising from obligations under annuity product guarantees; the difficulty in predicting the Company potential exposure arising out of regulatory proceedings or private claims relating to incentive compensation or payments made to brokers or other producers and alleged anti-competitive conduct; the uncertain effect on the Company of regulatory and market-driven changes in practices relating to the payment of incentive compensation to brokers and other producers, including changes that have been announced and those which may occur in the future; the possibility of more unfavorable loss experience than anticipated; the incidence and severity of catastrophes, both natural and man-made; stronger than anticipated competitive activity; unfavorable judicial or legislative developments, including the possibility that the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act of 2002 is not extended beyond 2005; the potential effect of domestic and foreign regulatory developments, including those which could increase the Company business costs and required capital levels; the possibility of general economic and business conditions that are less favorable than anticipated; the Company ability to distribute its products through distribution channels, both current and future; the uncertain effects of emerging claim and coverage issues; the effect of assessments and other surcharges for guaranty funds and second-injury funds and other mandatory pooling arrangements; a downgrade in the Company claims-paying, financial strength or credit ratings; the ability of the Company subsidiaries to pay dividends to the Company; and other factors described in such forward-looking statements. INDEX Overview 21 Critical Accounting Estimates 23 Consolidated Results of Operations 33 Life 34 Retail Products Group 39 Institutional Solutions Group 41 Individual Life 42 Group Benefits 43 Property & Casualty 44 Business Insurance 57 Personal Lines 59 Specialty Commercial 61 Other Operations (Including Asbestos and Environmental Claims) 63 Investments 68 Investment Credit Risk 75 Capital Markets Risk Management 80 Capital Resources and Liquidity 87 Impact of New Accounting Standards 95 OVERVIEW The Hartford is a diversified insurance and financial services company with operations dating back to 1810. The Company is headquartered in Connecticut and is organized into two major operations: Life and Property & Casualty, each containing reporting segments. In the quarter ended March 31, 2004, and as more fully described below, the Company changed its reporting segments to reflect the current manner by which its chief operating decision maker views and manages the business. All segment data for prior reporting periods have been adjusted to reflect the current segment reporting. Within the Life and Property & Casualty operations, The Hartford conducts business principally in eight operating segments. Additionally, Corporate includes all of the Company debt financing and related interest expense, as well as certain capital raising activities and purchase accounting adjustments. Life includes four reportable operating segments: Retail Products Group, Institutional Solutions Group, Individual Life and Group Benefits. Through Life the Company provides investment and retirement products such as variable and fixed annuities, mutual funds and retirement plan services; other institutional investment products; structured settlements; private placement life insurance; individual life insurance products including variable universal life, universal life, interest sensitive whole life and term life; and group benefit products, such as group life and group disability insurance. 21 Table of Contents Property & Casualty is organized into four reportable operating segments: the underwriting segments of Business Insurance, Personal Lines and Specialty Commercial (collectively Ongoing Operations ), and the Other Operations segment. Through Property & Casualty the Company provides a number of coverages, as well as insurance-related services, to businesses throughout the United States, including workers compensation, property, automobile, liability, umbrella, specialty casualty, marine, agriculture, bond, professional liability and director and officer liability coverages. Property & Casualty also provides automobile, homeowners, and home-based business coverage to individuals throughout the United States, as well as insurance-related services to businesses. Many of the principal factors that drive the profitability of The Hartford Life and Property & Casualty operations are separate and distinct. Management considers this diversification to be a strength of The Hartford that distinguishes the Company from its peers. To present its operations in a more meaningful and organized way, management has included separate overviews within the Life and Property & Casualty sections of MD&A. For further overview of Life profitability and analysis, see page 34. For further overview of Property & Casualty profitability and analysis, see page 44. Regulatory Developments In June 2004, the Company received a subpoena from the New York Attorney General Office in connection with its inquiry into compensation arrangements between brokers and carriers. In mid-September 2004 and subsequently, the Company has received additional subpoenas from the New York Attorney General Office, which relate more specifically to possible anti-competitive activity among brokers and insurers. Since the beginning of October 2004, the Company has received subpoenas or other information requests from Attorneys General and regulatory agencies in more than a dozen jurisdictions regarding broker compensation and possible anti-competitive activity. The Company may receive additional subpoenas and other information requests from Attorneys General or other regulatory agencies regarding similar issues. The Company also has received a subpoena from the New York Attorney General Office requesting information related to the Company underwriting practices with respect to legal professional liability insurance. In addition, the Company has received a request for information from the New York Attorney General Office concerning the Company compensation arrangements in connection with the administration of workers compensation plans. The Company intends to continue cooperating fully with these investigations, and is conducting an internal review, with the assistance of outside counsel, regarding the issues under investigation. On October 14, 2004, the New York Attorney General Office filed a civil complaint against Marsh & McLennan Companies, Inc., and Marsh, Inc. (collectively, Marsh ). The complaint alleges, among other things, that certain insurance companies, including the Company, participated with Marsh in arrangements to submit inflated bids for business insurance and paid contingent commissions to ensure that Marsh would direct business to them. The Company is not joined as a defendant in the action. Although no regulatory action has been initiated against the Company in connection with the allegations described in the civil complaint, it is possible that the New York Attorney General Office or one or more other regulatory agencies may pursue action against the Company or one or more of its employees in the future. The potential timing of any such action is difficult to predict. If such an action is brought, it could have a material adverse effect on the Company. On October 29, 2004, the New York Attorney General Office informed the Company that the Attorney General is conducting an investigation with respect to the timing of the previously disclosed sale by Thomas Marra, a director and executive officer of the Company, of 217,074 shares of the Company common stock on September 21, 2004. The sale occurred shortly after the issuance of two additional subpoenas dated September 17, 2004 by the New York Attorney General Office. The Company has engaged outside counsel to review the circumstances related to the transaction and is fully cooperating with the New York Attorney General Office. On the basis of the review, the Company has determined that Mr. Marra complied with the Company applicable internal trading procedures and has found no indication that Mr. Marra was aware of the additional subpoenas at the time of the sale. There continues to be significant federal and state regulatory activity relating to financial services companies, particularly mutual funds companies. These regulatory inquiries have focused on a number of mutual fund issues, including market timing and late trading, revenue sharing and directed brokerage, fees, transfer agents and other fund service providers, and other mutual-fund related issues. The Company has received requests for information and subpoenas from the Securities and Exchange Commission ( SEC ), subpoenas from the New York Attorney General Office, requests for information from the Connecticut Securities and Investments Division of the Department of Banking, and requests for information from the New York Department of Insurance, in each case requesting documentation and other information regarding various mutual fund regulatory issues. The SEC Division of Enforcement and the New York Attorney General Office are investigating aspects of the Company variable annuity and mutual fund operations related to market timing. The Company mutual funds are available for purchase by the separate accounts of different variable universal life insurance policies, variable annuity products, and funding agreements, and they are offered directly to certain qualified retirement plans. Although existing products contain transfer restrictions between subaccounts, some products, particularly older variable annuity products, do not contain restrictions on the frequency of transfers. In addition, as a result of the settlement of litigation against the Company with respect to certain owners of older variable annuity products, the Company ability to restrict transfers by these owners is limited. In February 2005, the Company agreed in principle with the Boards of Directors of the mutual funds to indemnify the mutual funds for any material harm caused to the funds from frequent trading by these owners. The specific terms of the indemnification have not been determined. The SEC Division of Enforcement also is investigating aspects of the Company variable annuity and mutual fund operations related to directed brokerage and revenue sharing. The Company discontinued the use of directed brokerage in recognition of mutual fund sales in late 2003. The Company also has received a subpoena from the New York Attorney General Office requesting information related to the Company group annuity products. The Company continues to cooperate fully with the SEC, the New York Attorney General Office and other regulatory agencies. 22 Table of Contents A number of companies have announced settlements of enforcement actions with various regulatory agencies, primarily the SEC and the New York Attorney General Office, which have included a range of monetary penalties and restitution. While no such action has been initiated against the Company, the SEC, and the New York Attorney General Office are likely to take some action at the conclusion of the on-going investigations related to market timing and directed brokerage. The potential timing of any such action is difficult to predict, and the Company ultimate liability, if any, from any such action is not reasonably estimable at this time. If such an action is brought, it could have a material adverse effect on the Company consolidated results of operations or cash flows in particular quarterly or annual periods. Broker Compensation As the Company has disclosed previously, the Company pays brokers and independent agents commissions and other forms of incentive compensation in connection with the sale of many of the Company insurance products. Since the New York Attorney General Office filed a civil complaint against Marsh & McLennan Companies, Inc. and Marsh, Inc. (collectively, Marsh ) on October 14, 2004, several of the largest national insurance brokers, including Marsh, have announced that they have discontinued the use of contingent compensation arrangements. Other industry participants may make similar, or different, determinations in the future. In addition, legal, legislative, regulatory, business or other developments may require changes to industry practices relating to incentive compensation. At this time, it is not possible to predict the effect of these announced or potential changes on the Company business or distribution strategies . CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES The preparation of financial statements, in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America ( GAAP ), requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates. The Company has identified the following estimates as critical in that they involve a higher degree of judgment and are subject to a significant degree of variability: insurance reserves; Life operations deferred policy acquisition costs and present value of future profits; the valuation of investments and derivative instruments and the evaluation of other-than-temporary impairments; pension and other postretirement benefits; and contingencies. In developing these estimates management makes subjective and complex judgments that are inherently uncertain and subject to material change as facts and circumstances develop. Although variability is inherent in these estimates, management believes the amounts provided are appropriate based upon the facts available upon compilation of the financial statements. Reserves Life The Company life insurance subsidiaries establish and carry as liabilities, predominantly, three types of reserves: (1) a liability for amounts that accrue to the benefit of the policyholder as of the financial statement date, (2) a liability for unpaid claims, including those that have been incurred but not yet reported, and (3) a liability for future policy benefits. Reserves also include amounts for unearned premiums. Reserves for assumed reinsurance are computed in a manner that is comparable to direct insurance reserves. The Company has classified its fixed and variable annuities, 401(k), certain governmental annuities, private placement life insurance, variable universal life insurance, universal life insurance and interest sensitive whole life insurance as universal life-type contracts. The liability for universal life-type contracts is equal to the balance that accrues to the benefit of the policyholders as of the financial statement date (commonly referred to as the account value), including credited interest, amounts that have been assessed to compensate the Company for services to be performed over future periods, and any amounts previously assessed against policyholders that are refundable on termination of the contract. Certain contracts classified as universal life-type may also include additional death or other insurance benefit features, such as guaranteed minimum death or income benefits offered with variable annuity contracts or no lapse guarantees offered with universal life insurance contracts. An additional liability is established for these benefits by estimating the expected present value of the benefits in excess of the projected account value in proportion to the present value of total expected assessments. Excess benefits are accrued as a liability as actual assessments are recorded. Determination of the expected value of excess benefits and assessments are based on a range of scenarios and assumptions including those related to market rates of return and volatility, contract surrender rates and mortality experience. The Company has classified its institutional and governmental products, without life contingencies, including funding agreements, structured settlements and guaranteed investment contracts, as investment contracts. The liability for investment contracts is equal to the balance that accrues to the benefit of the contract holder as of the financial statement date, which includes the accumulation of deposits plus credited interest, less withdrawals and amounts assessed through the financial statement date. Liabilities for the Company group life and disability contracts as well its individual term life insurance policies include amounts for unpaid claims and future policy benefits. Liabilities for unpaid claims include estimates of amounts to fully settle known reported claims as well as claims related to insured events that the Company estimates have been incurred but have not yet been reported. Liabilities for future policy benefits are calculated by estimating the present value of future policy benefits to be paid to or on behalf of policyholders less the estimated present value of future net premiums. The methods used in determining the liability for unpaid 23 Table of Contents claims and future policy benefits are standard actuarial methods recognized by the American Academy of Actuaries. For the tabular reserves, discount rates are based on the Company earned investment yield and the morbidity/mortality tables used are standard industry tables modified to reflect the Company actual experience when appropriate. In particular, for the Company group disability known claim reserves, the morbidity table for the early durations of claim is based exclusively on the Company experience, incorporating factors such as sex, elimination period and diagnosis. These reserves are computed such that they are expected to meet the Company future policy obligations. Future policy benefits are computed at amounts that, with additions from estimated premiums to be received and with interest on such reserves compounded annually at certain assumed rates, are expected to be sufficient to meet the Company policy obligations at their maturities or in the event of an insured death. Changes in or deviations from the assumptions used for mortality, morbidity, expected future premiums and interest can significantly affect the Company reserve levels and related future operations and, as such, provisions for adverse deviation are built into the long-tailed liability assumptions. Property & Casualty The Hartford establishes property and casualty reserves to provide for the estimated costs of paying claims under insurance policies written by the Company. These reserves include estimates for both claims that have been reported and those that have been incurred but not reported, and include estimates of all expenses associated with processing and settling these claims. Estimating the ultimate cost of future claims and claim adjustment expenses is an uncertain and complex process. This estimation process is based largely on the assumption that past developments are an appropriate predictor of future events and involves a variety of actuarial techniques that analyze experience, trends and other relevant factors. Reserve estimates can change over time because of unexpected changes in the external environment. Potential external factors include (1) changes in the inflation rate for goods and services related to covered damages such as medical care, hospital care, auto parts, wages and home repair, (2) changes in the general economic environment that could cause unanticipated changes in the claim frequency per unit insured, (3) changes in the litigation environment as evidenced by changes in claimant attorney representation in the claims negotiation and settlement process, (4) changes in the judicial environment regarding the interpretation of policy provisions relating to the determination of coverage and/or the amount of damages awarded for certain types of damages, (5) changes in the social environment regarding the general attitude of juries in the determination of liability and damages, (6) changes in the legislative environment regarding the definition of damages and (7) new types of injuries caused by new types of injurious exposure: past examples include breast implants, lead paint and construction defects. Reserve estimates can also change over time because of changes in internal company operations. Potential internal factors include (1) periodic changes in claims handling procedures, (2) growth in new lines of business where exposure and loss development patterns are not well established or (3) changes in the quality of risk selection in the underwriting process. In the case of assumed reinsurance, all of the above risks apply. In addition, changes in ceding company case reserving and reporting patterns can create additional factors that need to be considered in estimating the reserves. Due to the inherent complexity of the assumptions used, final claim settlements may vary significantly from the present estimates, particularly when those settlements may not occur until well into the future. The Hartford, like other insurance companies, categorizes and tracks its insurance reserves for its segments by line of business , such as property, auto physical damage, auto liability, commercial multi-peril package business, workers compensation, general liability and professional liability. Furthermore, The Hartford regularly reviews the appropriateness of reserve levels at the line of business level, taking into consideration the variety of trends that impact the ultimate settlement of claims for the subsets of claims in each particular line of business. In addition, within the Other Operations segment, the Company has reserves for asbestos and environmental (A&E) claims. Adjustments to previously established reserves, which may be material, are reflected in the operating results of the period in which the adjustment is determined to be necessary. In the judgment of management, information currently available has been properly considered in the reserves established for claims and claim adjustment expenses. Incurred but not reported (IBNR) reserves represent the difference between the estimated ultimate cost of all claims and the actual reported loss and loss adjustment expenses ( reported losses ). Reported losses represent cumulative loss and loss adjustment expenses paid plus case reserves for outstanding reported claims. Company actuaries evaluate the total reserves (IBNR and case reserves) on an accident year basis. An accident year is the calendar year in which a loss is incurred, or, in the case of claims-made policies, the calendar year in which a loss is reported. 24 Table of Contents The following table shows loss and loss adjustment expense reserves by line of business and by operating segment as of December 31, 2004, net of reinsurance: Operating Segment Business Personal Specialty Other Total Insurance Lines Commercial Operations P&C Reserve Line of Business Property $ 45 $ 208 $ 154 $ $ 407 Auto physical damage 9 49 (2 ) 56 Auto liability 549 1,522 72 2,143 Package business 1,499 1,499 Workers compensation 2,864 5 1,451 4,320 General liability 604 24 1,125 1,753 Professional liability 493 493 Bond 128 128 Reinsurance [1] 1,339 1,339 All other non-A&E 1,175 1,175 A&E 13 2 7 2,856 2,878 Total reserves-net 5,583 1,810 3,428 5,370 16,191 Reinsurance and other recoverables 474 190 2,091 2,383 5,138 Total reserves gross $ 6,057 $ 2,000 $ 5,519 $ 7,753 $ 21,329 [1] These net loss and loss adjustment expense reserves relate to assumed reinsurance underwritten by Reinsurance operations that were moved into Other Operations in 2002 and 2004 ( HartRe assumed reinsurance ). Reserving for non-A&E reserves within Ongoing and Other Operations: How non-A&E reserves are set Reserves are set by line of business within the various operating segments. As indicated in the above table, a single line of business may be written in one or more of the segments. Case reserves are established by a claims handler on each individual claim and are adjusted as new information becomes known during the course of handling the claim. Lines of business for which loss data (e.g. paid losses and case reserves) emerge (i.e. is reported) over a long period of time are referred to as long-tail lines of business. Lines of business for which loss data emerge more quickly are referred to as short-tail lines of business. Within the Company Ongoing Operations the shortest-tail lines of business are property and auto physical damage. The longest tail lines of business within Ongoing Operations include workers compensation, general liability, and professional liability. HartRe assumed reinsurance, which is within Other Operations, is also long-tail business. Company actuaries regularly review reserves for both current and prior accident years using the most current claim data. These quarterly reserve reviews incorporate a variety of actuarial methods and judgments and involve rigorous analysis. For most lines of business, a variety of actuarial methods are reviewed and the actuaries select methods and specific assumptions appropriate for each line of business based on the current circumstances affecting that line of business. These selections incorporate input from claims personnel, pricing actuaries and operating management on reported loss cost trends and other factors that could affect the reserve estimates. For short-tail lines of business, emergence of paid loss and case reserves is credible and likely indicative of ultimate losses. The method used to set reserves for these lines incorporates two key assumptions. The first key assumption is an expected loss ratio for the current accident year. This loss ratio is determined through a review of prior accident years loss ratios and expected changes to earned pricing, loss costs, mix of business, ceded reinsurance and other factors that are expected to impact the loss ratio for the current accident year. The second key assumption is a development pattern for reported losses (also referred to as the loss emergence pattern). IBNR reserves for the current year are set as the product of the expected loss ratio for the period, earned premium for the period and the proportion of losses expected to be reported in future calendar periods for the current accident period. IBNR reserves for prior accident years are similarly determined, again relying on an expected development pattern for reported losses. For long-tail lines of business, emergence of paid losses and case reserves is less credible in the early periods and, accordingly may not be indicative of ultimate losses. For these lines, methods which incorporate a development pattern assumption are given less weight in calculating IBNR reserves for the early stages of loss emergence because such a low percentage of ultimate losses are reported in that time frame. Accordingly, for any given accident year, the rate at which losses emerge in the early periods is generally not as reliable an indication of the ultimate loss costs as it would be for shorter-tail lines of business. The estimation of reserves for these lines of business in the early stages of loss emergence is therefore largely influenced by prior accident years loss ratios and expected changes to earned pricing, loss costs, mix of business, ceded reinsurance and other factors that are expected to affect the loss ratio. For later periods of loss emergence, methods which incorporate a development pattern assumption are given more weight in estimating ultimate losses. 25 Table of Contents Based on the results of the quarterly reserve reviews, the Company will determine the appropriate reserve adjustments, if any, to record. Recorded reserve estimates are changed after consideration of numerous factors, including but not limited to, the magnitude of the difference between the actuarial indication and the recorded reserves, improvement or deterioration of actuarial indications in the period, the maturity of the accident year, trends observed over the recent past and the level of volatility within a particular line of business. In general, changes are made more quickly to more mature accident years and less volatile lines of business. At year-end 2004, total recorded reserves excluding asbestos and environmental were within 0.2% of the actuarial indication. Annually, as part of the statutory reporting requirements, IBNR is allocated to accident year by statutory line of business. This work forms the basis for the loss development table and reserve re-estimates table shown in the Business section. During 2004 there were numerous changes to reserve estimates. Among other loss developments in 2004, these changes included a reduction in estimated ultimate losses associated with September 11 and increases in estimated ultimate losses associated with construction defect claims and HartRe assumed reinsurance. Changes in 2004 also included increases in the estimated ultimate losses for auto liability and package business in Business Insurance, as well as a reduction in the expected loss ratio for accident year 2004 for Bond within Specialty Commercial. See Reserves within the Property and Casualty MD&A for further discussion of reserve developments. Current trends contributing to reserve uncertainty The Hartford is a multi-line company in the property and casualty business. The Hartford is therefore subject to reserve uncertainty stemming from a number of conditions, including but not limited to those noted above, any of which could be material at any point in time for any segment. Certain issues may become more or less important over time as conditions change. As various market conditions develop, management must assess whether those conditions constitute a long-term trend that should result in a reserving action (i.e. increasing or decreasing the reserve). Below is a discussion of certain market conditions that Company management has observed during 2004. Within the commercial segments and the Other Operations segment, the Company has exposure to claims asserted for bodily injury as a result of long-term or continuous exposure to harmful products or substances. Examples include, but are not limited to, pharmaceutical products, latex gloves, silica and lead paint. The Company also has exposure to claims from construction defects, where property damage or bodily injury from negligent construction is alleged. The Company also has exposure to claims asserted against religious institutions and other organizations relating to molestation or abuse. Such exposures may involve potentially long latency periods and may implicate coverage in multiple policy periods. These factors make reserves for such claims more uncertain than other bodily injury or property damage claims. With regard to these exposures, the Company is monitoring trends in litigation, the external environment, the similarities to other mass torts and the potential impact on the Company reserves. In Personal Lines, reserving estimates are generally less variable than for the Company other property and casualty segments. This is largely due to the coverages having relatively shorter periods of loss emergence. Estimates, however, can still vary due to a number of factors, including interpretations of frequency and severity trends and their impact on recorded reserve levels. Severity trends can be impacted by changes in internal claim handling and reserving practices in addition to changes in the external environment. These changes in claim practices increase the uncertainty in the interpretation of case reserve data, which increases the uncertainty in recorded reserve levels. In Business Insurance, workers compensation is the Company single biggest line of business and the line of business with the longest pattern of loss emergence. Reserve estimates for workers compensation are particularly sensitive to assumptions about medical inflation, which has been increasing steadily over the past few years. In addition, changes in state legislative and regulatory environments impact the Company estimates. In particular, the California environment has been very volatile, in part due to reforms intended to reduce loss costs. It is still uncertain how these reforms will ultimately impact the timing of future payments and the needed amount of reserves. In the Specialty Commercial segment, many lines of insurance, such as excess insurance and deductible workers compensation insurance are long-tail lines of insurance. For long-tail lines, the period of time between the incidence of the insured loss and either the reporting of the claim to the insurer, the settlement of the claim, or the payment of the claim can be substantial, and in some cases, several years. As a result of this extended period of time for losses to emerge, reserve estimates for these lines are more uncertain (i.e. more variable) than reserve estimates for shorter-tail lines of insurance. Estimating required reserve levels for deductible workers compensation insurance is further complicated by the uncertainty of whether losses that are attributable to the deductible amount can be paid by the insured; if such losses are not paid by the insured due to financial difficulties, the Company would be contractually liable. Another example of reserve variability relates to reserves for directors and officers insurance. There is uncertainty in the required level of reserves due to the impact of recent allegations within the financial services industry, including those in the mutual fund, investment banking and insurance industries, as well as due to various highly-publicized bankruptcies. Impact of changes in key assumptions on reserve volatility As stated above, the Company practice is to estimate reserves using a variety of methods, assumptions and data elements. Within its reserve estimation process for reserves other than asbestos and environmental, the Company does not derive statistical loss distributions or confidence levels around its reserve estimate and, as a result, do not have reserve range estimates to disclose. 26 Table of Contents The reserve estimation process includes explicit assumptions about a number of factors in the internal and external environment. Across most lines of business, the most important assumptions are future loss development factors applied to paid or reported losses to date. For most lines, the reported loss development factor is most important. In workers compensation, paid loss development factors are also important. The trend in loss costs is also a key assumption, particularly in the most recent accident years, where loss development factors are less credible. The following discussion includes disclosure of possible variation from current estimates of loss reserves due to a change in certain key assumptions. Each of the impacts described below is estimated individually, without consideration for any correlation among key assumptions or among lines of business. Therefore, it would be inappropriate to take each of the amounts described below and add them together in an attempt to estimate volatility for the Company reserves in total. The estimated variation in reserves due to changes in key assumptions is a reasonable estimate of possible variation that may occur in the future, likely over a period of several calendar years. It is important to note that the variation discussed is not meant to be a worst-case scenario, and therefore, it is possible that future variation may be more than amounts discussed below. Recorded reserves for workers compensation, net of reinsurance, are $4.3 billion, across Business Insurance and Specialty Commercial. The two most important assumptions for workers compensation reserves are loss development factors and loss cost trends, particularly medical cost inflation. The Company has reviewed the historical variation in paid loss development patterns. If the paid loss development patterns change by 3%, a change that is within historical variation, the estimated reserve need would change by $300, in either direction. Approximately half of the workers compensation net reserves are related to future medical costs. A review of National Council on Compensation Insurance ( NCCI ) data suggests that the annual growth in industry medical claim costs has varied from -2% to +12% since 1991. Across the entire reserve base, a 1 point change in calendar year medical inflation would change the estimated net reserve by $350, in either direction. A change in calendar year medical inflation will impact paid loss development patterns, so the individual variation amounts shown above for a 3% change in paid loss development patterns and a 1 point change in medical inflation should not be added together to determine the combined impact of both changes. Recorded reserves for auto liability, net of reinsurance, are $2.1 billion across all lines, $1.5 billion of which is in Personal Lines. Personal auto liability reserves are shorter-tailed than other lines of business (such as workers compensation) and, therefore, less volatile. However, the size of the reserve base means that future changes in estimate could be material to the Company results of operations in any given period. The key assumption for Personal Lines auto liability is the annual loss cost trend, particularly the severity trend component of loss costs. A review of Insurance Services Office ( ISO ) data suggests that annual growth in industry severity since 1999 has varied from +1% to +6%. A 2.5 point change in assumed annual severity for the two most recent accident years would change the estimated net reserve need by $60, in either direction. Recorded reserves for general liability, net of reinsurance, are $1.8 billion across Business Insurance and Specialty Commercial. Reported loss development patterns are a key assumption for this line of business, particularly for more mature accident years. Historically, assumptions on reported loss development patterns have been impacted by, among other things, emergence of new types of claims (e.g. construction defect claims) or a shift in the mixture between smaller, more routine claims and larger, more complex claims. The Company has reviewed the historical variation in reported loss development patterns. If the reported loss development patterns change by 7%, a change that is within historical variation, the estimated net reserve need would change by $200, in either direction. Similar to general liability, HartRe assumed casualty reinsurance is affected by reported loss development pattern assumptions. In addition to the items identified above that would affect both direct and reinsurance liability claim development patterns, there is also an impact to assumed reporting patterns for any changes in claim notification from ceding companies to the reinsurer. Recorded net reserves for HartRe assumed reinsurance business, excluding asbestos and environmental liabilities, within Other Operations were $1.3 billion as of December 31, 2004. If the development patterns underlying the Company net reserves for HartRe assumed casualty reinsurance are incorrect by 10 points, the estimated net reserve need would change by $270, in either direction. Reserving for Asbestos and Environmental Claims within Other Operations How A&E reserves are set The Hartford continues to receive claims that assert damages from asbestos-related and environmental-related exposures. Asbestos claims relate primarily to bodily injuries asserted by those who came in contact with asbestos or products containing asbestos. Environmental claims relate primarily to pollution and related clean-up costs. The Hartford wrote several different categories of insurance coverage to which asbestos and environmental claims may apply. First, The Hartford wrote primary policies providing the first layer of coverage in an insured liability program. Second, The Hartford wrote excess policies providing higher layers of coverage for losses that exhaust the limits of underlying coverage. Third, The Hartford acted as a reinsurer assuming a portion of risks previously assumed by other insurers writing primary, excess and reinsurance coverages. Fourth, The Hartford participated in the London Market, writing both direct insurance and assumed reinsurance business. In establishing reserves for asbestos claims, The Hartford evaluates each insured estimated liability for such claims using a ground-up approach. The Hartford considers a variety of factors, including the jurisdictions where underlying claims have been brought, past, 27 Table of Contents pending and anticipated future claim activity, disease mix, past settlement values of similar claims, dismissal rates, allocated claim adjustment expense, and potential bankruptcy impact. Similarly, a ground-up exposure review approach is used to establish environmental reserves. The Hartford evaluation of each insured estimated liability for environmental claims involves consideration of several factors, including historical values of similar claims, the number of sites involved, the insured alleged activities at each site, the alleged environmental damage at each site, the respective shares of liability of potentially responsible parties at each site, the appropriateness and cost of remediation at each site, the nature of governmental enforcement activities at each site, and potential bankruptcy impact. Having evaluated the insured probable liability for asbestos and/or environmental claims, The Hartford then evaluates each insured insurance coverage program for such claims. The Hartford considers each insured total available insurance coverage, including the coverage issued by The Hartford. The Hartford also considers relevant judicial interpretations of policy language and applicable coverage defenses or determinations, if any. Evaluation of both the insured estimated liability and The Hartford exposure to the insured depends heavily on an analysis of the relevant legal issues and litigation environment. This analysis is conducted by the Company lawyers and is subject to applicable privileges. For both asbestos and environmental reserves, The Hartford also compares its historical direct net loss and expense paid and incurred experience, and net loss and expense paid and incurred experience year by year, to assess any emerging trends, fluctuations or characteristics suggested by the aggregate paid and incurred activity. Once the gross ultimate exposure for indemnity and allocated claim adjustment expense is determined for each insured by each policy year, The Hartford calculates its ceded reinsurance projection based on any applicable facultative and treaty reinsurance and the Company experience with reinsurance collections. Uncertainties Regarding Adequacy of Asbestos and Environmental Reserves With regard to both environmental and particularly asbestos claims, significant uncertainty limits the ability of insurers and reinsurers to estimate the ultimate reserves necessary for unpaid losses and related expenses. Traditional actuarial reserving techniques cannot reasonably estimate the ultimate cost of these claims, particularly during periods where theories of law are in flux. The degree of variability of reserve estimates for these exposures is significantly greater than for other more traditional exposures. In particular, The Hartford believes there is a high degree of uncertainty inherent in the estimation of asbestos loss reserves. In the case of the reserves for asbestos exposures, factors contributing to the high degree of uncertainty include inadequate loss development patterns, plaintiffs expanding theories of liability, the risks inherent in major litigation, and inconsistent emerging legal doctrines. Furthermore, over time, insurers, including The Hartford, have experienced significant changes in the rate at which asbestos claims are brought, the claims experience of particular insureds, and the value of claims, making predictions of future exposure from past experience uncertain. For example, in the past few years, insurers in general, including The Hartford, have experienced an increase in the number of asbestos-related claims due to, among other things, plaintiffs increased focus on new and previously peripheral defendants, and an increase in the number of insureds seeking bankruptcy protection as a result of asbestos-related liabilities. Plaintiffs and insureds have sought to use bankruptcy proceedings, including pre-packaged bankruptcies, to accelerate and increase loss payments by insurers. In addition, some policyholders have asserted new classes of claims for so-called non-products coverages to which an aggregate limit of liability may not apply. Further uncertainties include insolvencies of other carriers and unanticipated developments pertaining to The Hartford ability to recover reinsurance for asbestos and environmental claims. Management believes these issues are not likely to be resolved in the near future. In the case of the reserves for environmental exposures, factors contributing to the high degree of uncertainty include expanding theories of liabilities and damages; the risks inherent in major litigation; inconsistent decisions concerning the existence and scope of coverage for environmental claims; and uncertainty as to the monetary amount being sought by the claimant from the insured. It is also not possible to predict changes in the legal and legislative environment and their impact on the future development of asbestos and environmental claims. It is unknown whether potential Federal asbestos-related legislation will be enacted, and if so, what its effect will be on The Hartford aggregate asbestos liabilities. The reporting pattern for assumed reinsurance claims is much longer than for direct claims. In many instances, it takes months or years to determine that the policyholder own obligations have been met and how the reinsurance in question may apply to such claims. The delay in reporting reinsurance claims and exposures adds to the uncertainty of estimating the related reserves. Given the factors and emerging trends described above, The Hartford believes the actuarial tools and other techniques it employs to estimate the ultimate cost of claims for more traditional kinds of insurance exposure are less precise in estimating reserves for its asbestos and environmental exposures. For this reason, The Hartford relies on an exposure-based analysis to estimate the ultimate costs of these claims and regularly evaluates new information in assessing its potential asbestos and environmental exposures. The variability of estimates for asbestos and environmental reserves is affected by a number of factors including assumptions with respect to the frequency of claims, the average severity of those claims settled with payment, the dismissal rate of claims with no payment and the expense to indemnity ratio. The uncertainty with respect to the underlying reserve assumptions for asbestos and 28 Table of Contents environmental adds a greater degree of variability and risk to these reserve estimates than reserve estimates for more traditional exposures. While this variability is reflected in part in the size of the range of reserves developed by the Company, that range may still not be indicative of the potential variance between the ultimate outcome and the recorded reserves. The recorded net reserves as of December 31, 2004 of $2.9 billion ($2.5 billion and $394 for asbestos and environmental, respectively) is within an estimated range, unadjusted for covariance, of $2.4 billion to $3.4 billion. The process of estimating asbestos and environmental reserves remains subject to a wide variety of uncertainties, which are detailed in Note 12 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Due to these uncertainties, further developments could cause The Hartford to change its estimates and ranges of its asbestos and environmental reserves, and the effect of these changes could be material to the Company consolidated operating results, financial condition and liquidity. In the opinion of management, based upon the known facts and current law, the reserves recorded for The Hartford property and casualty businesses at December 31, 2004 represent the Company best estimate of its ultimate liability for claims and claim adjustment expenses related to losses covered by policies written by the Company. However, because of the significant uncertainties surrounding environmental, and particularly asbestos exposures, it is possible that management estimate of the ultimate liabilities for these claims may change and that the required adjustment to recorded reserves could exceed the currently recorded reserves by an amount that could be material to The Hartford results of operations, financial condition and liquidity. Valuation of Investments and Derivative Instruments and Evaluation of Other-Than-Temporary Impairments The Hartford investments in fixed maturities, which include bonds, redeemable preferred stock and commercial paper; and certain equity securities, which include common and non-redeemable preferred stocks, are classified as available-for-sale as defined in Statement of Financial Accounting Standards ( SFAS ) No. 115, Accounting for Certain Investments in Debt and Equity Securities ( SFAS No. 115 ). Accordingly, these securities are carried at fair value with the after-tax difference from amortized cost, as adjusted for the effect of deducting the life and pension policyholders share of the immediate participation guaranteed contracts and certain life and annuity deferred policy acquisition costs, reflected in stockholders equity as a component of accumulated other comprehensive income ( AOCI ). The equity investments associated with the variable annuity products offered in Japan are recorded at fair value and are classified as trading as defined in SFAS No. 115, with changes in fair value recorded in net investment income. Policy loans are carried at outstanding balance, which approximates fair value. Other investments primarily consist of limited partnership interests, derivatives and mortgage loans. The limited partnerships are accounted for under the equity method and accordingly the Company share of partnership earnings are included in net investment income. Derivatives are carried at fair value and mortgage loans on real estate are recorded at the outstanding principal balance adjusted for amortization of premiums or discounts and net of valuation allowances, if any. Valuation of Fixed Maturities The fair value for fixed maturity securities is largely determined by one of three primary pricing methods: independent third party pricing service market quotations, independent broker quotations or pricing matrices, which use data provided by external sources. With the exception of short-term securities for which amortized cost is predominantly used to approximate fair value, security pricing is applied using a hierarchy or waterfall approach whereby prices are first sought from independent pricing services with the remaining unpriced securities submitted to brokers for prices or lastly priced via a pricing matrix. Prices from independent pricing services are often unavailable for securities that are rarely traded or are traded only in privately negotiated transactions. As a result, certain of the Company asset-backed and commercial mortgage-backed securities are priced via broker quotations. A pricing matrix is used to price securities for which the Company is unable to obtain either a price from an independent third party service or an independent broker quotation. The pricing matrix begins with current treasury rates and uses credit spreads and issuer-specific yield adjustments received from an independent third party source to determine the market price for the security. The credit spreads incorporate the issuer credit rating as assigned by a nationally recognized rating agency and a risk premium, if warranted, due to the issuer industry and the security time to maturity. The issuer-specific yield adjustments, which can be positive or negative, are updated twice annually, as of June 30 and December 31, by an independent third party source and are intended to adjust security prices for issuer-specific factors. The matrix-priced securities at December 31, 2004 and 2003, primarily consisted of non-144A private placements and have an average duration of 4.8 and 4.5, respectively. The following table identifies the fair value of fixed maturity securities by pricing source as of December 31, 2004 and 2003: 2004 2003 Percentage of Percentage of Fair Value Total Fair Value Fair Value Total Fair Value Priced via independent market quotations $ 62,568 83.3 % $ 60,584 83.0 % Priced via broker quotations 4,233 5.6 % 4,113 5.6 % Priced via matrices 4,847 6.5 % 4,253 5.8 % Priced via other methods 52 0.1 % 337 0.5 % Short-term investments [1] 3,400 4.5 % 3,711 5.1 % Total $ 75,100 100.0 % $ 72,998 100.0 % Total general accounts $ 61,263 83.9 % Total guaranteed separate accounts [2] $ 11,735 16.1 % [1] Short-term investments are primarily valued at amortized cost, which approximates fair value. [2] Effective January 1, 2004, guaranteed separate account assets were included with general account assets as a result of adopting SOP 03-1. 29 Table of Contents The fair value of a financial instrument is the amount at which the instrument could be exchanged in a current transaction between knowledgeable, unrelated willing parties. As such, the estimated fair value of a financial instrument may differ significantly from the amount that could be realized if the security was sold immediately. Valuation of Derivative Instruments Derivative instruments are reported at fair value based upon either independent market quotations or pricing valuation models which utilize independent third party data as inputs. Other than the guaranteed minimum withdrawal benefit ( GMWB ) and the associated reinsurance contracts, which are discussed below, approximately 69% of derivatives, based upon notional values, were priced via valuation models and the remaining 31% of derivatives were priced via independent market quotations. Other-Than-Temporary Impairments One of the significant estimations inherent in the valuation of investments is the evaluation of other-than-temporary impairments. The evaluation of impairments is a quantitative and qualitative process, which is subject to risks and uncertainties and is intended to determine whether declines in the fair value of investments should be recognized in current period earnings. The risks and uncertainties include changes in general economic conditions, the issuer financial condition or near term recovery prospects and the effects of changes in interest rates. The Company accounting policy requires that a decline in the value of a security below its amortized cost basis be assessed to determine if the decline is other-than-temporary. If the security is deemed to be other-than-temporarily impaired, a charge is recorded in net realized capital losses equal to the difference between the fair value and amortized cost basis of the security. In addition, for securities expected to be sold, an other-than-temporary impairment charge is recognized if the Company does not expect the fair value of a security to recover to amortized cost prior to the expected date of sale. The fair value of the other-than-temporarily impaired investment becomes its new cost basis. The Company has a security monitoring process overseen by a committee of investment and accounting professionals ( the committee ) that identifies securities that, due to certain characteristics, as described below, are subjected to an enhanced analysis on a quarterly basis. Securities not subject to Emerging Issues Task Force ( EITF ) Issue No. 99-20, Recognition of Interest Income and Impairment on Purchased and Retained Beneficial Interests in Securitized Financial Assets ( non-EITF Issue No. 99-20 securities ), that are in an unrealized loss position, are reviewed at least quarterly to determine if an other-than-temporary impairment is present based on certain quantitative and qualitative factors. The primary factors considered in evaluating whether a decline in value for non-EITF Issue No. 99-20 securities is other-than-temporary include: (a) the length of time and the extent to which the fair value has been less than cost, (b) the financial condition, credit rating and near-term prospects of the issuer, (c) whether the debtor is current on contractually obligated interest and principal payments and (d) the intent and ability of the Company to retain the investment for a period of time sufficient to allow for recovery. Non-EITF Issue No. 99-20 securities depressed by twenty percent or more for six months are presumed to be other-than-temporarily impaired unless significant objective verifiable evidence supports that the security price is temporarily depressed and is expected to recover within a reasonable period of time. The evaluation of non-EITF Issue No. 99-20 securities depressed more than ten percent is documented and discussed quarterly by the committee. For certain securitized financial assets with contractual cash flows (including asset-backed securities), EITF Issue No. 99-20 requires the Company to periodically update its best estimate of cash flows over the life of the security. If the fair value of a securitized financial asset is less than its carrying amount and there has been a decrease in the present value of the estimated cash flows since the last revised estimate, considering both timing and amount, then an other-than-temporary impairment charge is recognized. Estimating future cash flows is a quantitative and qualitative process that incorporates information received from third party sources along with certain internal assumptions and judgments regarding the future performance of the underlying collateral. As a result, actual results may differ from current estimates. In addition, projections of expected future cash flows may change based upon new information regarding the performance of the underlying collateral. Once an impairment charge has been recorded, the Company continues to review the other-than-temporarily impaired securities for additional other-than-temporary impairments. As discussed in Note 1 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, the Financial Accounting Standards Board ( FASB ) voted to delay the implementation of the impairment measurement and recognition guidance contained in paragraphs 10-20 of EITF Issue No. 03-1, The Meaning of Other-Than-Temporary Impairments and Its Application to Certain Investments ( EITF Issue No. 03-1 ), in order to redeliberate certain aspects of the consensus. The ultimate completion of EITF Issue No. 03-1 may impact the Company current other-than-temporary impairment evaluation process. Valuation of Guaranteed Minimum Withdrawal Benefit Derivatives An embedded derivative instrument is reported at fair value based upon internally established valuations that are consistent with external valuation models, quotations furnished by dealers in such instruments or market quotations. The Company has calculated the fair value of the guaranteed minimum withdrawal benefit ( GMWB ) embedded derivative based on actuarial assumptions related to the projected cash flows, including benefits and related contract charges, over the lives of the contracts, incorporating expectations concerning policyholder behavior. Because of the dynamic and complex nature of these cash flows, stochastic techniques under a variety of market return scenarios and other best estimate assumptions are used. Estimating these cash flows involves numerous estimates and subjective judgments including those regarding expected market rates of return, market volatility, correlations of market returns and discount rates. At each valuation date, the Company assumes expected returns based on risk-free rates as represented by the current LIBOR forward curve rates; market volatility assumptions for each underlying index based on a blend of observed market 30 Table of Contents implied volatility data and annualized standard deviations of monthly returns using the most recent 20 years of observed market performance; correlations of market returns across underlying indices based on actual observed market returns and relationships over the ten years preceding the valuation date; and current risk-free spot rates as represented by the current LIBOR spot curve to determine the present value of expected future cash flows produced in the stochastic projection process. Life Deferred Policy Acquisition Costs and Present Value of Future Profits Policy acquisition costs include commissions and certain other expenses that vary with and are primarily associated with acquiring business. Present value of future profits is an intangible asset recorded upon applying purchase accounting in an acquisition of a life insurance company. Deferred policy acquisition costs and the present value of future profits intangible asset are amortized in the same way. Both are amortized over the estimated life of the contracts acquired, usually 20 years. Within the following discussion, deferred policy acquisition costs and the present value of future profits intangible asset will be referred to as DAC . At December 31, 2004 and 2003, the carrying value of Life DAC was $7.4 billion and $6.6 billion, respectively. For statutory accounting purposes, such costs are expensed as incurred. DAC related to traditional policies are amortized over the premium-paying period in proportion to the present value of annual expected premium income. DAC related to investment contracts and universal life-type contracts are deferred and amortized using the retrospective deposit method. Under the retrospective deposit method, acquisition costs are amortized in proportion to the present value of estimated gross profits ( EGPs ), arising principally from projected investment, mortality and expense margins and surrender charges. The attributable portion of the DAC amortization is allocated to realized gains and losses on investments. The DAC balance is also adjusted through other comprehensive income by an amount that represents the amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs that would have been required as a charge or credit to operations had unrealized gains and losses on investments been realized. Actual gross profits can vary from management estimates, resulting in increases or decreases in the rate of amortization. Life regularly evaluates its EGPs to determine if actual experience or other evidence suggests that earlier estimates should be revised. In the event that Life were to revise its EGPs, the cumulative DAC amortization would be adjusted to reflect such revised EGPs in the period the revision was determined to be necessary. Several assumptions considered to be significant in the development of EGPs include separate account fund performance, surrender and lapse rates, estimated interest spread and estimated mortality. The separate account fund performance assumption is critical to the development of the EGPs related to Life variable annuity and to a lesser extent, variable universal life insurance businesses. The average annual long-term rate of assumed separate account fund performance (before mortality and expense charges) used in estimating gross profits for the variable annuity and variable universal life business was 9% for the years ended December 31, 2004 and 2003. For other products including fixed annuities and other universal life-type contracts, the average assumed investment yield ranged from 5.7% to 7.9% for both years ended December 31, 2004 and 2003. Life had developed models to evaluate its DAC asset, which allowed it to run a large number of stochastically determined scenarios of separate account fund performance. These scenarios were then utilized to calculate a statistically significant range of reasonable estimates of EGPs. This range was then compared to the present value of EGPs currently utilized in the DAC amortization model. As of December 31, 2004, the present value of the EGPs utilized in the DAC amortization model fall within a reasonable range of statistically calculated present value of EGPs. As a result, Life does not believe there is sufficient evidence to suggest that a revision to the EGPs (and therefore, a revision to the DAC) as of December 31, 2004 is necessary; however, if in the future the EGPs utilized in the DAC amortization model were to fall outside of the margin of the reasonable range of statistically calculated EGPs, a revision could be necessary. Furthermore, Life has estimated that the present value of the EGPs is likely to remain within a reasonable range if overall separate account returns decline by 25% or less over the next twelve months, and if certain other assumptions that are implicit in the computations of the EGPs are achieved. Additionally, Life continues to perform analyses with respect to the potential impact of a revision to future EGPs. If such a revision to EGPs were deemed necessary, Life would adjust, as appropriate, all of its assumptions for products accounted for in accordance with Statement of Financial Accounting Standards ( SFAS ) No. 97, Accounting and Reporting by Insurance Enterprises for Certain Long-Duration Contracts and for Realized Gains and Losses from the Sale of Investments , and reproject its future EGPs based on current account values at the end of the quarter in which a revision is deemed to be necessary. To illustrate the effects of this process, assume Life had concluded that a revision of Life EGPs was required at December 31, 2004. If Life assumed a 9% average long-term rate of growth from December 31, 2004 forward along with other appropriate assumption changes in determining the revised EGPs, Life estimates the cumulative decrease to amortization would be approximately $60-$65, after-tax. If instead Life were to assume a long-term growth rate of 8% in determining the revised EGPs, the adjustment would be approximately $20-$25, after-tax. Any such adjustment would not affect statutory income or surplus, due to the prescribed accounting for such amounts that is discussed above. Aside from absolute levels and timing of market performance assumptions, additional factors that will influence this determination include the degree of volatility in separate account fund performance and shifts in asset allocation within the separate account made by policyholders. The overall return generated by the separate account is dependent on several factors, including the relative mix of the underlying sub-accounts among bond funds and equity funds as well as equity sector weightings. Life overall separate account fund performance has been reasonably correlated to the overall performance of the S&P 500 Index (which closed at 1,212 on December 31, 2004), although no assurance can be provided that this correlation will continue in the future. The overall recoverability of the DAC asset is dependent on the future profitability of the business. Life tests the aggregate recoverability of the DAC asset by comparing the amounts deferred to the present value of total EGPs. In addition, Life routinely 31 Table of Contents stress tests its DAC asset for recoverability against severe declines in its separate account assets, which could occur if the equity markets experienced another significant sell-off, as the majority of policyholders funds in the separate accounts is invested in the equity market. As of December 31, 2004, Life believed variable annuity separate account assets could fall by at least 45% before portions of its DAC asset would be unrecoverable. Pension and Other Postretirement Benefit Obligations Pursuant to accounting principles related to the Company pension and other postretirement benefit obligations to employees under its various benefit plans, the Company is required to make a significant number of assumptions in order to estimate the related liabilities and expenses each period. The two economic assumptions that have the most impact on pension expense are the discount rate and the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets. In determining the discount rate assumption, the Company utilizes current market information provided by its plan actuaries, including a discounted cash flow analysis of the Company pension obligation and general movements in the current market environment. In particular, the Company uses an interest rate yield curve developed by its plan actuaries. The yield curve is comprised of bonds rated AA or higher with maturities primarily between zero and thirty years. Based on all available information, it was determined that 5.75% was the appropriate discount rate as of December 31, 2004 to calculate the Company accrued benefit liability. Accordingly, the 5.75% discount rate will also be used to determine the Company 2005 pension expense. At December 31, 2003, the discount rate was 6.25%. The Company determines the long-term rate of return assumption for the pension plan asset portfolio based on analysis of the portfolio historical rates of return balanced with future long-term return expectations. Based on its long-term outlook with respect to the markets, the Company maintained its long-term rate of return assumption at 8.50% as of December 31, 2004. To illustrate the impact of these assumptions on annual pension expense for 2005 and going forward, a 25 basis point change in the discount rate will increase/decrease pension expense by approximately $13 and a 25 basis point change in the long-term asset return assumption will increase/decrease pension expense by approximately $6. Contingencies Management follows the requirements of SFAS No. 5 Accounting for Contingencies . This statement requires management to evaluate each contingent matter separately. A loss is recorded if estimable and probable. Management establishes reserves for these contingencies at its best estimate , or, if no one number within the range of possible losses is more probable than any other, the Company records an estimated reserve at the low end of the range of losses. The majority of contingencies currently being evaluated by the Company relate to litigation matters, which are inherently difficult to evaluate and subject to significant changes. 32 Table of Contents CONSOLIDATED RESULTS OF OPERATIONS Operating Summary 2004 2003 2002 Earned premiums $ 13,566 $ 11,891 $ 10,811 Fee income 3,252 2,760 2,577 Net investment income 5,162 3,233 2,929 Other revenues 437 556 476 Net realized capital gains (losses) 276 293 (376 ) Total revenues 22,693 18,733 16,417 Benefits, claims and claim adjustment expenses 13,640 13,548 10,034 Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs and present value of future profits 2,828 2,411 2,241 Insurance operating costs and expenses 2,776 2,314 2,220 Interest expense 251 271 265 Other expenses 675 739 589 Total benefits, claims and expenses 20,170 19,283 15,349 Income (loss) before income taxes and cumulative effect of accounting change 2,523 (550 ) 1,068 Income tax expense (benefit) 385 (459 ) 68 Income (loss) before cumulative effect of accounting change 2,138 (91 ) 1,000 Cumulative effect of accounting change, net of tax [1] (23 ) Net income (loss) $ 2,115 $ (91 ) $ 1,000 [1] Represents the cumulative impact of the Company adoption of SOP 03-1. Net Income (Loss) by Operation and Life Segment Life Retail Products Group $ 526 $ 430 $ 356 Institutional Solutions Group 124 83 108 Individual Life 153 145 133 Group Benefits 229 148 128 Other [1] 350 39 (95 ) Total Life 1,382 845 630 Total Property & Casualty [1] 910 (745 ) 543 Corporate (177 ) (191 ) (173 ) Net income (loss) $ 2,115 $ (91 ) $ 1,000 [1] For the year ended December 31, 2004, Life includes a $190 tax benefit recorded in its Other category and Property & Casualty includes a $26 tax benefit, which relate to agreement with the IRS on the resolution of matters pertaining to tax years prior to 2004. For further discussion of this benefit, see Note 12 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Underwriting Results by Property & Casualty Segment Business Insurance $ 360 $ 158 $ 94 Personal Lines 138 130 (31 ) Specialty Commercial (53 ) 10 6 Other Operations [1] (448 ) (2,840 ) (220 ) [1] Includes $2,604 of before-tax net asbestos reserve strengthening in 2003. Operating Results 2004 Compared to 2003 - Net income for the year ended December 31, 2004 increased $2.2 billion, compared to the prior year which reflected a $1.7 billion after-tax charge to strengthen net asbestos reserves based on a ground up study. Also contributing to the increase was a $216 tax benefit, of which $190 was recorded in Life and $26 was recorded in Property & Casualty, primarily consisting of the benefit related to the separate account dividends-received deduction ( DRD ) and interest. For further discussion, see Note 12 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Also contributing to the change in net income was growth in all of Life segments and improved underwriting results in the Business Insurance segment. Offsetting these increases were increased Property & Casualty catastrophe losses, primarily related to hurricanes Charley, Frances, Ivan and Jeanne. Revenues for the year ended December 31, 2004 increased $4.0 billion over the comparable 2003 period. The primary contributors to this increase were higher earned premiums in the Group Benefits, Business Insurance, Personal Lines and Specialty Commercial segments; increased fee income in the Retail Products Group segment; and an increase in net investment income. The increase in earned premiums for Group Benefits was driven by primarily the CNA acquisition, sales growth and favorable persistency. The increase in earned premiums in the Business Insurance, Personal Lines and Specialty Commercial segments was due to earned pricing increases and growth in new business premiums out pacing non-renewals for Personal Lines and Business Insurance. The increase in 33 Table of Contents fee income for Retail Products resulted from an increase in variable annuity average account values. The increase in net investment income was due primarily to the adoption of Statement of Position 03-1, Accounting and Reporting by Insurance Enterprises for Certain Nontraditional Long-Duration Contracts and for Separate Accounts ( SOP 03-1 ), which resulted in $1.6 billion of net investment income. 2003 Compared to 2002 Revenues for the year ended December 31, 2003 increased $2.3 billion over the comparable 2002 period. Revenues increased due to earned premium growth within the Business Insurance, Specialty Commercial and Personal Lines segments, primarily as a result of earned pricing increases, higher earned premiums and net investment income in the Retail Products segment and net realized capital gains in 2003 as compared to net realized capital losses in 2002. Total benefits, claims and expenses increased $3.9 billion for the year ended December 31, 2003 over the comparable prior year period primarily due to the Company $2.6 billion asbestos reserve strengthening during the first quarter of 2003 and due to increases in the Retail Products segment associated with the growth in the individual annuity and institutional investments businesses. The net loss for the year ended December 31, 2003 was primarily due to the Company first quarter 2003 asbestos reserve strengthening of $1.7 billion, after-tax. Included in net loss for the year ended December 31, 2003 are $40 of after-tax expense related to the settlement of litigation with Bancorp Services, LLC ( Bancorp ) and $27 of severance charges, after-tax, in Property & Casualty. Included in net income for the year ended December 31, 2002 are the $8 after-tax benefit recognized by Hartford Life, Inc. ( HLI ) related to the reduction of HLI reserves associated with September 11 and $11 of after-tax expense related to litigation with Bancorp. Net Realized Capital Gains and Losses See Investment Results in the Investments section. Income Taxes The effective tax rate for 2004, 2003 and 2002 was 15%, 83% and 6%, respectively. The principal causes of the difference between the effective rates and the U.S. statutory rate of 35% were tax-exempt interest earned on invested assets, the dividends-received deduction, the tax benefit associated with the settlement of the 1998-2001 IRS audit in 2004 and the tax benefit associated with the settlement of the 1996-1997 IRS audit in 2002. Income taxes paid (received) in 2004, 2003 and 2002 were $32, ($107) and ($102) respectively. For additional information, see Note 13 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Per Common Share The following table represents earnings per common share data for the past three years: 2004 2003 2002 Basic earnings (loss) per share $ 7.24 $ (0.33 ) $ 4.01 Diluted earnings (loss) per share [1] $ 7.12 $ (0.33 ) $ 3.97 Weighted average common shares outstanding (basic) 292.3 272.4 249.4 Weighted average common shares outstanding and dilutive potential common shares (diluted) [1] 297.0 272.4 251.8 [1] As a result of the net loss for the year ended December 31, 2003, SFAS No. 128, Earnings Per Share , requires the Company to use basic weighted average common shares outstanding in the calculation of the year ended December 31, 2003 diluted earnings (loss) per share, since the inclusion of options of 1.8 would have been antidilutive to the earnings per share calculation. In the absence of the net loss, weighted average common shares outstanding and dilutive potential common shares would have totaled 274.2. LIFE Executive Overview The Company provides investment and retirement products such as variable and fixed annuities, mutual funds and retirement plan services and other institutional products; individual and corporate owned life insurance; and, group benefit products, such as group life and group disability insurance. The Company derives its revenues principally from: (a) fee income, including asset management fees, on separate account and mutual fund assets and mortality and expense fees, as well as cost of insurance charges; (b) net investment income on general account assets; (c) fully insured premiums; and (d) certain other fees. Asset management fees and mortality and expense fees are primarily generated from separate account assets, which are deposited with the Company through the sale of variable annuity and variable universal life products and from mutual funds. Cost of insurance charges are assessed on the net amount at risk for investment-oriented life insurance products. Premium revenues are derived primarily from the sale of group life, and group disability and individual term insurance products. The Company expenses essentially consist of interest credited to policyholders on general account liabilities, insurance benefits provided, amortization of the deferred policy acquisition costs, expenses related to the selling and servicing the various products offered by the Company, dividends to policyholders, and other general business expenses. 34 Table of Contents The Company profitability in its variable annuity, mutual fund and to a lesser extent, variable universal life businesses depends largely on the amount of the contract holder account value or assets under management on which it earns fees and the level of fees charged. Changes in account value or assets under management are driven by two main factors: net flows, which measure the success of the Company asset gathering and retention efforts, and the market return of the funds, which is heavily influenced by the return on the equity markets. Net flows are comprised of new sales and other deposits less surrenders, death benefits, policy charges and annuitizations of investment type contracts, for instance, variable annuity contracts. In the mutual fund business, net flows are known as net sales. Net sales are comprised of new sales less redemptions of mutual fund customers. The Company uses the average daily value of the S&P 500 Index as an indicator for evaluating market returns of the underlying account portfolios in the United States. Relative profitability of variable products is highly correlated to the growth in account values or assets under management since these products generally earn fee income on a daily basis. Thus, a prolonged downturn in the financial markets could reduce revenues and potentially raise the possibility of a charge against deferred policy acquisition costs. The profitability of the Company fixed annuities and other spread based products depends largely on its ability to earn target spreads between earned investment rates on its general account assets and interest credited to policyholders. Profitability is also influenced by operating expense management including the benefits of economies of scale in the administration of its United States variable annuity businesses in particular. In addition, the size and persistency of gross profits from these businesses is an important driver of earnings as it affects the rate of amortization of the deferred policy acquisition costs. The Company profitability in its individual life insurance and group benefits businesses depends largely on the size of its in force block, the adequacy of product pricing and underwriting discipline, actual mortality and morbidity experience, and the efficiency of its claims and expense management. Performance Measures Fee Income Fee income is largely driven from amounts collected as a result of contractually defined percentages of assets under management on investment type contracts. These fees are generally collected on a daily basis from the contract holder account. For individual life insurance products, fees are contractually defined percentages based on levels of insurance, age, premiums and deposits collected and contractholder account value. Life insurance fees are generally collected on a monthly basis. Therefore, the growth in assets under management either through positive net flows or net sales and favorable equity market performance will have a favorable impact on fee income. Conversely, negative net flows or net sales and unfavorable equity market performance will reduce fee income generated from investment type contracts. For years ended Product/Key Indicator Information 2004 2003 2002 United States Variable Annuities Account value at December 31, $ 99,617 $ 86,501 $ 64,343 Net flows 5,471 7,709 2,127 Change in market value 7,645 14,449 (12,365 ) Retail Mutual Funds Assets under management at December 31, $ 25,240 $ 20,301 $ 14,079 Net sales 2,505 2,155 1,951 Change in market value 2,522 4,142 (3,232 ) Individual Life Insurance Variable universal life account value at December 31, $ 5,356 $ 4,725 $ 3,648 Total life insurance inforce 139,889 130,798 126,680 S&P500 Index Year end closing value 1,212 1,112 880 Daily average value 1,131 965 995 Net Investment Income and Interest Credited Certain investment type contracts such as fixed annuities and other spread-based contracts generate deposits that the Company collects and invests to earn investment income. In addition, insurance type contracts such as those sold by the Group Benefits segment collect premiums (discussed below) for protection from losses specified in the particular insurance contract. These deposits and premiums together comprise the majority of the assets of the general account that are invested to generate investment income for the Company. The investment type contracts use this investment income to credit the contract holder an amount of interest specified in the respective contract. As discussed in the overview, the amount of investment income earned in excess of the interest credited to the contract holder is the spread income earned by the Company. For insurance type contracts, net investment income earned during the time that premiums are invested prior to paying claims and expenses supports the profitability of these products. 35 Table of Contents For the Years Ended 2004 2003 2002 Net Investment Income Retail Products Group segment $ 1,077 $ 494 $ 368 Institutional Solutions Group segment 1,061 995 977 Individual Life segment 302 256 262 Group Benefits segment 375 264 258 Other 1,079 32 (16 ) Total net investment income $ 3,894 $ 2,041 $ 1,849 Interest Credited on General Account Assets Retail Products Group segment $ 880 $ 325 $ 256 Institutional Solutions Group segment 587 566 547 Individual Life segment 216 192 196 Other 798 Total interest credited on general account assets $ 2,481 $ 1,083 $ 999 The significant increase in net investment income and interest credited in the Retail Products Group segment and Other and, to a lesser extent Individual Life segment was largely the result of the adoption of SOP 03-1. The adoption of SOP 03-1 resulted in certain changes in presentation in the Company financial statements, including reporting of the spreads on the Company MVA fixed annuities and variable annuity products offered in Japan on a gross basis in net investment income and interest credited. The increase in net investment income for the Group Benefits segment was primarily due to the acquisition of the group benefits business of CNA at December 31, 2003. Premiums As discussed above, traditional insurance type products collect premiums from policyholders in exchange for financial protection of the policy holder from a specified insurable loss, such as death or disability. These premiums together with net investment income earned from the overall investment strategy are used to pay the contractual obligations under these insurance contracts. Two major factors, new sales and persistency, impact premium growth. Sales can increase or decrease in a given year based on a number of factors, including but not limited to, customer demand for the Company product offerings, pricing competition, distribution channels and the Company reputation and ratings. A majority of sales correspond with the open enrollment periods of employers benefits, typically January 1 or July 1. Persistency is a measure of business retention during a renewal period. For the Years Ended Group Benefits Segment 2004 2003 2002 Total premiums and other considerations $ 3,652 $ 2,362 $ 2,327 Fully insured ongoing sales 632 507 597 Persistency [1] 88 % 81 % 83 % [1] The persistency rate represents the employer group life and disability business, which accounts for 65-70% of inforce premiums, excluding the CNA acquisition. For comparability purposes, the 2004 persistency rate excludes the CNA acquisition. The significant increase in premiums for the Group Benefits segment in 2004 compared to 2003 is the result of the earned premium growth as the result of the CNA acquisition as well as in the pre-acquisition Group Benefits business. The increase in earned premiums of the pre-acquisition Group Benefits business was driven by sales and favorable persistency. Expenses There are three major categories for expenses. The first major category of expenses is benefits and claims. These include the costs of mortality and morbidity, particularly in the group benefits, and mortality in the individual life businesses, as well as other contractholder benefits to policyholders. In addition, traditional insurance type products generally use a loss ratio which is expressed as the amount of benefits incurred during a particular period divided by total premiums and other considerations, as a key indicator of underwriting performance. Since the Group Benefits segment occasionally buys a block of claims for a stated premium amount, the Company excludes this buyout from the loss ratio used for evaluating the underwriting results of the business as buyouts may distort the loss ratio. The second major category is insurance operating costs and expenses, which is commonly expressed in a ratio of a revenue measure depending on the type of business. The third category is the amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs and the present value of future profits, which is typically expressed as a percentage of pre-tax income before the cost of this amortization. The individual annuity business within the Retail Products Group segment accounts for the majority of the amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs and present value of future profits for the Company. 36 Table of Contents For the Years Ended 2004 2003 2002 Retail Products Group Segment Insurance expenses, net of deferrals $ 742 $ 602 $ 568 Expense ratio (individual annuity business) 18.3 bps 22.0 bps 24.5 bps DAC amortization ratio (individual annuity) 50.8 % 49.6 % 47.0 % Individual Life Segment Death benefits $ 245 $ 224 $ 232 Insurance expenses, net of deferrals $ 164 $ 161 $ 159 Group Benefits Segment Total benefits and claims $ 2,703 $ 1,862 $ 1,878 Loss ratio (excluding buyout premiums) 74.0 % 78.5 % 80.6 % Insurance expenses, net of deferrals $ 989 $ 553 $ 524 Expense ratio 27.7 % 24.6 % 23.4 % The increase in the expense ratio for the Group Benefits segment in 2004 compared to 2003 is the result of the CNA Acquisition. As part of the CNA Acquisition, a larger block of affinity business is now included in the Group Benefits segment and this business typically has lower expected loss ratios and higher expected commission ratios than other products within the business. Profitability Management evaluates the rates of return various businesses can provide as a way of determining where additional capital is invested to increase net income and shareholder returns. Specifically, because of the importance of its individual annuity products, the Company uses the return on assets for the individual annuity business for evaluating profitability. In Group Benefits, after tax margin is a key indicator of overall profitability. Ratios 2004 2003 2002 Retail Products Group Segment Individual annuity return on assets 44.8 bps 45.9 bps 41.8 bps Group Benefits Segment After tax margin 6.3 % 6.4 % 5.5 % Operating Summary 2004 2003 2002 Fee income $ 3,245 $ 2,760 $ 2,577 Earned premiums 4,072 3,086 2,697 Net investment income [1] 3,894 2,041 1,849 Other revenues 131 120 Net realized capital gains (losses) 149 40 (308 ) Total revenues 11,360 8,058 6,935 Benefits, claims and claim adjustment expenses [1] 6,630 4,616 4,158 Insurance operating costs and expenses 2,133 1,535 1,438 Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs and present value of future profits 978 769 628 Other expenses 12 72 32 Total benefits, claims and expenses 9,753 6,992 6,256 Income before income taxes and cumulative effect of accounting change 1,607 1,066 679 Income tax expense 202 221 49 Income before cumulative effect of accounting change 1,405 845 630 Cumulative effect of accounting change, net of tax [2] (23 ) Net income $ 1,382 $ 845 $ 630 [1] With the adoption of SOP 03-1, certain annuity and individual life products were required to be accounted for in the general account. This change in accounting resulted in an increase of $1,637 in net investment income, an increase of $1,387 in benefits, claims and claim adjustment expenses and a decrease of $131 in other revenues for the year ended December 31, 2004, respectively. [2] For the years ended December 31, 2004, represents the cumulative impact of the Company adoption of SOP 03-1. Life changed its reportable operating segments in 2004 from Investment Products, Individual Life, Group Benefits and Corporate Owned Life Insurance ( COLI ) to Retail Products Group ( Retail ), Institutional Solutions Group ( Institutional ), Individual Life and Group Benefits. Retail offers individual variable and fixed annuities, mutual funds, retirement plan products and services to corporations under Section 401(k) plans and other investment products. Institutional primarily offers retirement plan products and services to municipalities under Section 457 plans, other institutional investment products, structured settlements, and private placement life insurance. Individual Life sells a variety of life insurance products, including variable universal life, universal life, interest sensitive whole life and term life insurance. Group Benefits sells group insurance products, including group life and group disability insurance as well as other products, including medical stop loss and supplementary medical coverages to employers and employer sponsored plans, accidental death and dismemberment, travel accident and other special risk coverages to employers and associations. Life also includes, in an Other category, its international operations, which are primarily located in Japan and Brazil; net realized capital gains and losses other than periodic net coupon settlements on non-qualifying derivatives and net realized capital gains and losses related to guaranteed minimum withdrawal benefits; corporate items not directly allocated to any of its reportable operating segments; and intersegment eliminations. Periodic net coupon settlements on non-qualifying derivatives and net realized capital gains 37 Table of Contents and losses related to guaranteed minimum withdrawal benefits are reflected in each applicable segment in net realized capital gains and losses. 2004 Compared to 2003 Life net income increased due primarily to business growth in virtually all lines of business as discussed below, a lower effective income tax rate, and higher net realized capital gains. (See the Investments section for further discussion of investment results and related realized capital gains.) During the third quarter of 2004, the Internal Revenue Service completed its examination of the 1998-2001 tax years. (For further discussion see Note 12 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements under Tax Matters). Life recorded in the third quarter of 2004 a tax benefit of $190, consisting primarily of a change in estimate of the dividends-received deduction ( DRD ) tax benefit reported during 2003 and prior years and interest, and changed the estimate of the after-tax benefit for the DRD benefit related to the 2004 tax year. Net income in the Retail segment increased, principally driven by growth in the variable annuity and mutual fund businesses as a result of increasing assets under management. Partially offsetting the increase in the Retail segment was lower spread income on market value adjusted ( MVA ) fixed annuities due to the adoption of SOP 03-1. Net income in the Group Benefits segment increased due primarily to increased earned premiums and net investment income growth, primarily resulting from the Company acquisition of the group life and accident, and short-term and long-term disability businesses of CNA Financial Corporation ( CNA Acquisition ). In addition, the Group Benefits segment was impacted by favorable persistency in most businesses and lower benefit costs in the group life line. Net income in the Institutional segment was higher as a result of a decrease in other expenses related to private placement life insurance business compared to the respective prior year period. The decrease in other expenses for the current year is attributed to a $40 after-tax charge, recorded in the third quarter ended September 30, 2003, associated with the settlement of the Bancorp Services, LLC ( Bancorp ) litigation. Additionally, net income was higher for Individual Life and the international operations. The increase in Individual Life earnings was primarily driven by improved net investment spread income including the effects of prepayments and growth in account values and life insurance in force. Net income for the international operations, which is included in the other category, increased over the prior year primarily driven by the increase in assets under management of the Japan annuity business. Japan assets under management have grown to $14.7 billion at December 31, 2004 from $6.2 billion at December 31, 2003. During 2004, the Company introduced market value adjusted fixed annuity products to provide a diversified product portfolio to customers in Japan. The effective tax rate was 13% for Life operations for the current year as compared to an effective tax rate of 21% for Life operations for the respective prior year period. The lower effective tax rate was attributed to tax related items, as discussed above, of $190 and a 2004 tax year DRD benefit of $132, as compared to tax related items of $30 and a 2003 tax year DRD benefit of $87 reported for the years ended December 31, 2004 and 2003, respectively. Slightly offsetting the positive earnings drivers for the year ended December 31, 2004 was the cumulative effect of accounting change from the Company adoption of SOP 03-1. The adoption of SOP 03-1 also resulted in certain changes in presentation in the Company financial statements, including reporting of the spreads on the Company MVA fixed annuities and variable annuity products offered in Japan on a gross basis in net investment income and benefits expense. Exclusive of the cumulative effect, overall application of SOP 03-1 resulted in an immaterial reduction in net income. (For further discussion of the impact of the Company adoption of SOP 03-1, see Note 1 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements). 2003 Compared to 2002 Net income increased for the year ended December 31, 2003 due primarily to the growth in the Retail segment and a decrease in net realized capital losses compared to 2002. The earnings growth in the Retail segment is due to an increase in fee income and net investment income. Fee income in the Retail segment was higher in 2003 compared to 2002, as a result of higher average account values, specifically in individual annuities and mutual fund businesses, due primarily to stronger variable annuity sales as well as market appreciation. Net investment income in Retail increased due to higher general account assets in the individual annuity business. Also contributing to the net income growth was higher earnings in Group Benefits, primarily due to increases in earned premiums and favorable claims. Additionally, Individual Life experienced earnings growth due to increases in fees and cost of insurance as life insurance in-force grew and aged, and variable universal life account values increased 30% due primarily to the growth in the equity markets and favorable mortality. Partially offsetting these increases was a decrease in Institutional net income for the year ended December 31, 2003, as compared to the prior year period. This decrease is attributed to a $40 after-tax charge, recorded in the third quarter of 2003 associated with the settlement of the Bancorp litigation. In addition, there was an $8 after-tax benefit recorded in the first quarter of 2002 related to favorable development on the Company estimated September 11 exposure. The effective tax rate increased in 2003 when compared with 2002 as a result of higher earnings and lower DRD related tax items. The tax provision recorded during 2003 reflects a benefit of $30, consisting primarily of a change in estimate of the DRD tax benefit reported during 2002. The change in estimate was the result of actual 2002 investment performance on the related separate accounts being unexpectedly out of pattern with past performance, which had been the basis for the estimate. This compares with a tax benefit of $76 recorded in 2002. The total DRD benefit related to the 2003 tax year for the year ended December 31, 2003 was $87 as compared to $63 for the year ended December 31, 2002. Outlook In 2004, the Company experienced record earnings driven by strong growth in assets under management, favorable premium growth and loss ratios in Group Benefits, strong expense management, and a DRD tax benefit related to prior years of $190. Due to gains in the equity markets and positive net flows, assets under management grew 18%, resulting in increased fee income earned on those assets. The growth and profitability of the Company in the future is dependent to a large degree on the performance of the equity 38 Table of Contents markets as well as each segment ability to attract new customers and attract and retain assets under management. Please refer to each segment results for outlooks on specific segments and products. Also contributing to the Company performance in 2004 was increased earnings in the Other category, which was primarily the result of the growth in assets under management in the international operations. This growth was driven by record sales of $7.8 billion and positive net flows in Japan, which combined with gains in the equity market increased assets under management to $14.7 billion at December 31, 2004 from $6.2 billion at December 31, 2003. Although the Company international operations experienced significant growth during 2004, Japanese regulations combined with competition could adversely affect the Company ability to exceed or sustain the level of new sales and net flows attained in 2004. A description of each segment as well as an analysis of the operating results summarized above is included on the following pages. RETAIL PRODUCTS GROUP Operating Summary 2004 2003 2002 Fee income and other $ 2,098 $ 1,703 $ 1,591 Earned premiums 7 (31 ) (24 ) Net investment income 1,077 494 368 Net realized capital gains 21 7 Total revenues 3,182 2,187 1,942 Benefits, claims and claim adjustment expenses 1,120 568 486 Insurance operating costs and other expenses 742 602 568 Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs and present value of future profits 661 509 436 Total benefits, claims and expenses 2,523 1,679 1,490 Income before income taxes and cumulative effect of accounting change 659 508 452 Income tax expense 114 78 96 Income before cumulative effect of accounting change 545 430 356 Cumulative effect of accounting change, net of tax [1] (19 ) Net income $ 526 $ 430 $ 356 Assets Under Management 2004 2003 2002 Individual variable annuity account values $ 99,617 $ 86,501 $ 64,343 Individual fixed annuity and other account values 11,384 11,215 10,565 Other retail products account values 6,713 4,654 2,972 Total account values [2] 117,714 102,370 77,880 Retail mutual fund assets under management 25,240 20,301 14,079 Other mutual fund assets under management 1,396 953 480 Total mutual fund assets under management 26,636 21,254 14,559 Total assets under management $ 144,350 $ 123,624 $ 92,439 [1] Represents the cumulative impact of the Company adoption of SOP 03-1. [2] Includes policyholders balances for investment contracts and reserve for future policy benefits for insurance contracts. The Retail Products Group segment focuses on the savings and retirement needs of the growing number of individuals who are preparing for retirement, or have already retired, through the sale of individual variable and fixed annuities, mutual funds, retirement plan services and other investment products. The Company is both a leading writer of individual variable annuities and a top seller of individual variable annuities through banks in the United States. 2004 Compared to 2003 Net income increased for the year ended December 31, 2004, principally driven by higher fee income from double digit growth in the assets under management in virtually all businesses of the segment and strong expense management. Fee income generated by the variable annuity operation increased, as average account values were higher in the current year compared to the respective prior year periods. The increase in average account values can be attributed to market appreciation of $7.6 billion and net flows of $5.5 billion during 2004. Another contributing factor to the increase in fee income was the increase in assets under management in the mutual fund and 401(k) businesses. Retail mutual fund assets under management increased 24% principally due to net sales and market appreciation of $2.5 billion each during 2004. In addition, 401(k) assets under management grew 40% to $7.3 billion as a result of favorable net flows and market conditions. Partially offsetting the positive earnings drivers discussed above were higher DAC amortization costs, lower income from the fixed annuity business and the cumulative effect of accounting change from the Company adoption of SOP 03-1. DAC amortization was higher in the current year as compared to the prior year due to higher subsequent deposit activity, primarily in individual annuity. The decrease in net income in the fixed annuity business in 2004 compared to 2003 was principally due to lower investment spread from the market value adjusted ( MVA ) product. With the adoption of SOP 03-1, the Company includes the investment return from the fixed annuity product in net investment income and includes interest credited to contract holders in the benefits, claims and expenses line on the income statement rather than reporting the net spread in fee income and other. Additionally, income tax expense was higher for the current year due primarily to higher income earned by the segment. This increase was largely offset by a higher DRD 39 Table of Contents tax benefit of $115 related to the 2004 tax year reported for the year ended December 31, 2004, as discussed above, as compared to the DRD tax benefit of $79 related to the 2003 tax year reported in the comparable prior year period. 2003 Compared to 2002 Net income was higher driven by an increase in revenues in the individual annuity and other retail product operations as a result of the strong net flows and growth in the equity markets during 2003 and strong expense management. Net income increased due to an increase in fee income in Retail. Fee income in Retail was higher in 2003 compared to 2002, as a result of higher average account values, specifically in individual annuities and mutual fund businesses, due primarily to stronger variable annuity sales and the higher equity market values compared to the prior year. Net investment income increased due to higher general account assets. General account assets for the individual annuity business were $9.4 billion as of December 31, 2003, an increase of approximately $800 or 9% from 2002, due primarily to an increase in individual annuity sales, with the majority of those new sales electing to use the dollar cost averaging ( DCA ) feature. The DCA feature allows policyholders to earn a credited interest rate in the general account for a defined period of time as their invested assets are systematically invested into the separate account funds. Additionally, there was increased interest credited in the individual annuity operation as a result of higher general account asset levels and an increase in amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs related to the individual annuity business due to higher gross profits. In addition, net income increased in 2003 compared to 2002 due to the favorable impact of $19, resulting from the Company previously discussed change in estimate of the DRD tax benefit reported during 2002. The change in estimate was the result of 2002 actual investment performance on the related separate accounts being unexpectedly out of pattern with past performance, which had been the basis for the estimate. The total DRD benefit related to the 2003 tax year for the year ended December 31, 2003 was $79 as compared to $59 for the year ended December 31, 2002. Outlook Management believes the market for retirement products continues to expand as individuals increasingly save and plan for retirement. Demographic trends suggest that as the baby boom generation matures, a significant portion of the United States population will allocate a greater percentage of their disposable incomes to saving for their retirement years due to uncertainty surrounding the Social Security system and increases in average life expectancy. Individual annuity sales in 2004 were $15.7 billion (a 5% decrease) compared to $16.5 billion in 2003, and 401(k) products experienced an increase of 37% in sales in 2004 compared to 2003. Significantly contributing to the Company variable annuity sales during 2004 and 2003 was Principal First, a guaranteed minimum withdrawal benefit ( GMWB ) rider, which was developed in response to our customers needs. However, competition has increased substantially in this market with most major variable annuity writers now offering GMWB riders and as a result, the Company may not be able to sustain the level of sales attained in 2004. In an effort to meet diverse customer needs, in the fourth quarter of 2004 the Company introduced Principal First Preferred, a lower cost GMWB alternative to Principal First. The success of this new product will ultimately be based on customer acceptance. According to VARDS, the Company had 11.87% market share as of December 31, 2004 as compared to 12.6% at December 31, 2003. With the increased competition in the variable annuity market causing lower sales levels from the record level in 2003, combined with an aging block of business, net flows may decline from levels experienced in 2004. This will be largely dependent on the Company ability to retain contractholder account values as they reach the end of the surrender charge period of their contract. In addition, net flows in the Company fixed annuity block may be impacted by approximately $2 billion of contracts reaching renewal dates in 2005 at crediting rates significantly above those offered currently. The growth and profitability of the individual annuity and mutual fund businesses is dependent to a large degree on the performance of the equity markets. In periods of favorable equity market performance, the Company may experience stronger sales and higher net flows, which will increase assets under management and thus increase fee income earned on those assets. In addition, higher equity market levels will generally reduce certain costs to the Company of individual annuities, such as guaranteed minimum death benefits ( GMDB ) and GMWB benefits. Conversely, weak equity markets may dampen sales activity and increase surrender activity causing declines in assets under management and lower fee income. Such declines in the equity markets will also increase the cost to the Company of GMDB and GMWB benefits associated with individual annuities. The Company attempts to mitigate some of the volatility associated with the GMDB and GMWB benefits using reinsurance or other risk management strategies, such as hedging. Future net income for the Company will be affected by the effectiveness of the risk management strategies the Company has implemented to mitigate the net income volatility associated with the GMDB and GMWB benefits of variable annuity contracts. For spread based products sold in the Retail segment, the future growth will depend on the ability to earn targeted returns on new business given competition, retention of account values in the fixed annuity business where the contract holder rate guarantee expires in the upcoming year, and the future interest rate environment. 40 Table of Contents INSTITUTIONAL SOLUTIONS GROUP Operating Summary 2004 2003 2002 Fee income and other $ 307 $ 308 $ 356 Earned premiums 471 795 421 Net investment income 1,061 995 977 Net realized capital gains 7 12 3 Total revenues 1,846 2,110 1,757 Benefits, claims and claim adjustment expenses 1,513 1,749 1,369 Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs and present value of future profits 37 34 8 Insurance operating costs and expenses 127 212 224 Total benefits, claims and expenses 1,677 1,995 1,601 Income before income taxes and cumulative effect of accounting change 169 115 156 Income tax expense 44 32 48 Income before cumulative effect of accounting change 125 83 108 Cumulative effect of accounting change, net of tax [1] (1 ) Net income $ 124 $ 83 $ 108 Assets Under Management 2004 2003 2002 Institutional account values $ 14,599 $ 12,660 $ 9,738 Governmental account values 9,962 8,965 7,211 Private Placement Life Insurance account values Variable products 22,498 20,993 19,674 Leveraged COLI 2,529 2,524 3,321 Total Private Placement Life Insurance account values [2] 25,027 23,517 22,995 Mutual fund assets under management 1,432 1,208 762 Total assets under management $ 51,020 $ 46,350 $ 40,706 [1] Represents the cumulative impact of the Company adoption of SOP 03-1. [2] Includes policyholder balances for investment contracts and reserves for future policy benefits for insurance contracts The Institutional Solutions Group primarily offers customized wealth creation and financial protection for institutions, corporate and government employers and high net worth individuals through its three business units: Government, Institutional Investment Products ( IIP ) and private placement life insurance ( PPLI ) (formerly Corporate Owned Life Insurance or COLI ). 2004 Compared to 2003 Net income for the year ended December 31, 2004 increased primarily due to decreases in other expenses related to PPLI business compared to the prior year. The decrease in other expenses was primarily attributed to a $40 after-tax charge, recorded in the third quarter ended September 30, 2003, associated with the settlement of the Bancorp litigation. In addition, the governmental business contributed higher income for the current year. This increase was primarily attributable to higher revenues earned from the growth in the average account values as a result of positive net flows and market appreciation since the prior year coupled with improved spreads and expense management. Partially offsetting increases in segment net income for the current year was lower income from the IIP and PPLI businesses, excluding the settlement of the Bancorp litigation. For a discussion of the Bancorp litigation, see Note 12 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. The decrease in net income in the IIP was due primarily to lower spread income and slightly higher insurance operating costs for the year ended December 31, 2004 as compared to 2003. In addition, the IIP reported lower earnings for the current year compared to the prior year due to favorable mortality experience in 2003. PPLI also experienced lower earnings for the year ended December 31, 2004 as compared to 2003 due to lower average leveraged COLI account values. Additionally, income tax expense was higher for the current year due primarily to decreases in other expenses related to the PPLI business, as discussed above. This increase in income tax expense was partially offset by a higher DRD tax benefit of $11 related to the 2004 tax year, as compared to the DRD tax benefit of $4 related to the 2003 tax year reported in the prior year period. 2003 Compared to 2002 Net income decreased in 2003 compared to 2002 principally as a result of lower income from the PPLI business due to an increase in other expenses. Other expenses increased due primarily to a $40 after-tax expense, related to the Bancorp litigation expense recorded in 2003 compared with the $11 after-tax expense recorded in 2002. Excluding the expenses associated with the Bancorp litigation, net income increased $4 or 9%, primarily due to higher income in the institutional investment products business as a result of favorable mortality experience and growth in average assets over the last twelve months. General account assets under management related to the IIP increased 32% since December 31, 2002, to $9.9 billion as of December 31, 2003. The increase in general account assets was primarily due to higher net flows and market appreciation related to institutional annuities and structured settlement products. Partially offsetting the increase in earnings in the IIP was lower PPLI income due to the decline in leveraged COLI account values as a result of surrender activity and lower sales volume of PPLI products in 2003 as compared to the prior year. In addition, amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs increased as a result of higher sales in the institutional investment products business. 41 Table of Contents Outlook The future net income of this segment will depend on the Company ability to increase assets under management and maintain its investment spread earnings on the majority of the products sold in largely the IIP and Government businesses. These markets are highly competitive from a pricing perspective, and a small number of cases often account for a significant portion of sales, therefore the Company may not be able to sustain the level of assets under management growth attained in 2004. In 2004, IIP introduced the Hartford Income Notes, a new funding agreement backed product that provides the Company with opportunity for future growth. This product provides access to both a multi-billion-dollar retail market, and a nearly trillion dollar institutional market. These markets are very competitive and the Company success depends in part on the level of credited interest rates and the Company credit rating. The focus of the PPLI business is variable PPLI products to fund non-qualified benefits or other post employment benefit liabilities. The leveraged COLI business, while in run-off, has been an important contributor to PPLI profitability in recent years and will continue to contribute to the profitability of the Company albeit at lower levels. The market served by PPLI is subject to extensive legal and regulatory review that could have an adverse effect on its business. INDIVIDUAL LIFE Operating Summary 2004 2003 2002 Fee income and other $ 767 $ 747 $ 705 Earned premiums (21 ) (20 ) (8 ) Net investment income 302 256 262 Net realized capital losses (1 ) (1 ) Total revenues 1,048 982 958 Benefits, claims and claim adjustment expenses 480 436 443 Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs and present value of future profits 180 176 160 Insurance operating costs and other expenses 164 161 159 Total benefits, claims and expenses 824 773 762 Income before income taxes and cumulative effect of accounting change 224 209 196 Income tax expense 70 64 63 Income before cumulative effect of accounting change 154 145 133 Cumulative effect of accounting change, net of tax [1] (1 ) Net income $ 153 $ 145 $ 133 Account Value Variable universal life account values $ 5,356 $ 4,725 3,648 Universal life/interest sensitive whole life 3,402 3,259 3,139 Modified guaranteed life and other 729 742 770 Total account values $ 9,487 $ 8,726 $ 7,557 Life Insurance Inforce Variable universal life insurance inforce $ 69,089 $ 67,031 66,715 Universal life/interest sensitive whole life 39,109 38,320 38,457 Modified guaranteed life and other 31,691 25,447 21,508 Total life insurance inforce $ 139,889 $ 130,798 126,680 [1] Represents the cumulative impact of the Company adoption of SOP 03-1. The Individual Life segment provides life insurance solutions to a wide array of partners to solve the wealth protection, accumulation and transfer needs of their affluent, emerging affluent and business insurance clients. 2004 Compared to 2003 Net income in the Individual Life segment increased for the year ended December 31, 2004 as compared to the prior year, primarily driven by business growth and improved investment spreads. Account values and inforce grew 9% and 7% from 2003 to 2004. Net investment income increased for the current year as compared to the prior year primarily due to the adoption of SOP 03-1, growth in general account values and prepayments on bonds. The adoption of SOP 03-1 also resulted in increases in benefits, claims and claim adjustment expenses and a decrease to fee income and other for the year ended December 31, 2004 as compared to the prior year period for the segment Modified Guarantee Life Insurance product, which was formerly classified as a separate account product. Fee income increased primarily due to increased cost of insurance charges as life insurance inforce grew and aged and variable universal life account values increased driven by favorable equity markets and new sales. The increase in benefits, claims and claim adjustment expenses was primarily due to the absence in 2004 of the unusually favorable mortality experienced in 2003, along with continued growth and aging of the inforce. Business growth resulted in increased insurance operating costs and expenses for the year compared to prior year. Additionally, income tax expense was higher for the year ended December 31, 2004 due primarily to earnings growth, as discussed above. Income tax expense includes a DRD tax benefit of $5 related to the 2004 tax year, whereas, income tax expense for 2003 includes a total DRD tax benefit of $6. 2003 Compared to 2002 Net income increased due to increases in fee income. Fees increased primarily due to increased cost of insurance charges as life insurance inforce grew and aged, and variable universal life account values increased 30%, driven by the growth in the equity markets in 2003. Also contributing to the increase in net income was a decrease in benefit costs in 2003 as 42 Table of Contents compared to 2002 due to favorable mortality rates compared to the prior year. Additionally, net income for the year ended December 31, 2003 includes the favorable impact of $2 DRD benefit resulting from the Company previously discussed change in estimate of the DRD tax benefit reported during 2002. The total DRD benefit related to the 2003 tax year for the year ended December 31, 2003 was $4 as compared to $3 for the year ended December 31, 2002. Earned premiums, which include premiums for ceded reinsurance, decreased primarily due to increased use of reinsurance. The decrease in net investment income was due primarily to lower investment yields. Outlook Individual Life sales grew to $233 in 2004 from $196 in 2003 with renewed customer interest in variable universal life products and the successful introduction of new universal life and variable universal life products. Variable universal life sales and account values remain sensitive to equity market levels and returns. The Company also continues to introduce new and enhanced products, which are expected to increase new sales. The Company continues to pursue broader and deeper distribution opportunities to increase sales. However, the Company continues to face uncertainty surrounding estate tax legislation, aggressive competition from life insurance providers, reduced availability and higher price of reinsurance, and the current regulatory environment regarding reserving practices for universal life products with no-lapse guarantees. GROUP BENEFITS Operating Summary 2004 2003 2002 Earned premiums and other $ 3,652 $ 2,362 $ 2,327 Net investment income 375 264 258 Net realized capital gains (losses) 1 (2 ) (3 ) Total revenues 4,028 2,624 2,582 Benefits, claims and claim adjustment expenses 2,703 1,862 1,878 Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs 23 18 17 Insurance operating costs and other expenses 989 553 524 Total benefits, claims and expenses 3,715 2,433 2,419 Income before income taxes 313 191 163 Income tax expense 84 43 35 Net income $ 229 $ 148 $ 128 Earned Premiums and Other Fully insured ongoing premiums $ 3,611 $ 2,302 $ 2,295 Buyout premiums 4 40 13 Other 37 20 19 Earned premiums and other total $ 3,652 $ 2,362 $ 2,327 The Group Benefits segment provides employers, associations, affinity groups and financial institutions with group life, accident and disability coverage, along with other products and services, including voluntary benefits, employee assistance programs, travel assistance, group retiree health, and medical stop loss. The Company also offers disability underwriting, administration, claims processing services and reinsurance to other insurers and self-funded employer plans. 2004 Compared to 2003 Net income increased for the year ended December 31, 2004 as compared to the prior year due to earned premium growth and net investment income growth as the result of the CNA Acquisition. The increase in earned premiums was driven by sales (excluding buyouts) of $632 for the current year, representing an increase of 25% over sales reported in the prior year, and favorable persistency. Although benefits, claims and claim adjustment expenses increased, the segment loss ratio was 74% for the current year as compared to 79% for the prior year, which contributed favorably to net income. The loss ratio for the year was the result of improved mortality and morbidity experience as well as a change in mix of business (discussed below) that results in a lower loss ratio and higher expense ratio. Partially offsetting these favorable items for current year as compared to the prior year were higher commissions due to higher sales and premiums previously discussed. Additionally, operating costs increased due to the growth in the segment and the CNA Acquisition. Consistent with the increase in operating costs, the segment ratio of insurance operating costs and other expenses to premiums and other considerations (excluding buyouts) increased to 28% for the year ended December 31, 2004, respectively, from 25% for prior year. As part of the CNA Acquisition, a larger block of affinity business is now included in the Group Benefits segment. This business typically has lower expected loss ratios and higher expected commission ratios than other products within the business. 2003 Compared to 2002 Net income increased primarily due to increases in earned premiums and favorable claims experience. Premium growth was not as high as anticipated however due to lower sales to new customers in 2003 and lower persistency on renewals reflecting a competitive marketplace. However, the segment reported an increase in total buyout premiums. Buyouts involve the acquisition of claim liabilities from another carrier for a purchase price calculated to cover the run off of those liabilities plus administration expenses and profit. Due to the nature of the buyout marketplace, the predictability of buyout premiums is uncertain. Although, total benefits, claims and expenses increased for the year ended December 31, 2003, total benefits, claims and expenses excluding buyouts decreased $43, or 2%, over the same period. The segment loss ratio was 79%, down from 81% in 2002. Partially offsetting these factors that contributed to the increased net income was an increase in insurance operating costs and other 43 Table of Contents expenses due to the premium growth previously described and continued investments in technology, service and distribution. The segment ratio of insurance operating costs and other expenses to premiums and other considerations (excluding buyouts) was 25%, increasing slightly from 23% in 2002. Outlook Following the majority of the integration effort of the acquired group life and accident, and short-term and long-term disability businesses of CNA Financial Corporation, the Company anticipates the increased scale of the group life and disability operations and the expanded distribution network for its products and services will generate low double digit sales growth in 2005. Sales, however, may be negatively affected by the competitive pricing environment in the marketplace. Management is committed to selling competitively priced products that meet the Company internal rate of return guidelines. The two significant factors in evaluating this business are the loss ratio and the expense ratio. Based on historical experience trends and variability in the Group Benefits business, management expects the loss ratio in future periods to be in the range of 73% to 76% and the expense ratio to be in the range of 27% to 29%. Despite the current market conditions, including low interest rates, rising medical costs, the changing regulatory environment and cost containment pressure on employers, the Group Benefits segment continues to leverage off of its strength in claim practices risk management, service and distribution, enabling the Company to capitalize on market opportunities. Additionally, employees continue to look to the workplace for a broader and ever expanding array of insurance products. As employers design benefit strategies to attract and retain employees, while attempting to control their benefit costs, management believes that the need for the Group Benefits segment products will continue to expand. This, combined with the significant number of employees who currently do not have coverage or adequate levels of coverage, creates unique opportunities for our products and services. PROPERTY & CASUALTY Executive Overview Property & Casualty is organized into four reportable operating segments: the underwriting segments of Business Insurance, Personal Lines and Specialty Commercial (collectively Ongoing Operations ); and the Other Operations segment. Prior to the first quarter of 2004, Property & Casualty had also included the domestic assumed reinsurance business of HartRe. With the discontinuance of writing new assumed domestic reinsurance, HartRe assumed reinsurance is now fully included in the Other Operations segment for all periods presented. Property & Casualty provides a number of coverages, as well as insurance related services, to businesses throughout the United States, including workers compensation, property, automobile, liability, umbrella, specialty casualty, marine, agriculture, bond, professional liability and directors and officers liability coverages. Property & Casualty also provides automobile, homeowners and home-based business coverage to individuals throughout the United States as well as insurance-related services to businesses. Property & Casualty derives its revenues principally from premiums earned for insurance coverages provided to insureds, investment income, and, to a lesser extent, from fees earned for services provided to third parties and net realized capital gains and losses. Premiums charged for insurance coverages are earned principally on a pro rata basis over the terms of the related policies in force. Service fees principally include revenues from third party claims administration services provided by Specialty Risk Services and revenues from member contact center services provided through AARP Health Care Options program. Property & Casualty underwriting segments are evaluated by The Hartford management primarily based upon underwriting results. Underwriting results represent earned premiums less incurred claims, claim adjustment expenses and underwriting expenses. Underwriting results are influenced significantly by premium growth and the adequacy of the Company pricing. Property & Casualty seeks to price its insurance policies such that insurance premiums and future net investment income earned on premiums received will cover underwriting expenses and the ultimate cost of paying claims reported on the policies and provide for a profit margin. For many of its insurance products, Property & Casualty is required to obtain approval for its premium rates from state insurance departments. Pricing adequacy depends on a number of factors, including the ability to obtain regulatory approval for rate changes, proper evaluation of underwriting risks, the ability to project future loss cost frequency and severity based on historical loss experience adjusted for known trends, the Company response to rate actions taken by competitors, and expectations about regulatory and legal developments and expense levels. Underwriting profitability over time is also greatly influenced by the Company underwriting discipline which seeks to manage exposure to loss through favorable risk selection and diversification and by its ability to manage its expense ratio which it accomplishes through economies of scale and its management of acquisition costs and other underwriting expenses. In setting its pricing, Property & Casualty assumes an expected level of losses from natural or man-made catastrophes that will cover the Company exposure to catastrophes over the long-term. In most years, however, Property & Casualty actual losses from catastrophes will be significantly more or less than that assumed in its pricing due to the significant volatility of catastrophe losses. 44 Table of Contents ISO defines a catastrophe loss as an event that causes $25 or more in industry insured property losses and affects a significant number of property and casualty policyholders and insurers. Given the lag in the period from when claims are incurred to when they are reported and paid, final claim settlements may vary from current estimates of incurred losses and loss expenses, particularly when those payments may not occur until well into the future. Reserves for lines of business with a longer lag (or tail ) in reporting are more difficult to estimate. Reserve estimates for longer tail lines are initially set based on loss and loss expense ratio assumptions estimated when the business was priced and are adjusted as the paid and reported claims develop, indicating that the ultimate loss and loss expense ratio will differ from the initial assumptions. Adjustments to previously established loss and loss expense reserves, if any, are reflected in underwriting results in the period in which the adjustment is determined to be necessary. Through its Other Operations segment, Property & Casualty is responsible for managing operations of The Hartford that have discontinued writing new or renewal business as well as managing the claims related to asbestos and environmental exposures. As such, the underwriting loss in Other Operations is principally related to claim and claim adjustment expense development. The Company considers several measures and ratios to be the key performance indicators for the property and casualty underwriting businesses. The following tables and the segment discussions for the years ended December 31, 2004, 2003 and 2002 include various premium measures and underwriting ratios. Management believes that these measures and ratios are useful in understanding the underlying trends in The Hartford property and casualty insurance underwriting business. However, these key performance indicators should only be used in conjunction with, and not in lieu of, underwriting income for the individual Property & Casualty segments and net income for the Property & Casualty business as a whole and may not be comparable to other performance measures used by the Company competitors. The Company aims to achieve both growth and profitability in the Business Insurance and Personal Lines businesses and, therefore, key performance indicators for these two segments include both growth and profitability measures. Specialty Commercial, however, is comprised of transactional businesses where premium writings may fluctuate based on perceived market opportunity. As such, the key performance indicators do not include a growth objective for Specialty Commercial. The number of policies in force is a growth measure used for Personal Lines only. Ongoing Operations Premium Growth Measures and Ratios: 2004 2003 2002 Polices in Force as of year-end Personal Lines Automobile 2,166,922 2,058,825 2,081,208 Personal Lines Homeowners 1,348,573 1,319,629 1,339,914 Written Price Increase (Decrease) Business Insurance 2 % 9 % 17 % Personal Lines Automobile 3 % 10 % 8 % Personal Lines Homeowners 9 % 14 % 13 % Premium Renewal Retention Business Insurance 85 % 87 % 89 % Personal Lines Automobile 89 % 91 % 88 % Personal Lines Homeowners 100 % 101 % 99 % New Business % to Net Written Premium Business Insurance 25 % 26 % 26 % Personal Lines Automobile 18 % 15 % 17 % Personal Lines Homeowners 13 % 10 % 11 % Policies in force as of year end: Policies in force represent the number of policies with coverage in effect as of the end of the period. In both automobile and homeowners, the policy in force count in 2004 has increased as a result of the new Dimensions class plan rolled out in the latter part of 2003 and through the remainder of 2004. The increase is also attributable to continued growth in AARP business, reflecting growth in the size of the AARP target market and direct marketing programs to increase premium writings. The policy in force count is a reflection of both the increase in new business and strong policy renewal retention of prior year business. The Company expects the number of policies in force to continue to increase for both automobile and homeowners in 2005. Written pricing increase (decrease): Written pricing increase (decrease) over the comparable period of the prior year includes the impact of rate filings, the impact of changes in the value of the rating bases and individual risk pricing decisions. A number of factors impact written pricing increases (decreases) including expected loss costs as projected by the Company pricing actuaries, rate filings approved by state regulators, risk selection decisions made by the Company underwriters and marketplace 45 Table of Contents competition. Written pricing changes reflect the property and casualty insurance market cycle. Prices tend to increase for a particular line of business when insurance carriers have incurred significant losses in that line of business in the recent past or the industry as a whole commits less of its capital to writing exposures in that line of business. Prices tend to decrease when recent loss experience has been favorable or when competition among insurance carriers increases. In 2004, written pricing in both Business Insurance and Personal Lines continued to increase, but at a slower rate than in 2003. In 2005, the Company expects written pricing for Business Insurance to turn slightly negative and expects written pricing for Personal Lines to be slightly positive. As one of the factors used to determine pricing, the Company practice is to first make an overall assumption about claim frequency and severity for a given line of business and then, as part of the ratemaking process, adjust the assumption as appropriate for the particular state, product or coverage. Claim frequency represents the percentage change in the average number of reported claims per unit of exposure in the current accident year compared to that of the previous accident year. Claim severity represents the percentage change in the estimated average cost per claim in the current accident year compared to that of the previous accident year. Within Personal Lines auto, our overall assumption for the line of business is that frequency in the 2005 accident year will be generally flat and that severity will continue to increase. This represents a change in frequency from the recent past, where claim frequency had declined. Within Personal Lines homeowners, we expect frequency to decrease slightly, compared to a more significant decrease in recent years, and severity to continue to increase. Within Business Insurance, expectations are generally for frequency to be flat, although we expect frequency to continue to decline, albeit moderately, in workers compensation. As in Personal Lines, recent history in Business Insurance has shown more significant declines in frequency, so this assumption is an unfavorable change from recent years. Consistent with recent experience, severity within Business Insurance is expected to increase across all coverages. For long-tailed lines of business such as workers compensation and general liability, estimates of severity are subject to the same inherent uncertainty as estimates of loss reserves. Within the Specialty Commercial lines of business, the base assumptions for frequency and severity are similar to the assumptions for Business Insurance, but adjustments are made for the unique lines of business and for the individual risks or transactions being priced within Specialty Commercial. Premium renewal retention: Premium renewal retention represents the ratio of net written premium in the current period that is not derived from new business divided by total net written premium of the prior period. Accordingly, premium renewal retention includes the impact of written pricing increases (decreases) on renewed business. In addition to written pricing changes, the renewal retention rate is impacted by a number of other factors, including the percentage of renewal policy quotes accepted and decisions by the Company to non-renew policies because of specific policy underwriting concerns or because of a decision to reduce premium writings in certain lines of business or states. Premium renewal retention has decreased from 2002 to 2004 due largely to the effect of written pricing increases on renewals. New business premium as a percentage of written premium: New business as a percentage of written premium has remained relatively flat over 2003 and 2004 for Business Insurance and has increased for both Personal Lines automobile and homeowners. Personal Lines new business growth has been driven by rate increases filed in 2003 and 2004 and by the rollout of the Company new Dimensions automobile and homeowner class plan in 2004. The Company expects the percentage of new business premium to total net written premium to remain relatively steady in 2005 as it continues its growth initiatives in both Business Insurance and Personal Lines. 46 Table of Contents Underwriting Profitability Ratios and Measures 2004 2003 2002 Ongoing Operations ratios and measures: Earned Price Increase (Decrease) Business Insurance 5 % 12 % 11 % Personal Lines Automobile 5 % 9 % 6 % Personal Lines Homeowners 11 % 14 % 7 % Loss and loss adjustment expense ratio Current year 69.2 68.8 68.2 Prior years [1] 0.1 0.5 1.7 Total loss and loss adjustment expense ratio 69.3 69.2 70.0 Expense ratio 25.9 26.8 28.3 Policyholder dividend ratio 0.1 0.4 0.8 Combined ratio 95.3 96.5 99.1 Catastrophe ratio [1] 2.2 3.1 1.4 Combined ratio before catastrophes and prior year development 89.7 92.8 96.1 Other Operations underwriting results ($448 ) ($2,840 ) ($220 ) [1] Included in both the prior year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio and the catastrophe ratio is prior accident development on catastrophe losses, including, in 2004, the net reserve release of (3.1) points related to September 11. Earned pricing increase (decrease): Because the Company earns premiums over the 6 to 12 month term of the policies, earned pricing increases (decreases) lag written pricing increases (decreases) by 6 to 12 months. As of December 31, 2004, approximately 67% of Personal Lines Agency Auto policies in force were 6 month policies. Substantially all other policies in force for Property and Casualty at that date were 12 month policies. In 2004, earned pricing increases have moderated as written pricing increases over the prior 6 to 12 months have declined. During 2004 and 2003, the Company Property & Casualty operations have experienced earned pricing increases in excess of loss cost increases for Business Insurance and Personal Lines. The Company expects that at some point over the next twelve months, loss costs increases may begin to outpace earned pricing increases, although the Company still expects to earn targeted returns in each of its businesses in 2005. Loss and loss adjustment expense ratio: The current year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio is a measure of the cost of claims incurred in the current accident year divided by earned premiums. The prior year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio represents the increase (decrease) in the estimated cost of settling claims incurred in prior accident years as recorded in the current calendar year divided by earned premiums. Among other factors, the loss and loss adjustment expense ratio needed for the Company to achieve its targeted return on equity fluctuates from year to year based on changes in the expected investment yield over the claim settlement period, the timing of expected claim settlements and the targeted returns set by management based on the competitive environment. While relatively flat from 2003, the 2004 current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio is lower than anticipated at the time management set its pricing, principally because the change in the number of reported claims per unit of exposure (or claim frequency ) for property losses has been lower than originally expected. Management does not expect claim frequency for property coverages to continue to be as favorable in the future. In 2005, management expects the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio to increase modestly as earned pricing increases moderate. Management expects claim frequency to remain relatively flat and expects claim severity to increase as a result of inflation in claim settlement costs, driven principally by medical cost inflation, property value increases and other indemnity cost increases. Expected increases in total loss costs, however, are expected to be partially offset by reductions in loss adjustment expenses per claim. Reserve estimates, including reserves for catastrophe claims, are inherently uncertain. While the Company believes its recorded reserves are established at a level to meet the ultimate cost of unpaid claims, reserve estimates may change in the future based on information or trends that are not currently known. See Reserves below for a discussion of prior accident year loss development and Critical Accounting Estimates for a discussion of current trends contributing to reserve uncertainty and the impact of changes in key assumptions on reserve volatility. Expense ratio: The expense ratio is the ratio of underwriting expenses, excluding bad debt expense, to earned premiums. Underwriting expenses include the amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs and insurance operating costs and expenses. Deferred policy acquisition costs include commissions, taxes, licenses and fees and other underwriting expenses and are amortized over the policy term. While changes in the expense ratio vary by segment, the overall expense ratio for Ongoing segments 47 Table of Contents has decreased during the period from 2002 to 2004, principally due to the increase in earned premium and due to cost containment measures undertaken by management. In Business Insurance and Personal Lines, the expense ratio is expected to decrease further in 2005, largely as a result of expected increases in earned premium. In Specialty Commercial, the expense ratio is expected to increase slightly in 2005 due to changes in the business mix, most notably the Company decision in the fourth quarter of 2004 to exit the multi-peril crop insurance program which will eliminate significant expense reimbursements from the Specialty Commercial segment. Policyholder dividend ratio: The policyholder dividend ratio is the ratio of policyholder dividends to earned premium. Combined ratio: The combined ratio is the sum of the loss and loss adjustment expense ratio, the expense ratio and the policyholder dividend ratio. This ratio is a relative measurement that describes the related cost of losses and expense for every $100 of earned premiums. A combined ratio below 100.0 demonstrates underwriting profit; a combined ratio above 100.0 demonstrates underwriting losses. The combined ratio has decreased from 2003 to 2004 primarily because of improvement in the expense ratio. The combined ratio in 2005 could be significantly higher or lower than the 2004 combined ratio depending on the level of catastrophe losses, but will also be impacted by changes in pricing and an expected moderation in favorable loss cost trends. Catastrophe ratio: The catastrophe ratio (a component of the loss and loss adjustment expense ratio) represents the ratio of catastrophe losses (net of reinsurance) to earned premiums. A catastrophe is an event that causes $25 or more in industry insured property losses and affects a significant number of property and casualty policyholders and insurers. By their nature, catastrophe losses vary dramatically from year to year. Based on the mix and geographic dispersion of premium written and estimates derived from various catastrophe loss models, the Company expected catastrophe ratio over the long-term is 3.0 points. Before considering the reduction in Ongoing Operation catastrophe reserves related to September 11 of $298 in 2004, the catastrophe ratio in 2004 was 5.3 points. See Risk Management Strategy below for a discussion of the Company property catastrophe risk management program that serves to mitigate the Company net exposure to catastrophe losses. Combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development: The combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development represents the combined ratio for the current accident year, excluding the impact of catastrophes. The Company believes this ratio is an important measure of the trend in profitability since it removes the impact of volatile and unpredictable catastrophe losses and prior accident year reserve development. Before considering catastrophes, the combined ratio related to current accident year business has improved from 2002 to 2004 principally due to earned pricing increases and favorable claim frequency. Other Operations underwriting results: The Other Operations segment is responsible for managing operations of The Hartford that have discontinued writing new or renewal business as well as managing the claims related to asbestos and environmental exposures. As such, neither earned premiums nor underwriting ratios are meaningful financial measures. Instead, management believes that underwriting result is a more meaningful measure. The net underwriting loss for 2002 through 2004 is primarily due to prior accident year loss development, including $2.6 billion of net asbestos reserve strengthening in 2003. Reserve estimates within Other Operations, including estimates for asbestos and environmental claims, are inherently uncertain. Refer to the Other Operations segment MD&A for further discussion of Other Operation underwriting results. Total Property & Casualty Investment Earnings 2004 2003 2002 Investment yield, after-tax 4.1 % 4.2 % 4.5 % Net realized capital gains (losses), after-tax $ 87 $ 165 $ (44 ) The investment return, or yield, on Property & Casualty invested assets is an important element of the Company earnings since insurance products are priced with the assumption that premiums received can be invested for a period of time before loss and loss adjustment expenses are paid. For longer tail lines, such as workers compensation and general liability, claims are paid over several years and, therefore, the premiums received for these lines of business can generate significant investment income. HIM determines the appropriate allocation of investments by asset class and measures the investment yield performance for each asset class against market indices or other benchmarks. Due to the emphasis on preservation of capital and the need to maintain sufficient liquidity to satisfy claim obligations, the vast majority of Property and Casualty invested assets have been held in fixed maturities, including, among other asset classes, corporate bonds, municipal bonds, government debt, short-term debt, mortgage- 48 Table of Contents backed securities and asset-backed securities. As of both December 31, 2004 and 2003, approximately 96% of Property & Casualty invested assets were held in fixed maturities. The Company actual investment yields are influenced primarily by, among other factors, changes in market interest rates, prepayments on mortgage-backed securities and the credit-worthiness of individual issuers. During 2005, management expects after-tax investment yields to decrease slightly as the before-tax rate on newly invested funds is expected to be 4.8% to 5.0% in 2005, compared to a before-tax investment yield of 5.4% in 2004. When fixed maturity or equity investments are sold, net realized capital gains (losses) are realized. Individual securities may be sold for a variety of reasons, including a decision to change the Company asset allocation in response to market conditions and the need to liquidate funds to meet large claim settlements Accordingly, net realized capital gains (losses) for any particular period are not predictable and can vary significantly. Refer to the Investment section for further discussion of net investment income and net realized capital gains (losses). Risk Management Strategy The Hartford property and casualty operations have well-developed processes to manage catastrophic risk exposures to natural catastrophes, such as hurricanes and earthquakes, and other perils, such as terrorism. These processes involve establishing underwriting guidelines for both individual risks and in aggregate including individual policy limits and aggregate exposure limits by geographic zone and peril. The Company establishes exposure limits and actively monitors the risk exposures as a percent of Property and Casualty surplus. Generally the Company limits its exposure to natural catastrophes from a single 250-year event to less than 30% of property and casualty statutory surplus for losses prior to reinsurance and to less than 15% of property and casualty statutory surplus for losses net of reinsurance. In specifically identified locations, the Company manages aggregate terrorism exposures including exposures resulting from the Company Group Life operations. The aggregate terrorism exposure in these locations, as measured by specific loss scenarios, is generally limited to an amount equivalent to approximately 7% of the combined statutory surplus of the life and property and casualty operations. The Company monitors exposures monthly and employs both internally developed and externally purchased loss modeling tools. The Hartford utilizes reinsurance to manage risk and transfer exposures to well-established and financially secure reinsurers. Reinsurance is used to manage aggregate exposures as well as specific risks based on accumulated property and casualty liabilities in certain geographic zones. All treaty purchases related to the Company property and casualty operations are administered by a centralized function to support a consistent strategy and ensure that the reinsurance activities are fully integrated into the organization risk management processes. To minimize the potential credit risk resulting from the use of reinsurance, a centralized group evaluates the credit standing of potential reinsurers and establishes the Company schedule of approved reinsurers. The assessment process reviews reinsurers against a set of financial and management criteria and distinguishes between long-tail casualty and short-tail property business. A committee meets regularly to review activity with each reinsurer and affirm the schedule of approved reinsurers. A variety of traditional reinsurance products are used in the development and execution of the risk management strategy. The risk transfer products used include excess of loss occurrence-based products that protect aggregate property and workers compensation exposures, and individual risk or quota share products, that protect specific classes or lines of business. There are currently no significant finite risk contracts in place and the current statutory surplus benefit from all such prior year contracts is immaterial. Facultative reinsurance is also used to manage policy-specific risk exposures based on established underwriting guidelines. The Hartford also participates in governmentally administered reinsurance facilities such as the Florida Hurricane Catastrophe Fund ( FHCF ), the facility provided by The Terrorism Risk Insurance Act of 2002 and other reinsurance programs relating to particular risks or specific lines of business. The Hartford principal catastrophe reinsurance program provides coverage, on average, for 88% of the $695 of catastrophic property losses incurred from a single event in excess of a $125 retention. The exact amount and percentage of coverage varies by layer. In addition to the reinsurance protection provided by The Hartford principal catastrophe reinsurance program, in November 2004, the Company purchased two fully collateralized, four-year reinsurance coverages for losses sustained from qualifying hurricane and earthquake loss events. The Company purchased this reinsurance from Foundation Re, a Cayman Islands reinsurance company, which financed the provision of reinsurance through the issuance of $248 in catastrophe bonds to investors under two separate bond tranches. The first coverage provides reinsurance protection above the Company principal reinsurance program and covers losses arising from large hurricane loss events affecting the Gulf and Eastern Coast of the United States. The coverage reinsures 45% of $400 in losses in excess of an index loss trigger of $1.3 billion. The index trigger has an estimated probability of attachment of approximately 1-in-100 years. The second coverage purchased by the Company reinsures 90% of $75 in losses in excess of $125 in losses arising from qualifying hurricane and earthquake events. Qualifying hurricane and earthquake events are those which occur in the year following a large hurricane or earthquake event that has an estimated occurrence probability of 1-in-100 years. The Terrorism Risk Insurance Act of 2002 established a program that will run through 2005 that provides a backstop for insurance-related losses resulting from any act of terrorism certified by the Secretary of the Treasury, in concurrence with the Secretary of State and Attorney General. Under the program, the federal government would pay 90% of covered losses after an insurer losses exceed 15% of the Company direct commercial earned premiums in 2004, up to a combined annual aggregate limit for the federal 49 Table of Contents government and all insurers of $100 billion. If an act of terrorism or acts of terrorism result in covered losses exceeding the $100 billion annual limit, insurers with losses exceeding their deductibles will not be responsible for additional losses. Presently, no material catastrophe reinsurance capacity exists for certified acts of terrorism, including those related to nuclear, biological, chemical or radiological attack. The Company actively manages its exposures to the peril of terrorism and has reduced exposures in specific locations through underwriting actions. The Company has worked with various industry groups to develop policy exclusions related to the peril of terrorism, including those associated with nuclear, biological, chemical and radiological attacks. The Company may include such exclusions in policies in the future in those jurisdictions and classes of business where such exclusions are permitted, and take additional underwriting actions as deemed appropriate. Property and Casualty Operating Summary 2004 2003 2002 Earned premiums $ 9,494 $ 8,805 $ 8,114 Net investment income 1,248 1,172 1,060 Other revenues [1] 436 428 356 Net realized capital gains (losses) 133 253 (68 ) Total revenues 11,311 10,658 9,462 Benefits, claims and claim adjustment expenses [2],[3] Current year 6,590 6,102 5,577 Prior year [4] 414 2,824 293 Total benefits, claims and claim adjustment expenses 7,004 8,926 5,870 Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs 1,850 1,642 1,613 Insurance operating costs and expenses 643 779 782 Other expenses [5] 629 634 542 Total benefits, claims and expenses 10,126 11,981 8,807 Income (loss) before income taxes 1,185 (1,323 ) 655 Income tax expense (benefit) [6] 275 (578 ) 112 Net income (loss) [7] $ 910 $ (745 ) $ 543 Ongoing Operations Underwriting Ratios [8] Loss and loss adjustment expense ratio Current 69.2 68.8 68.2 Prior year 0.1 0.5 1.7 Total loss and loss adjustment expense ratio 69.3 69.2 70.0 Expense ratio 25.9 26.8 28.3 Policyholder dividend ratio 0.1 0.4 0.8 Combined ratio 95.3 96.5 99.1 Catastrophe ratio 2.2 3.1 1.4 Combined ratio before catastrophes 93.1 93.4 97.6 Combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development 89.7 92.8 96.1 [1] Primarily servicing revenue. [2] Includes the impact of 2003 asbestos reserve addition of $2,604. [3] Includes 2004 catastrophes of $507, before the net reserve release of $395 related to September 11. [4] Net prior year incurred losses includes reserve strengthening for construction defects claims of $190, a reduction in net reinsurance recoverable asset of $181, environmental reserve strengthening of $75, an increase in reserves of $170 for HartRe assumed reinsurance, partially offset by the net reserve release of $395 related to September 11. [5] Includes severance charges of $41 for 2003. [6] Includes $26 tax benefit related to tax years prior to 2004. [7] Includes net realized capital gains (losses), after tax, of $ 87, $165, and $(44) for the years ended December 31, 2004, 2003 and 2002, respectively. [8] Ratios do not include the effects of Other Operations. Refer to the Ratios section below for definitions of the underwriting ratios. 2004 Compared to 2003 Total revenues for Property & Casualty increased $653 for the year ended December 31, 2004. The increase was due primarily to earned premium growth of $689 and an increase in investment income of $76, partially offset by a decrease in realized capital gains of $120. The increase in earned premiums in the Business Insurance, Personal Lines and Specialty Commercial segments was due to earned pricing increases and growth in new business premiums outpacing non-renewals for Personal Lines and Business Insurance. Additionally, earned premium growth was partially offset by a $90 decrease reflecting a reduction in estimated earned premium under retrospectively-rated policies. The increase in investment income of $76 is primarily driven by an increase in underwriting cash flow, partially offset by a decrease in the after-tax investment yield. Net income for the year ended December 31, 2004 increased $1.7 billion, primarily due to the net asbestos reserve strengthening of $1.7 billion, after-tax, in the first quarter of 2003, a decrease in after-tax catastrophe losses related to September 11 of $257 and an improved combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development in Business Insurance, Personal Lines and Specialty Commercial. The increase in net income is partially offset by an increase in after-tax catastrophe losses of $159 before considering the September 11 reserve release, a decrease in after-tax realized capital gains of $78, and an increase in after-tax prior 50 Table of Contents accident year development of $383 before considering both the September 11 reserve release and the 2003 net asbestos reserve strengthening. Before the September 11 reserve release, after-tax catastrophe losses in 2004 of $330 includes after-tax losses of $76 from Hurricane Charley, $69 from Hurricane Frances, $54 from Hurricane Ivan and $60 from Hurricane Jeanne. Before the September 11 reserve release, 2004 prior accident year development of $526, after-tax, includes, among other movements, a $124 after-tax reserve strengthening for construction defect claims, a $118 after-tax provision related to a reduction in the reinsurance recoverable asset on older, long-term casualty liabilities, a $111 after-tax increased in assumed casualty reinsurance reserves, and a $49 after-tax increase in environmental reserves. The combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development for Ongoing Operations improved by 3.1 points, from 92.8 in 2003 to 89.7 in 2004. Strong earned pricing and favorable claim frequency contributed to the improvement across Business Insurance, Personal Lines and Specialty Commercial. 2003 Compared to 2002 Revenues for Property & Casualty increased $1.2 billion for the year ended December 31, 2003. The improvement was due primarily to earned premium growth in the Business Insurance, Specialty Commercial and Personal Lines segments, primarily as a result of earned pricing increases, as well as an increase in net realized capital gains of $321, and an increase in net investment income of $112. Partially offsetting the increase was a $412 earned premium decline in the Other Operations segment primarily as a result of the Company decision to withdraw from the assumed reinsurance business as discussed more fully below. On May 16, 2003, as part of the Company decision to withdraw from the assumed reinsurance business, the Company entered into a quota share and purchase agreement with Endurance Reinsurance Corporation of America ( Endurance ) whereby HartRe assumed reinsurance retroceded the majority of its domestic inforce book of business as of April 1, 2003 and sold renewal rights to Endurance. Under the quota share agreement, Endurance reinsured most of the segment assumed reinsurance contracts that were written on or after January 1, 2002 and that had unearned premium as of April 1, 2003. In consideration for Endurance reinsuring the unearned premium as of April 1, 2003, the Company paid Endurance an amount equal to unearned premiums less the related unamortized commissions/deferred acquisition costs. Under the quota share agreement, Endurance pays an override commission based on a percentage of all ceded premium and a profit sharing commission based on the performance of property treaty, property catastrophe and aviation pool unearned premium. Both the override commission and the profit sharing commission are recognized as income over the period the ceded contracts are in force. Under the purchase agreement, Endurance will pay a renewal rights fee, subject to a guaranteed minimum of $15, based on the level of renewal premium on the reinsured contracts over the two year period following the agreement. Given that the Company did not have a continuing obligation with respect to the renewal rights, the guaranteed minimum was recorded in income during the second quarter of 2003, when the purchase agreement was entered. During the first quarter of 2004, the Company fully transferred HartRe assumed reinsurance to its Other Operations segment, where it remains subject to ongoing reserve development relating to all retained business. Net income decreased $1.3 billion for the year ended December 31, 2003 primarily due to the net asbestos reserve strengthening of $1.7 billion, after-tax, in the first quarter of 2003. Results for the year were favorably impacted by an increase in net realized capital gains (losses) and improved underwriting results in the Personal Lines and Business Insurance segments. Strong earned pricing and favorable claim frequency resulted in an increase in underwriting results in both the Personal Lines and Business Insurance segments. In addition, net investment income, after-tax, rose $69 for the year ended December 31, 2003 due to higher invested assets, primarily from strong cash flows and additional capital raised during the second quarter of 2003. On September 1, 2003, the Company sold a wholly owned subsidiary, Trumbull Associates, LLC, for $33, resulting in a gain of $15, after-tax. The gain is included in net realized capital gains. The revenues and net income of Trumbull Associates, LLC were not material to the Company or the Property & Casualty operation. Reserves Reserving for property and casualty losses is an estimation process. As additional experience and other relevant claim data become available, reserve levels are adjusted accordingly. Such adjustments of reserves related to claims incurred in prior years are a natural occurrence in the loss reserving process and are referred to as reserve development . Reserve development that increases previous estimates of ultimate loss cost is called reserve strengthening . Reserve development that decreases previous estimates of ultimate loss cost is called reserve releases . Reserve development can influence the comparability of year over year underwriting results and is set forth in the paragraphs and tables that follow. The prior accident year development in the following table represents the ratio of reserve development to earned premiums. For a detailed discussion of the Company reserve policies, see Notes 1, 11 and 12 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements and the discussion in Critical Accounting Estimates. 51 Table of Contents A rollforward of liabilities for unpaid claims and claim adjustment expenses by segment for Property & Casualty follows: For the year ended December 31, 2004 Business Personal Specialty Ongoing Other Total Insurance Lines Commercial Operations Operations [2] P&C Beginning liabilities for unpaid claims and claim adjustment expenses-gross $ 5,296 $ 1,733 $ 5,148 $ 12,177 $ 9,538 $ 21,715 Reinsurance and other recoverables 395 43 2,096 2,534 2,963 5,497 Beginning liabilities for unpaid claims and claim adjustment expenses-net 4,901 1,690 3,052 9,643 6,575 16,218 Provision for unpaid claims and claim adjustment expenses Current year 2,700 2,509 1,345 6,554 36 6,590 Prior years (67 ) 3 69 5 409 414 Total provision for unpaid claims and claim adjustment expenses 2,633 2,512 1,414 6,559 445 7,004 Less: Payments [1] (1,951 ) (2,392 ) (1,038 ) (5,381 ) (1,650 ) (7,031 ) Ending liabilities for unpaid claims and claim adjustment expenses-net 5,583 1,810 3,428 10,821 5,370 16,191 Reinsurance and other recoverables 474 190 2,091 2,755 2,383 5,138 Ending liabilities for unpaid claims and claim adjustment expenses-gross $ 6,057 $ 2,000 $ 5,519 $ 13,576 $ 7,753 $ 21,329 Earned premiums $ 4,299 $ 3,445 $ 1,726 $ 9,470 $ 24 $ 9,494 Loss and loss expense paid ratio [3] 45.4 69.4 59.9 56.8 Loss and loss expense incurred ratio 61.2 72.9 81.9 69.3 Prior accident year development (pts.) (1.6 ) 0.1 4.0 0.1 [1] Other Operations included payments pursuant to the MacArthur settlement. [2] The financial results of HartRe assumed reinsurance are reported in Other Operations. [3] The loss and loss expense paid ratio represents the ratio of paid claims and claim adjustment expenses to earned premiums. Ongoing Operations At the end of 2003, several areas of reserve exposure were being closely monitored. Consistent with the Company practices to regularly review its reserves, the Company continued to monitor these reserve exposures and completed several reserve studies, including studies related to September 11 reserves and construction defects claims. As a result of these monitoring activities and studies, during the first quarter of 2004, the Company made reserve adjustments with regard to certain of those reserve exposures, most notably related to September 11 and construction defects. During 2004, the Company made other reserve adjustments based on regular reserve evaluations performed each quarter. These reserve adjustments, and the effects on the Company segments, are more fully discussed in the paragraphs that follow. With respect to September 11 claim reserves, the Company observed favorable developments, including the closure of all but 44 primary insurance property cases, a high participation rate within the Victim Compensation Fund and the expiration of the deadline for filing a liability claim in March 2004. Based on these favorable events, the Company determined that it was appropriate to reduce both the gross and net estimate of loss from September 11. The Company (Ongoing Operations and Other Operations) gross estimate of loss of $1.1 billion was reduced to $845. The corresponding reduction in net reserves for September 11 related to Ongoing Operations was $175 in Business Insurance, $116 in Specialty Commercial and $7 in Personal Lines. As of December 31, 2004, loss and loss expense reserves remaining related to September 11, both gross and net of reinsurance, are as follows: September 11 September 11 Segment Gross Reserves as of December 31, 2004 Net Reserves as of December 31, 2004 Personal Lines $ 0 $ 0 Business Insurance 160 37 Specialty Commercial 66 37 Total Ongoing Operations $ 226 $ 74 Substantially all of the net reserve balance is incurred but not reported ( IBNR ) and the majority of the balance is related to workers compensation exposures. The Company has exposure to losses from construction defects, particularly from contractors in California. The Company exposure to losses from construction defects relates primarily to years prior to 2000. The Company has been evaluating and closely monitoring these reserves. Based on the Company 2004 reserve study that used various predictive models and reflected the increasing severity of construction defect claims, the Company concluded an increase in reserves of $190 was required. This increase consisted of $23 for Business Insurance and $167 for Specialty Commercial and is included in the general liability line of business. As of December 31, 2004, reserves for Specialty Commercial general liability, net of reinsurance, were $1,125. The $167 strengthening related to Specialty Commercial represents 15% of the net reserves. 52 Table of Contents In addition to the release in September 11 reserves and strengthening for construction defect claims, Business Insurance reserves were strengthened by $85 during 2004. Most of this reserve strengthening relates to auto liability ($25) and package business ($38), reflecting an increase in the actuarial estimates of ultimate incurred losses for these lines, attributable to accident years 1998-2002. As of December 31, 2004, Business Insurance reserves for auto liability, net of reinsurance, were $549. The $25 of strengthening represents 5% of the net reserves. Package business reserves, net of reinsurance, for Business Insurance as of December 31, 2004 were $1,499, so the $38 of strengthening represents 3% of the net reserves. During normal quarterly reserve reviews, the Company actuaries noted that, for both auto liability and package business, actual reported losses were above previous expectations. In particular, the analysis indicated that there was a higher frequency of large claims (generally those greater than $100,000) than had been anticipated in prior estimates. The Company increased its estimate of ultimate incurred losses to recognize this. In addition to the foregoing reserve adjustments, within the Specialty Commercial segment there were other offsetting positive and negative adjustments. The principal offsetting adjustments related to a strengthening in specialty large deductible workers compensation reserves and a release in other liability reserves, each approximately $150. Other Operations Reserves and reserve activity in the Other Operations segment are categorized and reported as asbestos, environmental or all other activity. Total net reserve strengthening for Other Operations was $409 in 2004, including $262 of strengthening for asbestos and environmental reserves. The asbestos and environmental strengthening primarily includes a $75 increase in environmental reserves and a $181 reduction in the reinsurance recoverable asset associated with older, long-term casualty liabilities, including asbestos liabilities. These actions are further discussed in the Other Operations segment MD&A discussion. The largest component of the remaining $147 of net all other strengthening for Other Operations was related to assumed casualty reinsurance. The all other category of reserves covers a wide range of insurance and assumed reinsurance coverages, including, but not limited to, potential liability for breast implants, construction defects, lead paint, molestation, silica, pharmaceutical products and other long-tail liabilities. As of December 31, 2004, total reserves for HartRe assumed reinsurance and all other liabilities within Other Operations, net of ceded reinsurance, were $2.5 billion, so the $147 strengthening represents a 6% of these reserves. The Company has been evaluating and closely monitoring assumed reinsurance reserves in Other Operations. During 2003 and 2002, the Company booked unfavorable reserve development of $129 and $77, respectively. Unfavorable trends continued during 2004 and, as a result, the Company increased reserves by $170. The majority of the $170 increase was for assumed casualty treaty reinsurance for the years 1997 through 2001. Assumed reinsurance exposures are inherently less predictable than direct insurance exposures because the Company may not receive notice of a reinsurance claim until the underlying direct insurance claim is mature. This causes a delay in the receipt of information from the ceding companies. In recent years, the Company has seen an increase in reported claims above previous expectations and this increase in reported claims contributed to the reserve re-estimates. As noted in the Ongoing Operations discussion, the Company continued to observe favorable developments with respect to reserves related to September 11. Particularly for Other Operations, these favorable trends included a lack of significant additional loss notices on assumed reinsurance property treaties. The reduction in net reserves for September 11 for Other Operations was $97. As of December 31, 2004, gross reserves and net reserves remaining in Other Operations related to September 11 were $171 and $68, respectively. All September 11 reserves within Other Operations relate to HartRe assumed reinsurance exposures, both property and casualty. 53 Table of Contents For the year ended December 31, 2003 Business Personal Specialty Ongoing Other Total Insurance Lines Commercial Operations Operations P&C Beginning liabilities for unpaid claims and claim adjustment expenses-gross $ 4,744 $ 1,692 $ 5,000 $ 11,436 $ 5,655 $ 17,091 Reinsurance and other recoverables 366 49 2,007 2,422 1,528 3,950 Beginning liabilities for unpaid claims and claim adjustment expenses-net 4,378 1,643 2,993 9,014 4,127 13,141 Provision for unpaid claims and claim adjustment expenses Current year 2,346 2,324 1,130 5,800 302 6,102 Prior years (6 ) (6 ) 52 40 2,784 2,824 Total provision for unpaid claims and claim adjustment expenses 2,340 2,318 1,182 5,840 3,086 8,926 Payments (1,761 ) (2,211 ) (1,017 ) (4,989 ) (860 ) (5,849 ) Other [1] (56 ) (60 ) (106 ) (222 ) 222 -- Ending liabilities for unpaid claims and claim adjustment expenses-net 4,901 1,690 3,052 9,643 6,575 16,218 Reinsurance and other recoverables 395 43 2,096 2,534 2,963 5,497 Ending liabilities for unpaid claims and claim adjustment expenses-gross $ 5,296 $ 1,733 $ 5,148 $ 12,177 $ 9,538 $ 21,715 Earned premiums $ 3,696 $ 3,181 $ 1,558 $ 8,435 $ 370 $ 8,805 Loss and loss expense paid ratio [2] 47.7 69.5 65.4 59.2 Loss and loss expense incurred ratio 63.3 72.9 75.8 69.2 Prior accident year development (pts.) (0.2 ) (0.2 ) 3.3 0.4 [1] Represents the transfer of reserves pursuant to the MacArthur settlement. [2] The loss and loss expense paid ratio represents the ratio of paid claims and claim adjustment expenses to earned premiums. Ongoing Operations There was no significant reserve strengthening or release in the Business Insurance and Personal Lines segments for the year ended December 31, 2003. Specialty Commercial strengthened prior accident year reserves by $52 for the year ended December 31, 2003 primarily as a result of losses in the bond and professional liability lines of business. The bond reserve strengthening was isolated to a few severe contract surety claims related to accident year 2002. The professional liability reserve strengthening involved a provision for anticipated settlements of reinsurance obligations for contracts outstanding at the time of the original acquisition of Reliance Group Holdings auto residual value portfolio in the third quarter of 2000. Other Operations As further discussed in the segment section, the Company recorded net asbestos reserve strengthening of $2.6 billion during the first quarter of 2003. In addition, strengthening of assumed reinsurance reserves of $129 in 2003 occurred across multiple accident years, primarily 1997 through 2000, and principally in the casualty line of HartRe assumed reinsurance. 54 Table of Contents For the year ended December 31, 2002 Business Personal Specialty Ongoing Other Total Insurance Lines Commercial Operations Operations P&C Beginning liabilities for unpaid claims and claim adjustment expenses-gross $ 4,440 $ 1,530 $ 5,118 $ 11,088 $ 5,948 $ 17,036 Reinsurance and other recoverables 375 51 2,097 2,523 1,653 4,176 Beginning liabilities for unpaid claims and claim adjustment expenses-net 4,065 1,479 3,021 8,565 4,295 12,860 Provision for unpaid claims and claim adjustment expenses Current year 1,943 2,244 820 5,007 570 5,577 Prior years 19 75 29 123 170 293 Total provision for unpaid claims and claim adjustment expenses 1,962 2,319 849 5,130 740 5,870 Payments (1,649 ) (2,155 ) (877 ) (4,681 ) (908 ) (5,589 ) Ending liabilities for unpaid claims and claim adjustment expenses-net 4,378 1,643 2,993 9,014 4,127 13,141 Reinsurance and other recoverables 366 49 2,007 2,422 1,528 3,950 Ending liabilities for unpaid claims and claim adjustment expenses-gross $ 4,744 $ 1,692 $ 5,000 $ 11,436 $ 5,655 $ 17,091 Earned premiums $ 3,126 $ 2,984 $ 1,222 $ 7,332 $ 782 $ 8,114 Loss and loss expense paid ratio [1] 52.7 72.2 71.8 63.9 Loss and loss expense incurred ratio 62.7 77.7 69.4 70.0 Prior accident year development (pts.) 0.6 2.5 2.4 1.6 [1] The loss and loss expense paid ratio represents the ratio of paid claims and claim adjustment expenses to earned premiums. Ongoing Operations Reserve strengthening in the Business Insurance segment for the year ended December 31, 2002 was not significant. In Personal Lines, prior accident year loss and loss adjustment expenses for non-standard auto were strengthened due to heavier than expected frequency, severity and litigation rates on prior accident years. In addition, the prior accident year provision was increased modestly for mold losses. Virtually all of the strengthening in Specialty Commercial is due to deductible workers compensation losses on a few large accounts. Other Operations Reserve strengthening of $77 in HartRe assumed reinsurance reserves occurred across multiple accident years, primarily 1997 through 2000, and across several lines of business. High reported losses from ceding companies persisted throughout 2002 and loss ratios were revised upward. Virtually all of the remaining reserve strengthening in the Other Operations segment related to asbestos. Impact of Re-estimates As explained in connection with the Company discussion of Critical Accounting Estimates, the establishment of Property and Casualty reserves is an estimation process, using a variety of methods, assumptions and data elements. Ultimate losses may vary significantly from the current estimates. Many factors can contribute to these variations and the need to change the previous estimate of required reserve levels. Subsequent changes can generally be thought of as being the result of the emergence of additional facts that were not known or anticipated at the time of the prior reserve estimate and/or changes in interpretations of information and trends. The table below shows the range of annual reserve re-estimates experienced by The Hartford over the past four years. The amount of prior accident year development (as shown in the reserve rollforward) for a given calendar year is expressed as a percent of the beginning calendar year reserves, net of reinsurance. The percentage relationships presented are significantly influenced by the facts and circumstances of each particular year and by the fact that only the last four years are included in the range. Accordingly, these percentages are not intended to be a prediction of the range of possible future variability. See Impact of key assumptions on reserve volatility within Critical Accounting Estimates for further discussion of the potential for variability in recorded loss reserves. Business Personal Specialty Ongoing Other Total Insurance Lines Commercial Operations Operations P&C Range of prior accident year development for the four years ended December 31, 2004 [1] [2] (1.4) - 0.5 (0.4) -5.1 0.8 - 2.3 0.1 - 1.4 2.9- 67.4 1.2 - 21.5 [1] Bracketed prior accident year development indicates favorable development. Unbracketed amounts represent unfavorable development. [2] Before the $2.6 billion of reserve strengthening for asbestos during 2003 and the $785 of reserve strengthening for asbestos and environmental during 1996, over the past ten years, reserve re-estimates for total Property and Casualty ranged from (1.3%) to 3.0% . 55 Table of Contents The potential variability of the Company Property and Casualty reserves would normally be expected to vary by segment and the types of loss exposures insured by those segments. Illustrative factors influencing the potential reserve variability for each of the segments are discussed under Critical Accounting Estimates. In general, the Company would expect the variability of its Personal Lines reserve estimates to be relatively less than the variability of the reserve estimates for its other property and casualty segments. The Company would expect the degree of variability of the remaining segments reserve estimates, from lower variability to higher variability, to be generally Business Insurance, Specialty Commercial, and Other Operations. The actual relative variability could prove to be different than anticipated. Reinsurance Recoverables The Company net reinsurance recoverables from various property and casualty reinsurance arrangements amounted to $5.2 billion and $5.4 billion as of December 31, 2004 and December 31, 2003, respectively. Of the total net reinsurance recoverables as of December 31, 2004, 8.4% relates to the Company mandatory participation in various involuntary assigned risk pools, which are backed by the financial strength of the property and casualty insurance industry. Of the remainder, $3.4 billion, or 70.9%, were rated by A.M. Best. Of the total rated by A.M. Best, 93% were rated A- (excellent) or better. The remaining $1.4 billion, or 29.1%, of net recoverables from reinsurers were comprised of the following: 4.8% related to voluntary pools, 3.2% related to captive insurance companies, and 21.1% related to companies not rated by A.M. Best. Where its contracts permit, the Company secures future claim obligations with various forms of collateral including irrevocable letters of credit, secured trusts, funds held accounts and group wide offsets. The allowance for uncollectible reinsurance was $374 and $381 as of December 31, 2004 and December 31, 2003, respectively. The allowance for uncollectible reinsurance is based on an assessment of the credit quality of the Company reinsurers as well as an estimate of the cost of resolution of reinsurer disputes. The Company completed an evaluation of the reinsurance recoverable asset associated with older, long-term casualty liabilities, including asbestos liabilities, reported in the Other Operations segment. As a result of this evaluation, the Company reduced its net reinsurance recoverable by $181. The after-tax income effect of this action was $118. The $181 primarily related to a reduction of the amount of liabilities, principally asbestos, that the Company expects to cede to reinsurers and, to a lesser extent, an increase in the allowance for uncollectible reinsurance recoverables. Premium Measures Written premium is a Statutory accounting financial measure which represents the amount of premiums charged for policies issued, net of reinsurance, during a fiscal period. Earned premium is a GAAP and Statutory measure. Premiums are considered earned and are included in the financial results on a pro rata basis over the policy period. The following segment discussions for the years ended December 31, 2004, 2003 and 2002, respectively, include the presentation of written premiums in addition to earned premiums. Management believes that this performance measure is useful to investors as it reflects current trends in the Company sale of property and casualty insurance products, as compared to earned premium. Reinstatement premium represents additional ceded premium paid for the reinstatement of the amount of reinsurance coverage that was reduced as a result of a reinsurance loss payment. 56 Table of Contents BUSINESS INSURANCE Underwriting Summary 2004 2003 2002 Written premiums $ 4,575 $ 3,957 $ 3,412 Change in unearned premium reserve 276 261 286 Earned premiums 4,299 3,696 3,126 Benefits, claims and claim adjustment expenses Current year 2,700 2,346 1,943 Prior year (67 ) (6 ) 19 Total benefits, claims and claim adjustment expenses 2,633 2,340 1,962 Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs 1,058 913 779 Insurance operating costs and expenses 248 285 291 Underwriting results $ 360 $ 158 $ 94 Loss and loss adjustment expense ratio Current year 62.8 63.5 62.1 Prior year (1.6 ) (0.2 ) 0.6 Total loss and loss adjustment expense ratio 61.2 63.3 62.7 Expense ratio 30.1 31.8 32.7 Policyholder dividend ratio 0.2 0.6 1.5 Combined ratio 91.6 95.7 97.0 Catastrophe ratio (0.9 ) 2.7 0.8 Combined ratio before catastrophes 92.5 93.0 96.2 Combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development 89.7 93.0 95.7 2004 2003 2002 Written Premiums [1] Small Commercial $ 2,255 $ 1,862 $ 1,678 Middle Market 2,320 2,095 1,734 Total $ 4,575 $ 3,957 $ 3,412 Earned Premiums [1] Small Commercial $ 2,077 $ 1,782 $ 1,555 Middle Market 2,222 1,914 1,571 Total $ 4,299 $ 3,696 $ 3,126 [1] The difference between written premiums and earned premiums is attributable to the change in unearned premium reserve. Business Insurance provides standard commercial insurance coverage to small and middle market commercial businesses, primarily throughout the United States. This segment offers workers compensation, property, automobile, liability, umbrella and marine coverages. The Business Insurance segment also provides commercial risk management products and services. 2004 Compared to 2003 Earned premiums for the segment increased $603 for the year ended December 31, 2004, primarily due to earned pricing increases and new business premium outpacing non-renewals. For the year ended December 31, 2004, earned pricing increases of 7% for small commercial and 3% for middle market contributed to the earned premium growth of $295 in small commercial and $308 in middle market. The increase in earned premiums is partially due to an increase in Select Xpand product sales for small commercial and growth in workers compensation premium for middle market. As substantially all premiums in the segment are earned over a 12 month policy period, earned pricing increases in 2004 were primarily driven by written pricing increases of 9% in the last six months of 2003 and 2% during 2004. New business written premium for the year ended December 31, 2004 of $1,148 was up from $1,038 for the year ended December 31, 2003, due to an increase in new business written premium for small commercial of $172, partially offset by a decrease in new business written premium for middle market of $61. The new business premium growth in Small Commercial was due primarily to growth from the Select Xpand product and growth from an increase in the number of agents, partially offset by the moderation in written pricing increases. Premium renewal retention remained strong, decreasing slightly from 87% for the year ended December 31, 2003 to 85% for the year ended December 31, 2004. The moderation in written pricing increases for middle market from 2003 to 2004 contributed to the decrease in premium renewal retention. Underwriting results for the year ended December 31, 2004 improved $202, with a corresponding 4.1 point decrease in the combined ratio. The improvement in the combined ratio is mainly due to a decrease in the loss and loss adjustment expense ratio of 2.1 points and a decrease in the expense ratio of 1.7 points. The improvement in the loss and loss adjustment expense ratio of 2.1 points was due to a $175 reduction in reserves for September 11 and the impact of earning pricing increases in excess of loss cost increases, partially offset by $108 of strengthening of prior accident year reserves, excluding September 11, and an increase in catastrophe losses, 57 Table of Contents excluding September 11, of 0.5 points. The 2004 prior accident year reserve strengthening excluding September 11 of $108, or 2.5 points, includes an increase in reserves of $38 for small commercial package business, $25 for auto liability claims and $23 for construction defect claims. Catastrophe losses, excluding the reduction in September 11 reserves, were $136 in 2004 and included losses from hurricanes Charley, Frances, Ivan and Jeanne in the third quarter of 2004. Before catastrophes and all prior accident year development, underwriting results for the year ended December 31, 2004 improved $181, with a corresponding 3.3 point decrease in the combined ratio, due to a lower loss and loss adjustment expense ratio and a lower expense ratio. The decrease in the loss and loss adjustment expense ratio was primarily due to earned pricing increases and to improved claim frequency, partially offset by increased claim severity. The expense ratio improved 1.7 points, primarily due to earned premium growth coupled with a decrease in commissions as a percentage of earned premium. Commissions are a lower percentage of earned premium on workers compensation policies and workers compensation premiums were a higher percentage of earned premium in 2004 than in 2003. 2003 Compared to 2002 Earned premiums for the segment increased by $570 for the year ended December 31, 2003, primarily due to earned pricing increases of 12% and new business growth outpacing non-renewals. As substantially all premiums in the segment are earned over a 12 month policy period, earned pricing increases in 2003 were primarily driven by written pricing increases of 14% in the last six months of 2002 and 9% during 2003. New business growth of 17% in 2003 was primarily driven by growth in middle market business. Premium renewal retention for the year ended December 31, 2003 remained strong at 87% compared to 89% in 2002. Underwriting results improved $64, with a corresponding 1.3 point decrease in the combined ratio, for the year ended December 31, 2003, despite a significant increase in catastrophe losses due largely to Hurricane Isabel and severe tornadoes in the Midwest. Before catastrophes, underwriting results improved $140, or 119%, with a corresponding 3.2 point decrease in the combined ratio. The improvement was driven by a decrease in the loss and loss expense ratio before catastrophes for both small commercial and middle market, primarily due to improved claim frequency and double-digit earned pricing increases. In addition, double-digit earned pricing increases and prudent expense management favorably impacted the expense ratio for the year ended December 31, 2003. Outlook Management expects the Business Insurance segment to continue to deliver strong results in 2005. Although some price decreases within many markets of the commercial industry are expected, the Company expects to achieve mid- to high-single-digit written premium growth due, in part, to implementing continued strategic actions. These actions include working with distribution channels to expand market share in targeted states, improving pricing opportunities through better segmentation of the market, offering flexible products that allow agents to tailor offerings to each customer, maintaining disciplined renewal underwriting and enhancing agency technology, including e-submission capability. Loss costs are expected to increase due to less favorable trends in claim frequency and continuing trends of increasing claim severity. As a result of the anticipated slight decrease in written pricing and increase in loss costs, management expects the loss and loss expense ratio to increase moderately in 2005. Competition in middle market is challenging, but largely rational, with some classes of business experiencing more aggressive price competition. Written pricing in the small commercial market will also continue to be impacted by increasing competition as more national carriers enter the market. Nonetheless, we anticipate continued new business growth in the small commercial segment through execution of strategic initiatives and the continued growth of our Select Xpand product sales. 58 Table of Contents PERSONAL LINES Underwriting Summary 2004 2003 2002 Written premiums $ 3,557 $ 3,272 $ 3,050 Change in unearned premium reserve 112 91 66 Earned premiums 3,445 3,181 2,984 Benefits, claims and claim adjustment expenses Current year 2,509 2,324 2,244 Prior year 3 (6 ) 75 Total benefits, claims and claim adjustment expenses 2,512 2,318 2,319 Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs 530 386 415 Insurance operating costs and expenses 265 347 281 Underwriting results $ 138 $ 130 $ (31 ) Loss and loss adjustment expense ratio Current year 72.8 73.1 75.2 Prior year 0.1 (0.2 ) 2.5 Total loss and loss adjustment expense ratio 72.9 72.9 77.7 Expense ratio 23.1 23.0 23.3 Combined ratio 96.0 95.9 101.0 Catastrophe ratio 7.4 4.1 2.5 Combined ratio before catastrophes 88.6 91.8 98.6 Combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development 88.2 91.7 96.3 Other Revenues [1] $ 123 $ 123 $ 123 [1] Represents servicing revenue Written Premiums [1] 2004 2003 2002 Business Unit AARP $ 2,244 $ 2,066 $ 1,855 Other Affinity 128 148 179 Agency 942 804 756 Omni 243 254 260 Total $ 3,557 $ 3,272 $ 3,050 Product Line Automobile $ 2,685 $ 2,508 $ 2,352 Homeowners 872 764 698 Total $ 3,557 $ 3,272 $ 3,050 Earned Premiums [1] 2004 2003 2002 Business Unit AARP $ 2,146 $ 1,956 $ 1,747 Other Affinity 138 163 192 Agency 907 807 794 Omni 254 255 251 Total $ 3,445 $ 3,181 $ 2,984 Product Line Automobile $ 2,622 $ 2,458 $ 2,326 Homeowners 823 723 658 Total $ 3,445 $ 3,181 $ 2,984 Combined Ratios Automobile 95.7 98.0 103.1 Homeowners 96.8 88.8 93.8 Total 96.0 95.9 101.0 [1] The difference between written premiums and earned premiums is attributable to the change in unearned premium reserve. Personal Lines provides automobile, homeowners and home-based business coverages to the members of AARP through a direct marketing operation; to individuals who prefer local agent involvement through a network of independent agents in the standard personal lines market ( Standard ) and in the non-standard automobile market through the Company Omni Insurance Group, Inc. ( Omni ) subsidiary. Personal Lines also operates a member contact center for health insurance products offered through AARP Health Care Options. The Hartford exclusive licensing arrangement with AARP continues through January 1, 2010 for automobile, homeowners and home-based business. The Health Care Options agreement continues through 2007. 2004 Compared to 2003 Earned premiums increased $264 for the year ended December 31, 2004 due to growth in both AARP and Agency, partially offset by a reduction in Other Affinity earned premium. Earned premiums for Omni were flat from 2003 to 59 Table of Contents 2004. AARP and Agency earned premium increased $190 and $100, respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2004, primarily because new business growth over the prior 6 to 12 months has exceeded non-renewals. Both AARP and Agency have experienced increased earned premiums in both automobile and homeowners business. The growth in Agency earned premium is due, in part, to the new Dimensions automobile and homeowners class plans, which allows the Company to write a broader class of risks. The growth in AARP reflects growth in the size of the AARP target market and direct marketing programs to increase premium writings. The new Dimensions auto class plan has been rolled out to an additional six states in 2004, bringing the total number of states to 37 . The new Dimensions homeowners class plan was introduced in the first quarter of 2004 and has been rolled out to 28 states through December 31, 2004. As a result of the new Dimensions class plan initiative and other actions taken to increase growth, the number of policies in force at year end increased in auto and homeowners from 2,058,825 and 1,319,629, respectively, as of December 31, 2003, to 2,166,922 and 1,348,573, respectively, as of December 31, 2004. The growth in policies in force does not correspond directly with the growth in earned premium due to the impact of earned pricing increases and because policy in force counts are as of a point in time rather than over a period of time. Most of the growth in homeowners policies in force was generated by Agency while for auto policies in force, growth in both AARP and Agency is partially offset by a decline in Omni. For the year ended December 31, 2004, new business premiums for both automobile and homeowners in AARP and Agency were $311 and $167, respectively, which was up from $226 and $105, respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2003. Earned pricing increases have declined from 2003 to 2004. Earned pricing increases in automobile of 5% in the year ended December 31, 2004, primarily reflects written pricing increases of 8% in the last 6 months of 2003 and 3% in 2004. Earned pricing increases in homeowners of 11% in the year ended December 31, 2004, primarily reflects written pricing increases of 13% in the last 6 months of 2003 and 9% in 2004. In addition to earned pricing increases, homeowners earned premiums included the effect of automatic increases in the amount of insurance coverage to adjust for construction cost inflation. Premium renewal retention for automobile decreased from 91% for the year ended December 31, 2003 to 89% for the year ended December 31, 2004. The decrease in premium renewal retention for automobile is driven largely by the impact of declining written pricing increases. Premium renewal retention for homeowners decreased from 101% for the year ended December 31, 2003 to 100% for the year ended December 31, 2004, also due to declining written pricing increases. Underwriting results increased $8 for the year ended December 31, 2004 and the combined ratio remained relatively flat at 96.0. The loss and loss adjustment expense ratio remained flat at 72.9, due to the impact of earned pricing increases in excess of loss cost increases, offset by an increase in pre-tax catastrophe losses of $122, or 3.3 points. Pre-tax catastrophes, including losses from Hurricane Charley, Hurricane Frances, Hurricane Ivan and Hurricane Jeanne, were $253, or 7.4 points, for the year ended December 31, 2004, compared to $131, or 4.1 points, for the year ended December 31, 2003. Net prior accident year development was not significant in either 2004 or 2003. Before catastrophes and prior accident year development, underwriting results for the year ended December 31, 2004 increased $142, with a corresponding 3.5 point decrease in the combined ratio, due to earned pricing increases and favorable claim frequency, offset by increased claim severity. Automobile and homeowners results, before catastrophes, improved 2.3 and 4.7 combined ratio points, respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2004 as earned pricing increases outpaced loss costs in both lines of business. The expense ratio remained relatively flat at 23.1%, despite earned premium growth, because of higher commissions as a result of increased Agency business and increased other underwriting expenses. 2003 Compared to 2002 Earned premiums increased $197 in 2003 due to growth in both the automobile and homeowners lines, primarily in AARP business, which grew by $209, or 12%. The increase in automobile earned premium of $132 was primarily due to new business growth in AARP and earned pricing increases of 9% in 2003 up from 6% in 2002. Homeowners earned premium growth of $65 for the year ended December 31, 2003, was largely driven by new business growth in AARP and earned pricing increases of 14% in 2003, up from 7% in 2002. The increase in earned premiums for AARP and Agency is partially offset by the decrease in earned premiums for other affinity business of $29 due to a planned reduction in policy counts as a result of the Company strategic decision to de-emphasize other affinity business. Earned pricing increases in automobile of 9% in the year ended December 31, 2003 primarily reflects written pricing increases of 10% in the last 6 months of 2002 and for all of 2003. Earned pricing increases in homeowners of 14% in the year ended December 31, 2003 primarily reflects written pricing increases of 14% in the last 6 months of 2002 and for all of 2003. Automobile premium renewal retention increased from 88% for the year ended December 31 2002 to 91% for the year ended December 31, 2003. Premium renewal retention for homeowners was 101% for the year ended December 31, 2003, which was relatively consistent with the prior year. Underwriting results increased $161, with a corresponding 5.1 point decrease in the combined ratio. The improvement was primarily due to the successful execution of the segment state-specific strategies to manage pricing and loss costs. Automobile results improved 5.1 combined ratio points and homeowners results improved 5.0 combined ratio points, both due primarily to earned pricing increases and favorable claim frequency. Personal Lines financial performance was negatively affected by an increase in pre-tax catastrophe losses over the prior year of $58, or 1.6 points, due largely to Hurricane Isabel, California wildfires and severe tornadoes in the Midwest. Double-digit earned pricing increases and prudent expense management resulted in a 0.3 point decrease in the expense ratio. 60 Table of Contents Outlook While the personal lines industry operating fundamentals are expected to be strong in 2005, the market will continue to face significant challenges. Price increases in automobile and homeowners are expected to be in the low single digits. Regulatory requirements applying to premium rates vary from state to state, and, in most states, rates are subject to prior regulatory approval. State regulatory constraints may prevent companies from obtaining the necessary rates to achieve an underwriting profit. Industry rates may remain inadequate in certain states in 2005. New business competition is still rational, but with lower rate increases, consumer shopping has slowed and fewer customers are switching carriers. Loss cost inflation is expected to rise in 2005, and it is uncertain whether favorable claim frequency trends can continue. Automobile repair and medical cost inflation are expected to continue to outpace general inflation trends. In 2005, the Personal Lines segment is expected to deliver written premium growth in the high single digits by expanding the number of agents offering our Dimensions products and increasing our direct marketing to the AARP membership base. Our new product and technology investments are expected to continue to deliver a competitive value proposition to independent agents. Continued strong financial results in 2005 for the Personal Lines segment are also expected as a result of continued state-driven pricing, product and underwriting actions. SPECIALTY COMMERCIAL Underwriting Summary 2004 2003 2002 Written premiums $ 1,772 $ 1,612 $ 1,362 Change in unearned premium reserve 46 54 140 Earned premiums 1,726 1,558 1,222 Benefits, claims and claim adjustment expenses Current year 1,345 1,130 820 Prior year 69 52 29 Total benefits, claims and claim adjustment expenses 1,414 1,182 849 Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs 257 254 240 Insurance operating costs and expenses 108 112 127 Underwriting results $ (53 ) $ 10 $ 6 Loss and loss adjustment expense ratio Current year 77.9 72.5 67.1 Prior year 4.0 3.3 2.4 Total loss and loss adjustment expense ratio 81.9 75.8 69.4 Expense ratio 21.1 22.9 29.3 Policyholder dividend ratio 0.1 0.7 0.7 Combined ratio 103.1 99.3 99.4 Catastrophe ratio (0.4 ) 1.7 0.5 Combined ratio before catastrophes 103.5 97.6 98.9 Combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development 92.8 94.3 96.6 Other Revenue [1] $ 314 $ 306 $ 233 [1] Represents servicing revenue 2004 2003 2002 Written Premiums [1] Property $ 443 $ 440 $ 405 Casualty 743 670 556 Bond 197 162 157 Professional Liability 342 324 239 Other 47 16 5 Total $ 1,772 $ 1,612 $ 1,362 Earned Premiums [1] Property $ 461 $ 429 $ 346 Casualty 635 615 498 Bond 188 152 148 Professional Liability 335 296 200 Other 107 66 30 Total $ 1,726 $ 1,558 $ 1,222 [1] The difference between written premiums and earned premiums is attributable to the change in unearned premium reserve. Specialty Commercial offers a variety of customized insurance products and risk management services. The segment provides standard commercial insurance products including workers compensation, automobile and liability coverages to large-sized companies. Specialty Commercial also provides bond, professional liability, specialty casualty and agricultural coverages, as well as core property and excess and surplus lines coverages not normally written by standard lines insurers. Alternative markets, within Specialty Commercial, provides insurance products and services primarily to captive insurance companies, pools and self-insurance 61 Table of Contents groups. In addition, Specialty Commercial provides third-party administrator services for claims administration, integrated benefits, loss control and performance measurement through Specialty Risk Services. 2004 Compared to 2003 Earned premiums for the Specialty Commercial segment grew $168 due primarily to earned pricing increases in casualty, bond and professional liability, partially offset by earned pricing decreases in property, a decline in new business growth in all lines except bond and a decrease in renewal retention in all lines. The increase in earned premium for the year ended December 31, 2004 is also offset by a $90 reduction in premiums receivable under retrospectively-rated policies, reflecting a decrease in estimated earned premium under the terms of these policies. As substantially all premiums in the segment are earned over a 12 month policy period, the earned pricing increases in 2004 resulted primarily from written pricing increases over the last 6 months of 2003 and the year ended December 31, 2004. Despite written pricing decreases in 2004, property written premium is relatively flat for the year ended December 31, 2004, primarily due to an increase of $43 in the portion of property business derived from multi-peril crop insurance premiums. On September 30, 2004, the Company agreed to transfer its entire book of multi-peril crop insurance (MPCI) to Rural Community Insurance Company (RCIC), a subsidiary of Wells Fargo & Company. The agreement transfers in bulk all 2005 crop year policies to RCIC in exchange for an initial payment and renewal fees based upon retention of the transferred business over a three year period. The Company will retain responsibility for the MPCI business written for the 2004 and prior crop years. Earned premium for MPCI for the year ended December 31, 2004 was $127. Before considering the increase in MPCI premiums, earned premiums for property declined by 12%, reflecting a business decision to write less new business and renew less premium as a result of the decline in written pricing. Casualty written premiums were up $73 for the year ended December 31, 2004, primarily because of written premium growth in alternative markets business and high single-digit written pricing increases, partially offset by a decrease in premium renewal retention. Of the total growth in written premium for the year ended December 31, 2004, $75 was attributable to a single alternative markets insured program. This program was non-renewed effective December 1, 2004, although it will continue to earn premium into 2005. The non-renewal is not expected to have a significant impact on Specialty Commercial underwriting results. Bond written premium grew $35 for the year ended December 31, 2004, primarily as a result of an increase in contract surety business and a decrease in ceded premiums of $11 as well as written pricing increases, partially offset by a slight decrease in premium renewal retention. In professional liability, written premium is up $18 for the year ended December 31, 2004 due to a decrease in the portion of risks ceded to outside reinsurers and earned pricing increases, partially offset by a decrease in renewal retention and new business growth. Earned pricing increases in professional liability were due entirely to written pricing increases in 2003 as prices have declined in 2004. Within the other category, written and earned premiums increased $31 and $41, respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2004 due to increased premiums on internal reinsurance arrangements. Underwriting results decreased $63 for the year ended December 31, 2004, primarily due to prior accident year loss development and catastrophe losses incurred from the hurricanes in the third quarter of 2004 and the decrease in earned premiums under retrospectively-rated policies, partially offset by a $116 release of September 11 reserves and a decrease in the expense ratio. Before the release of the September 11 reserves, prior accident year loss development was $185, or 10.7 points, in 2004, up from $52, or 3.3 points, in 2003. Prior accident year loss development for the year ended December 31, 2004 included $167 of reserve strengthening for construction defect claims as well as strengthening in large deductible workers compensation reserves and a release in other liability reserves, each approximately $150. Before the release of the September 11 reserves, catastrophe losses were $110, or 6.3 points, in 2004, up from $26, or 1.7 points, in 2003, principally due to losses incurred for hurricanes Charley, Frances, Ivan and Jeanne in the third quarter of 2004. Before catastrophes, all prior accident year development, and the earned premium adjustment on retrospectively-rated policies, underwriting results improved $126 with a corresponding 6.1 point decrease in the combined ratio for the year ended December 31, 2004, primarily due to underwriting improvement in all lines of business. The improvement in casualty, bond and professional liability was due to earned pricing increases exceeding loss costs. The improvement in property was due to low non-catastrophe property losses, despite the decline in earned pricing. The expense ratio for the year ended December 31, 2004 decreased over the prior year expense ratio due primarily to earned premium growth. 2003 Compared to 2002 Earned premiums increased $336, or 27%, for the year ended December 31, 2003, primarily due to earned premium growth in the property, casualty and professional liability lines of business as a result of strong earned pricing increases. Written premiums increased $250, or 18%, in 2003, primarily due to double-digit growth in casualty and professional liability. Casualty and professional liability written premiums grew $114, or 21%, and $85, or 36%, respectively, due to strong written pricing increases. Bond growth for the year was negatively impacted by ceded reinstatement premium. While property pricing began to turn negative in the latter half of 2003, written premiums in property increased $35 for the year ended December 31, 2003. Premium renewal retention for casualty, professional liability and bond was flat to slightly higher from year to year, except for a decrease in renewal retention in property due to the decline in pricing. Underwriting results improved $4 for the year ended December 31, 2003, despite higher catastrophe losses compared to unusually low catastrophe losses in the prior period and an increase in loss reserve development that was driven by prior accident year loss reserve strengthening of $20 in the bond and $25 in the professional liability lines of business. The bond reserve strengthening is 62 Table of Contents isolated to a few severe contract surety claims related to accident year 2002. The professional liability reserve strengthening involved a provision for anticipated settlements of reinsurance obligations for contracts outstanding at the time of the original acquisition of Reliance Group Holdings auto residual value portfolio in the third quarter of 2000. Excluding catastrophes, property underwriting results continued to be favorable due to earned pricing increases. Casualty continued to show underwriting improvement over the prior year due to a lower loss ratio. The Specialty Commercial combined ratio improved 0.1 points for the year ended December 31, 2003 as a result of strong earned pricing, higher ceding commissions in the professional liability line of business and prudent expense management, partially offset by the prior accident year reserve strengthening and increased catastrophe losses. Outlook Specialty Commercial is made up of a diverse group of businesses, each of which operates independently with its own set of business objectives and focuses on the operational dynamics of its specific industry. These businesses, while somewhat interrelated, each have a unique business model and operating cycle. Given pricing declines in some markets, we anticipate negative written premium growth for 2005. Although written price decreases for property and professional liability are expected to continue in 2005, management expects written pricing increases in both casualty and bond. We will continue to write and renew business where pricing and terms and conditions are reasonable. Management will continue to take actions to maintain profitability, including exercising underwriting discipline, maximizing growth in the segment most profitable lines, providing innovative new products and expanding non-traditional distribution alternatives. In 2005, both the loss and loss adjustment expense ratio and the expense ratio will be impacted from exiting the MPCI crop insurance business. The MPCI business made up 27.5% of the earned premium in property for 2004 and had a higher loss ratio than the balance of the property business. The MPCI business also had one of the lowest expense ratios in Specialty Commercial because of the reimbursement of expenses from the Federal government under the MPCI program. As a result of exiting the business, there will likely be an unfavorable impact to earned premium growth and the expense ratio, offset by a favorable impact on the loss and loss adjustment expense ratio. In addition, the non-renewal of an alternative markets insured program, representing $225 of earned premium in 2004, will negatively impact casualty earned premium in 2005, but is not expected to have a significant impact on underwriting results. OTHER OPERATIONS (INCLUDING ASBESTOS AND ENVIRONMENTAL CLAIMS) Operating Summary 2004 2003 2002 Written premiums $ (10 ) $ 224 $ 760 Change in unearned premium reserve (34 ) (146 ) (22 ) Earned premiums 24 370 782 Benefits, claims and claim adjustment expenses 445 3,086 740 Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs 5 89 179 Insurance operating costs and expenses 22 35 83 Underwriting results $ (448 ) $ (2,840 ) $ (220 ) The Other Operations segment includes operations that are under a single management structure, Heritage Holdings, which is responsible for two related activities. The first activity is the management of certain subsidiaries and operations of The Hartford that have discontinued writing new business. The second is the management of claims (and the associated reserves) related to asbestos and environmental exposures. Effective January 1, 2004, the financial results of HartRe assumed reinsurance are fully reported in Other Operations, and 2003 and 2002 financial results have been restated to include HartRe assumed reinsurance. 2004 Compared to 2003 Earned premiums continue to decline as a result of the Company decision to exit from the HartRe assumed domestic reinsurance business in the second quarter of 2003. Underwriting losses decreased $2.4 billion for the year ended December 31, 2004, primarily due to the impact of $2.6 billion of asbestos reserve strengthening in the first quarter 2003, and a reduction in September 11 reserves of $97 in the first quarter of 2004. These favorable variances were partially offset by the $170 strengthening of assumed reinsurance reserves, the $75 strengthening of environmental reserves in the third quarter of 2004, and the $181 provision associated with the evaluation of the reinsurance recoverable asset in the second quarter of 2004. 2003 Compared to 2002 The decline in earned premiums was primarily due to the Company decision to exit the HartRe assumed domestic reinsurance business. The underwriting loss was driven by the first quarter net asbestos reserve strengthening of $2.6 billion as discussed in the section that follows. The paragraphs that follow are background information and a discussion of asbestos and environmental claims, the deteriorating trends with respect to asbestos, and a summary of the Company detailed study of asbestos reserves. Asbestos and Environmental Claims The Hartford continues to receive claims that assert damages from asbestos-related and environmental-related exposures. Asbestos claims relate primarily to bodily injuries asserted by those who came in contact with asbestos or products containing asbestos. Environmental claims relate primarily to pollution and related clean-up costs. 63 Table of Contents The Hartford wrote several different categories of insurance coverage to which asbestos and environmental claims may apply. First, The Hartford wrote primary policies providing the first layer of coverage in an insured liability program. Second, The Hartford wrote excess policies providing higher layers of coverage for losses that exhaust the limits of underlying coverage. Third, The Hartford acted as a reinsurer assuming a portion of risks previously assumed by other insurers writing primary, excess and reinsurance coverages. Fourth, The Hartford participated in the London Market, writing both direct insurance and assumed reinsurance business. With regard to both environmental and particularly asbestos claims, significant uncertainty limits the ability of insurers and reinsurers to estimate the ultimate reserves necessary for unpaid losses and related expenses. Traditional actuarial reserving techniques cannot reasonably estimate the ultimate cost of these claims, particularly during periods where theories of law are in flux. The degree of variability of reserve estimates for these exposures is significantly greater than for other more traditional exposures. In particular, The Hartford believes there is a high degree of uncertainty inherent in the estimation of asbestos loss reserves. In the case of the reserves for asbestos exposures, factors contributing to the high degree of uncertainty include inadequate loss development patterns, plaintiffs expanding theories of liability, the risks inherent in major litigation, and inconsistent emerging legal doctrines. Furthermore, over time, insurers, including The Hartford, have experienced significant changes in the rate at which asbestos claims are brought, the claims experience of particular insureds, and the value of claims, making predictions of future exposure from past experience uncertain. For example, in the past few years, insurers in general, including The Hartford, have experienced an increase in the number of asbestos-related claims due to, among other things, plaintiffs increased focus on new and previously peripheral defendants, and an increase in the number of insureds seeking bankruptcy protection as a result of asbestos-related liabilities. Plaintiffs and insureds have sought to use bankruptcy proceedings, including pre-packaged bankruptcies, to accelerate and increase loss payments by insurers. In addition, some policyholders have asserted new classes of claims for so-called non-products coverages to which an aggregate limit of liability may not apply. Further uncertainties include insolvencies of other carriers and unanticipated developments pertaining to The Hartford ability to recover reinsurance for asbestos and environmental claims. Management believes these issues are not likely to be resolved in the near future. In the case of the reserves for environmental exposures, factors contributing to the high degree of uncertainty include expanding theories of liabilities and damages; the risks inherent in major litigation; inconsistent decisions concerning the existence and scope of coverage for environmental claims; and uncertainty as to the monetary amount being sought by the claimant from the insured. It is also not possible to predict changes in the legal and legislative environment and their impact on the future development of asbestos and environmental claims. It is unknown whether potential Federal asbestos-related legislation will be enacted, and if so, what its effect will be on The Hartford aggregate asbestos liabilities. The reporting pattern for assumed reinsurance claims is much longer than for direct claims. In many instances, it takes months or years to determine that the policyholder own obligations have been met and how the reinsurance in question may apply to such claims. The delay in reporting reinsurance claims and exposures adds to the uncertainty of estimating the related reserves. Given the factors and emerging trends described above, The Hartford believes the actuarial tools and other techniques it employs to estimate the ultimate cost of claims for more traditional kinds of insurance exposure are less precise in estimating reserves for its asbestos and environmental exposures. For this reason, The Hartford relies on exposure-based analysis to estimate the ultimate costs of these claims and regularly evaluates new information in assessing its potential asbestos and environmental exposures. The process of estimating asbestos and environmental reserves remains subject to a wide variety of uncertainties, which are detailed in Note 12 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. The Company believes that its current asbestos and environmental reserves are reasonable and appropriate. However, analyses of future developments could cause The Hartford to change its estimates and ranges of its asbestos and environmental reserves, and the effect of these changes could be material to the Company consolidated operating results, financial condition and liquidity. Reserve Activity Reserves and reserve activity in the Other Operations segment are categorized and reported as asbestos, environmental or all other activity. The following discussion relates to reserves and reserve activity, net of applicable reinsurance. There are a wide variety of claims that drive the reserves within each category of Other Operations. Asbestos claims relate primarily to bodily injury claims asserted by those who came in contact with asbestos or products containing asbestos. Environmental claims relate primarily to pollution and related clean-up costs. The all other category of reserves covers a wide range of insurance and assumed reinsurance coverages, including, but not limited to, potential liability for breast implants, construction defects, lead paint, silica, pharmaceutical products, molestation and other long-tail or late emerging liabilities. The Other Operations book of business contains policies written from 1940s to 2003. With the transfer of HartRe assumed reinsurance into Other Operations in both 2002 and 2004, Other Operations has exposure related to more recent assumed casualty reinsurance reserves, particularly for the underwriting years 1997 through 2001. The Hartford experience has been that this book of runoff business has over time produced significantly higher claims and losses than were contemplated at inception. The areas of active claim activity have also shifted based on changes in plaintiff focus and the overall litigation environment. A significant portion of the claim reserves of the Other Operations segment relates to exposure to the insurance businesses of other insurers or reinsurers ( whole account exposure). Many of these whole account exposures arise from reinsurance agreements previously written by The 64 Table of Contents Hartford. The Hartford net exposure in these arrangements has increased for a variety of reasons, including The Hartford commutation of previous retrocessions of such business. Due to the reporting practices of cedants to their reinsurers, determination of the nature of the individual risks involved in these whole account exposures (such as asbestos, environmental, or other exposures) requires various assumptions and estimates, which are subject to uncertainty, as previously discussed. During 2002, as part of the Company ongoing monitoring of reserves, the Company reclassified $600 of reserves from the all other reserve category, of which $540 was reclassified to asbestos and $60 was reclassified to environmental claim reserves. The increase in reserves categorized as environmental of $60 occurred because the reviews, in each of the two categories of claims, employed actuarial techniques to analyze distinct and non-overlapping blocks of reserves and associated exposures. Facts and circumstances associated with each block determined the resulting changes in category. A portion of the 2002 reclassification relates to re-estimates of the appropriate allocation among the asbestos, environmental and all other categories of the aggregate reserves (net of reinsurance) carried for certain assumed reinsurance, commuted cessions and commuted retrocessions of whole account business. As part of the 2002 reclassification, The Hartford also revised formulas that it will use to allocate (among the asbestos, environmental and all other categories) future claim payments for which reinsurance arrangements were commuted and to allocate claim payments made to effect commutations. As a result of these revisions, payments categorized as asbestos and environmental exposures will be higher in future periods than in prior periods. In December 2002, Halliburton announced its intention to file a pre-packaged bankruptcy plan through one or more subsidiaries and in January 2003, Honeywell announced that it had reached an agreement with the plaintiffs bar that would enable it to file a pre-negotiated plan through its former NARCO subsidiary, then already in bankruptcy. In January 2003, Congoleum, a floor tile manufacturer, which previously had defended claims successfully in the tort system, announced its intention to file a pre-packaged plan of reorganization to be funded almost entirely with insurance proceeds. Moreover, prominent members of the plaintiffs and policyholders bars announced publicly their intention to file many more such plans. These events represented a worsening of conditions the Company observed in 2002. In the first quarter of 2003, several events occurred that in the Company view confirmed the existence of a substantial long-term deterioration in the asbestos litigation environment. For example, in February 2003, Combustion Engineering, long a major asbestos defendant, filed a pre-packaged bankruptcy plan under which it proposed to emerge from bankruptcy within five weeks, before opponents of the plan could have a meaningful opportunity to object, and included many novel features in its plan that its insurers found objectionable. As a result of these worsening conditions, the Company conducted a comprehensive, ground-up study of its asbestos exposures in the first quarter of 2003 in an effort to project, beginning at the individual account level, the effect of these trends on the Company estimated total exposure to asbestos liability. Based on the Company evaluation of the deteriorating conditions described above, the Company strengthened its gross and net asbestos reserves by $3.9 billion and $2.6 billion, respectively. The reserve strengthening related primarily to policies effective in 1985 or prior years. The Company had incorporated an absolute asbestos exclusion in most of its general liability policies written after 1985. During the first quarter of 2004, the Company completed an updated gross asbestos reserve evaluation. As part of this evaluation, the Company reviewed all of its open direct domestic insurance accounts exposed to asbestos liability as well as assumed reinsurance accounts and certain closed accounts. The Company also examined its London Market exposures for both direct insurance and assumed reinsurance. The evaluation indicated no change in the overall required gross asbestos reserves. During the second quarter of 2004, the Company completed an evaluation of the reinsurance recoverables associated with older, long-term casualty liabilities reported in the Other Operations segment, including asbestos liabilities. In conducting its Other Operations reinsurance recoverable review, the Company used its most recent detailed studies of gross asbestos, environmental and all other liabilities reported in the segment, including its estimate of the type and potential timing of future claims, and analyzed the legal entities through which each exposed coverage was written, the reinsurance arrangements in place at each of these legal entities and the years of potential reinsurance available. As part of its Other Operations reinsurance recoverable review, the Company also analyzed recent developments in commutation activity between reinsurers and cedants, recent trends in arbitration and litigation outcomes in disputes between cedants and reinsurers and the overall credit quality of the Company reinsurers. As a result of this evaluation, the Company reduced its estimated net reinsurance recoverable by $181, which was comprised of a $126 reduction of ceded amounts and a $55 increase in the allowance for uncollectible reinsurance. The after-tax effect of this action was $118. The Company also consolidated within the all other category its allowance for insolvencies and disputes that might affect reinsurance coverage associated with Other Operations into a single allowance. As of December 31, 2004, the allowance for uncollectible reinsurance totals $314. In the third quarter of 2004, The Hartford completed an account-by-account review of its environmental exposures. During the course of this review, the Company found estimates for individual cases changed based upon the particular circumstances of each account, although the review found no apparent overarching cause or change in the claim environment. The net effect of these changes resulted in a $75 before tax increase in gross and net environmental liabilities. In the fourth quarter of 2004, the Company completed a review of its non-asbestos and environmental exposures in Other Operations. As a result of this review, the Company increased its assumed casualty reinsurance reserves by $40. For the year ended December 31, 2004, assumed casualty reinsurance reserves were strengthened by a total of $170, including $130 of strengthening in the first quarter and $40 in the fourth quarter. 65 Table of Contents Consistent with the Company long-standing reserving practices, The Hartford will continue to review and monitor these reserves regularly and, where future developments indicate, make appropriate adjustments to the reserves. The loss reserving assumptions, drawn from both industry data and the Company experience, have been applied over time to all of this business and have resulted in reserve strengthening or reserve releases at various times over the past decade. The Company believes that its current asbestos and environmental reserves are reasonable and appropriate. However, analyses of future developments could cause The Hartford to change its estimates and ranges of its asbestos and environmental reserves, and the effect of these changes could be material to the Company consolidated operating results, financial condition and liquidity. Currently, the Company expects to perform an asbestos study in the second quarter of 2005 and an environmental study in the third quarter of 2005. In addition, the Company currently expects to perform a comprehensive review of Other Operations reinsurance recoverables at least annually. At any time there are significant developments that affect particular exposures, reinsurance arrangements or the financial condition of particular reinsurers, the Company will respond by making adjustments in the portion of liabilities it expects to cede or in its allowance for uncollectible reinsurance. The following table presents reserve activity, inclusive of estimates for both reported and incurred but not reported claims, net of reinsurance, for Other Operations, categorized by asbestos, environmental and all other claims, for the years ended December 31, 2004, 2003 and 2002. Also included are the remaining asbestos and environmental exposures of Ongoing Operations. Other Operations Claims and Claim Adjustment Expenses Asbestos Environmental All Other[1] [2] Total 2004 Beginning liability net $ 3,794 $ 408 $ 2,392 $ 6,594 Claims and claim adjustment expenses incurred [5] 222 86 150 458 Claims and claim adjustment expenses paid [6] (1,202 ) (90 ) (368 ) (1,660 ) Reclassification of allowance for uncollectible reinsurance (330 ) (10 ) 340 Ending liability net [3] [4] $ 2,484 [7] $ 394 $ 2,514 $ 5,392 2003 Beginning liability net $ 1,118 $ 591 $ 2,436 $ 4,145 Claims and claim adjustment expenses incurred 2,612 2 484 3,098 Claims and claim adjustment expenses paid (161 ) (185 ) (525 ) (871 ) Other [8] 225 (3 ) 222 Ending liability net [3] [4] $ 3,794 $ 408 $ 2,392 $ 6,594 2002 Beginning liability net $ 616 $ 654 $ 3,060 $ 4,330 Claims and claim adjustment expenses incurred 88 (11 ) 654 731 Claims and claim adjustment expenses paid (126 ) (112 ) (678 ) (916 ) Other [9] 540 60 (600 ) Ending liability net [3] [4] $ 1,118 $ 591 $ 2,436 $ 4,145 [1] Includes unallocated loss adjustment expense reserves and allowance for uncollectible reinsurance. [2] The financial results of HartRe assumed reinsurance are reported in Other Operations. [3] Ending liabilities include asbestos and environmental reserves reported in Ongoing Operations of $13 and $9, respectively, as of December 31, 2004, $11 and $8, respectively as of December 31, 2003, and $11 and $7 respectively as of December 31, 2002. The total net claim and claim adjustment expenses incurred for the twelve months ended December 31, 2004, 2003, and 2002, respectively includes $13, $13, and $18, respectively, related to asbestos and environmental claims reported in Ongoing Operations. [4] Gross of reinsurance, asbestos and environmental reserves were $4,322 and $501, respectively, as of December 31, 2004; $5,884 and $542, respectively, as of December 31, 2003; and $1,994 and $682, respectively as of December 31, 2002. [5] Includes 2004 second quarter $181 provision associated with the evaluation of the reinsurance recoverable asset. [6] Asbestos payments include payments pursuant to the MacArthur settlement. [7] The one year and average three year net paid amounts for asbestos claims are $1,202 and $504, respectively, resulting in a one year net survival ratio of 2.1 (15.2 excluding the MacArthur payments) and a three year net survival ratio of 5.0 (16.5 excluding the MacArthur payments). Net survival ratio is the quotient of the net carried reserves divided by the average annual payment amount and is an indication of the number of years that the net carried reserve would last (i.e. survive) if the future annual claim payments were consistent with the calculated historical average. [8] Represents the transfer of reserves pursuant to the MacArthur settlement. [9] The nature of these reallocations is described in the preceding discussion. At December 31, 2004, asbestos reserves were $2.5 billion, a decrease of $1.3 billion compared to $3.8 billion as of December 31, 2003. The decrease in asbestos reserves was due primarily to the MacArthur settlement payment made in the first quarter of 2004. At December 31, 2003, asbestos reserves were $3.8 billion, an increase of $2.7 billion compared to $1.1 billion as of December 31, 2002. Net incurred losses and loss adjustment expenses were $2.6 billion for the year ended December 31, 2003. The increase in reserves for 2003 as well as the increase in paid losses reflect asbestos claim and litigation trends. The Company classifies its asbestos and environmental reserves into three categories: direct insurance; assumed reinsurance and London Market. Direct insurance includes primary and excess coverage. Assumed reinsurance includes both treaty reinsurance (covering broad categories of claims or blocks of business) and facultative reinsurance (covering specific risks or individual policies of primary or excess insurance companies). London Market business includes the business written by one or more of The Hartford subsidiaries in the United Kingdom, which are no longer active in the insurance or reinsurance business. Such business includes both direct insurance and assumed reinsurance. 66 Table of Contents Of these three categories, direct policies tend to have the greatest factual developments from which to estimate the Company exposures. Over the last three years, including the current reporting period, the Company experienced a reduction in newly reported environmental claims on direct business, and actual claim payments have been made at levels within the Company previously established provisions for loss. However, with respect to asbestos claims, the Company experienced a variety of negative trends, including increasing numbers of policyholders making claims, an apparent increase in the number of claimants under such policies, and an accelerated rate of policyholder bankruptcies. Assumed reinsurance exposures are inherently less predictable than direct insurance exposures because the Company may not receive notice of a reinsurance claim until the underlying direct insurance claim is mature. This causes a delay in the receipt of information at the reinsurer level reflecting changes in the asbestos tort litigation and direct insurance coverage environments. Estimating liabilities for London Market business is the most uncertain of the three categories of claims (direct, assumed reinsurance and London Market). As a participant in the London Market (comprised of both Lloyd of London and London Company Markets), the Company wrote business on a subscription basis, with the Company involvement being limited to a relatively small percentage of a total contract placement. Claims are reported, via a broker, to the lead underwriter and, once agreed to, are presented to the following markets for concurrence. This reporting and claim agreement process makes estimating liabilities for this business the most uncertain of the three categories of claims. On December 19, 2003, Hartford Accident and Indemnity Co. ( Hartford A&I ) entered into a settlement agreement with MacArthur Co. and its subsidiary, Western MacArthur Co. Under the settlement agreement, during the first quarter of 2004, Hartford A&I paid $1.15 billion into an escrow account owned by Hartford A&I. The funds were held in the escrow account until conditions precedent to the settlement occurred in April. On April 22, 2004, the funds were disbursed from the escrow account into a trust established for the benefit of present and future asbestos claimants pursuant to the bankruptcy plan. The settlement payments were accounted for as a reduction in unpaid claim and claim adjustment expenses during the first quarter of 2004. For the past three years, direct paid loss and expense for environmental claims have declined. The vast majority of these payments have been made under settlement agreements that fully resolve The Hartford exposure to these insureds for environmental liabilities. The following table sets forth, for the three years ended December 31, 2004, paid and incurred loss activity by the three categories of claims for asbestos and environmental. Paid and Incurred Loss and Loss Adjustment Expense ( LAE ) Development Asbestos and Environmental Asbestos Environmental Paid Incurred Paid Incurred Loss & LAE [1] Loss & LAE Loss & LAE Loss & LAE 2004 Gross Direct $ 1,491 $ (13 ) $ 87 $ 83 Assumed Domestic 66 30 18 London Market 22 19 Total 1,579 17 124 83 Ceded (377 ) 205 (34 ) 3 Net $ 1,202 $ 222 $ 90 $ 86 2003 Gross Direct $ 226 $ 3,113 $ 109 $ 12 Assumed Domestic 53 585 15 (3 ) London Market 40 286 17 (8 ) Total 319 3,984 141 1 Ceded (158 ) (1,372 ) 44 1 Net $ 161 $ 2,612 $ 185 $ 2 2002 Gross Direct $ 212 $ 559 $ 124 $ (9 ) Assumed Domestic 66 89 15 (39 ) London Market 35 26 24 (26 ) Total 313 674 163 (74 ) Ceded (187 ) (46 ) (51 ) 123 Net $ 126 $ 628 $ 112 $ 49 [1] Reflects payments pursuant to the MacArthur settlement. Outlook The Other Operations segment will continue to manage the discontinued operations of The Hartford as well as claims (and associated reserves) related to asbestos and environmental exposure. The Hartford will continue to review various components of all of its reserves on a regular basis. 67 Table of Contents INVESTMENTS General The Hartford investment portfolios are primarily divided between Life and Property & Casualty. The investment portfolios of Life and Property & Casualty are managed by Hartford Investment Management Company ( HIM ), a wholly-owned subsidiary of The Hartford. HIM manages the portfolios to maximize economic value, while attempting to generate the income necessary to support the Company various product obligations, within internally established objectives, guidelines and risk tolerances. The portfolio objectives and guidelines are developed based upon the asset/liability profile, including duration, convexity and other characteristics within specified risk tolerances. The risk tolerances considered include, for example, asset and credit issuer allocation limits, maximum portfolio below investment grade ( BIG ) holdings and foreign currency exposure. The Company attempts to minimize adverse impacts to the portfolio and the results of operations due to changes in economic conditions through asset allocation limits, asset/liability duration matching and through the use of derivatives. (For a further discussion of how the investment portfolio credit and market risks are assessed and managed, see the Investment Credit Risk and Capital Markets Risk Management sections of the MD&A.) HIM security selection process is a multi-dimensional approach that combines independent internal credit research along with a macro economic outlook of technical trends (e.g. interest rates, slope of the yield curve and credit spreads) and market pricing to identify valuation inefficiencies and relative value buying and selling opportunities. Security selection and monitoring is performed by asset class specialists working within dedicated portfolio management teams. HIM portfolio managers may sell securities, except those securities in an unrealized loss position for which the Company has indicated its intent and ability to hold until the price recovers, due to portfolio guidelines or market technicals or trends. For example, the Company may sell securities to capture market valuation inefficiencies or relative value opportunities through security or sector rotation, to remain compliant with internal asset/liability duration matching guidelines often times a result of changes in interest rates, or to modify a portfolio duration to capitalize on interest rate levels or yield curve slope. HIM believes that advantageously buying and selling securities within a structured purchasing, monitoring and selling framework, provides the greatest economic value for the Company over the long-term. Pursuant to the adoption of SOP 03-1, as discussed in Note 1 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, on January 1, 2004, the Company reclassified $18.1 billion of separate account assets to the general account. Of this amount, $11.7 billion was associated with guaranteed separate accounts and was primarily comprised of fixed maturities. These assets are classified as available-for-sale securities with changes in fair value reported in other comprehensive income. In addition, $6.2 billion is primarily comprised of equity securities related to variable annuity products offered in Japan. These assets are classified as trading securities with changes in fair value reported in net investment income. The remaining amount of $200 related to policy loans on private placement life insurance products. Return on general account invested assets is an important element of The Hartford financial results. Significant fluctuations in the fixed income or equity markets could weaken the Company financial condition or its results of operations. Additionally, changes in market interest rates may impact the period of time over which certain investments, such as mortgage-backed securities, are repaid and whether certain investments are called by the issuers. Such changes may, in turn, impact the yield on these investments and also may result in reinvestment of funds received from calls and prepayments at rates below the average portfolio yield. Net investment income and net realized capital gains and losses accounted for approximately 24%, 19% and 16% of the Company consolidated revenues for the years ended December 31, 2004, 2003 and 2002, respectively. The increase in the percentage of consolidated revenues for 2004, as compared to the prior years, is primarily due to income earned on separate account assets reclassified to the general account as a result of the adoption of SOP 03-1. Fluctuations in interest rates affect the Company return on, and the fair value of, general account fixed maturity investments, which comprised approximately 80% and 93% of the fair value of its invested assets as of December 31, 2004 and 2003, respectively. Other events beyond the Company control could also adversely impact the fair value of these investments. Specifically, a downgrade of an issuer credit rating or default of payment by an issuer could reduce the Company investment return. The Company invests in private placement securities, mortgage loans and limited partnership arrangements in order to further diversify its investment portfolio. These investment types comprised approximately 16% and 17% of the fair value of its invested assets as of December 31, 2004 and 2003, respectively. These security types are typically less liquid than direct investments in publicly traded fixed income or equity investments. However, generally these securities have higher yields to compensate for the liquidity risk. A decrease in the fair value of any investment that is deemed other-than-temporary would result in the Company recognition of a net realized capital loss in its financial results prior to the actual sale of the investment. (For a further discussion of the evaluation of other-than-temporary impairments, see the Critical Accounting Estimates section of the MD&A under Valuation of Investments and Derivative Instruments and Evaluation of Other-Than-Temporary Impairments .) 68 Table of Contents Life The primary investment objective of Life general account is to maximize after-tax returns consistent with acceptable risk parameters, including the management of the interest rate sensitivity of invested assets and the generation of sufficient liquidity relative to that of policyholder and corporate obligations, as discussed in the Capital Markets Risk Management section of the MD&A under Market Risk Life . The following table identifies the invested assets by type held in the general account as of December 31, 2004 and 2003. Composition of Invested Assets 2004 2003 Amount Percent Amount Percent Fixed maturities, available-for-sale, at fair value $ 50,531 73.5 % $ 37,462 91.0 % Equity securities, available-for-sale, at fair value 525 0.8 % 357 0.9 % Equity securities, held for trading, at fair value 13,634 19.8 % Policy loans, at outstanding balance 2,662 3.9 % 2,512 6.1 % Mortgage loans, at cost 923 1.3 % 466 1.1 % Limited partnerships, at fair value 256 0.4 % 177 0.4 % Other investments 185 0.3 % 180 0.5 % Total investments $ 68,716 100.0 % $ 41,154 100.0 % Fixed maturity investments and equity securities held for trading increased 35% and 100%, respectively, since December 31, 2003, primarily the result of fixed maturities and equity securities that were reclassified from separate accounts to the general account as a result of the adoption of SOP 03-1 coupled with positive operating cash flow. Mortgage loans increased $457, or 98%, since December 31, 2003, as a result of a decision to increase Life investment in this asset class primarily due to its attractive yields and diversification opportunities. Investment Results The following table summarizes Life investment results. (before-tax) 2004 2003 2002 Net investment income excluding income on policy loan and trading securities $ 2,690 $ 1,831 $ 1,595 Policy loan income 186 210 254 Trading securities income [1] 1,018 Net investment income total $ 3,894 $ 2,041 $ 1,849 Yield on average invested assets [2] 5.8 % 6.0 % 6.1 % Gross gains on sale 359 267 175 Gross losses on sale (147 ) (95 ) (112 ) Impairments (25 ) (162 ) (380 ) Periodic net coupon settlements on non-qualifying derivatives 6 26 9 GMWB derivatives, net 8 6 Other, net [3] (52 ) (2 ) Net realized capital gains (losses), before-tax $ 149 $ 40 $ (308 ) [1] Represents the change in value of securities classified as trading. [2] Represents annualized net investment income (excluding the change in fair value of trading securities) divided by the monthly weighted average invested assets at cost or amortized cost, as applicable, excluding trading securities and the collateral received associated with the securities lending program. Also, for 2003, the fixed maturities associated with the acquisition of CNA group life and accident, long-term and short-term disability and certain specialty businesses are excluded from the weighted average invested assets. [3] Primarily consists of changes in fair value on non-qualifying derivatives and hedge ineffectiveness on qualifying derivative instruments, as well as, the amortization of deferred acquisition costs. 2004 Compared to 2003 Net investment income, excluding income on policy loans and trading securities, increased $859, or 47%, compared to the prior year. The increase in net investment income was primarily due to income earned on a higher average invested assets base, as compared to the prior year, and an increase in income from prepayment penalties primarily associated with commercial mortgage-backed securities ( CMBS ) and yield adjustments related to changes in prepayment speeds associated with mortgage-backed securities ( MBS ) held at a premium or discount. These increases were partially offset by a decrease in the average new invested asset yield and the repositioning of the portfolio into higher quality assets as described below. The increase in the average invested assets base, as compared to the prior year, was primarily the result of separate account assets reclassified to the general account pursuant to the adoption of SOP 03-1 and, to a lesser extent, assets acquired in the CNA acquisition and operating cash flows. Income earned on separate account assets reclassified to the general account, excluding trading securities, was $619 for 2004. Income earned on assets acquired in the CNA transaction was $116 for 2004. 69 Table of Contents During 2004, the yield on average invested assets decreased from the prior year as a result of new investment purchases at rates below the average portfolio yield due to the continued low interest rate environment and decreased policy loan income. Since the Company invests primarily in long-term fixed rate debt securities, current period changes in long-term interest rates impact the yield on new asset purchases and, therefore, have a gradual impact on the overall portfolio yield. The weighted average yield on new invested asset purchases in 2004 of approximately 4.9%, before-tax, continues to be below the average portfolio yield. Life expects the average before-tax new investment yields in 2005 to range from 4.8% to 5.0%. If future interest rates differ from the forward rates as of December 31, 2004, the actual average new investment yields may be significantly different than yields currently expected. Net realized capital gains during 2004 increased by $109 compared to the prior year, primarily the result of lower other-than-temporary impairments. (For further discussion of other-than-temporary impairments, see the Other-Than-Temporary Impairments commentary in this section of the MD&A.) In 2004, gross gains were realized as fixed maturity credit spreads tightened and portions of the Life portfolios were repositioned into higher quality assets where HIM believed greater relative value existed. Credit spreads tightened primarily due to improved credit quality, market liquidity and demand for higher yielding assets, as well as the relatively low interest rate environment. It is expected that the higher quality assets will provide greater liquidity if the credit environment and issuer default rates return to historical norms. In addition, foreign government securities were sold, primarily in the first and fourth quarters of 2004, to reduce the portfolios exposure to foreign holdings and realize gains associated with the decline in value of the U.S. dollar against foreign currencies. In 2004, securities sold at a loss were predominantly corporate securities, U.S. government securities, certain asset-backed securities ( ABS ) and CMBS with no single security sold at a loss in excess of $5 and an average loss as a percentage of the fixed maturity amortized cost of less than 5%, which under the Company current impairment policy, were deemed to be depressed only to a minor extent. In 2003, no single security was sold at a loss in excess of $8. 2003 Compared to 2002 Net investment income, excluding policy loan income, increased $236, or 15%, compared to the prior year. The increase was primarily due to income earned on a higher invested asset base partially offset by lower investment yields. Policy loan income decreased primarily due to the decline in leveraged COLI policies, as a result of surrender activity and lower sales. Yield on average invested assets decreased as a result of lower rates on new investment purchases and decreased policy loan income. Net realized capital gains (losses) for 2003 increased by $348 compared to the prior year, primarily as a result of net gains on sales of fixed maturities and a decrease in other-than-temporary impairments on fixed maturities. Sales were the result of normal trading activity and were primarily attributable to the improvement in the corporate credit environment, general economic conditions and operating fundamentals, the decrease in interest rates and improved pricing levels for ABS. (For a further discussion of other-than-temporary impairments, see the Other-Than-Temporary Impairments commentary in this section of the MD&A.) Separate Account Products Separate account products are those for which a separate investment and liability account is maintained on behalf of the policyholder. Prior to January 1, 2004, the Company separate accounts reflected two categories of risk assumption: non-guaranteed separate accounts wherein the policyholder assumes substantially all the risk and reward; and guaranteed separate accounts wherein the Company contractually guarantees either a minimum return or the account value to the policyholder. Effective January 1, 2004, the guaranteed separate accounts are included with general account assets pursuant to SOP 03-1. As of December 31, 2004, the Company separate accounts totaled $140.0 billion. As of December 31, 2003, the Company total separate accounts totaled $136.6 billion, of which $12.1 billion was guaranteed separate accounts. Investment objectives for non-guaranteed separate accounts, which consist of the participants account balances, vary by fund account type, as outlined in the applicable fund prospectus or separate account plan of operations. Separate account products include variable annuities, variable universal life insurance contracts and variable COLI. The assets and liabilities associated with variable annuity products sold in Japan do not meet the criteria to be recognized as a separate account because the assets are not legally insulated from the Company. Therefore, these assets are also included with general account assets effective January 1, 2004. Products, previously recorded as guaranteed separate accounts but now recorded in the general account upon adoption of SOP 03-1, primarily consist of modified guaranteed individual annuities and modified guaranteed life insurance and generally include market value adjustment features and surrender charges to mitigate the risk of disintermediation. The primary investment objective of these assets is to maximize after-tax returns consistent with acceptable risk parameters, including the management of the interest rate sensitivity of invested assets relative to that of policyholder obligations, as discussed in the Capital Markets Risk Management section of the MD&A under Market Risk Life . 70 Table of Contents Property & Casualty The investment objective for Property & Casualty ongoing operations is to maximize economic value while generating after-tax income and sufficient liquidity to meet policyholder and corporate obligations. For Property & Casualty Other Operations segment, the investment objective is to ensure the full and timely payment of all liabilities. Property & Casualty investment strategies are developed based on a variety of factors including business needs, regulatory requirements and tax considerations. The following table identifies the invested assets by type held as of December 31, 2004 and 2003. Composition of Invested Assets 2004 2003 Amount Percent Amount Percent Fixed maturities, available-for-sale, at fair value $ 24,410 95.6 % $ 23,715 96.4 % Equity securities, available-for-sale, at fair value 307 1.2 % 208 0.8 % Real estate/Mortgage loans, at cost 253 1.0 % 328 1.3 % Limited partnerships, at fair value 177 0.7 % 168 0.7 % Other investments 379 1.5 % 186 0.8 % Total investments $ 25,526 100.0 % $ 24,605 100.0 % During 2004, fixed maturities increased $695, or 3%, primarily due to positive operating cash flow, partially offset by $1.15 billion of payments made pursuant to the MacArthur settlement. Investment Results The following table below summarizes Property & Casualty investment results. 2004 2003 2002 Net investment income, before-tax $ 1,248 $ 1,172 $ 1,060 Net investment income, after-tax [1] $ 932 $ 889 $ 820 Yield on average invested assets, before-tax [2] 5.4 % 5.5 % 5.8 % Yield on average invested assets, after-tax [1] [2] 4.1 % 4.2 % 4.5 % Gross gains on sale $ 210 $ 397 $ 282 Gross losses on sale (83 ) (125 ) (181 ) Impairments (13 ) (38 ) (199 ) Periodic net coupon settlements on non-qualifying derivatives 9 18 15 Other, net [3] 10 1 15 Net realized capital gains (losses), before-tax $ 133 $ 253 $ (68 ) [1] Due to significant holdings in tax-exempt investments, after-tax net investment income and yield are also included. [2] Represents annualized net investment income divided by the monthly weighted average invested assets at cost or amortized cost, as applicable, excluding the collateral received associated with the securities lending program. [3] Primarily consists of changes in fair value on non-qualifying derivatives and hedge ineffectiveness on qualifying derivative instruments. 2004 Compared to 2003 Before-tax net investment income increased $76, or 6%, and after-tax net investment income increased $43, or 5%, compared to the prior year. The increases in net investment income were primarily due to income earned on a higher average invested assets base in 2004, as compared to prior year, partially offset by a decrease in the average new invested asset yield and the repositioning of the portfolio into higher quality assets as described below. In 2004, the yield on average invested assets decreased slightly from prior year as a result of new investment purchases at rates below the average portfolio yield due to the continued low interest rate environment. Since the Company invests primarily in long-term fixed rate debt securities, current period changes in long-term interest rates impact the yield on new asset purchases and, therefore, have a gradual impact on the overall portfolio yield. The weighted average yield on new asset purchases in 2004 of approximately 4.9%, before-tax, continues to be below the average portfolio yield. Property & Casualty expects the average before-tax new investment yields in 2005 to range from 4.8% to 5.0%. If future interest rates differ from the forward rates as of December 31, 2004, the actual average new investment yields may be significantly different from the yields currently expected. Net realized capital gains for 2004 decreased $120 as compared to the prior year as a result of lower net realized gains on sales of fixed maturity securities, partially offset by lower other-than-temporary impairments. (For further discussion of other-than-temporary impairments, see the Other-Than-Temporary Impairments commentary in this section of the MD&A.) In 2004, gross gains were realized as fixed maturity credit spreads tightened and portions of the Property & Casualty portfolios were repositioned into higher quality assets where HIM believed greater relative value existed. Credit spreads tightened primarily due to improved credit quality, market liquidity and demand for higher yielding assets, as well as the relatively low interest rate environment. It is expected that the higher quality assets will provide greater liquidity if the credit environment and issuer default rates return to historical norms. In addition, foreign government securities were sold, primarily in the first and fourth quarters of 2004, to reduce the 71 Table of Contents portfolios exposure to foreign holdings and realize gains associated with the decline in value of the U.S. dollar against foreign currencies. In 2004, securities sold at a loss were predominantly corporate securities, U.S. government securities, certain ABS and CMBS with no single security sold at a loss in excess of $5 and an average loss as a percentage of the fixed maturity amortized cost of less than 5%, which under the Company current impairment policy were deemed to be depressed only to a minor extent. In 2003, no Property & Casualty security was sold at a loss in excess of $10. 2003 Compared to 2002 Before-tax net investment income increased $112, or 11%, and after-tax net investment income increased $69, or 8%, compared to the prior year. The increases in net investment income were primarily due to income earned on a higher invested asset base partially offset by lower investment yields. Yields on average invested assets decreased from the prior year as a result of lower rates on new investment purchases. Net realized capital gains (losses) for 2003 improved by $321 compared to the prior year. The improvement was primarily the result of net gains on sales of fixed maturity investments, Trumbull Associates, LLC and a decrease in other-than-temporary impairments. In the first half of 2003, interest rates fell to historical lows, the yield curve steepened and credit spreads rallied significantly. The portfolio was repositioned to realize the available gains, modestly move out the yield curve and improve statutory surplus. This strategy resulted in approximately $175 of before-tax gains but adversely impacted Property & Casualty before-tax net investment income in 2004 by approximately 8 basis points. (For a further discussion of other-than-temporary impairments, see the Other-Than-Temporary Impairments commentary in this section of the MD&A.) Corporate The investment objective of Corporate is to raise capital through financing activities to support the Life and Property & Casualty operations of the Company and to maintain sufficient funds to support the cost of those financing activities including the payment of interest for Hartford Financial Services Group, Inc. ( HFSG ) issued debt and dividends to shareholders of The Hartford common stock. As of December 31, 2004 and 2003, Corporate held $159 and $86, respectively, of short-term fixed maturity investments. In addition, Corporate held $7 and $2, respectively, of other investments as of December 31, 2004 and 2003. Investment Management Activities During 2004, HIM issued one and began serving as the collateral asset manager for two additional synthetic collateralized loan obligations ( CLOs ), which invest in senior secured bank loans through total return swaps ( referenced bank loan portfolios ). The notional value of the referenced bank loan portfolios from the three synthetic CLOs as of December 31, 2004 was $1.1 billion. The synthetic CLOs issued approximately $185 of notes and preferred shares ( CLO issuances ), approximately $170 of which was to third party investors. The proceeds from the CLO issuances were invested in collateral accounts consisting of high credit quality securities that were pledged to the referenced bank loan portfolios swap counterparties. Investors in the CLO issuances receive the net proceeds from the referenced bank loan portfolios. Any principal losses incurred by the swap counterparties associated with the referenced bank loan portfolios are borne by the CLO issuances investors through the total return swaps. Pursuant to the requirements of FIN 46R, the Company has concluded that the three synthetic CLOs are variable interest entities ( VIEs ) and for the CLO issued in 2004, the Company is the primary beneficiary and must consolidate this CLO. Accordingly, the Company has recorded in the consolidated balance sheets $65 of cash and invested assets, total return swaps with a fair value of $3 in other assets, which reference a bank loan portfolio with a maximum notional of $400, and $52 in other liabilities related to the CLO issuances. The total return from the referenced bank loan portfolio of $3 was received via the total return swap and recorded in realized capital gains and losses. Income from the fixed maturity collateral account and CLO issuance investor payments were recorded in net investment income in the consolidated statements of operations. The Company investment in the consolidated synthetic CLO issuance is $14, which is its maximum exposure to loss. Of the two non-consolidated synthetic CLOs, the Company has a $2 preferred share investment in one of the CLO issuances, which is its maximum exposure to loss. The investors in the three synthetic CLO issuances have recourse only to the VIE assets and not to the general credit of the Company. The collateral management fees earned by HIM for the two non-consolidated synthetic CLOs totaled $3 for the year ended December 31, 2004 and are reported in other income in the consolidated statements of operations. Other-Than-Temporary Impairments The Company has a security monitoring process overseen by a committee of investment and accounting professionals that, on a quarterly basis, identifies securities that could potentially be other-than-temporarily impaired. When a security is deemed to be other-than-temporarily impaired its carrying amount is written-down to current market value and a realized loss is recorded in the Company consolidated statements of operations. (For further discussion regarding the Company other-than-temporary impairment policy, see Valuation of Investments and Derivative Instruments and Evaluation of Other-Than-Temporary Impairments included in the Critical Accounting Estimates section of the MD&A and Note 1 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.) 72 Table of Contents The following table identifies the Company other-than-temporary impairments by type. Other-Than-Temporary Impairments by Type Life Property & Casualty Consolidated (before-tax) 2004 2003 2002 2004 2003 2002 2004 2003 2002 ABS Aircraft lease receivables $ 2 $ 29 $ 73 $ $ $ 11 $ 2 $ 29 $ 84 Collaterized debt obligations ( CDOs ) 4 21 35 1 10 12 5 31 47 Credit card receivables 12 9 2 14 9 Interest only securities 5 3 7 4 12 7 Manufactured housing ( MH ) receivables 9 14 8 9 22 Mutual fund fee receivables 3 16 2 3 18 Other ABS 3 13 6 3 6 3 16 Total ABS 6 82 163 7 19 40 13 101 203 Commercial mortgages 3 3 CMBS 3 5 4 3 5 4 Corporate Financial services 4 6 4 4 10 Food and beverage 3 25 3 25 Technology and communications 1 3 142 2 116 1 5 258 Transportation 7 1 3 5 10 6 Utilities 23 1 17 1 40 Other Corporate 8 13 1 3 11 1 11 24 Total Corporate 4 47 185 1 9 153 5 56 338 Equity 7 21 17 5 9 3 12 30 20 Foreign government 11 3 14 MBS interest only securities 2 7 1 2 8 Total other-than-temporary impairments $ 25 $ 162 $ 380 $ 13 $ 38 $ 199 $ 38 $ 200 $ 579 The decrease in other-than-temporary impairments during 2003 and 2004 in comparison to 2002 levels is due to an improvement in the corporate credit environment, general economic conditions and operating fundamentals, and improved pricing levels for ABS. In general, security issuers operating fundamentals have improved due to reduced company leverage, improved liquidity and the successful implementation of various cost cutting measures. Improvement in pricing levels for ABS has been driven by a general stabilization in the performance of the underlying collateral and an increase in demand for these asset types due to improved economic and operating fundamentals of the underlying security issuers, better market liquidity and attractive yields. The following discussion provides an analysis of significant other-than-temporary impairments recognized during 2004, 2003 and 2002, the related circumstances giving rise to the other-than-temporary impairments and the potential impact such circumstances may have on other material investments held. 2004 During 2004 there were no significant other-than-temporary impairments (e.g. $15 or greater) recorded on any single security or issuer. In aggregate, other-than-temporary impairments recorded on ABS primarily relate to the decline in market values of certain previously impaired securities. Other-than-temporary impairments recorded on equity securities primarily related to variable rate perpetual preferred securities issued by two highly rated financial services companies. These securities are variable rate securities with unique structural interest rate reset characteristics that have sustained a decline in market value for an extended period of time primarily as a result of the increase in short-term interest rates after the security interest rate reset period. As of December 31, 2004, the Company did not hold other perpetual preferred securities in an unrealized loss position with similar interest rate reset characteristics. 2003 During 2003, other-than-temporary impairments were primarily recorded on ABS, corporate fixed maturities and equity securities. The ABS other-than-temporary impairments were primarily due to the continued deterioration of the underlying collateral supporting the various transactions. A significant portion of corporate fixed maturity other-than-temporary impairments during 2003 resulted from various issuers who experienced fraud or accounting irregularities. In addition, during the first half of the year, corporate debt issuers in the transportation sector, specifically issuers in the airline sector, deteriorated as a result of the continued decline in airline travel. During 2003, there was one security for which a significant (e.g. $15 or greater) other-than-temporary impairment was recorded, the circumstances of which are discussed in more detail below. 73 Table of Contents The $25 of impairments on corporate fixed maturities within the food and beverage sector related to securities issued by the Italian dairy concern, Parmalat SpA. Parmalat filed for bankruptcy in December 2003 due to liquidity problems when it was discovered that 4 billion euros of liquid investments previously reported on its balance sheet were non-existent. The following list identifies ABS and equity impairment losses recognized in 2003 that by issuer did not exceed $15 but did when combined with securities supported with similar collateral or equity security types. The circumstances giving rise to those losses are as follows: The $31 of CDO other-than-temporary impairments consisted of approximately ten securities, the majority of which were interests in the lower tranches of securities backed by high yield corporate debt. These impairments were primarily the result of continued high default rates in 2003 and lower recovery rates on the CDO underlying collateral. The $29 of other-than-temporary impairments recognized on ABS supported by aircraft lease receivables primarily consisted of investments in lower tranches of five transactions. These securities are supported by aircraft leases and enhanced equipment trust certificates (together, aircraft lease receivables ) issued by multiple airlines that had sustained a steep decline in market value and adverse change in expected cash flows due to continued lower aircraft lease rates, airline bankruptcies and the prolonged decline in airline travel. The $30 of the other-than-temporary impairments recorded on equity securities primarily related to various diversified mutual funds. The market values of these funds had fallen since the date of purchase due to declines in primarily the equity markets and were not expected to recover within a reasonable period of time. Due to the severity of the price depression and length of time the holdings were in an unrealized loss position, these securities were deemed to be other-than-temporarily impaired. In addition to the impairments described above, fixed maturity and equity securities were sold at losses during 2003, with no single security sold at a loss in excess of $10. 2002 During 2002, other-than-temporary impairments on ABS were primarily driven by collateral deterioration associated with securities backed by aircraft lease receivables and high yield debt. Impairments recognized on corporate fixed maturities were concentrated in the technology and communications sector and were primarily driven by weakening economic conditions and operating fundamentals in the sector. Other-than-temporary impairments were also recorded on equity securities, the majority of which related to various diversified mutual funds. The market values of these funds had fallen since the date of purchase due to declines in the bond and equity markets and were not expected to recover within a reasonable period of time. Due to severity of the price depression and length of time the holdings were in an unrealized loss position, these securities were deemed to be other-than-temporarily impaired. During 2002, there were 8 securities for which a significant (e.g. $15 or greater) other-than-temporary impairment was recorded which are discussed in more detail below. Of the technology and communications sector impairments, $110 related to securities issued by WorldCom and its subsidiary MCI, which filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection in July 2002 as a result of liquidity problems driven by economic and operating weakness in this sector, and specific issues related to accounting fraud. Of the $84 of impairments relating to ABS backed by aircraft lease receivables, $41 related to investments in the lower tranches of one transaction that experienced a steep decline in fair value as a result of a significant decrease in aircraft lease payments and lower appraised values on the underlying collateral. This transaction was primarily supported by lower quality aircraft and was significantly impacted by the decline in airline travel and numerous airline bankruptcies resulting from the catastrophic events of September 11, 2001. The remaining $43 of impairments on aircraft lease receivables were primarily related to two other transactions that were also adversely impacted by similar circumstances surrounding the airline industry in 2002. In the technology and telecommunications sector, $32 of impairments were recognized on fixed maturity securities issued by a major U.S. telecom equipment manufacturer. This issuer had amassed high levels of debt to acquire assets and subsequently experienced liquidity difficulties due to the downturn in demand and economic conditions within the technology and telecommunications sector. As a result, this issuer initiated a debt restructuring in 2002. Of the impairments recognized on ABS securities backed by MH receivables, $21 related to three securities issued by the same transaction. These securities were backed by the transaction sponsor who ultimately filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection as a result of numerous defaults on the underlying loans. The manufactured housing sector experienced above average default rates in 2002 primarily due to weak underwriting practices and loan originators extending credit to sub-prime borrowers. Another $15 of impairments in the technology and communications sector related to a Canada based local and long-distance communications carrier. As a result of excess capacity and margin erosion within the long-distance sector, this issuer began to experience liquidity problems and eventually filed for bankruptcy in 2002. Also within the technology and communications sector, $15 of the impairments recognized related to a major U.S. local and long-distance service provider. This issuer had amassed high levels of debt to increase capacity and was significantly impacted by reduced demand and margin erosion, particularly within the long-distance sector. As a result, this issuer initiated a debt restructuring in 2002. The following identifies ABS impairment losses recognized in 2002 that by issuer did not exceed $15 but did when combined with securities supported with similar collateral. The circumstances giving rise to those losses are as follows: 74 Table of Contents The $47 of CDO impairments consisted of approximately ten securities, the majority of which were interests in the lower tranches of transactions backed by high yield corporate debt. These impairments were primarily driven by deterioration in the underlying collateral resulting from corporate bankruptcies and above average defaults on high yield bonds. In addition to the impairments described above, fixed maturity and equity securities were sold at losses during 2002, with no single security sold at a loss in excess of $13. The favorable other-than-temporary impairments trend will depend on continued strong economic fundamentals, political stability and collateral performance. In addition, as discussed in Note 1 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, the future adoption of EITF Issue No. 03-1 could result in the recognition of additional other-than-temporary impairments. While the ultimate impact of the adoption of this standard is still unknown, depending on the nature of the ultimate guidance, adoption of this standard could potentially result in the recognition of unrealized losses, including those declines in value that are attributable to interest rate movements, as other-than-temporary impairments, except those deemed to be minor in nature. As of December 31, 2004, the Company had $265 of total gross unrealized losses. The amount of impairments to be recognized, if any, will depend on the final standard, market conditions and management intent and ability to hold securities with unrealized losses at the time of the impairment evaluation. (For further discussion of risk factors associated with sectors with significant unrealized loss positions, see the sector risk factor commentary under the Consolidated Total Available-for-Sale Securities with Unrealized Loss Greater than Six Months by Type schedule in the Investment Credit Risk section of the MD&A.) INVESTMENT CREDIT RISK The Company has established investment credit policies that focus on the credit quality of obligors and counterparties, limit credit concentrations, encourage diversification and require frequent creditworthiness reviews. Investment activity, including setting of policy and defining acceptable risk levels, is subject to regular review and approval by senior management and by the Finance Committee of the Company Board of Directors. The Company invests primarily in securities which are rated investment grade and has established exposure limits, diversification standards and review procedures for all credit risks including borrower, issuer and counterparty. Creditworthiness of specific obligors is determined by an internal credit evaluation supplemented by consideration of external determinants of creditworthiness, typically ratings assigned by nationally recognized ratings agencies. Obligor, asset sector and industry concentrations are subject to established Company limits and monitored on a regular basis. The Company is not exposed to any credit concentration risk of a single issuer greater than 10% of the Company stockholders equity other than certain U.S. government and government agencies. Derivative Instruments The Company derivative counterparty exposure policy establishes market-based credit limits, favors long-term financial stability and creditworthiness and typically requires credit enhancement/credit risk reducing agreements. Credit risk is measured as the amount owed to the Company based on current market conditions and potential payment obligations between the Company and its counterparties. Credit exposures are generally quantified daily, netted by counterparty for each legal entity of the Company, and collateral is pledged to and held by, or on behalf of, the Company to the extent the current value of derivatives exceeds the exposure policy thresholds which do not exceed $10. The Company also minimizes the credit risk in derivative instruments by entering into transactions with high quality counterparties rated Aa/A or better, which are monitored by the Company internal compliance unit and reviewed frequently by senior management. In addition, the compliance unit monitors counterparty credit exposure on a monthly basis to ensure compliance with Company policies and statutory limitations. The Company also maintains a policy of requiring that all derivative contracts be governed by an International Swaps and Dealers Association Master Agreement which is structured by legal entity and by counterparty and permits right of offset. To date, the Company has not incurred any losses on derivative instruments due to counterparty nonperformance. In addition to counterparty credit risk, the Company periodically enters into swap agreements in which the Company assumes credit exposure from a single entity, referenced index or asset pool. Total return swaps involve the periodic exchange of payments with other parties, at specified intervals, calculated using the agreed upon index and notional principal amounts. Generally, no cash or principal payments are exchanged at the inception of the contract. Typically, at the time a swap is entered into, the cash flow streams exchanged by the counterparties are equal in value. Credit default swaps involve a transfer of credit risk from one party to another in exchange for periodic payments. One party to the contract will make a payment based on an agreed upon rate and a notional amount. The second party, who assumes credit exposure will only make a payment when there is a credit event, and such payment will be equal to the notional value of the swap contract less the value of the referenced security issuer debt obligation. A credit event is generally defined as default on contractually obligated interest or principal payments or bankruptcy. The average S&P rating for these referenced security issuer debt obligations is A. The Company also uses credit defaults swaps to reduce its credit exposure by entering into agreements in which the Company pays a derivative counterparty a periodic fee in exchange for compensation from the counterparty should a credit event occur on the part of the referenced security issuer. The Company entered into these agreements as an efficient means to reduce credit exposure to the specified issuers. The average S&P rating for all of these referenced securities issuers is A-. 75 Table of Contents As of December 31, 2004 and 2003, the notional value of total return and credit default swaps totaled $2.2 billion and $1.0 billion, respectively, and the swap fair value totaled $8 and $(33), respectively. Fixed Maturities The following table identifies fixed maturity securities by type on a consolidated basis as of December 31, 2004 and 2003. Consolidated Fixed Maturities by Type 2004 2003 Percent Percent of Total of Total Amortized Unrealized Unrealized Fair Fair Amortized Unrealized Unrealized Fair Fair Cost Gains Losses Value Value Cost Gains Losses Value Value ABS $ 7,446 $ 95 $ (72 ) $ 7,469 9.9 % $ 6,483 $ 154 $ (113 ) $ 6,524 8.9 % CMBS 11,306 475 (33 ) 11,748 15.6 % 10,230 545 (44 ) 10,731 14.7 % Collateralized mortgage obligations ( CMOs ) 1,218 12 (3 ) 1,227 1.6 % 1,059 17 (3 ) 1,073 1.5 % Corporate Basic industry 3,131 234 (9 ) 3,356 4.5 % 3,343 223 (15 ) 3,551 4.8 % Capital goods 2,033 159 (10 ) 2,182 2.9 % 2,037 143 (10 ) 2,170 3.0 % Consumer cyclical 3,229 207 (13 ) 3,423 4.6 % 3,305 217 (11 ) 3,511 4.8 % Consumer non-cyclical 3,394 245 (12 ) 3,627 4.8 % 3,525 234 (17 ) 3,742 5.1 % Energy 1,770 147 (5 ) 1,912 2.5 % 2,026 142 (11 ) 2,157 3.0 % Financial services 8,201 589 (33 ) 8,757 11.7 % 7,848 560 (44 ) 8,364 11.5 % Technology and communications 4,940 440 (15 ) 5,365 7.2 % 5,051 496 (19 ) 5,528 7.6 % Transportation 766 52 (2 ) 816 1.1 % 778 52 (7 ) 823 1.1 % Utilities 3,361 302 (13 ) 3,650 4.9 % 3,101 224 (20 ) 3,305 4.5 % Other 1,001 69 (5 ) 1,065 1.4 % 806 46 (6 ) 846 1.2 % Government/Government agencies Foreign 1,648 153 (5 ) 1,796 2.4 % 1,605 171 (3 ) 1,773 2.4 % United States 1,116 22 (6 ) 1,132 1.5 % 1,401 33 (4 ) 1,430 1.9 % MBS agency 2,774 29 (4 ) 2,799 3.7 % 2,794 43 (3 ) 2,834 3.9 % Municipal Taxable 919 34 (9 ) 944 1.3 % 625 19 (15 ) 629 0.9 % Tax-exempt 9,670 726 (3 ) 10,393 13.8 % 9,445 775 (4 ) 10,216 14.0 % Redeemable preferred stock 36 3 39 0.1 % 77 3 80 0.1 % Short-term 3,400 3,400 4.5 % 3,708 3 3,711 5.1 % Total fixed maturities $ 71,359 $ 3,993 $ (252 ) $ 75,100 100.0 % $ 69,247 $ 4,100 $ (349 ) $ 72,998 100.0 % Total general account fixed maturities $ 58,127 $ 3,413 $ (277 ) $ 61,263 83.9 % Total guaranteed separate account fixed maturities [1] $ 11,120 $ 687 $ (72 ) $ 11,735 16.1 % [1] Effective January 1, 2004, guaranteed separate account assets were included with general account assets as a result of adopting SOP 03-1. The Company fixed maturity portfolio gross unrealized gains and losses as of December 31, 2004 in comparison to December 31, 2003 were primarily impacted by changes in interest rates, foreign currency exchange rates, credit spreads and security sales. The Company fixed maturity gross unrealized gains decreased $107 from December 31, 2003 to December 31, 2004 primarily due to sales of securities in a gain position and the increase in interest rates (e.g. short-term through five-year rates) offset by credit spread tightening and changes in foreign currency exchange rates. The gross unrealized loss amount decreased by $97 from December 31, 2003 to December 31, 2004 primarily due to credit spread tightening, improved pricing levels for certain CDOs and ABS, security sales and, to a lesser extent, other-than-temporary impairments, offset by interest rate increases. (For further discussion of risk factors associated with sectors with significant unrealized loss positions, see the sector risk factor commentary under the Consolidated Total Available-for-Sale Securities with Unrealized Loss Greater than Six Months by Type schedule in this section of the MD&A.) Investment sector allocations as a percentage of total fixed maturities have remained materially consistent since December 31, 2003, except for ABS and CMBS. In 2004, HIM continued to overweight, in comparison to the Lehman Aggregate Index, ABS supported by diversified pools of consumer loans (e.g. home equity and auto loans and credit card receivables) and CMBS due to the securities attractive spread levels and underlying asset diversification and quality. In general, CMBS securities have lower prepayment risk than MBS due to contractual penalties. As of December 31, 2004 and 2003, 18% of the fixed maturities were invested in private placement securities, including 11% of Rule 144A offerings to qualified institutional buyers. Private placement securities are generally less liquid than public securities. Most of the private placement securities are rated by nationally recognized rating agencies. 76 Table of Contents At the December 14th, 2004 Federal Open Market Committee policy meeting, the overnight funds rate was raised a quarter-point for the fifth time in 2004 to 2.25%. The Fed members indicated that the economy is growing at a moderate pace and the job market continues to show gradual improvement despite higher energy and commodity prices. The Company continues to expect the Fed to raise short-term interest rates at a measured pace for the foreseeable future unless inflationary pressures accelerate. The risk of inflation could increase if energy and commodity prices continue to rise, productivity growth slows or the U.S. dollar continues to devalue in comparison to foreign currencies. Increases in future interest rates may result in lower fixed maturity valuations. The following table identifies fixed maturities by credit quality on a consolidated basis as of December 31, 2004 and 2003. The ratings referenced below are based on the ratings of a nationally recognized rating organization or, if not rated, assigned based on the Company internal analysis of such securities. Consolidated Fixed Maturities by Credit Quality 2004 2003 Percent of Percent of Amortized Total Fair Amortized Total Fair Cost Fair Value Value Cost Fair Value Value United States Government/Government agencies $ 5,109 $ 5,160 6.9 % $ 5,274 $ 5,357 7.3 % AAA 17,984 18,787 25.0 % 15,672 16,552 22.7 % AA 8,090 8,546 11.4 % 7,377 7,855 10.8 % A 16,905 18,131 24.2 % 17,646 18,750 25.7 % BBB 16,853 17,904 23.8 % 16,143 17,114 23.4 % BB & below 3,018 3,172 4.2 % 3,427 3,659 5.0 % Short-term 3,400 3,400 4.5 % 3,708 3,711 5.1 % Total fixed maturities $ 71,359 $ 75,100 100.0 % $ 69,247 $ 72,998 100.0 % Total general account fixed maturities $ 58,127 $ 61,263 83.9 % Total guaranteed separate account fixed maturities [1] $ 11,120 $ 11,735 16.1 % [1] Effective January 1, 2004, guaranteed separate account assets were included with general account assets as a result of adopting SOP 03-1. As of December 31, 2004 and 2003, 95% or greater of the fixed maturity portfolio was invested in short-term securities or securities rated investment grade (BBB and above). The following table presents the BIG fixed maturities by type as of December 31, 2004 and 2003. Consolidated BIG Fixed Maturities by Type 2004 2003 Percent of Percent of Amortized Total Fair Amortized Total Fair Cost Fair Value Value Cost Fair Value Value ABS $ 257 $ 228 7.2 % $ 293 $ 275 7.5 % CMBS 154 166 5.3 % 185 190 5.2 % Corporate Basic industry 327 347 11.0 % 395 413 11.3 % Capital goods 180 181 5.7 % 177 187 5.1 % Consumer cyclical 227 242 7.6 % 392 424 11.6 % Consumer non-cyclical 250 263 8.3 % 413 430 11.7 % Energy 91 96 3.0 % 96 105 2.9 % Financial services 23 24 0.8 % 22 23 0.6 % Technology and communications 470 508 16.0 % 418 505 13.8 % Transportation 12 13 0.4 % 59 61 1.7 % Utilities 456 486 15.3 % 509 530 14.5 % Foreign government 484 531 16.7 % 416 463 12.7 % Other 87 87 2.7 % 52 53 1.4 % Total fixed maturities $ 3,018 $ 3,172 100.0 % $ 3,427 $ 3,659 100.0 % Total general account fixed maturities $ 2,681 $ 2,877 78.6 % Total guaranteed separate account fixed maturities [1] $ 746 $ 782 21.4 % [1] Effective January 1, 2004, guaranteed separate account assets were included with general account assets as a result of adopting SOP 03-1. As of December 31, 2004 and 2003, the Company held no issuer of a BIG security with a fair value in excess of 4% and 3%, respectively, of the total fair value for BIG securities. Total BIG securities decreased since December 31, 2003 as a result of decisions to reduce exposure to lower credit quality assets resulting from the securities significant credit spread tightening and re-invest in higher quality securities. The following table presents the Company unrealized loss aging for total fixed maturity and equity securities classified as available-for-sale on a consolidated basis, as of December 31, 2004 and 2003, by length of time the security was in an unrealized loss position. 77 Table of Contents Consolidated Unrealized Loss Aging of Total Available-for-Sale Securities 2004 2003 Amortized Fair Unrealized Amortized Fair Unrealized Cost Value Loss Cost Value Loss Three months or less $ 7,572 $ 7,525 $ (47 ) $ 4,867 $ 4,826 $ (41 ) Greater than three months to six months 573 567 (6 ) 3,991 3,854 (137 ) Greater than six months to nine months 3,405 3,342 (63 ) 404 382 (22 ) Greater than nine months to twelve months 462 445 (17 ) 151 142 (9 ) Greater than twelve months 2,417 2,285 (132 ) 1,844 1,688 (156 ) Total $ 14,429 $ 14,164 $ (265 ) $ 11,257 $ 10,892 $ (365 ) Total general account $ 9,234 $ 8,941 $ (293 ) Total guaranteed separate accounts [1] $ 2,023 $ 1,951 $ (72 ) [1] Effective January 1, 2004, guaranteed separate account assets were included with general account assets as a result of adopting SOP 03-1. The decrease in the unrealized loss amount since December 31, 2003 is primarily the result of credit spread tightening, improved pricing levels for certain CDOs and ABS, asset sales, and, to a lesser extent, other-than-temporary impairments, offset in part by an increase in the short-term through five-year interest rates. (For further discussion, see the economic commentary under the Consolidated Fixed Maturities by Type table in this section of the MD&A.) As a percentage of amortized cost, the average security or fixed maturity unrealized loss at December 31, 2004 and 2003 was less than 2% and 4%, respectively. As of December 31, 2004 and 2003, fixed maturities represented $252, or 95%, and $349, or 96%, respectively, of the Company total unrealized loss associated with securities classified as available-for-sale. There were no fixed maturities as of December 31, 2004 and 2003 with a fair value less than 80% of the security amortized cost basis for six continuous months other than certain ABS and CMBS subject to EITF Issue No. 99-20. Other-than-temporary impairments for certain ABS and CMBS are recognized if the fair value of the security, as determined by external pricing sources, is less than its carrying amount and there has been a decrease in the present value of the expected cash flows since the last reporting period. There were no ABS or CMBS included in the table above, as of December 31, 2004 and 2003, for which management best estimate of future cash flows adversely changed during the reporting period. (For further discussion of the other-than-temporary impairments criteria, see Valuation of Investments and Derivative Instruments and Evaluation of Other-Than-Temporary Impairments included in the Critical Accounting Estimates section of the MD&A and Note 1 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.) The Company held no securities of a single issuer that were at an unrealized loss position in excess of 5% of the total unrealized loss amount as of December 31, 2004 and 2003. The total securities classified as available-for-sale in an unrealized loss position for longer than six months by type as of December 31, 2004 and 2003 are presented in the following table. Consolidated Total Available-for-Sale Securities with Unrealized Loss Greater Than Six Months by Type 2004 2003 Percent of Percent of Total Total Amortized Fair Unrealized Unrealized Amortized Fair Unrealized Unrealized Cost Value Loss Loss Cost Value Loss Loss ABS Aircraft lease receivables $ 227 $ 172 $ (55 ) 25.9 % $ 174 $ 116 $ (58 ) 31.0 % CDOs 76 72 (4 ) 1.9 % 176 153 (23 ) 12.3 % Credit card receivables 88 86 (2 ) 0.9 % 123 111 (12 ) 6.4 % Other ABS 502 496 (6 ) 2.8 % 490 479 (11 ) 5.9 % CMBS 896 878 (18 ) 8.5 % 203 194 (9 ) 4.8 % Corporate Basic industry 355 347 (8 ) 3.8 % 74 70 (4 ) 2.1 % Consumer cyclical 277 269 (8 ) 3.8 % 48 45 (3 ) 1.6 % Consumer non-cyclical 436 425 (11 ) 5.2 % 52 49 (3 ) 1.6 % Financial services 1,271 1,234 (37 ) 17.5 % 747 710 (37 ) 19.8 % Technology and communications 435 421 (14 ) 6.6 % 55 52 (3 ) 1.6 % Utilities 324 313 (11 ) 5.2 % 103 95 (8 ) 4.3 % Other 484 468 (16 ) 7.5 % 136 122 (14 ) 7.5 % Other securities 913 891 (22 ) 10.4 % 18 16 (2 ) 1.1 % Total $ 6,284 $ 6,072 $ (212 ) 100.0 % $ 2,399 $ 2,212 $ (187 ) 100.0 % Total general accounts $ 1,760 $ 1,619 $ (141 ) 75.4 % Total guaranteed separate accounts [1] $ 639 $ 593 $ (46 ) 24.6 % [1] Effective January 1, 2004, guaranteed separate account assets were included with general account assets as a result of adopting SOP 03-1. 78 Table of Contents The increase in 2004 consolidated available-for-sale securities with an unrealized loss greater than six months amounts was primarily driven by the aging of securities depressed due to interest rate changes from the date of purchase. This increase was partially offset by improved pricing levels for certain CDOs and ABS, credit spread tightening, security sales and other-than-temporary impairments. With the exception of ABS security types, the majority of the securities in an unrealized loss position for six months or more as of December 31, 2004 were depressed primarily due to interest rate changes from the date of purchase. The sectors with the most significant concentration of unrealized losses were ABS supported by aircraft lease receivables and corporate fixed maturities primarily within the financial services sector. The Company current view of risk factors relative to these fixed maturity types is as follows: Aircraft lease receivables The decrease in the unrealized loss position during 2004 was primarily the result of improving pricing levels for certain issuers in this sector, as well as by other-than-temporary impairments taken during the year. In prior years, these securities had suffered a decrease in value as a result of a prolonged decline in airline travel, the uncertainty of a potential industry recovery and lack of market liquidity in this sector. Although uncertainty surrounding the stability of domestic airlines continues to weigh heavily on this sector, worldwide travel and aircraft demand appears to be improving. While the Company has seen modest price increases and greater liquidity in this sector during 2004, any additional price recovery will depend on continued improvement in economic fundamentals, political stability and airline operating performance. Financial services As of December 31, 2004, the Company held approximately 110 different securities in the financial services sector that had been in an unrealized loss position for greater than six months. Substantially all of these securities are investment grade securities priced at or greater than 90% of amortized cost as of December 31, 2004. These positions are a mixture of fixed and variable rate securities with extended maturity dates, which have been adversely impacted by changes in interest rates after the purchase date. Additional changes in fair value of these securities are primarily dependent on future changes in interest rates. As part of the Company ongoing security monitoring process by a committee of investment and accounting professionals, the Company has reviewed its investment portfolio and concluded that there were no additional other-than-temporary impairments as of December 31, 2004 and 2003. Due to the issuers continued satisfaction of the securities obligations in accordance with their contractual terms and the expectation that they will continue to do so, management intent and ability to hold these securities, as well as the evaluation of the fundamentals of the issuers financial condition and other objective evidence, the Company believes that the prices of the securities in the sectors identified above were temporarily depressed. The evaluation for other-than-temporary impairments is a quantitative and qualitative process, which is subject to risks and uncertainties in the determination of whether declines in the fair value of investments are other-than-temporary. The risks and uncertainties include changes in general economic conditions, the issuer financial condition or near term recovery prospects and the effects of changes in interest rates. In addition, for securitized financial assets with contractual cash flows (e.g. ABS and CMBS), projections of expected future cash flows may change based upon new information regarding the performance of the underlying collateral. As of December 31, 2004 and 2003, management expectation of the discounted future cash flows on these securities was in excess of the associated securities amortized cost. (For a further discussion, see Valuation of Investments and Derivative Instruments and Evaluation of Other-Than-Temporary Impairments included in the Critical Accounting Estimates section of the MD&A and Note 1 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.) The following table presents the Company unrealized loss aging for BIG and equity securities on a consolidated basis as of December 31, 2004 and 2003. Consolidated Unrealized Loss Aging of Available-for-Sale BIG and Equity Securities 2004 2003 Amortized Fair Unrealized Amortized Fair Unrealized Cost Value Loss Cost Value Loss Three months or less $ 326 $ 322 $ (4 ) $ 133 $ 129 $ (4 ) Greater than three months to six months 33 32 (1 ) 134 129 (5 ) Greater than six months to nine months 174 165 (9 ) 81 73 (8 ) Greater than nine months to twelve months 81 75 (6 ) 18 17 (1 ) Greater than twelve months 285 240 (45 ) 417 349 (68 ) Total $ 899 $ 834 $ (65 ) $ 783 $ 697 $ (86 ) Total general accounts $ 663 $ 593 $ (70 ) Total guaranteed separate accounts [1] $ 120 $ 104 $ (16 ) [1] Effective January 1, 2004, guaranteed separate account assets were included with general account assets as a result of adopting SOP 03-1. The decrease in the BIG and equity security unrealized loss amount for securities classified as available-for-sale during 2004 was primarily the result of credit spread tightening, improved pricing levels for certain CDOs and ABS and other-than-temporary impairments, partially offset by rating agency downgrades for certain issuers in the aircraft lease receivables sector. (For a further discussion, see the economic commentary under the Consolidated Fixed Maturities by Type table in this section of the MD&A.) The BIG and equity securities classified as available-for-sale in an unrealized loss position for longer than six months by type as of December 31, 2004 and 2003 are presented in the following table. 79 Table of Contents Consolidated Available-for-Sale BIG and Equity Securities with Unrealized Loss Greater Than Six Months by Type 2004 2003 Percent of Percent of Total Total Amortized Fair Unrealized Unrealized Amortized Fair Unrealized Unrealized Cost Value Loss Loss Cost Value Loss Loss ABS Aircraft lease receivables $ 129 $ 96 $ (33 ) 55.0 % $ 55 $ 36 $ (19 ) 24.6 % CDOs 27 25 (2 ) 3.3 % 44 34 (10 ) 13.0 % Credit card receivables 8 8 45 34 (11 ) 14.3 % Other ABS 11 10 (1 ) 1.7 % 12 9 (3 ) 3.9 % CMBS 47 40 (7 ) 9.1 % Corporate Financial services 169 158 (11 ) 18.3 % 142 128 (14 ) 18.2 % Technology & communication 61 57 (4 ) 6.7 % 6 6 Utilities 37 34 (3 ) 5.0 % 76 70 (6 ) 7.8 % Other 82 76 (6 ) 10.0 % 84 77 (7 ) 9.1 % Other securities 16 16 5 5 Total $ 540 $ 480 $ (60 ) 100.0 % $ 516 $ 439 $ (77 ) 100.0 % Total general accounts $ 417 $ 355 $ (62 ) 80.5 % Total guaranteed separate accounts [1] $ 99 $ 84 $ (15 ) 19.5 % [1] Effective January 1, 2004, guaranteed separate account assets were included with general account assets as a result of adopting SOP 03-1. The decrease in the consolidated available-for-sale BIG and equity securities greater than six months unrealized loss amount since December 31, 2003 was primarily the result of credit spread tightening, improved pricing levels for certain CDOs and ABS, other-than-temporary impairments taken during the year and, to a lesser extent, asset sales. This decrease was partially offset by rating agency downgrades for certain issuers in the aircraft lease receivables sector. (For a further discussion of the Company current view of risk factors relative to certain security types listed above, see the Consolidated Total Available-for-Sale Securities with Unrealized Loss Greater Than Six Months by Type table in this section of the MD&A.) CAPITAL MARKETS RISK MANAGEMENT The Hartford has a disciplined approach to managing risks associated with its capital markets and asset/liability management activities. Investment portfolio management is organized to focus investment management expertise on the specific classes of investments, while asset/liability management is the responsibility of a dedicated risk management unit supporting Life and Property & Casualty operations. Derivative instruments are utilized in compliance with established Company policy and regulatory requirements and are monitored internally and reviewed by senior management. Market Risk The Hartford is exposed to market risk, primarily relating to the market price and/or cash flow variability associated with changes in interest rates, market indices or foreign currency exchange rates. The Company analyzes interest rate risk using various models including parametric models that forecast cash flows of the liabilities and the supporting investments, including derivative instruments under various market scenarios. Interest Rate Risk The Company exposure to interest rate risk relates to the market price and/or cash flow variability associated with the changes in market interest rates. The Company manages its exposure to interest rate risk through asset allocation limits, asset/liability duration matching and through the use of derivatives. The Company analyzes interest rate risk using various models including parametric models that forecast cash flows of the liabilities and the supporting investments, including derivative instruments under various market scenarios. Measures the Company uses to quantify its exposure to interest rate risk inherent in its invested assets and interest rate sensitive liabilities are duration and key rate duration. Duration is the weighted average term-to-maturity of a security cash flows, and is used to approximate the percentage change in the price of a security for a 100-basis-point change in market interest rates. For example, a duration of 5 means the price of the security will change by approximately 5% for a 1% change in interest rates. The key rate duration analysis considers the expected future cash flows of assets and liabilities assuming non-parallel interest rate movements. To calculate duration, projections of asset and liability cash flows are discounted to a present value using interest rate assumptions. These cash flows are then revalued at alternative interest rate levels to determine the percentage change in fair value due to an incremental change in rates. Cash flows from corporate obligations are assumed to be consistent with the contractual payment streams on a yield to worst basis. The primary assumptions used in calculating cash flow projections include expected asset payment streams taking into account prepayment speeds, issuer call options and contract holder behavior. Asset-backed securities, collateralized mortgage obligations and mortgage-backed securities are modeled based on estimates of the rate of future prepayments of principal over the remaining life of the securities. These estimates are developed using prepayment speeds provided in broker consensus data. 80 Table of Contents Such estimates are derived from prepayment speeds previously experienced at the interest rate levels projected for the underlying collateral. Actual prepayment experience may vary from these estimates. The Company is also exposed to interest rate risk based upon the discount rate assumption associated with the Company pension and other postretirement benefit obligation. The discount rate assumption is based upon an interest rate yield curve comprised of AAA/AA bonds with maturities between zero and thirty years. Declines in long-term interest rates have had a negative impact on the funded status of the plans. (For a further discussion of interest rate risk associated with the plans, see the Capital Resource and Liquidity section of the MD&A under Pension Plans and Other Postretirement Benefits and Note 17 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.) The Company believes that an increase in interest rates from the current levels is generally a favorable development for the Company. Rate increases are expected to provide additional net investment income, increase sales of fixed rate Life investment products, reduce the cost of the GMWB hedging program, limit the potential risk of margin erosion due to minimum guaranteed crediting rates in certain Life products and, if sustained, could reduce the Company prospective pension expense. Conversely, a rise in interest rates will reduce the net unrealized gain position of the investment portfolio, increase interest expense on the Company variable rate debt obligations and, if long-term interest rates rise dramatically within a six to twelve month time period, certain Life businesses may be exposed to disintermediation risk. Disintermediation risk refers to the risk that policyholders will surrender their contracts in a rising interest rate environment requiring the Company to liquidate assets in an unrealized loss position. In conjunction with the interest rate risk measurement and management techniques, significant portions of Life fixed income product offerings have market value adjustment provisions at contract surrender. Equity Risk The Company primary exposure to equity risk relates to the potential for lower earnings associated with certain of the Life businesses such as variable annuities where fee income is earned based upon the fair value of the assets under management. In addition, Life offers certain guaranteed benefits, primarily associated with variable annuity products, which increases the Company potential benefit exposure as the equity markets decline. (For a further discussion, see Life Equity Risk in this section of the MD&A.) The Company does not have significant equity risk exposure from invested assets. In March 2003, the Company decided to liquidate certain equity securities and reinvest the proceeds into fixed maturity investments, thereby reducing its exposure to equity price risk. The Company has not materially changed other aspects of its overall asset allocation position or market risk since December 31, 2003. The Company is also subject to equity risk based upon the expected long-term rate of return assumption associated with the Company pension and other postretirement benefit obligation. The Company determines the long-term rate of return assumption for the plans portfolio based upon an analysis of historical returns. Declines in equity returns have had a negative impact on the funded status of the plans. (For a further discussion of equity risk associated with the plans, see the Capital Resource and Liquidity section of the MD&A under Pension Plans and Other Postretirement Benefits and Note 17 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.) Foreign Currency Exchange Risk The Company currency exchange risk is related to non-U.S. dollar denominated investments, which primarily consist of fixed maturity investments, the investment in the Japanese Life operation and a yen denominated individual fixed annuity product, and to a lesser extent, its GMDB and GMIB benefit associated with its Japanese variable annuities. A significant portion of the Company foreign currency exposure is mitigated through the use of derivatives. Derivative Instruments The Hartford utilizes a variety of derivative instruments, including swaps, caps, floors, forwards, futures and options, in compliance with Company policy and regulatory requirements to mitigate interest rate, equity market or currency exchange rate risk or volatility. Interest rate swaps involve the periodic exchange of payments with other parties, at specified intervals, calculated using the agreed upon rates and notional principal amounts. Generally, no cash or principal payments are exchanged at the inception of the contract. Typically, at the time a swap is entered into, the cash flow streams exchanged by the counterparties are equal in value. Interest rate cap and floor contracts entitle the purchaser to receive from the issuer at specified dates, the amount, if any, by which a specified market rate exceeds the cap strike rate or falls below the floor strike rate, applied to a notional principal amount. A premium payment is made by the purchaser of the contract at its inception and no principal payments are exchanged. Forward contracts are customized commitments to either purchase or sell designated financial instruments, at a future date, for a specified price and may be settled in cash or through delivery of the underlying instrument. Financial futures are standardized commitments to either purchase or sell designated financial instruments, at a future date, for a specified price and may be settled in cash or through delivery of the underlying instrument. Futures contracts trade on organized exchanges. Margin requirements for futures are met by pledging securities, and changes in the futures contract values are settled daily in cash. 81 Table of Contents Option contracts grant the purchaser, for a premium payment, the right to either purchase from or sell to the issuer a financial instrument at a specified price, within a specified period or on a stated date. Foreign currency swaps exchange an initial principal amount in two currencies, agreeing to re-exchange the currencies at a future date, at an agreed upon exchange rate. There may also be a periodic exchange of payments at specified intervals calculated using the agreed upon rates and exchanged principal amounts. Derivative activities are monitored by an internal compliance unit and reviewed frequently by senior management. The notional amounts of derivative contracts represent the basis upon which pay or receive amounts are calculated and are not reflective of credit risk. Notional amounts pertaining to derivative instruments used in the management of market risk for both the general and guaranteed separate accounts at December 31, 2004 and 2003 were $54.1 billion and $37.3 billion, respectively. The increase in the derivative notional amount during 2004 was primarily due to the embedded derivatives associated with the GMWB product feature. The following discussions focus on the key market risk exposures within Life and Property & Casualty portfolios. Life Life is responsible for maximizing after-tax returns within acceptable risk parameters, including the management of the interest rate sensitivity of invested assets and the generation of sufficient liquidity to support policyholder and corporate obligations. Life fixed maturity portfolios and certain investment contract and insurance product liabilities have material market exposure to interest rate risk. In addition, Life operations are significantly influenced by changes in the equity markets. Life profitability depends largely on the amount of assets under management, which is primarily driven by the level of sales, equity market appreciation and depreciation and the persistency of the in-force block of business. Life foreign currency exposure is primarily related to non-U.S. dollar denominated fixed income securities, the investment in the Japanese Life operation and certain foreign currency based individual fixed annuity contracts, and to a lesser extent, its GMDB and GMIB benefits associated with its Japanese variable annuities. Interest Rate Risk Life exposure to interest rate risk relates to the market price and/or cash flow variability associated with changes in market interest rates. Changes in interest rates can potentially impact Life profitability. In certain scenarios where interest rates are volatile, Life could be exposed to disintermediation risk and a reduction in net interest rate spread or profit margins. The investments and liabilities primarily associated with interest rate risk are included in the following discussion. Certain product liabilities, including those containing guaranteed minimum withdrawal or death benefits, expose the Company to interest rate risk but also have significant equity risk. These liabilities are discussed as part of the Equity Risk section below. Fixed Maturity Investments Life general account investment portfolios, including guaranteed separate accounts as of December 31, 2003, primarily consist of investment grade fixed maturity securities, including corporate bonds, asset-backed securities, commercial mortgage-backed securities, tax-exempt municipal securities and collateralized mortgage obligations. The fair value of these investments was $50.5 billion and $49.2 billion at December 31, 2004 and 2003, respectively. The fair value of these investments and Life other invested assets fluctuates depending on the interest rate environment and other general economic conditions. During periods of declining interest rates, paydowns on mortgage-backed securities and collateralized mortgage obligations increase as the underlying mortgages are prepaid. During such periods, the Company generally will not be able to reinvest the proceeds of any such prepayments at comparable yields. Conversely, during periods of rising interest rates, the rate of prepayments generally declines, exposing the Company to the possibility of asset/liability cash flow and yield mismatch. The weighted average duration of the fixed maturity portfolio was approximately 5.0 and 4.8 as of December 31, 2004 and 2003, respectively. In 2004, the duration of certain Life portfolios were modestly lengthened, which generated additional interest income. Liabilities Life investment contracts and certain insurance product liabilities, other than non-guaranteed separate accounts, include asset accumulation vehicles such as fixed annuities, guaranteed investment contracts, other investment and universal life-type contracts and other insurance products such as long-term disability. Asset accumulation vehicles primarily require a fixed rate payment, often for a specified period of time. Product examples include fixed rate annuities with a market value adjustment feature and fixed rate guaranteed investment contracts. The duration of these contracts generally range from less than one year to ten years. In addition, certain products such as universal life contracts and the general account portion of Life variable annuity products, credit interest to policyholders subject to market conditions and minimum interest rate guarantees. The duration of these products is short-to-intermediate term. While interest rate risk associated with many of these products has been reduced through the use of market value adjustment features and surrender charges, the primary risk associated with these products is that the spread between investment return and credited rate may not be sufficient to earn targeted returns. The Company also manages the risk of other insurance liabilities similarly to investment type products due to the relative predictability of the aggregate cash flow payment streams. Products in this category may contain significant actuarial (including 82 Table of Contents mortality and morbidity) pricing and cash flow risks. Product examples include structured settlement contracts, on-benefit annuities (i.e., the annuitant is currently receiving benefits thereon) and short and long-term disability contracts. The cash out flows associated with these policy liabilities are not interest rate sensitive but do vary based on the timing and amount of benefit payments. The primary risks associated with these products are that the benefits will exceed expected actuarial pricing and/or that the actual timing of the cash flows will differ from those anticipated, resulting in an investment return lower than that assumed in pricing. Contract duration can range from less than one year to typically up to ten years. Derivatives Life utilizes a variety of derivative instruments to mitigate interest rate risk. Interest rate swaps are primarily used to convert interest receipts to a fixed or variable rate. In addition, interest rate swaps are used to convert the contract rate on certain liability products offered by the Company into a rate that trades in a more liquid and efficient market. The use of such swaps enables the Company to customize contract terms and conditions to customer objectives and satisfies the operation asset/liability duration matching policy. Occasionally, swaps are also used to hedge the variability in the cash flow of a forecasted purchase or sale due to changes in interest rates. Interest rate caps and floors, swaptions and option contracts are primarily used to hedge against the risk of liability contract holder disintermediation in a rising interest rate environment, and to offset the changes in fair value of corresponding derivatives embedded in certain of the Company fixed maturity investments. At December 31, 2004 and 2003, notional amounts pertaining to derivatives utilized to manage interest rate risk totaled $9.9 billion and $9.5 billion, respectively ($7.7 billion and $7.8 billion, respectively related to insurance investments and $2.2 billion and $1.7 billion, respectively related to life insurance liabilities). The fair value of these derivatives as reflected on the consolidated balance sheets was $41 and $142 as of December 31, 2004 and 2003, respectively. Calculated Interest Rate Sensitivity The after-tax change in the net economic value of investment contracts (e.g. guaranteed investment contracts) and certain other insurance product liabilities (e.g. short and long-term disability contracts), for which the payment rates are fixed at contract issuance and the investment experience is substantially absorbed by Life, are included in the following table along with the corresponding general and guaranteed separate account assets. Also included in this analysis are the interest rate sensitive derivatives used by Life to hedge its exposure to interest rate risk. Certain financial instruments, such as limited partnerships, have been omitted from the analysis because the investments lack sensitivity to interest rate changes. Non-guaranteed separate account assets and liabilities and equity securities held for trading and the corresponding liabilities associated with the variable annuity products sold in Japan are excluded from the analysis because gains and losses in separate accounts accrue to policyholders. The estimated change in net economic value below assumes a 100 basis point upward and downward parallel shift in the yield curve. Change in Net Economic Value As of December 31, 2004 2003 Basis point shift - 100 + 100 - 100 + 100 Amount $ (73 ) $ 15 $ (27 ) $ (19 ) The fixed liabilities included above represented approximately 50% and 60% of Life general account liabilities as of December 31, 2004 and Life general and guaranteed separate account liabilities as of December 31, 2003. The assets supporting the fixed liabilities are monitored and managed within rigorous duration guidelines using scenario simulation techniques, and are evaluated on an annual basis, in compliance with regulatory requirements. The after-tax change in fair value of the general account invested asset portfolios that support certain universal life-type contracts and other insurance contracts that possess significant mortality risk are shown in the following table. The cash flows associated with these liabilities are less predictable than fixed liabilities. The Company identifies the most appropriate investment strategy based upon the expected policyholder behavior and liability crediting needs. The hypothetical calculation of the estimated change in fair value below assumes a 100 basis point upward and downward parallel shift in the yield curve. Change in Fair Value As of December 31, 2004 2003 Basis point shift - 100 + 100 - 100 + 100 Amount $ 501 $ (491 ) $ 481 $ (473 ) The selection of the 100 basis point parallel shift in the yield curve was made only as a hypothetical illustration of the potential impact of such an event and should not be construed as a prediction of future market events. Actual results could differ materially from those illustrated above due to the nature of the estimates and assumptions used in the above analysis. The Company sensitivity analysis calculation assumes that the composition of invested assets and liabilities remain materially consistent throughout the year and that the current relationship between short-term and long-term interest rates will remain constant over time. As a result, these calculations may not fully capture the impact of portfolio re-allocations, significant product sales or non-parallel changes in interest rates. 83 Table of Contents Equity Risk The Company operations are significantly influenced by changes in the equity markets. The Company profitability depends largely on the amount of assets under management, which is primarily driven by the level of sales, equity market appreciation and depreciation and the persistency of the in-force block of business. Prolonged and precipitous declines in the equity markets can have a significant impact on the Company operations, as sales of variable products may decline and surrender activity may increase, as customer sentiment towards the equity market turns negative. Lower assets under management will have a negative impact on the Company financial results, primarily due to lower fee income related to the Retail Products Group and Institutional Solutions Group and, to a lesser extent, the Individual Life segments, where a heavy concentration of equity linked products are administered and sold. Furthermore, the Company may experience a reduction in profit margins if a significant portion of the assets held in the variable annuity separate accounts move to the general account and the Company is unable to earn an acceptable investment spread, particularly in light of the low interest rate environment and the presence of contractually guaranteed minimum interest credited rates, which for the most part are at a 3% rate. In addition, prolonged declines in the equity market may also decrease the Company expectations of future gross profits, which are utilized to determine the amount of DAC to be amortized in a given financial statement period. A significant decrease in the Company estimated gross profits would require the Company to accelerate the amount of DAC amortization in a given period, potentially causing a material adverse deviation in that period net income. Although an acceleration of DAC amortization would have a negative impact on the Company earnings, it would not affect the Company cash flow or liquidity position. The Company sells variable annuity contracts that offer one or more benefit guarantees that generally increase with declines in equity markets. As is described in more detail below, the Company manages the equity market risks embedded in these guarantees through reinsurance, product design and hedging programs. The Company believes its ability to manage these equity market risks by these means gives it a competitive advantage; and, in particular, its ability to create innovative product designs that allow the Company to meet identified customer needs while generating manageable amounts of equity market risk. The Company relative sales and variable annuity market share have generally increased during periods when it has recently introduced new products to the market. In contrast, the Company relative sales and market share have generally decreased when competitors introduce products that cause an issuer to assume larger amounts of equity and other market risk than the Company is confident it can prudently manage. The Company believes its long-term success in the variable annuity market will continue to be aided by successful innovation in both product design and in equity market risk management and that, in the absence of this innovation, its market share could decline. The Company sells variable annuity contracts that offer various guaranteed death and income benefits. The Company maintains a liability for the death and income benefit costs, net of reinsurance, of $138, as of December 31, 2004. Declines in the equity market may increase the Company net exposure to death benefits under these contracts. The majority of the contracts with the guaranteed death benefit feature are sold by the Retail Products Group segment. For certain guaranteed death benefits, The Hartford pays the greater of (1) the account value at death; (2) the sum of all premium payments less prior withdrawals; or (3) the maximum anniversary value of the contract, plus any premium payments since the contract anniversary, minus any withdrawals following the contract anniversary. For certain guaranteed death benefits sold with variable annuity contracts beginning in June 2003, the Retail Products Group segment pays the greater of (1) the account value at death; or (2) the maximum anniversary value; not to exceed the account value plus the greater of (a) 25% of premium payments, or (b) 25% of the maximum anniversary value of the contract. The Company currently reinsures a significant portion of these death benefit guarantees associated with its in-force block of business. The Company total gross exposure (i.e. before reinsurance) to these guaranteed death benefits as of December 31, 2004 is $8.3 billion. Due to the fact that 80% of this amount is reinsured, the Company net exposure is $1.6 billion. This amount is often referred to as the retained net amount at risk. However, the Company will incur these guaranteed death benefit payments in the future only if the policyholder has an in-the-money guaranteed death benefit at their time of death. In addition, the Company offers certain variable annuity products with a GMWB rider. Declines in the equity market may increase the Company exposure to benefits under the GMWB contracts. For all contracts in effect through July 6, 2003, the Company entered into a reinsurance arrangement to offset its exposure to the GMWB for the remaining lives of those contracts. As of July 6, 2003, the Company exhausted all but a small portion of the reinsurance capacity for new business under the current arrangement and will be ceding only a very small number of new contracts subsequent to July 6, 2003. Substantially all new contracts with the GMWB are not covered by reinsurance. These unreinsured contracts are expected to generate volatility in net income as the underlying embedded derivative liabilities are recorded at fair value each reporting period, resulting in the recognition of net realized capital gains or losses in response to changes in certain critical factors including capital market conditions and policyholder behavior. In order to minimize the volatility associated with the unreinsured GMWB liabilities, the Company established an alternative risk management strategy. During the third quarter of 2003, the Company began hedging its unreinsured GMWB exposure using interest rate futures, Standard and Poor ( S&P ) 500 and NASDAQ index put options and futures contracts. During the first quarter of 2004, the Company entered into Europe, Australasia and Far East ( EAFE ) Index swaps to hedge GMWB exposure to international equity markets. The hedging program involves a detailed monitoring of policyholder behavior and capital markets conditions on a daily basis and rebalancing of the hedge position as needed. While the Company actively manages this hedge position, hedge ineffectiveness may result due to factors including, but not limited to, policyholder behavior, capital markets dislocation or discontinuity and divergence between the performance of the underlying funds and the hedging indices. 84 Table of Contents The net impact of the change in value of the embedded derivative net of the results of the hedging program was an $8 gain before deferred policy acquisition costs and tax effects for the year ended December 31, 2004. As of December 31, 2004, the notional and fair value related to the embedded derivatives, the hedging strategy, and reinsurance was $37.7 billion and $170, respectively. In December 2004, the Company purchased one and two year S&P 500 put option contracts to economically hedge certain liabilities that could increase if the equity markets decline. As of December 31, 2004, the notional and market value related to this strategy was $1.9 billion and $32, respectively. Because this strategy is intended to partially hedge certain equity-market sensitive liabilities calculated under statutory accounting (see Capital Resources and Liquidity), changes in the value of the put options may not be closely aligned to changes in liabilities determined in accordance with Generally Accepted Accounting Principles ( GAAP ), causing volatility in GAAP net income. The Company anticipates employing similar strategies in the future, which could further increase volatility in GAAP net income. Currency Exchange Risk Currency exchange risk exists with respect to investments in non-U.S. dollar denominated fixed maturities, primarily denominated in Euro, Sterling, Yen and Canadian dollars, as well as Life investment in foreign operations, primarily Japan, and the yen based individual fixed annuity product and, to a lesser extent, its GMDB and GMIB benefits associated with its Japanese variable annuities. The risk associated with the non-U.S. dollar denominated fixed maturities relates to potential decreases in value and income resulting from unfavorable changes in foreign exchange rates. The fair value of the non-U.S. dollar denominated fixed maturities at December 31, 2004 and 2003, were approximately $2.5 billion and $2.0 billion, respectively. In order to manage its currency exposures, Life enters into foreign currency swaps and forwards to hedge the variability in cash flow associated with certain foreign denominated fixed maturities. These foreign currency swap agreements are structured to match the foreign currency cash flows of the hedged foreign denominated securities. At December 31, 2004 and 2003, the derivatives used to hedge currency exchange risk related to non-U.S. dollar denominated fixed maturities had a total notional value of $1.7 billion and $1.4 billion, respectively, and total fair value of $(503) and $(299), respectively. The functional currency of the Japanese operation is the Japanese yen. Accordingly, the premiums, claims, commissions and investment income are paid or received in yen. In addition, most of the Japanese operation investments are yen denominated. The net investment in the Japanese operation was approximately $673 and $250, as of December 31, 2004 and 2003, respectively. Life has entered into the yen denominated forwards to hedge a substantial portion of the net investment in the Japanese operation. At December 31, 2004 and 2003, the derivatives used to hedge the net investment in the Japanese operation had a total notional value of $401 and $200, respectively, and total fair value of $(23) and $(4), respectively. The yen based fixed annuity product is written by Hartford Life Insurance KK, a wholly-owned Japanese subsidiary of HLA, and subsequently reinsured to Hartford Life Insurance Company, a U.S. dollar based wholly-owned subsidiary of Hartford Life, Inc. The yen denominated fixed annuity product is recorded in the consolidated balance sheets in other policyholder funds and benefits payable in U.S. dollars based upon the December 31, 2004 yen to dollar spot rate. To mitigate the yen exposure associated with the product, during the fourth quarter of 2004, the Company entered into pay fixed U.S. dollar receive fixed yen, zero coupon currency swaps and forwards (dollar to yen derivatives). As of December 31, 2004 the dollar to yen derivatives had a notional and fair value of $611 and $10, respectively. Based on the fair values of Life non-U.S. dollar denominated investments and derivative instruments (including its yen based individual fixed annuity product) as of December 31, 2004 and 2003, management estimates that a 10% unfavorable change in exchange rates would decrease the fair values by an after-tax total of $9 and $20, respectively. The estimated impact was based upon a 10% change in December 31 spot rates. The selection of the 10% unfavorable change was made only for hypothetical illustration of the potential impact of such an event and should not be construed as a prediction of future market events. Actual results could differ materially from those illustrated above due to the nature of the estimates and assumptions used in the above analysis. Property & Casualty Property & Casualty attempts to maximize economic value while generating appropriate after-tax income and sufficient liquidity to meet policyholder and corporate obligations. Property & Casualty investment portfolio has material exposure to interest rates. The Company continually monitors these exposures and makes portfolio adjustments to manage these risks within established limits. Interest Rate Risk The primary exposure to interest rate risk in Property & Casualty relates to its fixed maturity investments, including corporate bonds, asset-backed securities, municipal bonds, commercial mortgage-backed securities and collateralized mortgage obligations. The fair value of these investments was $24.4 billion and $23.7 billion at December 31, 2004 and 2003, respectively. The fair value of these and Property & Casualty other invested assets fluctuates depending on the interest rate environment and other general economic conditions. During periods of declining interest rates, embedded call features within securities are exercised with greater frequency and paydowns on mortgage-backed securities and collateralized mortgage obligations increase as the underlying mortgages are prepaid. During such periods, the Company generally will not be able to reinvest the proceeds of any such prepayments at comparable yields. Conversely during periods of rising interest rates, the rate of prepayments generally decline. Derivative instruments such as 85 Table of Contents swaps, caps and options are used to manage interest rate risk and had a total notional amount as of December 31, 2004 and 2003 of $1.5 billion and $1.4 billion, respectively, and fair value of $7 and $19, respectively. One of the measures Property & Casualty uses to quantify its exposure to interest rate risk inherent in its invested assets is duration. The weighted average duration of the fixed maturity portfolio was 4.6 and 4.7 as of December 31, 2004 and 2003, respectively. In 2004, the duration of the Property & Casualty portfolios were modestly shortened in anticipation of higher future interest rates. Calculated Interest Rate Sensitivity The following table provides an analysis showing the estimated after-tax change in the fair value of Property & Casualty fixed income investments and related derivatives, assuming 100 basis point upward and downward parallel shifts in the yield curve as of December 31, 2004 and 2003. Certain financial instruments, such as limited partnerships, have been omitted from the analysis due to the fact the investments are accounted for under the equity method and lack sensitivity to interest rate changes. Change in Fair Value As of December 31, 2004 2003 Basis point shift - 100 + 100 - 100 + 100 Amount $ 750 $ (725 ) $ 738 $ (714 ) The selection of the 100 basis point parallel shift in the yield curve was made only for hypothetical illustration of the potential impact of such an event and should not be construed as a prediction of future market events. Actual results could differ materially from those illustrated above due to the nature of the estimates and assumptions used in the above analysis. The Company sensitivity analysis calculation assumes that the composition of invested assets remains materially consistent throughout the year and that the current relationship between short-term and long-term interest rates will remain constant over time. As a result, these calculations may not fully capture the impact of portfolio re-allocations or non-parallel changes in interest rates. Currency Exchange Risk Currency exchange risk exists with respect to investments in non-U.S. dollar denominated fixed maturities, primarily Euro, Sterling and Canadian dollar denominated securities. The risk associated with these securities relates to potential decreases in value resulting from unfavorable changes in foreign exchange rates. The fair value of these fixed maturity securities at December 31, 2004 and 2003 was $1.4 billion and $1.2 billion, respectively. In order to manage its currency exposures, Property & Casualty enters into foreign currency swaps and forward contracts to hedge the variability in cash flow associated with certain foreign denominated securities. These foreign currency swap agreements are structured to match the foreign currency cash flows of the hedged foreign denominated securities. At December 31, 2004 and 2003, the derivatives used to hedge currency exchange risk had a total notional value of $370 and $325, respectively, and total fair value of $(70) and $(26), respectively. Based on the fair values of Property & Casualty non-U.S. dollar denominated securities and derivative instruments as of December 31, 2004 and 2003, management estimates that a 10% unfavorable change in exchange rates would decrease the fair values by an after-tax total of approximately $63 and $49, respectively. The estimated impact was based upon a 10% change in December 31 spot rates. The selection of the 10% unfavorable change was made only for hypothetical illustration of the potential impact of such an event and should not be construed as a prediction of future market events. Actual results could differ materially from those illustrated above due to the nature of the estimates and assumptions used in the above analysis. Corporate Interest Rate Risk The primary exposure to interest rate risk in Corporate relates to the Company debt. The table below provides information as of December 31, 2004 on Corporate debt obligations and reflects principal cash flows and related weighted average interest rates by maturity year. Comparative totals are included as of December 31, 2003. 2004 2003 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 Thereafter Total Total Short-term Debt [1] Amount $ 623 $ $ $ $ $ $ 623 $ 1,050 Weighted average interest rate 4.6 % 4.6 % 2.4 % Fair value $ 626 $ 1,055 Long-term Debt Amount $ $ 250 $ 500 $ 1,220 $ $ 2,345 $ 4,315 $ 4,615 Weighted average interest rate 2.3 % 5.7 % 3.6 % 6.1 % 5.1 % 5.8 % Fair value $ 4,887 $ 5,173 [1] Includes current maturities of long-term debt: $250 of 7.75% senior notes in 2004 and $200 of 6.9% senior notes in 2003. 86 Table of Contents CAPITAL RESOURCES AND LIQUIDITY Capital resources and liquidity represent the overall financial strength of The Hartford and its ability to generate strong cash flows from each of the business segments, borrow funds at competitive rates and raise new capital to meet operating and growth needs. Liquidity Requirements The liquidity requirements of The Hartford have been and will continue to be met by funds from operations as well as the issuance of commercial paper, common stock, debt securities and borrowings from its credit facilities. Current and expected patterns of claim frequency and severity may change from period to period but continue to be within historical norms and, therefore, the Company current liquidity position is considered to be sufficient to meet anticipated demands. However, if an unanticipated demand was placed on the Company it is likely that the Company would either sell certain of its investments to fund claims which could result in larger than usual realized capital gains and losses or the Company would enter the capital markets to raise further funds to provide the requisite liquidity. For a discussion and tabular presentation of the Company current contractual obligations by period including those related to its Life and Property & Casualty insurance refer to the Off-Balance Sheet and Aggregate Contractual Obligations section below. The principal sources of operating funds are premiums and investment income, while investing cash flows originate from maturities and sales of invested assets. The Hartford endeavors to maintain a capital structure that provides financial and operational flexibility to its insurance subsidiaries, ratings that support its competitive position in the financial services marketplace (see the Ratings section below for further discussion), and strong shareholder returns. As a result, the Company may from time to time raise capital from the issuance of stock, debt or other capital securities. The issuance of common stock, debt or other capital securities could result in the dilution of shareholder interests or reduced net income due to additional interest expense. The Company Japanese life insurance operations are conducted through Hartford Life Insurance K.K. a wholly owned subsidiary of Hartford Life and Accident ( HLA ), one of the Company principal statutorily regulated operating subsidiaries. To date, the Company has funded the capital needs of its Japanese operations through investments in the common stock of Hartford Life Insurance K.K. by HLA, an investment that stood at $673 at the end of 2004. This arrangement has generally allowed some portion of the Company investment in its Japanese operations to be included as part of the aggregate statutory capital (for the purposes of regulatory and rating agency capital adequacy measures) of HLA. The Company is currently in the process of evaluating capital structures that it believes in the long-term could result in improved financial flexibility. Certain of these structures would no longer allow a portion of the capital invested in our Japanese operations to be included in the aggregate capital of HLA. This could potentially reduce certain of the capital adequacy measures employed by regulators and rating agencies to assess the capital strength of The Hartford domestic life insurance companies. At the current time, the Company believes it has sufficient financial resources to maintain capital adequacy levels consistent with all of its rating objectives. The Company may also repurchase outstanding shares of its common stock and equity units from time to time, in an aggregate amount not to exceed $1 billion. For additional information regarding the Company authorization to repurchase its securities, please see the Stockholders Equity section below. HFSG and HLI are holding companies which rely upon operating cash flow in the form of dividends from their subsidiaries, which enable them to service debt, pay dividends, and pay certain business expenses. Dividends to HFSG from its subsidiaries are restricted. The payment of dividends by Connecticut-domiciled insurers is limited under the insurance holding company laws of Connecticut. Under these laws, the insurance subsidiaries may only make their dividend payments out of unassigned surplus. These laws require notice to and approval by the state insurance commissioner for the declaration or payment of any dividend, which, together with other dividends or distributions made within the preceding twelve months, exceeds the greater of (i) 10% of the insurer policyholder surplus as of December 31 of the preceding year or (ii) net income (or net gain from operations, if such company is a life insurance company) for the twelve-month period ending on the thirty-first day of December last preceding, in each case determined under statutory insurance accounting policies. In addition, if any dividend of a Connecticut-domiciled insurer exceeds the insurer earned surplus, it requires the prior approval of the Connecticut Insurance Commissioner. The insurance holding company laws of the other jurisdictions in which The Hartford insurance subsidiaries are incorporated (or deemed commercially domiciled) generally contain similar (although in certain instances somewhat more restrictive) limitations on the payment of dividends. For the year ended December 31, 2004, the Company insurance subsidiaries paid $861 to HFSG and HLI and are permitted to pay up to a maximum of approximately $1.9 billion in dividends to HFSG and HLI in 2005 without prior approval from the applicable insurance commissioner. The primary uses of funds are to pay claims, policy benefits, operating expenses and commissions and to purchase new investments. In addition, The Hartford has a policy of carrying a significant short-term investment position and accordingly does not anticipate selling intermediate- and long-term fixed maturity investments to meet any liquidity needs. (For a discussion of the Company investment objectives and strategies, see the Investments and Capital Markets Risk Management sections.) 87 Table of Contents Sources of Liquidity Shelf Registrations On December 3, 2003, The Hartford shelf registration statement (Registration No. 333-108067) for the potential offering and sale of debt and equity securities in an aggregate amount of up to $3.0 billion was declared effective by the Securities and Exchange Commission. The Registration Statement allows for the following types of securities to be offered: (i) debt securities, preferred stock, common stock, depositary shares, warrants, stock purchase contracts, stock purchase units and junior subordinated deferrable interest debentures of the Company, and (ii) preferred securities of any of one or more capital trusts organized by The Hartford ( The Hartford Trusts ). The Company may enter into guarantees with respect to the preferred securities of any of The Hartford Trusts. In January 2004, the Company issued approximately 6.7 million shares of common stock pursuant to an underwritten offering at a price to the public of $63.25 per share and received net proceeds of $411. On March 9, 2004, the Company issued $200 of 4.75% senior notes due March 1, 2014. As of December 31, 2004, the Company had $2.4 billion remaining on its shelf. On May 15, 2001, HLI filed with the SEC a shelf registration statement (Registration No. 333-60944) for the potential offering and sale of up to $1.0 billion in debt and preferred securities. The registration statement was declared effective on May 29, 2001. As of December 31, 2004, HLI had $1.0 billion remaining on its shelf. Commercial Paper and Revolving Credit Facilities The table below details the Company short-term debt programs and the applicable balances outstanding. As of December 31, Description Effective Date Expiration Date Maximum Available 2004 2003 Commercial Paper The Hartford 11/10/86 N/A $ 2,000 $ 372 $ 850 HLI 2/7/97 N/A 250 Total commercial paper $ 2,250 $ 372 $ 850 Revolving Credit Facility 5-year revolving credit facility 6/20/01 6/20/06 $ 1,000 $ $ 3-year revolving credit facility 12/31/02 12/31/05 490 Total Revolving Credit Facilities $ 1,490 $ $ Total Outstanding Commercial Paper and Revolving Credit Facilities $ 3,740 $ 372 $ 850 Under the two revolving credit agreements, the Company must maintain a minimum level of consolidated statutory surplus and risk based capital ratios. In addition, the Company must not exceed a maximum ratio of debt to capitalization. Quarterly, the Company certifies compliance with each financial covenant for its banks. At December 31, 2004 and 2003, the Company was in compliance with all such covenants. Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements and Aggregate Contractual Obligations The Company does not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that are reasonably likely to have a material effect on the financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, or capital resources of the Company, except for unfunded commitments to purchase investments in limited partnerships and mortgage loans totaling $629 and a guarantee of the residual value of leased furniture and fixtures for $20, both as disclosed in Note 12 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 88 Table of Contents The following table identifies the Company aggregate contractual obligations due by payment period: Payments due by period Total Less than 1 year 1-3 years 3-5 years More than 5 years Property and casualty obligations [1] $ 21,885 $ 5,777 $ 6,150 $ 3,016 $ 6,942 Life, annuity and disability obligations [2] 281,998 18,037 37,318 40,255 186,388 Long-term debt obligations [3] 9,093 536 1,288 1,613 5,656 Operating lease obligations 723 175 285 162 101 Purchase obligations [4] [5] 1,764 1,614 120 14 16 Other long-term liabilities reflected on the balance sheet [6] [7] 1,642 1,590 52 Total $ 317,105 $ 27,729 $ 45,161 $ 45,112 $ 199,103 [1] The following points are significant to understanding the cash flows estimated for obligations under property and casualty contracts: Reserves for Property & Casualty unpaid claim and claim adjustment expenses include case reserves for reported claims and reserves for claims incurred but not reported (IBNR). While payments due on claim reserves are considered contractual obligations because they relate to insurance policies issued by the Company, the ultimate amount to be paid to settle both case reserves and IBNR is an estimate, subject to significant uncertainty. The actual amount to be paid is not determined until the Company reaches a settlement with the claimant. Final claim settlements may vary significantly from the present estimates, particularly since many claims will not be settled until well into the future. In estimating the timing of future payments by year, the Company has assumed that its historical payment patterns will continue. However, the actual timing of future payments will likely vary materially from these estimates due to, among other things, changes in claim reporting and payment patterns and large unanticipated settlements. In particular, there is significant uncertainty over the claim payment patterns of asbestos and environmental claims. Also, estimated payments in 2005 do not include payments that will be made on claims incurred in 2005 on policies that were in force as of December 31, 2004. In addition, the table does not include future cash flows related to the receipt of premiums that will be used, in part, to fund loss payments. Under generally accepted accounting principles, the Company is only permitted to discount reserves for claim and claim adjustment expenses in cases where the payment pattern and ultimate loss costs are fixed and reliably determinable on an individual claim basis. For the Company, these include claim settlements with permanently disabled claimants and certain structured settlement contracts that fund loss runoffs for unrelated parties. As of December 31, 2004, the total property and casualty reserves in the above table of $21,885 are gross of the reserve discount of $556. [2] Estimated life, annuity and disability obligations include death and disability claims, policy surrenders, policyholder dividends and trail commissions offset by expected future deposits and premiums on in-force contracts. Estimated contractual policyholder obligations are based on mortality, morbidity and lapse assumptions comparable with Life historical experience, modified for recent observed trends. Life has also assumed market growth and interest crediting consistent with assumptions used in amortizing deferred acquisition costs. In contrast to this table, the majority of Life obligations are recorded on the balance sheet at the current account value, as described in Critical Accounting Estimates, and do not incorporate an expectation of future market growth, interest crediting, or future deposits. Therefore, the estimated contractual policyholder obligations presented in this table significantly exceed the liabilities recorded in reserve for future policy benefits and unpaid claims and claim adjustment expenses, other policyholder funds and benefits payable and separate account liabilities. Due to the significance of the assumptions used, the amounts presented could materially differ from actual results. As separate account obligations are legally insulated from general account obligations, the separate account obligations will be fully funded by cash flows from separate account assets. Life expects to fully fund the general account obligations from cash flows from general account investments and future deposits and premiums. [3] Includes contractual principal and interest payments. Payments exclude amounts associated with fair-value hedges of certain of the Company long-term debt. All long-term debt obligations have fixed rates of interest. Long-term debt obligations also includes principal and interest payments of $700 and $2.4 billion, respectively, related to junior subordinated debentures which are callable beginning in 2006. See Note 14 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional discussion of long-term debt obligations. [4] Includes $1.4 billion in commitments to purchase investments including $330 of limited partnerships and $299 of mortgage loans. Outstanding commitments under these limited partnerships and mortgage loans are included in payments due in less than 1 year since the timing of funding these commitments cannot be estimated. The remaining $759 relates to payables for securities purchased which are reflected on the Company consolidated balance sheet. [5] Includes estimated contribution of $200 to the Company pension plan in 2005. [6] As of December 31, 2004, the Company has accepted cash collateral of $1.6 billion in connection with the Company securities lending program and derivative instruments. Since the timing of the return of the collateral is uncertain, the return of the collateral has been included in the payments due in less than 1 year. [7] Includes $52 in collateralized loan obligations ( CLOs ) issued to third-party investors by a consolidated investment management entity sponsored by the Company in connection with synthetic CLO transactions. The CLO investors have no recourse to the Company assets other than the dedicated assets collateralizing the CLOs. Refer to Note 4 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional discussion of CLOs. 89 Table of Contents Pension Plans and Other Postretirement Benefits The Company maintains a U.S. qualified defined benefit pension plan (the Plan ) that covers substantially all employees, as well as unfunded excess plans to provide benefits in excess of amounts permitted to be paid to participants of the Plan under the provisions of the Internal Revenue Code. Additionally, the Company has entered into individual retirement agreements with certain current and retired directors providing for unfunded supplemental pension benefits. The Company maintains international plans which represent an immaterial percentage of total pension assets, liabilities and expense and, for reporting purposes, are combined with domestic plans. In September 2003, the Company announced its approval to amend the Plan to implement, effective January 1, 2009, the cash balance formula for purposes of calculating future pension benefits for services rendered on or after January 1, 2009 for employees hired before January 1, 2001. These amounts are in addition to amounts earned through December 31, 2008 under the traditional final average pay formula. Employees hired on or after January 1, 2001 are currently covered under the same cash balance formula. The Company made voluntary contributions of $317, $306 and $0 in 2004, 2003 and 2002, respectively, to its defined benefit pension plans. Pension expense reflected in the Company net income was $104, $120 and $67 in 2004, 2003 and 2002, respectively. The Company estimates its 2005 pension expense will be approximately $133, based on current assumptions provided below. The assumptions that primarily impact the amount of the Company pension obligations and periodic pension expense are the weighted-average discount rate and the Plan asset portfolio expected long-term rate of return. In determining the discount rate assumption, the Company utilizes current market information provided by its plan actuaries, including a discounted cash flow analysis of the Company pension obligation and general movements in the current market environment. In particular, the Company uses an interest rate yield curve developed by its plan actuaries to make judgments pursuant to EITF Topic No. D-36, Selection of Discount Rates Used for Measuring Defined Benefit Pension Obligations and Obligations of Postretirement Benefit Plans Other Than Pensions . The yield curve is comprised of bonds rated AA or higher with maturities primarily between zero and thirty years. Based upon all available information, it was determined that 5.75% was the appropriate discount rate as of December 31, 2004 to calculate the Company accrued benefit liability. Accordingly, as prescribed by SFAS No. 87, Employers Accounting for Pensions , the 5.75% discount rate will also be used to determine the Company 2005 pension expense. At December 31, 2003, the discount rate was 6.25%. The Company determines the long-term rate of return assumption for the Plan asset portfolio based on analysis of the portfolio historical compound rates of return since 1979 (the earliest date for which comparable portfolio data is available) and over rolling 5 year, 10 year and 20 year periods, balanced along with future long-term return expectations. The Company selected these periods, as well as shorter durations, to assess the portfolio volatility, duration and total returns as they relate to pension obligation characteristics, which are influenced by the Company workforce demographics. While the historical return of the Plan portfolio has been 11.16% since 1979, management maintained its long-term rate of return assumption at 8.50% as of December 31, 2004 based on its long-term outlook with respect to the markets. The Plan asset portfolio is generally structured over time to include approximately 60% equity securities (substantially securities issued by United States-based companies) and 40% fixed income securities (substantially investment grade and above). At December 31, 2004, the portfolio composition varied slightly from the targeted mix and was approximately 67% equity securities and 33% fixed income securities due in part to a rebound in the equity markets and declining interest rates. As provided for under SFAS No. 87, the Company uses a five-year averaging method to determine the market-related value of Plan assets, which is used to determine the expected return component of pension expense. Under this methodology, asset gains/losses that result from returns that differ from the Company long-term rate of return assumption are recognized in the market-related value of assets on a level basis over a five year period. The actual asset returns for the Plan of $289 and $334 for the years ended December 31, 2004 and 2003, respectively, reflect improved equity market performance, as compared to expected returns of $201 and $184 for the years ended December 31, 2004 and 2003, respectively. These differentials will be fully reflected in the market-related value of Plan assets over the next five years using the methodology described above. Despite the favorable 2004 actual asset return, the level of unrecognized net losses continues to exceed the allowable amortization corridor as defined under SFAS No. 87. Based on the selected 2005 discount rate of 5.75% and taking into account estimated future minimum funding, the differential between actual and expected performance in 2004 will decrease annual pension expense in future years by approximately $4 in 2005 and by approximately $22 in 2009. At December 31, 2004, the change in the discount rate from 6.25% (as of December 31, 2003) to 5.75% (as of December 31, 2004) increased the projected benefit obligation ( PBO ) by $219. The effect of this increase in PBO will serve to increase annual pension expense by approximately $16, assuming no future changes in discount rates going forward. In addition, the decrease in discount rate will also increase the service cost component of pension expense by approximately $9. Changes in the economic assumptions used to determine pension expense will impact the Company pension expense. As mentioned earlier, the two economic assumptions that have the most impact on pension expense are the discount rate and the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets. To illustrate the impact of these assumptions on annual pension expense for 2005 and going forward, a 25 basis point change in the discount rate will increase/decrease pension expense by approximately $13, and a 25 basis point change in the long-term asset return assumption will increase/decrease pension expense by approximately $6. 90 Table of Contents The Company presently anticipates contributing approximately $200 to its pension plans in 2005, based upon certain economic and business assumptions. These assumptions include, but are not limited to, equity market performance, changes in interest rates and the Company other capital requirements. The Company 2005 required minimum funding contributions are estimated to be approximately $1. Capitalization The capital structure of The Hartford as of December 31, 2004 and 2003 consisted of debt and equity, summarized as follows: As of December 31, 2004 2003 Short-term debt (includes current maturities of long-term debt) $ 621 $ 1,050 Long-term debt [1] 4,308 4,610 Total debt $ 4,929 $ 5,660 Equity excluding accumulated other comprehensive income, net of tax ( AOCI ) $ 12,813 $ 10,393 AOCI 1,425 1,246 Total stockholders' equity $ 14,238 $ 11,639 Total capitalization including AOCI $ 19,167 $ 17,299 Debt to equity 35 % 49 % Debt to capitalization 26 % 33 % [1] Includes junior subordinated debentures $704 and $952 and debt associated with equity units of $1,020 and $1,020 as of December 31, 2004 and 2003, respectively. The Hartford total capitalization increased $1.9 billion as of December 31, 2004 as compared with December 31, 2003. This increase was due to a $2.6 billion increase in equity partially offset by a $731 decrease in debt. The increase in total stockholders equity is primarily due to net income of $2.1 billion, the issuance of common stock of $411 and a $179 increase in AOCI. The increase in AOCI is primarily the result of Life adoption of SOP 03-1, which resulted in a $292 cumulative effect for unrealized gains on securities in the first quarter of 2004 related to the reclassification of investments from separate account assets to general account assets, partially offset by net unrealized losses on cash-flow hedging instruments. The decrease in total debt reflects repayments of commercial paper of $477 and senior notes of $200 and the redemption of $250 of junior subordinated debentures, offset by the issuance of $200 in 4.75% senior notes. Debt The following discussion describes the Company debt financing activities for 2004. For the year ended December 31, 2004, the Company repaid $477 of commercial paper utilizing the proceeds from the equity offering and internal sources. On June 15, 2004, HLI repaid $200 of 6.9% senior notes at maturity. On March 15, 2004, HLI redeemed its 7.2% junior subordinated debentures underlying the trust preferred securities issued by Hartford Life Capital I. On March 9, 2004, the Company issued 4.75% senior notes due March 1, 2014 and received net proceeds of $197. Interest on the notes is payable semi-annually on March 1 and September 1. For additional information regarding debt, see Note 14 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Stockholders Equity Issuance of Common Stock On January 22, 2004, The Hartford issued approximately 6.3 million shares of common stock pursuant to an underwritten offering at a price to the public of $63.25 per share and received net proceeds of $388. Subsequently, on January 30, 2004, The Hartford issued approximately 377 thousand shares of common stock pursuant to an underwritten offering at a price to the public of $63.25 per share and received net proceeds of $23. The Company used the proceeds from these issuances to repay $411 of commercial paper issued in connection with the CNA Acquisition. In September 2004, the Company Board of Directors authorized the Company to repurchase up to $1 billion of its securities. The Company repurchase authorization permits purchases of common stock and equity units, which may be in the open market or through privately negotiated transactions. The Company also may enter into derivative transactions to facilitate future repurchases of common stock and equity units. The timing of repurchases will be dependent upon several factors, including the market price of the Company securities, the Company capital position, consideration of the effect of any repurchases on the Company financial strength or credit ratings, and other corporate considerations. The repurchase program may be modified, extended or terminated by the Board of Directors at any time. The Company has made no repurchases under this program. Dividends On February 17, 2005, The Hartford Board of Directors declared a quarterly dividend of $0.29 per share payable on April 1, 2005 to shareholders of record as of March 1, 2005. 91 Table of Contents On October 21, 2004, The Hartford declared a dividend on its common stock of $0.29 per share payable on January 3, 2005 to shareholders of record as of December 1, 2004. The Hartford declared $331 and paid $325 in dividends to shareholders in 2004, declared $300 and paid $291 in dividends to shareholders in 2003, declared $262 and paid $257 in 2002. AOCI - AOCI increased by $179 as of December 31, 2004 compared with December 31, 2003. The increase in AOCI is primarily the result of Life adoption of SOP 03-1, which resulted in a $292 cumulative effect for unrealized gains on securities in the first quarter of 2004 related to the reclassification of investments from separate account assets to general account assets, partially offset by net unrealized losses on cash-flow hedging instruments. The funded status of the Company pension and postretirement plans is dependent upon many factors, including returns on invested assets and the level of market interest rates. Declines in the value of securities traded in equity markets coupled with declines in long-term interest rates have had a negative impact on the funded status of the plans. As a result, the Company recorded a minimum pension liability as of December 31, 2004, and 2003, which resulted in an after-tax reduction of stockholders equity of $480 and $375 respectively. This minimum pension liability did not affect the Company results of operations. For additional information on stockholders equity and AOCI see Notes 15 and 16, respectively, of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Cash Flow 2004 2003 2002 Net cash provided by operating activities $ 2,634 $ 3,896 $ 2,577 Net cash used for investing activities $ (2,401 ) $ (8,387 ) $ (6,600 ) Net cash provided by financing activities $ 477 $ 4,608 $ 4,037 Cash end of year $ 1,148 $ 462 $ 377 2004 Compared to 2003 Cash from operating activities primarily reflects premium cash flows in excess of claim payments. The decrease in cash provided by operating activities was due primarily to the $1.15 billion settlement of the MacArthur litigation in 2004. Cash provided by financing activities decreased primarily due to lower proceeds from investment and universal life-type contracts as a result of the adoption of SOP 03-1, decreased capital raising activities, repayment of commercial paper and early retirement of junior subordinated debentures in 2004. The decrease in cash from financing activities and operating cash flows invested long-term accounted for the majority of the change in cash used for investing activities. 2003 Compared to 2002 The increase in cash provided by operating activities was primarily the result of strong premium cash flows. Financing activities increased primarily due to capital raising activities related to the 2003 asbestos reserve addition and decreased due to repayments on long-term debt and lower proceeds from investment and universal life-type contracts. The increase in cash from financing activities accounted for the majority of the change in cash used for investing activities. Operating cash flows in each of the last three years have been adequate to meet liquidity requirements. Equity Markets For a discussion of the potential impact of the equity markets on capital and liquidity, see the Capital Markets Risk Management section under Market Risk . Ratings Ratings are an important factor in establishing the competitive position in the insurance and financial services marketplace. There can be no assurance that the Company ratings will continue for any given period of time or that they will not be changed. In the event the Company ratings are downgraded, the level of revenues or the persistency of the Company business may be adversely impacted. On August 4, 2004, Moody affirmed the Company and Hartford Life, Inc. A3 senior debt ratings as well as the Aa3 insurance financial strength ratings of both its property-casualty and life insurance operating subsidiaries. In addition, Moody changed the outlook for all of these ratings from negative to stable. Since the announcement of the suit filed by the New York Attorney General Office against Marsh & McLennan Companies, Inc., and Marsh, Inc. on October 14, 2004, the major independent ratings agencies have indicated that they continue to monitor developments relating to the suit. On October 22, 2004, Standard & Poor revised its outlook on the U.S. property/casualty commercial lines sector to negative from stable. On November 23, 2004, Standard & Poor revised its outlook on the financial strength and credit ratings of the property-casualty insurance subsidiaries to negative from stable. The outlook on the life insurance subsidiaries and corporate debt was unaffected. 92 Table of Contents The following table summarizes The Hartford significant United States member companies financial ratings from the major independent rating organizations as of February 25, 2005. A.M. Best Fitch Standard & Poor Moody Insurance Financial Strength Ratings: Hartford Fire A+ AA AA- Aa3 Hartford Life Insurance Company A+ AA AA- Aa3 Hartford Life and Accident A+ AA AA- Aa3 Hartford Life Group Insurance Company A+ AA Hartford Life and Annuity A+ AA AA- Aa3 Hartford Life Insurance KK (Japan) AA- Other Ratings: The Hartford Financial Services Group, Inc.: Senior debt a- A A- A3 Commercial paper AMB-2 F1 A-2 P-2 Hartford Capital III trust originated preferred securities bbb A- BBB Baa1 Hartford Life, Inc.: Senior debt a- A A- A3 Commercial paper F1 A-2 P-2 Hartford Life, Inc.: Capital II trust preferred securities bbb A- BBB Baa1 Hartford Life Insurance Company: Short Term Rating A-1+ P-1 These ratings are not a recommendation to buy or hold any of The Hartford securities and they may be revised or revoked at any time at the sole discretion of the rating organization. The agencies consider many factors in determining the final rating of an insurance company. One consideration is the relative level of statutory surplus necessary to support the business written. Statutory surplus represents the capital of the insurance company reported in accordance with accounting practices prescribed by the applicable state insurance department. The table below sets forth statutory surplus for the Company insurance companies. 2004 2003 Life Operations $ 5,119 $ 4,470 Property & Casualty Operations 6,337 5,819 Total $ 11,456 $ 10,289 Risk-based Capital The National Association of Insurance Commissioners ( NAIC ) has regulations establishing minimum capitalization requirements based on risk-based capital ( RBC ) formulas for both life and property and casualty companies. The requirements consist of formulas, which identify companies that are undercapitalized and require specific regulatory actions. The RBC formula for life companies establishes capital requirements relating to insurance, business, asset and interest rate risks. RBC is calculated for property and casualty companies after adjusting capital for certain underwriting, asset, credit and off-balance sheet risks. As of December 31, 2004, each of The Hartford insurance subsidiaries within Life and Ongoing Property & Casualty had more than sufficient capital to meet the NAIC minimum RBC requirements. Terrorism Risk Insurance Act of 2002 The Terrorism Risk Insurance Act of 2002 established a program that will run through 2005 that provides a backstop for insurance-related losses resulting from any act of terrorism certified by the Secretary of the Treasury, in concurrence with the Secretary of State and Attorney General. Under the program, the federal government would pay 90% of covered losses after an insurer losses exceed 15% of the Company direct commercial earned premiums in 2004, up to a combined annual aggregate limit for the federal government and all insurers of $100 billion. If an act of terrorism or acts of terrorism result in covered losses exceeding the $100 billion annual limit, insurers with losses exceeding their deductibles will not be responsible for additional losses. The statutory formula for determining a company deductible for each year is based on the company direct commercial earned premiums for the prior calendar year multiplied by a specified percentage. The specified percentage is 15% for 2005. The Act requires all property and casualty insurers, including The Hartford, to make terrorism insurance available in all of their covered commercial property and casualty insurance policies (as defined in the Act). The Act applies to a significant portion of The Hartford commercial property and casualty contracts, but it specifically excludes some of The Hartford other insurance business, including crop or livestock insurance, reinsurance and personal lines business. The Act does not apply to group life insurance contracts. The Act is scheduled to expire on December 31, 2005. If the Act is not extended or renewed, the Company is exposed to terrorism losses in 2006 that would otherwise have been covered by the Act, including terrorism losses arising on policies written in 2005 that expire after December 31, 2005. The Department of Treasury is required to provide Congress its findings and recommendations related to the Act by June 30, 2005. In the event the Act is not renewed, or is renewed in a materially different form, the Company 93 Table of Contents may attempt to obtain appropriate reinsurance for the related terrorism risk, limit certain of its writings, or pursue a solution encompassing aspects of one or all of the foregoing (see Property & Casualty of MD&A). Contingencies Legal Proceedings - For a discussion regarding contingencies related to The Hartford legal proceedings, please see Item 3, Legal Proceedings . Dependence on Certain Third Party Relationships - The Company distributes its annuity, life and certain property and casualty insurance products through a variety of distribution channels, including broker-dealers, banks, wholesalers, its own internal sales force and other third party organizations. The Company periodically negotiates provisions and renewals of these relationships and there can be no assurance that such terms will remain acceptable to the Company or such third parties. An interruption in the Company continuing relationship with certain of these third parties could materially affect the Company ability to market its products. For a discussion regarding contingencies related to the manner in which The Hartford compensates brokers and other producers, please see Overview Broker Compensation above. Regulatory Developments - For a discussion regarding contingencies related to regulatory developments that affect The Hartford, please see Overview Regulatory Developments above. On October 21, 2004, the Financial Services Agency ( FSA ), the Company primary regulator in Japan, issued regulations concerning new reserving methodologies and Solvency Margin Ratio ( SMR ) standards for variable annuity contracts. The regulations allow a Standard methodology and an Alternative methodology to determine required reserve levels and SMR standards. On December 27, 2004, the FSA also issued administrative guidelines that describe the detailed requirements under the two methodologies. The regulations are scheduled to become effective on April 1, 2005. The new reserve methodologies and SMR standards would only apply to capital requirements for Japanese regulatory purposes, and are not directly related to results under accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. At this time, the Company has decided to adopt the Standard methodology. While management is still evaluating the impact of the regulations on the Company Japanese operations, at this time, based on the Company assessment, the Standard methodology would require $400 $650 of additional capital during 2005. This estimate assumes that the Company will successfully employ various capital management strategies within its discretion and control, which may include, but are not limited to, product re-filing. The Company also is currently evaluating certain reinsurance strategies which have the potential to reduce the additional capital required to $100. These reinsurance strategies would be subject to regulatory approval, which may not be granted. For further information on other contingencies, see Note 12 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Legislative Initiatives On July 10, 2003, the Senate Judiciary Committee approved legislation that would have provided for the creation of a Federal asbestos trust fund in place of the current tort system for determining asbestos liabilities. The 108 th Congress concluded without further action on the proposal. Although Judiciary Committee chair Arlen Specter may likely pursue reform legislation in the current Congress, the prospects for enactment and the ultimate details of any legislation creating a Federal asbestos trust fund are uncertain. Therefore, any potential effect on the Company financial condition or results of operations cannot be reasonably estimated at this time. On November 18, 2004, the House Financial Services Committee approved legislation which would have extended the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act (TRIA) beyond its December 31, 2005, termination. Efforts will continue in 2005 to extend TRIA and to enact permanent legislation. The prospects for enactment of a simple extension or more permanent legislation are uncertain. Therefore, any potential effect on the Company financial condition or results of operations cannot be reasonably estimated at this time. President Bush has proposed new investment vehicles with larger annual contribution limits for individuals and permanent income tax rate reductions and changes to the estate tax. These changes could have a material effect on sales of the Company life insurance and investment products. Prospects for enactment of this legislation in 2005 are uncertain. Therefore, any potential effect on the Company financial condition or results of operations from such potential legislative changes cannot be reasonably estimated at this time. The American Jobs Creation Act of 2004 imposes new restrictions on non-qualified deferred compensation plans. The Company does not believe these changes will have a material effect on the sale of its products. In addition, other tax proposals and regulatory initiatives which have been or are being considered by Congress could have a material effect on the insurance business. These proposals and initiatives include changes pertaining to the tax treatment of insurance companies and life insurance products and annuities, and reductions in benefits currently received by the Company stemming from the dividends received deduction. The President has also established an advisory panel to study reform of the Internal Revenue Code. The panel is scheduled to report its findings and make recommendations to the Secretary of the Treasury by the end of July, 2005. Legislation to restructure the Social Security system and expand private pension plans incentives also may be considered. Prospects for enactment and the ultimate effect of these proposals are uncertain. Congress is expected to consider provisions regarding age discrimination in defined benefit plans, transition relief for older and longer service workers affected by changes to traditional defined benefit pension plans and the replacement of the interest rate used to determine pension plan funding requirements. These changes could affect the Company pension plan. 94 Table of Contents The President has signed into law the Class Action Fairness Act of 2005. The Act will reduce the number and type of national class actions certified by state judges by updating the federal rules on diversity jurisdiction. Any potential effect on the Company cannot be reasonably estimated at this time. Congress may consider a number of other legal reform proposals this year. Prospects for enactment of these proposals in 2005 are uncertain. Guaranty Fund and Other Insurance-related Assessments In all states, insurers licensed to transact certain classes of insurance are required to become members of a guaranty fund. In most states, in the event of the insolvency of an insurer writing any such class of insurance in the state, members of the fund are assessed to pay certain claims of the insolvent insurer. A particular state fund assesses its members based on their respective written premiums in the state for the classes of insurance in which the insolvent insurer is engaged. Assessments are generally limited for any year to one or two percent of premiums written per year depending on the state. Such assessments paid by The Hartford approximated $23 in 2004, $26 in 2003 and $26 in 2002. The Hartford accounts for guaranty fund and other insurance assessments in accordance with Statement of Position No. 97-3, Accounting by Insurance and Other Enterprises for Insurance-Related Assessments . Liabilities for guaranty fund and other insurance-related assessments are accrued when an assessment is probable, when it can be reasonably estimated, and when the event obligating the entity to pay an imposed or probable assessment has occurred. Liabilities for guaranty funds and other insurance-related assessments are not discounted and are included as part of other liabilities in the Consolidated Balance Sheets. As of December 31, 2004 and 2003, the liability balance was $215 and $181, respectively. As of December 31, 2004 and 2003, included in other assets was $14 of related assets for premium tax offsets. IMPACT OF NEW ACCOUNTING STANDARDS For a discussion of accounting standards, see Note 1 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 
