CIK: 874766
Company Name: HARTFORD FINANCIAL SERVICES GROUP INC DE
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2015-02-27


Item 7. MANAGEMENT S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS (Dollar amounts in millions, except for per share data, unless otherwise stated) The Hartford provides projections and other forward-looking information in the following discussions, which contain many forward-looking statements, particularly relating to the Company future financial performance. These forward-looking statements are estimates based on information currently available to the Company, are made pursuant to the safe harbor provisions of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 and are subject to the cautionary statements set forth on pages 3 and 4 of this Form 10-K. Actual results are likely to differ, and in the past have differed, materially from those forecast by the Company, depending on the outcome of various factors, including, but not limited to, those set forth in each discussion below and in Part I, Item 1A, Risk Factors. The Hartford undertakes no obligation to publicly update any forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future developments or otherwise. Certain reclassifications have been made to prior year financial information presented in Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations ("MD&A") to conform to the current year presentation. In 2014, the Company refined the definition of underwriting expenses by including certain centralized services and bad debt expenses in the determination of underwriting results for the Commercial Lines, Personal Lines and Property & Casualty Other Operations reporting segments. The reclassification of certain centralized services and bad debt expenses from other income (expenses) did not impact previously reported net income. The Hartford defines increases or decreases greater than or equal to 200% as NM or not meaningful. INDEX Description Page The Hartford's Operations 33 Consolidated Results of Operations 35 Investment Results 37 Critical Accounting Estimates 41 Key Performance Measures and Ratios 66 Commercial Lines 71 Personal Lines 74 Property & Casualty Other Operations 78 Group Benefits 79 Mutual Funds 81 Talcott Resolution 83 Corporate 86 Enterprise Risk Management 88 Capital Resources and Liquidity 117 Impact of New Accounting Standards 129 32 THE HARTFORD S OPERATIONS Overview The Hartford is a financial holding company for a group of subsidiaries that provide property and casualty, group benefits and investment products to both individual and business customers in the United States and continues to administer life and annuity products previously sold. The Hartford currently conducts business principally in six reporting segments including Commercial Lines, Personal Lines, Property & Casualty Other Operations, Group Benefits, Mutual Funds and Talcott Resolution, as well as a Corporate category. The Hartford includes in its Corporate category the Company debt financing and related interest expense, as well as other capital raising activities; and purchase accounting adjustments related to goodwill and other expenses not allocated to the reporting segments. On June 30, 2014 , the Company completed the sale of all of the issued and outstanding equity of HLIKK to ORIX Life Insurance Corporation, a subsidiary of ORIX Corporation, a Japanese company. HLIKK sold variable and fixed annuity policies in Japan from 2001 to 2009 and had been in runoff since 2009. On December 12, 2013 , the Company completed the sale of Hartford Life International Limited ("HLIL"), which comprised the Company's U.K. variable annuity business, to Columbia Insurance Company, a Berkshire Hathaway company. On January 1, 2013 , the Company completed the sale of its Retirement Plans business to Massachusetts Mutual Life Insurance Company ("MassMutual") and on January 2, 2013 , the Company completed the sale of its Individual Life insurance business to The Prudential Insurance Company of America ("Prudential"), a subsidiary of Prudential Financial, Inc. For further discussion of these transactions, see Note 2 - Business Dispositions , Note 7 - Reinsurance and Note 19 - Discontinued Operations of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. These businesses are included in the Talcott Resolution reporting segment. The Company derives its revenues principally from: (a) premiums earned for insurance coverages provided to insureds; (b) fee income, including asset management fees, on separate account and mutual fund assets and mortality and expense fees, as well as cost of insurance charges; (c) net investment income; (d) fees earned for services provided to third parties; and (e) net realized capital gains and losses. Premiums charged for insurance coverages are earned principally on a pro rata basis over the terms of the related policies in-force. Asset management fees and mortality and expense fees are primarily generated from separate account assets. Cost of insurance charges are assessed on the net amount at risk for investment-oriented life insurance products. The profitability of the Company's property and casualty insurance businesses over time is greatly influenced by the Company underwriting discipline, which seeks to manage exposure to loss through favorable risk selection and diversification, its management of claims, its use of reinsurance, the size of its in force block, actual mortality and morbidity experience, and its ability to manage its expense ratio which it accomplishes through economies of scale and its management of acquisition costs and other underwriting expenses. Pricing adequacy depends on a number of factors, including the ability to obtain regulatory approval for rate changes, proper evaluation of underwriting risks, the ability to project future loss cost frequency and severity based on historical loss experience adjusted for known trends, the Company response to rate actions taken by competitors, and expectations about regulatory and legal developments and expense levels. The Company seeks to price its insurance policies such that insurance premiums and future net investment income earned on premiums received will cover underwriting expenses and the ultimate cost of paying claims reported on the policies and provide for a profit margin. For many of its insurance products, the Company is required to obtain approval for its premium rates from state insurance departments. The financial results in the Company mutual fund and variable annuity businesses depend largely on the amount of the contract holder or shareholder account value or assets under management on which it earns fees and the level of fees charged. Changes in account value or assets under management are driven by two main factors: net flows, and the market return of the funds, which is heavily influenced by the return realized in the equity markets. Net flows are comprised of deposits less surrenders, death benefits, policy charges and annuitizations of investment type contracts, such as variable annuity contracts. In the mutual fund business, net flows are known as net sales. Net sales are comprised of new sales less redemptions by mutual fund customers. The Company uses the average daily value of the S&P 500 Index as an indicator for evaluating market returns of the underlying account portfolios in the United States. Financial results of variable products are highly correlated to the growth in account values or assets under management since these products generally earn fee income on a daily basis. Equity market movements could also result in benefits for or charges against deferred acquisition costs. The profitability of fixed annuities and other spread-based products depends largely on the Company ability to earn target spreads between earned investment rates on its general account assets and interest credited to policyholders. 33 The investment return, or yield, on invested assets is an important element of the Company earnings since insurance products are priced with the assumption that premiums received can be invested for a period of time before benefits, loss and loss adjustment expenses are paid. Due to the need to maintain sufficient liquidity to satisfy claim obligations, the majority of the Company invested assets have been held in available-for-sale securities, including, among other asset classes, corporate bonds, municipal bonds, government debt, short-term debt, mortgage-backed securities and asset-backed securities. The primary investment objective for the Company is to maximize economic value, consistent with acceptable risk parameters, including the management of credit risk and interest rate sensitivity of invested assets, while generating sufficient after-tax income to meet policyholder and corporate obligations. Investment strategies are developed based on a variety of factors including business needs, regulatory requirements and tax considerations. For more information on the Company's reporting segments, refer to Part I, Item 1, Business Reporting Segments. Financial Highlights for the Year Ended December 31, 2014 Net income of $798 , or $1.73 per diluted share, compared with net income of $176 , or $0.36 per diluted share, for the prior year. Amounts paid for share repurchases totaled approximately $1.8 billion for the year. Book value per diluted common share (excluding AOCI) increased to $40.71 from $39.30 as of the prior year end due to the effect of net income less dividends and the effect of share repurchases for the year. Net investment income decreased 3.4% to $3,154 compared to the prior year primarily due to a decrease in income from fixed maturities as a result of a decline in asset levels, primarily in Talcott Resolution, lower income from repurchase agreements, and the impact of reinvesting at lower interest rates. While the annualized investment yield after-tax of 3.0% decreased 10 basis points compared to the prior year, new money yields decreased from 3.8% to 3.6% driven by lower interest rates, tighter credit spreads and the effect of reinvesting Japan sales proceeds into short-duration assets pending use for share repurchases. Higher short term interest rates and wider credit spreads increased the after-tax net unrealized gains in the investment portfolio by approximately $1.4 billion for the year. Property & Casualty written premium increased 3% over the prior year, comprised of 3% growth in Commercial Lines and 4% in Personal Lines. Property & Casualty combined ratio, before catastrophes and prior year development, improved to 91.5 from 94.4 in the prior year. Catastrophe losses of $341 , before tax, increased from catastrophe losses of $312 , before tax, in the prior year. Unfavorable prior year development totaled $228 , before tax, primarily driven by strengthening of net asbestos and environmental reserves. Group Benefits after-tax core earnings margin, excluding buyouts, increased to 5.2% from 4.3% in the prior year. Talcott Resolution after-tax income from continuing operations was $370 , down from $414 in the prior year. 34 CONSOLIDATED RESULTS OF OPERATIONS The Consolidated Results of Operations should be read in conjunction with the Company's Consolidated Financial Statements and the related Notes beginning on page F-1. 2014 2013 2012 Increase (Decrease) From 2013 to 2014 Increase (Decrease) From 2012 to 2013 Earned premiums $ 13,336 $ 13,231 $ 13,637 $105 $(406) Fee income 1,996 2,105 3,567 (109) (1,462) Net investment income 3,154 3,264 4,127 (110) (863) Net realized capital gains [1] 16 1,798 497 (1,782) 1,301 Other revenues 112 275 258 (163) 17 Total revenues 18,614 20,673 22,086 (2,059) (1,413) Benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses 10,805 11,048 13,195 (243) (2,147) Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs and present value of future profits 1,729 1,794 1,990 (65) (196) Insurance operating costs and other expenses 4,028 4,176 5,090 (148) (914) Loss on extinguishment of debt 213 910 (213) (697) Reinsurance (gain) loss on disposition in 2014 and 2013, goodwill impairment of $342 in 2012 and premium deficiency of $191 in 2012 (23 ) 1,574 533 (1,597) 1,041 Interest expense 376 397 457 (21) (60) Total benefits, losses and expenses 16,915 19,202 22,175 (2,287) (2,973) Income (loss) from continuing operations before income taxes 1,699 1,471 (89 ) 228 1,560 Income tax expense (benefit) 350 246 (309 ) 104 555 Income from continuing operations, net of tax 1,349 1,225 220 124 1,005 Loss from discontinued operations, net of tax (551 ) (1,049 ) (258 ) 498 (791) Net income (loss) $ 798 $ 176 $ (38 ) $622 $214 [1] Includes net realized capital gains in 2013 of $1,575 on investments transferred at fair value in business disposition by reinsurance. Year ended December 31, 2014 compared to the year ended December 31, 2013 The increase in net income from 2013 to 2014 was primarily due to the net effect of the following items: A decrease in the loss from discontinued operations to $551 , net of tax, compared to $1,049 , net of tax, in 2013. The loss from discontinued operations in 2014 includes the results of operations of the Japan business and the realized capital loss on the sale of HLIKK. The loss from discontinued operations in 2013 includes the results of operations of the Japan and U.K. annuity businesses and the realized capital loss on the sale of HLIL. The results of operations for the Japan annuity business in 2013 include the write-off of DAC and higher hedging losses. For further discussion of the sale of these businesses, see Note 2 - Business Dispositions and Note 19 - Discontinued Operations of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. A $299 before tax improvement in current accident year underwriting results before catastrophes in Property & Casualty resulting in a 2.9 point decrease in the combined ratio before catastrophes and prior year development. Also contributing to the improvement in underwriting results was an increase in earned premiums of 2% or $232, before tax, in 2014, compared to 2013, reflecting earned premium growth of 1% in Commercial Lines and 4% in Personal Lines. For a discussion of the Company's operating results by segment, see the segment sections of MD&A. A loss on extinguishment of debt of $213 , before tax, in 2013 related to the repurchase of approximately $800 of senior notes at a premium to the face amount of the then outstanding debt. The resulting loss on extinguishment of debt consists of the repurchase premium, the write-off of the unamortized discount and debt issuance and other costs related to the repurchase transaction. Pension settlement charge of $128 , before tax, in 2014, in insurance operating costs and other expenses, related to voluntary lump-sum settlements with vested participants in the Company's defined benefit pension plan who had separated from service, but who had not yet commenced annuity benefits. For additional information, see MD&A - Capital Resources and Liquidity, Pension Plans and Other Postretirement Benefits. 35 Net investment income of $3,154 , before tax, in 2014 decreased from $3,264 , before tax, in 2013. The decrease in net investment income is primarily due to lower income from fixed maturities, as a result of a decline in asset levels, primarily in Talcott Resolution, lower income from repurchase agreements, and the impact of reinvesting at lower interest rates. For further discussion of investment results, see MD&A - Investment Results, Net Investment Income (Loss). Current accident year catastrophe losses in Property & Casualty of $341 , before tax, in 2014, compared to $312 , before tax, in 2013. The increase in current accident year catastrophe losses was primarily due to increased frequency and severity from wind and hail events across various U.S. geographic regions. For additional information, see MD&A - Critical Accounting Estimates, Property and Casualty Insurance Product Reserves, Net of Reinsurance. Prior accident year reserve strengthening in Property & Casualty of $228 , before tax, in 2014, compared to reserve strengthening of $192 , before tax, in 2013. Reserve strengthenings in 2014 were primarily related to an increase in reserves for asbestos and environmental claims, primarily due to a higher than previously estimated number of mesothelioma claim filings and an increase in costs associated with asbestos litigation. Reserve strengthenings in 2013 were primarily related to increased net asbestos reserves due to higher claim frequency and severity as well as costs and expenses associated with litigating asbestos coverage matters. Differences between the Company's effective income tax rate and the U.S. statutory rate of 35% are due primarily to tax-exempt interest earned on invested assets and the dividends received deduction ("DRD"). The $104 increase in income tax expense in 2014 compared with 2013 was primarily due to the $228 increase in income from continuing operations, before tax. Income tax expense of $350 and $246 in 2014 and 2013, respectively, includes separate account DRD benefits of $114 and $139 , respectively. Year ended December 31, 2013 compared to the year ended December 31, 2012 The increase in net income from 2012 to 2013 was primarily due to the net effect of the following items: An increase in the loss from discontinued operations to $1,049 , net of tax, compared to $258 , net of tax, in 2013. The loss from discontinued operations in 2013 includes the results of operations of the Japan and U.K. annuity businesses and the realized capital loss on the sale of HLIL. The loss from discontinued operations in 2012 includes the results of operations of the Japan and U.K. annuity businesses. Reinsurance loss on disposition of $533, before tax, in 2012 consisting of an impairment of goodwill and a loss accrual for premium deficiency related to the disposition of the Individual Life business, and losses in 2012 from the operations of the Retirement Plans and Individual Life businesses sold in 2013. A loss on extinguishment of debt of $213, before tax, in 2013, compared to $910, before tax in 2012. The loss in 2013 related to the repurchase of approximately $800 of senior notes and the loss in 2012 related to the repurchase of all outstanding 10% fixed-to-floating rate junior subordinated debentures due 2068 with a $1.75 billion aggregate principal amount all held by Allianz. Current accident year catastrophe losses in Property & Casualty of $312, before tax, in 2013, compared to $706, before tax, in 2012. Losses in 2013 were primarily due to multiple thunderstorm, hail, and tornado events across various U.S. geographic regions. Losses in 2012 were primarily driven by $350 related to Storm Sandy and multiple thunderstorm, hail, and tornado events across various U.S. geographic regions. Current accident year losses and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes in Property & Casualty of $6.3 billion, before tax, in 2013 decreased from $6.6 billion, before tax, in 2012. The decrease was primarily driven by lower loss and loss adjustment expenses in Commercial Lines workers compensation business due to favorable severity and frequency. Net investment income of $3,264, before tax, in 2013 decreased from $4,127, before tax, in 2012. The decrease in net investment income is primarily due to lower asset levels as a result of the sale of the Retirement Plans and Individual Life businesses in 2013, and a decline in yield. Net asbestos reserve strengthening of $130, before tax, in 2013 compared to $48, before tax, in 2012 resulting from the Company's annual review of its asbestos liabilities. For further information, see MD&A - Critical Accounting Estimates, Property & Casualty Other Operations Claims with the Property and Casualty Insurance Product Reserves, Net of Reinsurance. Differences between the Company's effective income tax rate and the U.S. statutory rate of 35% are due primarily to tax-exempt interest earned on invested assets and the dividends received deduction ("DRD"). The $555 increase in income tax expense in 2013 compared to an income tax benefit in 2012 was primarily due to the $1.0 billion increase in income from continuing operations, before tax. Income tax expense of $246 in 2013 and income tax benefit of $309 in 2012, includes separate account DRD benefits of $139 and $145 , respectively. 36 The following table presents net income (loss) for each reporting segment, as well as the Corporate category. For a discussion of the Company's operating results by segment, see the segment sections of MD&A. Net income (loss) by segment 2014 2013 2012 Increase (Decrease) From 2013 to 2014 Increase (Decrease) From 2012 to 2013 Commercial Lines $ 983 $ 870 $ 547 $ 113 $ 323 Personal Lines 207 229 166 (22 ) 63 Property & Casualty Other Operations (108 ) (2 ) 57 (106 ) (59 ) Group Benefits 191 192 129 (1 ) 63 Mutual Funds 87 76 71 11 5 Talcott Resolution (187 ) (634 ) 1 447 (635 ) Corporate (375 ) (555 ) (1,009 ) 180 454 Net income (loss) $ 798 $ 176 $ (38 ) $ 622 $ 214 Investment Results Composition of Invested Assets December 31, 2014 December 31, 2013 Amount Percent Amount Percent Fixed maturities, available-for-sale ("AFS"), at fair value $ 59,384 77.9 % $ 62,357 79.2 % Fixed maturities, at fair value using the fair value option ("FVO") 488 0.6 % 844 1.1 % Equity securities, AFS, at fair value [1] 1,047 1.4 % 868 1.1 % Mortgage loans 5,556 7.3 % 5,598 7.1 % Policy loans, at outstanding balance 1,431 1.9 % 1,420 1.8 % Limited partnerships and other alternative investments 2,942 3.9 % 3,040 3.9 % Other investments [2] 536 0.7 % 521 0.7 % Short-term investments 4,883 6.4 % 4,008 5.1 % Total investments excluding equity securities, trading 76,267 100 % 78,656 100 % Equity securities, trading, at fair value [3] 11 19,745 Total investments $ 76,278 $ 98,401 [1] Includes equity securities at fair value using the FVO of $348 and $0 as of December 31, 2014 and December 31, 2013 , respectively. [2] Primarily relates to derivative instruments. [3] As of December 31, 2013 , approximately $19.7 billion of equity securities, trading, supported Japan variable annuities. Those equity securities, trading, were invested in mutual funds, which, in turn, invested in the following asset classes as of December 31, 2013 : Japan equity 22% , Japan fixed income (primarily government securities) 15% , global equity 22% , global government bonds 40% , and cash and other 1% . Total investments decreased since December 31, 2013 , primarily as a result of a decline in equity securities, trading and fixed maturities, AFS, partially offset by an increase in short-term investments. The decrease in equity securities, trading and fixed maturities, AFS is largely due to the sale of the Japan variable and fixed annuity business as well as the continued runoff of the remaining Talcott Resolution business. For further discussion on the Japan sale, see Note 2 - Business Dispositions of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. This decline was partially offset by an increase in the valuation of fixed maturities, AFS due to a decrease in interest rates. Short-term investments increased primarily due to the investment of proceeds from the sale of the Japan variable and fixed annuity business. 37 Net Investment Income (Loss) For the years ended December 31, 2014 2013 2012 (Before tax) Amount Yield [1] Amount Yield [1] Amount Yield [1] Fixed maturities [2] $ 2,420 4.2 % $ 2,552 4.3 % $ 3,299 4.4 % Equity securities, AFS 38 4.8 % 30 3.6 % 36 4.3 % Mortgage loans 265 4.7 % 260 4.9 % 334 5.2 % Policy loans 80 5.6 % 83 5.9 % 119 6.0 % Limited partnerships and other alternative investments 294 10.4 % 287 9.5 % 196 7.1 % Other investments [3] 179 167 248 Investment expense (122 ) (115 ) (105 ) Total net investment income (loss) $ 3,154 4.4 % $ 3,264 4.4 % $ 4,127 4.5 % Total net investment income excluding limited partnerships and other alternative investments 2,860 4.1 % 2,977 4.2 % 3,931 4.5 % [1] Yields calculated using annualized net investment income divided by the monthly average invested assets at cost, amortized cost, or adjusted carrying value, as applicable, excluding repurchase agreement collateral, if any, and derivatives book value. Yield calculations for each period exclude assets associated with the dispositions of the Japan variable and fixed annuity business, the Retirement Plans and Individual Life businesses, and the Hartford Life International Limited business, as applicable. [2] Includes net investment income on short-term investments. [3] Primarily includes income from derivatives that qualify for hedge accounting and hedge fixed maturities. Year ended December 31, 2014 compared to the year ended December 31, 2013 Total net investment income decreased primarily due to a decrease in income from fixed maturities as a result of a decline in asset levels, primarily in Talcott Resolution, lower income from repurchase agreements, and the impact of reinvesting at lower interest rates. The annualized net investment income yield, excluding limited partnerships and other alternative investments, has declined to 4.1% in 2014 versus 4.2% in 2013 . The decline was primarily attributable to lower income from repurchase agreements and lower reinvestment rates. For further discussion of repurchase agreements, see Note 6 - Investments and Derivative Instruments of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. The average reinvestment rate, excluding certain U.S. Treasury securities and cash equivalent securities, for the year ended December 31, 2014 was approximately 3.6% which was below the average yield of sales and maturities of 3.9% for the same period due to the current interest rate environment. In addition, the reinvestment rate was impacted by the investment of proceeds from the sale of the Japan variable and fixed annuity business into short duration, high quality corporates and ABS. For the year ended December 31, 2014 , the new money yield of 3.6% decreased from 3.8% in 2013 driven by lower interest rates, tighter credit spreads on average and the effect of reinvesting Japan sales proceeds into short-duration assets pending use for share repurchases. Based upon current reinvestment rates, we expect the annualized net investment income yield, excluding limited partnerships and other alternative investments, for 2015 , to decline slightly compared to the 2014 net investment income yield. The estimated impact on net investment income is subject to change as the composition of the portfolio changes through normal portfolio management and trading activities and changes in market conditions. Year ended December 31, 2013 compared to the year ended December 31, 2012 Total net investment income decreased primarily due to a decrease in income due to lower asset levels as a result of the sale of the Retirement Plans and Individual Life businesses in 2013 , and a decline in yield. The decline was partially offset by an increase in income from limited partnerships, due to real estate and private equity funds selling underlying investments and continued valuation improvements. The annualized net investment income yield, excluding limited partnerships and other alternative investments, declined to 4.2% in 2013 versus 4.5% in 2012. The decline was primarily attributable to the divestiture of Individual Life and Retirement Plans businesses. 38 Net Realized Capital Gains (Losses) For the years ended December 31, (Before tax) 2014 2013 2012 Gross gains on sales [1] $ 527 $ 2,313 $ 801 Gross losses on sales (250 ) (659 ) (420 ) Net OTTI losses recognized in earnings [2] (59 ) (73 ) (349 ) Valuation allowances on mortgage loans (4 ) (1 ) 14 Periodic net coupon settlements on credit derivatives 1 (8 ) (18 ) Results of variable annuity hedge program GMWB derivatives, net 5 262 519 Macro hedge program (11 ) (234 ) (340 ) Total results of variable annuity hedge program (6 ) 28 179 Other, net [3] (193 ) 198 290 Net realized capital gains (losses) $ 16 $ 1,798 $ 497 [1] Includes $1.5 billion of gains relating to the sales of the Retirement Plans and Individual Life businesses in the year ended December 31, 2013. [2] Includes $177 of intent-to-sell impairments for the year ended December 31, 2012 , relating to the sales of the Retirement Plans and Individual Life businesses in 2013. [3] Primarily consists of changes in value of non-qualifying derivatives, including interest rate derivatives used to manage duration, and the Japan fixed payout annuity hedge. Details on the Company net realized capital gains and losses are as follows: Gross gains and losses on sales Gross gains on sales for the year ended December 31, 2014 were primarily due to gains on the sale of corporate securities, CMBS, RMBS, and municipal securities. Gross losses on sales for the year ended December 31, 2014 were primarily the result of losses on the sale of corporate and foreign government and government agency securities, which included sales resulting from a reduction in our exposure to the emerging market and energy sector securities as well as other portfolio management activities. The sales were primarily a result of duration, liquidity and credit management, as well as tactical changes to the portfolio as a result of changing market conditions. Gross gains on sales for the year ended December 31, 2013 were predominately from the sale of the Retirement Plans and Individual Life businesses resulting in a gain of $1.5 billion. The remaining gains on sales were primarily due to the sales of corporate securities and tax-exempt municipals. Gross losses on sales were primarily the result of the sales of U.S. Treasuries and mortgage backed securities, predominantly due to duration, liquidity and credit management as well as progress towards sector allocation objectives. Gross gains and losses on sales for the year ended December 31, 2012 were predominately from investment grade corporate securities, municipal bonds, mortgage backed securities and U.S. Treasuries. These sales were the result of tactical portfolio management as well as to maintain duration targets. Net OTTI losses See Other-Than-Temporary Impairments within the Investment Portfolio Risks and Risk Management section of the MD&A. Valuation allowances on mortgage loans See Valuation Allowances on Mortgage Loans within the Investment Portfolio Risks and Risk Management section of the MD&A. Variable annuity hedge program For the year ended December 31, 2014 , the gain related to the combined GMWB derivatives, net, which include the GMWB product, reinsurance, and hedging derivatives, was primarily driven by gains of $25 on liability/model assumption updates and gains of $15 due to increased volatility, partially offset by a loss of $26 resulting from policyholder behavior primarily related to increased surrenders. The loss on the macro hedge program for the year ended December 31, 2014 was primarily due to a loss of $25 driven by an improvement in the domestic equity markets, partially offset by a gain of $17 related to a decrease in interest rates. 39 For the year ended December 31, 2013 the gain on GMWB related derivatives, net, was primarily related to gains of $203 from revaluing the liability for living benefits largely driven by favorable policyholder behavior related to increased surrenders and gains of $38 due to liability assumption updates for lapses and withdrawal rates. The loss on the macro hedge program for the year ended December 31, 2013 was primarily driven by losses of $114 due to an improvement in domestic equity markets, losses of $56 related to an increase in interest rates, and losses of $31 related to a decrease in equity market volatility. For the year ended December 31, 2012 the gain on GMWB related derivatives, net, was primarily driven by gains due to liability model assumption updates of $ 274 , largely related to a reduction in the reset assumptions to better align with actual experience, gains of $ 106 related to outperformance of the underlying actively managed funds compared to their respective indices, and gains of $ 83 driven by a decline in equity market volatility. The loss on the macro hedge program for the year ended December 31, 2013 was primarily driven by losses of $ 167 related to the passage of time, losses of $ 118 due to an improvement in domestic equity markets, and losses of $ 60 related to a decrease in equity market volatility. Other, net Other, net loss for the year ended December 31, 2014 was primarily related to a loss of $172 on interest rate derivatives used to manage the risk of a rise in interest rates and manage duration, driven by a decline in U.S. interest rates. Other, net gain for the year ended December 31, 2013 was primarily related to gains of $71 on interest rate derivatives primarily associated with fixed rate bonds sold as part of the Individual Life and Retirement Plan business dispositions. For further information on the business dispositions, see Note 2 of Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. Additional gains included $69 on interest rate derivatives primarily due to an increase in U.S. interest rates and $42 of gains on credit derivatives due to credit spreads tightening. Other, net gain for the year ended December 31, 2012 was primarily related to gains of $313 on credit derivatives due to credit spreads tightening, and gains of $96 on interest derivatives largely driven by the de-designation of the cash flow hedges associated with bonds included in the sale of Individual Life and Retirement Plans businesses. For further information on the business dispositions, see Note 2 of Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. These gains were partially offset by losses of $111 related to Japan fixed payout annuity hedges primarily driven by the strengthening of the currency basis swap spread between the U.S. dollar and Japanese yen and the decline in U.S. interest rates. 40 CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES The preparation of financial statements, in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America ( U.S. GAAP ), requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ, and in the past have differed, from those estimates. The Company has identified the following estimates as critical in that they involve a higher degree of judgment and are subject to a significant degree of variability: property and casualty insurance product reserves, net of reinsurance; estimated gross profits used in the valuation and amortization of assets and liabilities associated with variable annuity and other universal life-type contracts; evaluation of other-than-temporary impairments on available-for-sale securities and valuation allowances on mortgage loans; living benefits required to be fair valued (in other policyholder funds and benefits payable); goodwill impairment; valuation of investments and derivative instruments; valuation allowance on deferred tax assets; and contingencies relating to corporate litigation and regulatory matters. Certain of these estimates are particularly sensitive to market conditions, and deterioration and/or volatility in the worldwide debt or equity markets could have a material impact on the Consolidated Financial Statements. In developing these estimates management makes subjective and complex judgments that are inherently uncertain and subject to material change as facts and circumstances develop. Although variability is inherent in these estimates, management believes the amounts provided are appropriate based upon the facts available upon compilation of the financial statements. Property and Casualty Insurance Product Reserves, Net of Reinsurance The Hartford establishes reserves on its property and casualty insurance products to provide for the estimated costs of paying claims under insurance policies written by the Company. These reserves include estimates for both claims that have been reported and those that have not yet been reported, and include estimates of all expenses associated with processing and settling these claims. Incurred but not reported ( IBNR ) reserves represent the difference between the estimated ultimate cost of all claims and the actual reported loss and loss adjustment expenses ( reported losses ). Reported losses represent cumulative loss and loss adjustment expenses paid plus case reserves for outstanding reported claims. Company actuaries evaluate the total reserves (IBNR and case reserves) on an accident year basis. An accident year is the calendar year in which a loss is incurred, or, in the case of claims-made policies, the calendar year in which a loss is reported. Reserve estimates can change over time because of unexpected changes in the external environment. Potential external factors include (1) changes in the inflation rate for goods and services related to covered damages such as medical care, hospital care, auto parts, wages and home repair; (2) changes in the general economic environment that could cause unanticipated changes in the claim frequency per unit insured; (3) changes in the litigation environment as evidenced by changes in claimant attorney representation in the claims negotiation and settlement process; (4) changes in the judicial environment regarding the interpretation of policy provisions relating to the determination of coverage and/or the amount of damages awarded for certain types of damages; (5) changes in the social environment regarding the general attitude of juries in the determination of liability and damages; (6) changes in the legislative environment regarding the definition of damages; and (7) new types of injuries caused by new types of injurious exposure: past examples include lead paint, construction defects and tainted Chinese-made drywall. Reserve estimates can also change over time because of changes in internal Company operations. Potential internal factors include (1) periodic changes in claims handling procedures; (2) growth in new lines of business where exposure and loss development patterns are not well established; (3) changes in the quality of risk selection in the underwriting process; (4) changes in the geographic mix of business; (5) changes in the mix of business by industry; (6) changes in policy language; or (7) changes in the mix of business by policy limit or deductible. In the case of assumed reinsurance, all of the above risks apply. In addition, changes in ceding company case reserving and reporting patterns can create additional factors that need to be considered in estimating the reserves. Due to the inherent complexity of the assumptions used, final claim settlements may vary significantly from the present estimates, particularly when those settlements may not occur until well into the future. 41 Through both facultative and treaty reinsurance agreements, the Company cedes a share of the risks it has underwritten to other insurance companies. The Company net reserves for loss and loss adjustment expenses include anticipated recovery from reinsurers on unpaid claims. The estimated amount of the anticipated recovery, or reinsurance recoverable, is net of an allowance for uncollectible reinsurance. Reinsurance recoverables include an estimate of the amount of gross loss and loss adjustment expense reserves that may be ceded under the terms of the reinsurance agreements, including IBNR unpaid losses. The Company calculates its ceded reinsurance projection based on the terms of any applicable facultative and treaty reinsurance, often including an estimate by reinsurance agreement of how IBNR losses will ultimately be ceded. The Company provides an allowance for uncollectible reinsurance, reflecting management best estimate of reinsurance cessions that may be uncollectible in the future due to reinsurers unwillingness or inability to pay. The Company analyzes recent developments in commutation activity between reinsurers and cedants, recent trends in arbitration and litigation outcomes in disputes between reinsurers and cedants and the overall credit quality of the Company reinsurers. Where its contracts permit, the Company secures funding of future claim obligations with various forms of collateral, including irrevocable letters of credit, secured trusts, funds held accounts and group-wide offsets. The allowance for uncollectible reinsurance was $271 as of December 31, 2014 , comprised of $46 related to Commercial Lines and $225 related to Property & Casualty Other Operations. The Company estimate of reinsurance recoverables, net of an allowance for uncollectible reinsurance, is subject to similar risks and uncertainties as the estimate of the gross reserve for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses. The Hartford, like other insurance companies, categorizes and tracks its insurance reserves for its segments by line of business . Furthermore, The Hartford regularly reviews the appropriateness of reserve levels at the line of business level, taking into consideration the variety of trends that impact the ultimate settlement of claims for the subsets of claims in each particular line of business. In addition, Property & Casualty Other Operations categorizes reserves as asbestos and environmental ( A&E ), whereby the Company reviews these reserve levels by type of event, rather than by line of business. Adjustments to previously established reserves, which may be material, are reflected in the operating results of the period in which the adjustment is determined to be necessary. In the judgment of management, information currently available has been properly considered in the reserves established for losses and loss adjustment expenses. Loss and loss adjustment expense reserves by line of business as of December 31, 2014 , net of reinsurance are as follows: Commercial Lines Personal Lines Property & Casualty Other Operations Total Property & Casualty Auto liability $ 689 $ 1,401 $ $ 2,090 Auto physical damage 21 31 52 Homeowners 396 396 Professional liability 593 593 Package business 1,232 1,232 General liability 2,459 27 2,486 Bond 196 196 Commercial property 152 152 A&E 21 1 1,951 1,973 Workers compensation 8,678 8,678 Assumed reinsurance 237 237 All other non-A&E 680 680 Total reserves-net 14,041 1,856 2,868 18,765 Reinsurance and other recoverables 2,464 18 559 3,041 Total reserves-gross $ 16,505 $ 1,874 $ 3,427 $ 21,806 42 Reserving Methodology (See Reserving for Asbestos and Environmental Claims within Property & Casualty Other Operations for a discussion of how A&E reserves are set) How reserves are set Reserves are set by line of business within the various segments. A single line of business may be written in more than one segment. Case reserves are established by a claims handler on each individual claim and are adjusted as new information becomes known during the course of handling the claim. Lines of business for which loss data (e.g., paid losses and case reserves) emerge (i.e., is reported) over a long period of time are referred to as long-tail lines of business. Lines of business for which loss data emerge more quickly are referred to as short-tail lines of business. The Company shortest-tail lines of business are property and auto physical damage. The longest tail lines of business include workers compensation, general liability, professional liability and assumed reinsurance. For short-tail lines of business, emergence of paid loss and case reserves is credible and likely indicative of ultimate losses. For long-tail lines of business, emergence of paid losses and case reserves is less credible in the early periods and, accordingly, may not be indicative of ultimate losses. The Company reserving actuaries, who are independent of the business units, regularly review reserves for both current and prior accident years using the most current claim data. For most lines of business, these reserve reviews incorporate a variety of actuarial methods and judgments and involve rigorous analysis. These selections incorporate input, as judged by the reserving actuaries to be appropriate, from claims personnel, pricing actuaries and operating management on reported loss cost trends and other factors that could affect the reserve estimates. Most reserves are reviewed fully each quarter, including loss and loss adjustment expense reserves for property, auto physical damage, auto liability, package business, workers compensation, most general liability, professional liability and bond. Other reserves are reviewed semi-annually (twice per year) or annually. These include, but are not limited to, reserves for losses incurred in accident years older than twelve and twenty years, for Personal and Commercial Lines, respectively, assumed reinsurance, latent exposures, such as construction defects, and unallocated loss adjustment expense. For reserves that are reviewed semi-annually or annually, management monitors the emergence of paid and reported losses in the intervening quarters to either confirm that the estimate of ultimate losses should not change or, if necessary, perform a reserve review to determine whether the reserve estimate should change. An expected loss ratio is used in initially recording the reserves for both short-tail and long-tail lines of business. This expected loss ratio is determined through a review of prior accident years loss ratios and expected changes to earned pricing, loss costs, mix of business, ceded reinsurance and other factors that are expected to impact the loss ratio for the current accident year. For short-tail lines, IBNR for the current accident year is initially recorded as the product of the expected loss ratio for the period, earned premium for the period and the proportion of losses expected to be reported in future calendar periods for the current accident period. For long-tailed lines, IBNR reserves for the current accident year are initially recorded as the product of the expected loss ratio for the period and the earned premium for the period, less reported losses for the period. In addition to the expected loss ratio, the actuarial techniques or methods used primarily include paid and reported loss development and frequency / severity techniques as well as the Bornhuetter-Ferguson method (a combination of the expected loss ratio and paid development or reported development method). Within any one line of business, the methods that are given more influence vary based primarily on the maturity of the accident year, the mix of business and the particular internal and external influences impacting the claims experience or the methods. The output of the reserve reviews are reserve estimates that are referred to herein as the actuarial indication . Most of the Company property and casualty insurance product reserves are not discounted. However, the Company has discounted liabilities funded through structured settlements and has discounted certain reserves for indemnity payments due to permanently disabled claimants under workers compensation policies. For further discussion of these discounted liabilities, see Note 11 - Reserves for Future Policy Benefits and Unpaid Losses and Loss Adjustment Expenses of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. As of December 31, 2014 and 2013 , net U.S. property and casualty insurance product reserves for losses and loss adjustment expenses reported under accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America ( U.S. GAAP ) were approximately equal to net reserves reported on a statutory basis. Under U.S. GAAP, liabilities for unpaid losses for permanently disabled workers compensation claimants are discounted at rates that are no higher than risk-free interest rates in effect at the time the claims are incurred and which can vary from the statutory discount rates set by regulators. Largely offsetting/augmenting the effect of the difference in discounting is that a portion of the U.S. GAAP provision for uncollectible reinsurance is not recognized under statutory accounting. Provided below is a general discussion of which methods are preferred by line of business. Because the actuarial estimates are generated at a much finer level of detail than line of business (e.g., by distribution channel, coverage, accident period), this description should not be assumed to apply to each coverage and accident year within a line of business. Also, as circumstances change, the methods that are given more influence will change. 43 Property and Auto Physical Damage. These lines are fast-developing and paid and reported development techniques are used as these methods use historical data to develop paid and reported loss development patterns, which are then applied to current paid and reported losses by accident period to estimate ultimate losses. The Company relies primarily on reported development techniques although a review of frequency and severity and the initial loss expectation based on the expected loss ratio is used for the most immature accident months. The advantage of frequency / severity techniques is that frequency estimates are generally easier to predict and external information can be used to supplement internal data in making severity estimates. Personal Auto Liability. For auto liability, and bodily injury in particular, the Company performs a greater number of techniques than it does for property and auto physical damage. In addition to traditional paid and reported development methods, the Company relies on frequency/severity techniques and Berquist-Sherman techniques. Because the paid development technique is affected by changes in claim closure patterns and the reported development method is affected by changes in case reserving practices, the Company uses Berquist-Sherman techniques which adjust these patterns to reflect current settlement rates and case reserving techniques. The Company generally uses the reported development method for older accident years as a higher percentage of ultimate losses are reflected in reported losses than in cumulative paid losses and a combination of reported development, frequency/severity and Berquist-Sherman methods for more recent accident years. Recent periods can be influenced by changes in case reserve practices and changing disposal rates; the frequency/severity techniques are not affected as much by these changes and the Berquist-Sherman techniques specifically adjust for these changes. Auto Liability for Commercial Lines and Short-Tailed General Liability. The Company performs a variety of techniques, including the paid and reported development methods and frequency / severity techniques. For older, more mature accident years, the Company finds that reported development techniques are best. For more recent accident years, the Company typically prefers frequency / severity techniques that make separate assumptions about loss activity above and below a selected capping level. Long-Tailed General Liability, Bond and Large Deductible Workers Compensation . For these long-tailed lines of business, the Company generally relies on the expected loss ratio and reported development techniques. The Company generally weights these techniques together, relying more heavily on the expected loss ratio method at early ages of development and more on the reported development method as an accident year matures. Workers Compensation . Workers compensation is the Company single largest reserve line of business so a wide range of methods are reviewed in the reserve analysis. Methods performed include paid and reported development, variations on expected loss ratio methods, and an in-depth analysis on the largest states. Historically, paid development patterns in the Company workers compensation business have been stable, so paid techniques are preferred. Although paid techniques may be less predictive of the ultimate liability when a low percentage of ultimate losses are paid as in early periods of development, given changes in the frequency of workers compensation claims over time, the Company places greater reliance on paid methods with continued consideration of the state-by-state analysis and the expected loss ratio approach. Professional Liability. Reported and paid loss developments patterns for this line tend to be volatile. Therefore, the Company typically relies on frequency and severity techniques. Assumed Reinsurance and All Other. For these lines, the Company tends to rely on the reported development techniques. In assumed reinsurance, assumptions are influenced by information gained from claim and underwriting audits. Allocated Loss Adjustment Expenses (ALAE). For some lines of business (e.g., professional liability and assumed reinsurance), ALAE and losses are analyzed together. For most lines of business, however, ALAE is analyzed separately, using paid development techniques and an analysis of the relationship between ALAE and loss payments. Unallocated Loss Adjustment Expense (ULAE). ULAE is analyzed separately from loss and ALAE. For most lines of business, incurred ULAE costs to be paid in the future are projected based on an expected cost per claim year and the anticipated claim closure pattern and the ratio of paid ULAE to paid loss. The final step in the reserve review process involves a comprehensive review by senior reserving actuaries who apply their judgment and, in concert with senior management, determine the appropriate level of reserves based on the information that has been accumulated. Numerous factors are considered in this process including, but not limited to, the assessed reliability of key loss trends and assumptions that may be significantly influencing the current actuarial indications, pertinent trends observed over the recent past, the level of volatility within a particular line of business, and the improvement or deterioration of actuarial indications in the current period as compared to the prior periods. Total recorded net reserves, excluding asbestos and environmental, were 3.5% higher than the actuarial indication of the reserves as of December 31, 2014 . For a discussion of changes to reserve estimates recorded in 2014 , see Reserve Roll-forwards and Development included below in this section. 44 Current trends contributing to reserve uncertainty The Hartford is a multi-line company in the property and casualty insurance business. The Hartford is therefore subject to reserve uncertainty stemming from a number of conditions, including but not limited to those noted above, any of which could be material at any point in time. Certain issues may become more or less important over time as conditions change. As various market conditions develop, management must assess whether those conditions constitute a long-term trend that should result in a reserving action (i.e., increasing or decreasing the reserve). Within Commercial Lines and Property & Casualty Other Operations, the Company has exposure to claims asserted for bodily injury as a result of long-term or continuous exposure to harmful products or substances. Examples include, but are not limited to, pharmaceutical products, silica and lead paint. The Company also has exposure to claims from construction defects, where property damage or bodily injury from negligent construction is alleged. In addition, the Company has exposure to claims asserted against religious institutions and other organizations relating to molestation or abuse. Such exposures may involve potentially long latency periods and may implicate coverage in multiple policy periods. These factors make reserves for such claims more uncertain than other bodily injury or property damage claims. With regard to these exposures, the Company is monitoring trends in litigation, the external environment, the similarities to other mass torts and the potential impact on the Company reserves. In Personal Lines, reserving estimates are generally less variable than for the Company other property and casualty segments because of the coverages having relatively shorter periods of loss emergence. Estimates, however, can still vary due to a number of factors, including interpretations of frequency and severity trends and their impact on recorded reserve levels. Severity trends can be impacted by changes in internal claim handling and case reserving practices in addition to changes in the external environment. These changes in claim practices increase the uncertainty in the interpretation of case reserve data, which increases the uncertainty in recorded reserve levels. In addition, the introduction of new products and class plans has led to a different mix of business by type of insured than the Company experienced in the past. Such changes in mix increase the uncertainty of the reserve projections, since historical data and reporting patterns may not be applicable to the new business. In standard commercial lines, workers compensation is the Company single biggest line of business and the line of business with the longest pattern of loss emergence. Medical costs make up more than 50% of workers compensation payments. To the extent that payment patterns are impacted by increases or decreases in the frequency of settlement payments, historical patterns would be less reliable, increasing the uncertainty around reserve estimates. As such, reserve estimates for workers compensation are particularly sensitive to changes in medical inflation, the changing use of medical care procedures and changes in state legislative and regulatory environments. In addition, a changing economic environment can affect the ability of an injured worker to return to work and the length of time a worker receives disability benefits. In specialty lines, many lines of insurance are long-tail , including large deductible workers compensation insurance; as such, reserve estimates for these lines are more difficult to determine than reserve estimates for shorter-tail lines of insurance. Estimating required reserve levels for large deductible workers compensation insurance is further complicated by the uncertainty of whether losses that are attributable to the deductible amount will be paid by the insured; if such losses are not paid by the insured due to financial difficulties, the Company would be contractually liable. Auto severity trends can be impacted by changes in internal claim handling and case reserving practices in addition to changes in the external environment. These changes in claim practices increase the uncertainty in the interpretation of case reserve data, which increases the uncertainty in recorded reserve levels. Another example of reserve variability relates to reserves for directors and officers insurance. There is potential volatility in the required level of reserves due to the continued uncertainty regarding the number and severity of class action suits. Additionally, the Company exposure to losses under directors and officers insurance policies is primarily in excess layers, making estimates of loss more complex. Impact of changes in key assumptions on reserve volatility As stated above, the Company practice is to estimate reserves using a variety of methods, assumptions and data elements. Within its reserve estimation process for reserves other than asbestos and environmental, the Company does not consistently use statistical loss distributions or confidence levels around its reserve estimate and, as a result, does not disclose reserve ranges. The reserve estimation process includes assumptions about a number of factors in the internal and external environment. Across most lines of business, the most important assumptions are future loss development factors applied to paid or reported losses to date. The trend in loss costs is also a key assumption, particularly in the most recent accident years, where loss development factors are less credible. 45 The following discussion includes disclosure of possible variation from current estimates of loss reserves due to a change in certain key indicators of potential losses. Each of the impacts described below is estimated individually, without consideration for any correlation among key indicators or among lines of business. Therefore, it would be inappropriate to take each of the amounts described below and add them together in an attempt to estimate volatility for the Company reserves in total. The estimated variation in reserves due to changes in key indicators is a reasonable estimate of possible variation that may occur in the future, likely over a period of several calendar years. It is important to note that the variation discussed is not meant to be a worst-case scenario, and therefore, it is possible that future variation may be more than the amounts discussed below. Recorded reserves for auto liability, net of reinsurance, are approximately $2.1 billion across all lines, $1.4 billion of which is in Personal Lines. Personal auto liability reserves are shorter-tailed than other lines of business (such as workers compensation) and, therefore, less volatile. However, the size of the reserve base means that future changes in estimates could be material to the Company results of operations in any given period. The key indicator for Personal Lines auto liability is the annual loss cost trend, particularly the severity trend component of loss costs. A 2.5 point change in annual severity for the two most recent accident years would change the estimated net reserve need by $80 , in either direction. A 2.5 point change in annual severity is within the Company historical variation. Recorded reserves for workers compensation, net of reinsurance, are approximately $8.7 billion . Loss development patterns are a key indicator for this line of business, particularly for more mature accident years. Historically, loss development patterns have been impacted by, among other things, medical cost inflation and other changes in loss cost trends. The Company has reviewed the historical variation in paid loss development patterns. If the paid loss development patterns change by 2% , the estimated net reserve need would change by $400 , in either direction. A 2% change in paid loss development patterns is within the Company historical variation, as measured by the variation around the average development factors as reported in statutory accident year reports. Recorded reserves for general liability, net of reinsurance, are approximately $2.5 billion . Loss development patterns are a key indicator for this line of business, particularly for more mature accident years. Historically, loss development patterns have been impacted by, among other things, emergence of new types of claims (e.g., construction defect claims) or a shift in the mixture between smaller, more routine claims and larger, more complex claims. The Company has reviewed the historical variation in reported loss development patterns. If the reported loss development patterns change by 10% , the estimated net reserve need would change by $200 , in either direction. A 10% change in reported loss development patterns is within the Company historical variation, as measured by the variation around the average development factors as reported in statutory accident year reports. Reserving for Asbestos and Environmental Claims within Property & Casualty Other Operations How A&E reserves are set In establishing reserves for asbestos claims, the Company evaluates its insureds estimated liabilities for such claims using a ground-up approach. The Company considers a variety of factors, including the jurisdictions where underlying claims have been brought, past, pending and anticipated future claim activity, disease mix, past settlement values of similar claims, dismissal rates, allocated loss adjustment expense, and potential bankruptcy impact. Similarly, a ground-up exposure review approach is used to establish environmental reserves. The Company evaluation of its insureds estimated liabilities for environmental claims involves consideration of several factors, including historical values of similar claims, the number of sites involved, the insureds alleged activities at each site, the alleged environmental damage at each site, the respective shares of liability of potentially responsible parties at each site, the appropriateness and cost of remediation at each site, the nature of governmental enforcement activities at each site, and potential bankruptcy impact. Having evaluated its insureds probable liabilities for asbestos and/or environmental claims, the Company then evaluates its insureds insurance coverage programs for such claims. The Company considers its insureds total available insurance coverage, including the coverage issued by the Company. The Company also considers relevant judicial interpretations of policy language and applicable coverage defenses or determinations, if any. Evaluation of both the insureds estimated liabilities and the Company exposure to the insureds depends heavily on an analysis of the relevant legal issues and litigation environment. This analysis is conducted by the Company lawyers and is subject to applicable privileges. For both asbestos and environmental reserves, the Company also compares its historical direct net loss and expense paid and reported experience, and net loss and expense paid and reported experience year by year, to assess any emerging trends, fluctuations or characteristics suggested by the aggregate paid and reported activity. Once the gross ultimate exposure for indemnity and allocated loss adjustment expense is determined for its insureds by each policy year, the Company calculates its ceded reinsurance projection based on any applicable facultative and treaty reinsurance and the Company experience with reinsurance collections. 46 Uncertainties Regarding Adequacy of Asbestos and Environmental Reserves A number of factors affect the variability of estimates for asbestos and environmental reserves including assumptions with respect to the frequency of claims, the average severity of those claims settled with payment, the dismissal rate of claims with no payment and the expense to indemnity ratio. The uncertainty with respect to the underlying reserve assumptions for asbestos and environmental adds a greater degree of variability to these reserve estimates than reserve estimates for more traditional exposures. While this variability is reflected in part in the size of the range of reserves developed by the Company, that range may still not be indicative of the potential variance between the ultimate outcome and the recorded reserves. The recorded net reserves as of December 31, 2014 of approximately $2.0 billion ( $1.7 billion and $0.3 billion for asbestos and environmental, respectively) are within an estimated range, unadjusted for covariance, of $1.6 billion to $2.3 billion. The process of estimating asbestos and environmental reserves remains subject to a wide variety of uncertainties, which are detailed in Note 14 - Commitments and Contingencies of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. The Company believes that its current asbestos and environmental reserves are appropriate. However, analyses of future developments could cause the Company to change its estimates and ranges of its asbestos and environmental reserves, and the effect of these changes could be material to the Company's consolidated operating results or cash flows. Consistent with the Company's long-standing reserve practices, the Company will continue to review and monitor its reserves in Property & Casualty Other Operations regularly, including its annual reviews of asbestos liabilities, reinsurance recoverables and the allowance for uncollectible reinsurance, and environmental liabilities, and where future developments indicate, make appropriate adjustments to the reserves. Reserve Roll-forwards and Development Based on the results of the quarterly reserve review process, the Company determines the appropriate reserve adjustments, if any, to record. Recorded reserve estimates are changed after consideration of numerous factors, including but not limited to, the magnitude of the difference between the actuarial indication and the recorded reserves, improvement or deterioration of actuarial indications in the period, the maturity of the accident year, trends observed over the recent past and the level of volatility within a particular line of business. In general, adjustments are made more quickly to more mature accident years and less volatile lines of business. Such adjustments of reserves are referred to as reserve development . Reserve development that increases previous estimates of ultimate cost is called reserve strengthening . Reserve development that decreases previous estimates of ultimate cost is called reserve releases . Reserve development can influence the comparability of year over year underwriting results and is set forth in the paragraphs and tables that follow. Total Property and Casualty Insurance Product Reserves, Net of Reinsurance, Results In the opinion of management, based upon the known facts and current law, the reserves recorded for the Company property and casualty insurance products at December 31, 2014 represent the Company best estimate of its ultimate liability for losses and loss adjustment expenses related to losses covered by policies written by the Company. However, because of the significant uncertainties surrounding reserves, and particularly asbestos and environmental exposures, it is possible that management estimate of the ultimate liabilities for these claims may change and that the required adjustment to recorded reserves could exceed the currently recorded reserves by an amount that could be material to the Company results of operations or cash flows. 47 A roll-forward of property and casualty insurance product liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses follows: For the year ended December 31, 2014 Commercial Lines Personal Lines Property & Casualty Other Operations Total Property & Casualty Beginning liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses, gross $ 16,293 $ 1,864 $ 3,547 $ 21,704 Reinsurance and other recoverables 2,442 13 573 3,028 Beginning liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses, net 13,851 1,851 2,974 18,676 Provision for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses Current accident year before catastrophes 3,733 2,498 6,231 Current accident year catastrophes [3] 109 232 341 Prior accident years strengthening (release) 13 (46 ) 261 228 Total provision for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses 3,855 2,684 261 6,800 Less: Payments 3,665 2,679 367 6,711 Ending liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses, net 14,041 1,856 2,868 18,765 Reinsurance and other recoverables 2,464 18 559 3,041 Ending liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses, gross $ 16,505 $ 1,874 $ 3,427 $ 21,806 Earned premiums $ 6,289 $ 3,806 Loss and loss expense paid ratio [1] 58.3 70.4 Loss and loss expense incurred ratio 61.3 70.5 Prior accident years development (pts) [2] 0.2 (1.2 ) [1] The loss and loss expense paid ratio represents the ratio of paid losses and loss adjustment expenses to earned premiums. [2] Prior accident years development (pts) represents the ratio of prior accident years development to earned premiums. [3] Contributing to the current accident year catastrophes losses were the following events: For the year ended December 31, 2014 Category Commercial Lines Personal Lines Total Property and Casualty Insurance Wind and hail [1] $ 45 $ 196 $ 241 Winter storms [1] 54 19 73 Other [2] 10 17 27 Total $ 109 $ 232 $ 341 [1] These amounts represent an aggregation of multiple catastrophes. [2] Includes tornadoes, earthquakes and flooding. 48 Prior accident years development recorded in 2014 Included within prior accident years development were the following loss and loss adjustment expense reserve strengthenings (releases): For the year ended December 31, 2014 Commercial Lines Personal Lines Property & Casualty Other Operations Total Property & Casualty Insurance Auto liability $ 23 $ 2 $ $ 25 Homeowners (7 ) (7 ) Professional liability (17 ) (17 ) Package business 3 3 General liability (25 ) (25 ) Bond 8 8 Commercial property 2 2 Net asbestos reserves 212 212 Net environmental reserves 30 30 Workers compensation (7 ) (7 ) Change in workers compensation discount, including accretion 30 30 Catastrophes (14 ) (31 ) (45 ) Other reserve re-estimates, net 10 (10 ) 19 19 Total prior accident years development $ 13 $ (46 ) $ 261 $ 228 During 2014 , the Company re-estimates of prior accident years reserves included the following significant reserve changes: Strengthened reserves in commercial auto liability due to an increased frequency of severe claims spread across several accident years. Homeowners reserves emerged favorably for accident year 2013, primarily related to favorable development on fire and water-related claims. Released reserves in professional liability for accident years 2013, 2012 and 2010 due to lower frequency of reported claims. Released reserves in general liability due to lower frequency in late emerging claims. Bond reserves emerged favorably for accident years 2008 to 2013, offset by adverse emergence on reserves for accident years 2007 and prior. Released reserves primarily for accident year 2013 catastrophes as fourth quarter 2013 catastrophes have developed favorably. Released reserves in workers' compensation for recent accident years due to improved frequency and lower estimated claim handling costs. Refer to the Property & Casualty Other Operations Claims section for discussion of the increase to net asbestos reserves, net environmental reserves and other reserve re-estimates, net. 49 A roll-forward of property and casualty insurance product liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses follows: For the year ended December 31, 2013 Commercial Lines Personal Lines Property & Casualty Other Operations Total Property & Casualty Insurance Beginning liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses, gross $ 16,020 $ 1,926 $ 3,770 $ 21,716 Reinsurance and other recoverables 2,365 16 646 3,027 Beginning liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses, net 13,655 1,910 3,124 18,689 Provision for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses Current accident year before catastrophes 3,897 2,412 6,309 Current accident year catastrophes [3] 105 207 312 Prior accident years strengthening (release) 83 (39 ) 148 192 Total provision for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses 4,085 2,580 148 6,813 Less: Payments 3,889 2,639 298 6,826 Ending liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses, net 13,851 1,851 2,974 18,676 Reinsurance and other recoverables 2,442 13 573 3,028 Ending liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses, gross $ 16,293 $ 1,864 $ 3,547 $ 21,704 Earned premiums $ 6,203 $ 3,660 Loss and loss expense paid ratio [1] 62.7 72.1 Loss and loss expense incurred ratio 65.9 70.5 Prior accident years development (pts) [2] 1.3 (1.1 ) [1] The loss and loss expense paid ratio represents the ratio of paid losses and loss adjustment expenses to earned premiums. [2] Prior accident years development (pts) represents the ratio of prior accident years development to earned premiums. [3] Contributing to the current accident year catastrophes losses were the following events: For the year ended December 31, 2013 Category Commercial Lines Personal Lines Total Property and Casualty Insurance Wind and hail [1] $ 65 $ 103 $ 168 Tornadoes [1] 27 63 90 Other [2] 13 41 54 Total $ 105 $ 207 $ 312 [1] Amounts represent an aggregation of multiple catastrophes. [2] Includes wildfire, winter storms and flooding. 50 Prior accident years development recorded in 2013 Included within prior accident years development were the following loss and loss adjustment expense reserve strengthenings (releases): For the year ended December 31, 2013 Commercial Lines Personal Lines Property & Casualty Other Operations Total Property & Casualty Insurance Auto liability $ 141 $ 3 $ $ 144 Homeowners (6 ) (6 ) Professional liability (29 ) (29 ) Package business 2 2 General liability (75 ) (75 ) Bond (8 ) (8 ) Commercial property (7 ) (7 ) Net asbestos reserves 130 130 Net environmental reserves 12 12 Uncollectible reinsurance (25 ) (25 ) Workers compensation (2 ) (2 ) Workers compensation - NY 25a Fund for Reopened Cases 80 80 Change in workers compensation discount, including accretion 30 30 Catastrophes (24 ) (39 ) (63 ) Other reserve re-estimates, net 3 6 9 Total prior accident years development $ 83 $ (39 ) $ 148 $ 192 During 2013 , the Company re-estimates of prior accident years reserves included the following significant reserve changes: Strengthened reserves in commercial auto liability, primarily related to specialty lines claims, arising from a higher frequency of large loss bodily injury claims in accident years 2010 through 2012. Released reserves in professional liability for accident years 2008 through 2012 due to lower than expected claim severity, primarily for large-sized accounts. Released reserves in general liability in accident years 2006 through 2011. The emergence of claim severity as well as the frequency of late reported claims for these years was lower than expected and management has placed more weight on the emerged experience. The Company reviewed its allowance for uncollectible reinsurance in the second quarter of 2013 and reduced its allowance as a result of favorable collections compared to expectations. Release in workers compensation is the net of releases for accident year 2009 and prior reflecting favorable development in average severity, the result of a speed up in settlements and the result of moving to an enhanced state-level analysis of loss experience, offset by strengthening workers compensation for accident years 2010 through 2012 reflecting the emergence of a higher mix of more severe claims. Reserve strengthening related to the closing of the New York Section 25A Fund for Reopened Cases (the "Fund"). These claims were previously funded through assessments and paid by the Fund. The claims will become payable by the Company effective January 1, 2014. Released reserves for catastrophes primarily related to Storm Sandy. Other reserve re-estimates, net includes an $18 recovery related to a class action settlement with American International Group involving prior accident years involuntary workers compensation pool loss and loss adjustment expense. Refer to the Property & Casualty Other Operations Claims section for further discussion of the increase to net asbestos and net environmental reserves. 51 A roll-forward of property and casualty insurance product liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses follows: For the year ended December 31, 2012 Commercial Lines Personal Lines Property & Casualty Other Operations Total Property & Casualty Insurance Beginning liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses, gross $ 15,437 $ 2,061 $ 4,052 $ 21,550 Reinsurance and other recoverables 2,343 9 681 3,033 Beginning liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses, net 13,094 2,052 3,371 18,517 Provision for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses Current accident year before catastrophes 4,178 2,390 6,568 Current accident year catastrophes [3] 325 381 706 Prior accident years strengthening (release) 72 (141 ) 65 (4 ) Total provision for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses 4,575 2,630 65 7,270 Less: Payments 4,014 2,772 312 7,098 Ending liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses, net 13,655 1,910 3,124 18,689 Reinsurance and other recoverables 2,365 16 646 3,027 Ending liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses, gross $ 16,020 $ 1,926 $ 3,770 $ 21,716 Earned premiums $ 6,259 $ 3,636 Loss and loss expense paid ratio [1] 64.1 76.2 Loss and loss expense incurred ratio 73.1 72.3 Prior accident years development (pts) [2] 1.2 (3.9 ) [1] The loss and loss expense paid ratio represents the ratio of paid losses and loss adjustment expenses to earned premiums. [2] Prior accident years development (pts) represents the ratio of prior accident years development to earned premiums. [3] Contributing to the current accident year catastrophes losses were the following events: For the year ended December 31, 2012 Category Commercial Lines Personal Lines Total Property and Casualty Insurance Wind and hail [1] $ 84 $ 172 $ 256 Tornadoes [1] 30 40 70 Storm Sandy 207 143 350 Other [1][2] 4 26 30 Total $ 325 $ 381 $ 706 [1] Amounts represent an aggregation of multiple catastrophes. [2] Primarily includes wildfire. 52 Prior accident years development recorded in 2012 Included within prior accident years development were the following loss and loss adjustment expense reserve strengthenings (releases): For the year ended December 31, 2012 Commercial Lines Personal Lines Property & Casualty Other Operations Total Property & Casualty Insurance Auto liability $ 56 $ (81 ) $ $ (25 ) Homeowners (32 ) (32 ) Professional liability 40 40 Package business (20 ) (20 ) General liability (87 ) (87 ) Bond (9 ) (9 ) Commercial property (8 ) (8 ) Net asbestos reserves 48 48 Net environmental reserves 10 10 Workers compensation 78 78 Change in workers compensation discount, including accretion 52 52 Catastrophes (37 ) (29 ) (66 ) Other reserve re-estimates, net 7 1 7 15 Total prior accident years development $ 72 $ (141 ) $ 65 $ (4 ) During 2012 , the Company re-estimates of prior accident years reserves included the following significant reserve changes: Released reserves for personal auto liability claims, primarily for accident years 2008 through 2011. As these accident years matured, favorable bodily injury severity trends were observed and management placed more weight on the emerged experience. Management has adjusted trend assumptions accordingly. Released reserves for homeowners claims, primarily for accident year 2011 as a result of favorable large loss frequency and lower than expected severity. Strengthened reserves for commercial auto liability claims, primarily for accident year 2010 and 2011. Higher than expected bodily injury severity, driven by large loss activity, has been observed for these accident years. Strengthened reserves for professional liability directors and officers claims for accident years 2011 and prior as a result of higher severity, primarily for mid- and large-sized accounts. Released reserves in package business liability coverages and general liability, primarily for accident years 2006 through 2011. Claim severity emergence for these years was lower than expected and management has placed more weight on the emerged experience. In addition, older years have improved due to favorable emergence of larger claims. Strengthened reserves in workers' compensation primarily due to the emergence of lost time claims from 2011. The change in workers compensation discount, including accretion, primarily reflects a decrease in the number of tabular claims, and to a lesser extent, the decrease in interest rates. Reserve releases on certain prior year catastrophes, primarily related to 2001 World Trade Center worker's compensation claims. Refer to the Property & Casualty Other Operations Claims section for further discussion of the increase to net asbestos and net environmental reserves. 53 Property & Casualty Other Operations Claims Reserve Activity Reserves and reserve activity in Property & Casualty Other Operations are categorized and reported as asbestos, environmental, or all other . The all other category of reserves covers a wide range of insurance and assumed reinsurance coverages, including, but not limited to, potential liability for construction defects, lead paint, silica, pharmaceutical products, molestation and other long-tail liabilities. The following table presents reserve activity, inclusive of estimates for both reported and incurred but not reported claims, net of reinsurance, for Property & Casualty Other Operations, categorized by asbestos, environmental and all other claims, for the years ended December 31, 2014 , 2013 and 2012 . Property & Casualty Other Operations Losses and Loss Adjustment Expenses Asbestos Environmental All Other [1] Total 2014 Beginning liability net [2] [3] $ 1,714 $ 270 $ 990 $ 2,974 Losses and loss adjustment expenses incurred 212 30 19 261 Less: Losses and loss adjustment expenses paid 216 59 92 367 Ending liability net [2] [3] $ 1,710 [4] $ 241 $ 917 $ 2,868 2013 Beginning liability net [2] [3] $ 1,776 $ 290 $ 1,058 $ 3,124 Losses and loss adjustment expenses incurred 130 12 6 148 Less: Losses and loss adjustment expenses paid 192 32 74 298 Ending liability net [2] [3] $ 1,714 $ 270 $ 990 $ 2,974 2012 Beginning liability net [2] [3] $ 1,892 $ 320 $ 1,159 $ 3,371 Losses and loss adjustment expenses incurred 48 10 7 65 Less: Losses and loss adjustment expenses paid 164 40 108 312 Ending liability net [2] [3] $ 1,776 $ 290 $ 1,058 $ 3,124 [1] All Other includes unallocated loss adjustment expense reserves. All Other also includes the Company allowance for uncollectible reinsurance. When the Company commutes a ceded reinsurance contract or settles a ceded reinsurance dispute, the portion of the allowance for uncollectible reinsurance attributable to that commutation or settlement, if any, is reclassified to the appropriate cause of loss. [2] Excludes amounts reported in Commercial Lines and Personal Lines reporting segments (collectively Ongoing Operations ) for asbestos and environmental net liabilities of $16 and $6 respectively, as of December 31, 2014 , $18 and $5 , respectively, as of December 31, 2013 , and $15 and $7 , respectively, as of December 31, 2012 ; excludes total net losses and loss adjustment expenses incurred for the years ended December 31, 2014 , 2013 and 2012 of $16, $15 and $13 , respectively, related to asbestos and environmental claims; and excludes total net losses and loss adjustment expenses paid for the years ended December 31, 2014 , 2013 and 2012 of $17, $14 and $15 , respectively, related to asbestos and environmental claims. [3] Gross of reinsurance, asbestos and environmental reserves, including liabilities in Ongoing Operations, were $2,193 and $267, respectively, as of December 31, 2014 ; $2,182 and $311 , respectively, as of December 31, 2013 ; and $2,294 and $334 , respectively, as of December 31, 2012 . [4] The one year and average three year net paid amounts for asbestos claims, including Ongoing Operations, were $229 and $201, respectively, resulting in a one year net survival ratio of 7.6 and a three year net survival ratio of 8.6 . Net survival ratio is the quotient of the net carried reserves divided by the average annual payment amount and is an indication of the number of years that the net carried reserve would last (i.e., survive) if the future annual claim payments were consistent with the calculated historical average. For paid and incurred losses and loss adjustment expenses reporting, the Company classifies its asbestos and environmental reserves into three categories: Direct, Assumed Reinsurance and London Market. Direct insurance includes primary and excess coverage. Assumed Reinsurance includes both treaty reinsurance (covering broad categories of claims or blocks of business) and facultative reinsurance (covering specific risks or individual policies of primary or excess insurance companies). London Market business includes the business written by one or more of the Company subsidiaries in the United Kingdom, which are no longer active in the insurance or reinsurance business. Such business includes both direct insurance and assumed reinsurance.Of the three categories of claims (Direct, Assumed Reinsurance and London Market), direct policies tend to have the greatest factual development from which to estimate the Company exposures. 54 Assumed reinsurance exposures are less predictable than direct insurance exposures because the Company does not generally receive notice of a reinsurance claim until the underlying direct insurance claim is mature. This causes a delay in the receipt of information at the reinsurer level and adds to the uncertainty of estimating related reserves. London Market exposures are the most uncertain of the three categories of claims. As a participant in the London Market (comprised of both Lloyd of London and London Market companies), certain subsidiaries of the Company wrote business on a subscription basis, with those subsidiaries involvement being limited to a relatively small percentage of a total contract placement. Claims are reported, via a broker, to the lead underwriter and, once agreed to, are presented to the following markets for concurrence. This reporting and claim agreement process makes estimating liabilities for this business the most uncertain of the three categories of claims. The following table sets forth, for the years ended December 31, 2014 , 2013 and 2012 , paid and incurred loss activity by the three categories of claims for asbestos and environmental. Paid and Incurred Losses and Loss Adjustment Expenses ( LAE ) Development Asbestos and Environmental Asbestos [1] Environmental [1] Paid Losses & LAE Incurred Losses & LAE Paid Losses & LAE Incurred Losses & LAE 2014 Gross Direct $ 201 $ 206 $ 55 $ 23 Assumed Reinsurance 72 70 12 London Market 17 28 6 7 Total 290 304 73 30 Ceded (74 ) (92 ) (14 ) Net $ 216 $ 212 $ 59 $ 30 2013 Gross Direct $ 159 $ 72 $ 23 $ 6 Assumed Reinsurance 68 50 4 6 London Market 16 8 6 Total 243 130 33 12 Ceded (51 ) (1 ) Net $ 192 $ 130 $ 32 $ 12 2012 Gross Direct $ 153 $ 55 $ 31 $ 9 Assumed Reinsurance 51 14 7 London Market 17 5 5 3 Total 221 74 43 12 Ceded (57 ) (26 ) (3 ) (2 ) Net $ 164 $ 48 $ 40 $ 10 [1] Excludes asbestos and environmental paid and incurred loss and LAE reported in Ongoing Operations. Total gross losses and LAE incurred in Ongoing Operations for the years ended December 31, 2014 , 2013 and 2012 includes $19, $15 and $13, respectively, related to asbestos and environmental claims. Total gross losses and LAE paid in Ongoing Operations for the years ended December 31, 2014 , 2013 and 2012 includes $21, $14 and $15, respectively, related to asbestos and environmental claims. In the fourth quarters of 2014, 2013 and 2012, the Company completed evaluations of certain of its non-asbestos and non-environmental reserves in Property & Casualty Other Operations, including its assumed reinsurance liabilities. In 2014, the Company's prior year development was impacted by unfavorable frequency of international workers' compensation claims. The Company's prior year development on these reserves was immaterial in 2013 and 2012. 55 During the second quarters of 2014, 2013 and 2012, the Company completed its annual ground-up asbestos reserve evaluations. As part of these evaluations, the Company reviewed all of its open direct domestic insurance accounts exposed to asbestos liability, as well as assumed reinsurance accounts and its London Market exposures for both direct insurance and assumed reinsurance. During 2014, the Company found estimates for certain direct accounts increased, principally due to a higher than previously estimated number of mesothelioma claim filings and an increase in costs associated with asbestos litigation. The Company also experienced unfavorable development on certain of its assumed reinsurance accounts driven by a variety of account-specific factors, including those experienced by the direct policyholders. Based on this evaluation, the Company strengthened its net asbestos reserves by $212 in second quarter 2014. During 2013, the Company found estimates for individual cases changed based upon the particular circumstances in such accounts. These cases were case specific and not as a result of any underlying change in current environment. The Company experienced moderate increases in claim frequency and severity as well as expense and costs associated with litigating asbestos coverage matters, particularly against certain smaller, more peripheral insureds. The Company also experienced unfavorable development on certain of its assumed reinsurance accounts driven largely by the same factors experience by the direct policyholders. Based on this evaluation, the Company strengthened its net asbestos reserves by $130 in second quarter 2013. During 2012, the Company found estimates for individual cases changed based upon the particular circumstances of such accounts. These changes were case specific and not as a result of any underlying change in the current environment. The Company experienced moderate increases in claim severity, expense and costs associated with litigating asbestos coverage matters, particularly against certain smaller, more peripheral insureds. The Company also experienced unfavorable development on certain of its assumed reinsurance accounts driven largely by the same factors experienced by direct policy holders. Based on this evaluation, the Company strengthened its net asbestos reserves by $48 in second quarter 2012. The Company currently expects to continue to perform an evaluation of its asbestos liabilities annually. During the second quarters of 2014, 2013 and 2012, the Company completed its annual ground-up environmental reserve evaluations. In each of these evaluations, the Company reviewed all of its open direct domestic insurance accounts exposed to environmental liability, as well as assumed reinsurance accounts and its London Market exposures for both direct and assumed reinsurance. The Company found estimates for certain individual account exposures increased based upon unfavorable litigation results and increased clean-up and expense costs. The net effect of these account-specific changes as well as quarterly actuarial evaluations of new account emergence and historical loss and expense paid experience resulted in increases of $30, $12 and $10 in net environmental reserves in 2014 , 2013 and 2012 , respectively. The Company currently expects to continue to perform a ground-up evaluation of its environmental liabilities annually and to regularly evaluate the Company's historical direct net loss and expense paid and reported experience by calendar and/or report year, to assess any emerging trends, fluctuations or characteristics suggested by the aggregate paid and reported activity. The Company divides its gross asbestos and environmental exposures into Direct, Assumed Reinsurance and London Market. Direct asbestos exposures include Major Asbestos Defendants, Non-Major Accounts, and Unallocated Direct Accounts. Major Asbestos Defendants represent the Top 70 accounts in Tillinghast's published Tiers 1 and 2 and Wellington accounts. Major Asbestos Defendants have the fewest number of asbestos accounts and include reserves related to PPG Industries, Inc. ( PPG ). In January 2009, the Company, along with approximately three dozen other insurers, entered into a modified agreement in principle with PPG to resolve the Company's coverage obligations for all its PPG asbestos liabilities. The agreement is contingent on the fulfillment of certain conditions. Major Asbestos Defendants gross asbestos reserves accounted for approximately 25% of the Company's total Direct gross asbestos reserves as of June 30, 2014. Non-Major Accounts are all other open direct asbestos accounts and largely represent smaller and more peripheral defendants. These exposures represented 1,115 accounts and contained approximately 49% of the Company's total Direct gross asbestos reserves as of June 30, 2014. Unallocated Direct Accounts includes an estimate of the reserves necessary for asbestos claims related to direct insureds that have not previously tendered asbestos claims to the Company and exposures related to liability claims that may not be subject to an aggregate limit under the applicable policies. 56 The following table displays gross asbestos and environmental reserves by category as of December 31, 2014 : Summary of Gross A&E Reserves Asbestos [1] Environmental [2] Total A&E Gross Direct $ 1,640 $ 196 $ 1,836 Assumed Reinsurance 289 22 311 London Market 264 49 313 Total 2,193 267 2,460 Ceded (467 ) (20 ) (487 ) Net $ 1,726 $ 247 $ 1,973 [1] The one year gross paid amount for total asbestos claims is $304, resulting in a one year gross survival ratio of 7.2. The three year average gross paid amount for total asbestos claims is $263, resulting in a three year gross survival ratio of 8.3. [2] The one year gross paid amount for total environmental claims is $83, resulting in a one year gross survival ratio of 3.2. The three year average gross paid amount for total environmental claims is $58, resulting in a three year gross survival ratio of 4.6. The Company provides an allowance for uncollectible reinsurance, reflecting management best estimate of reinsurance cessions that may be uncollectible in the future due to reinsurers unwillingness or inability to pay. During the second quarters of 2014, 2013 and 2012, the Company completed its annual evaluations of the collectability of the reinsurance recoverables and the adequacy of the allowance for uncollectible reinsurance associated with older, long-term casualty liabilities reported in the Property & Casualty Other Operations. In conducting this evaluation, the Company used its most recent detailed evaluations of ceded liabilities reported in the segment. The Company analyzed the overall credit quality of the Company reinsurers, recent trends in arbitration and litigation outcomes in disputes between cedants and reinsurers, and recent developments in commutation activity between reinsurers and cedants. The evaluation in the second quarters of 2014, 2013, and 2012 resulted in no adjustments to the allowance for uncollectible reinsurance. As of December 31, 2014, 2013, and 2012, the allowance for uncollectible reinsurance for Property & Casualty Other Operations totaled $225, $202, and $203. The Company currently expects to perform its regular comprehensive review of Property & Casualty Other Operations reinsurance recoverables annually. Due to the inherent uncertainties as to collection and the length of time before reinsurance recoverables become due, particularly for older, long-term casualty liabilities, it is possible that future adjustments to the Company reinsurance recoverables, net of the allowance, could be required. Consistent with the Company long-standing reserving practices, the Company will continue to review and monitor its reserves in Property & Casualty Other Operations regularly, including its annual reviews of asbestos liabilities, reinsurance recoverables and allowance for uncollectible reinsurance, and environmental liabilities, and where future developments indicate, make appropriate adjustments to the reserves. The company will complete both its annual ground-up asbestos and environmental reserve studies during the second quarter of 2015. 57 Impact of Re-estimates The establishment of property and casualty insurance product reserves is an estimation process, using a variety of methods, assumptions and data elements. Ultimate losses may vary materially from the current estimates. Many factors can contribute to these variations and the need to change the previous estimate of required reserve levels. Subsequent changes can generally be thought of as being the result of the emergence of additional facts that were not known or anticipated at the time of the prior reserve estimate and/or changes in interpretations of information and trends. The table below shows the range of annual reserve re-estimates experienced by The Hartford over the past ten years. The amount of prior accident year development (as shown in the reserve rollforward) for a given calendar year is expressed as a percent of the beginning calendar year reserves, net of reinsurance. The percentage relationships presented are significantly influenced by the facts and circumstances of each particular year and by the fact that only the last ten years are included in the range. Accordingly, these percentages are not intended to be a prediction of the range of possible future variability. See Impact of key assumptions on reserve volatility within this section for further discussion of the potential for variability in recorded loss reserves. Commercial Lines Personal Lines Property & Casualty Other Operations Total Property & Casualty [1] Annual range of prior accident year unfavorable (favorable) development for the ten years ended December 31, 2014 (3.1)% - 1.5% (6.9)% - (0.2)% 1.9% - 9.3% (1.2)% - 2.0% [1] Excluding the reserve strengthening for asbestos and environmental reserves, over the past ten years reserve re-estimates for total property and casualty insurance ranged from (2.5)% to 1.0% . The potential variability of the Company property and casualty insurance product reserves would normally be expected to vary by segment and the types of loss exposures insured by those segments. Illustrative factors influencing the potential reserve variability for each of the segments are discussed above. A table depicting the historical development of the liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses, net of reinsurance, follows: Loss Development Table Loss And Loss Adjustment Expense Liability Development Net of Reinsurance For the Years Ended December 31, 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 Liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses, net of reinsurance $ 16,191 $ 16,863 $ 17,604 $ 18,231 $ 18,347 $ 18,210 $ 17,948 $ 18,517 $ 18,689 $ 18,676 $ 18,765 Cumulative paid losses and loss expenses One year later 3,594 3,702 3,727 3,703 3,771 3,882 4,037 4,216 4,274 4,072 Two years later 6,035 6,122 5,980 5,980 6,273 6,401 6,664 6,897 7,019 Three years later 7,825 7,755 7,544 7,752 8,074 8,241 8,503 8,875 Four years later 9,045 8,889 8,833 9,048 9,411 9,538 9,928 Five years later 9,928 9,903 9,778 10,061 10,395 10,649 Six years later 10,798 10,674 10,564 10,845 11,303 Seven years later 11,448 11,334 11,216 11,612 Eight years later 12,023 11,895 11,883 Nine years later 12,526 12,493 Ten years later 13,088 Liabilities re-estimated One year later 16,439 17,159 17,652 18,005 18,161 18,014 18,315 18,513 18,881 18,904 Two years later 16,838 17,347 17,475 17,858 18,004 18,136 18,275 18,686 19,207 Three years later 17,240 17,318 17,441 17,700 18,139 18,093 18,299 19,013 Four years later 17,344 17,497 17,439 17,866 18,120 18,056 18,629 Five years later 17,570 17,613 17,676 17,848 18,092 18,408 Six years later 17,777 17,895 17,673 17,857 18,437 Seven years later 18,064 17,899 17,749 18,215 Eight years later 18,062 18,045 18,097 Nine years later 18,214 18,390 Ten years later 18,565 Deficiency (redundancy), net of reinsurance $ 2,374 $ 1,527 $ 493 $ (16 ) $ 90 $ 198 $ 681 $ 496 $ 518 $ 228 58 The previous table shows the cumulative deficiency (redundancy) of the Company reserves, net of reinsurance, as now estimated with the benefit of additional information. Those amounts are comprised of changes in estimates of gross losses and changes in estimates of related reinsurance recoveries. The following table, for the periods presented, reconciles the net reserves to the gross reserves, as initially estimated and recorded, and as currently estimated and recorded, and computes the cumulative deficiency (redundancy) of the Company reserves before reinsurance. Loss And Loss Adjustment Expense Liability Development Gross For the Years Ended December 31, 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 Net reserve, as initially estimated $ 16,863 $ 17,604 $ 18,231 $ 18,347 $ 18,210 $ 17,948 $ 18,517 $ 18,689 $ 18,676 $ 18,765 Reinsurance and other recoverables, as initially estimated 5,403 4,387 3,922 3,586 3,441 3,077 3,033 3,027 3,028 3,041 Gross reserve, as initially estimated $ 22,266 $ 21,991 $ 22,153 $ 21,933 $ 21,651 $ 21,025 $ 21,550 $ 21,716 $ 21,704 $ 21,806 Net re-estimated reserve $ 18,390 $ 18,097 $ 18,215 $ 18,437 $ 18,408 $ 18,629 $ 19,013 $ 19,207 $ 18,904 Re-estimated and other reinsurance recoverables 6,296 4,732 4,443 4,115 3,713 3,376 3,292 3,099 3,041 Gross re-estimated reserve $ 24,686 $ 22,829 $ 22,658 $ 22,552 $ 22,121 $ 22,005 $ 22,305 $ 22,306 $ 21,945 Gross deficiency (redundancy) $ 2,420 $ 838 $ 505 $ 619 $ 470 $ 980 $ 755 $ 590 $ 241 The following table is derived from the Loss Development table and summarizes the effect of reserve re-estimates, net of reinsurance, on calendar year operations for the ten-year period ended December 31, 2014 . The total of each column details the amount of reserve re-estimates made in the indicated calendar year and shows the accident years to which the re-estimates are applicable. The amounts in the total accident year column on the far right represent the cumulative reserve re-estimates during the ten year period ended December 31, 2014 for the indicated accident year(s). Effect of Net Reserve Re-estimates on Calendar Year Operations Calendar Year 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 Total By Accident Year 2004 & Prior $ 248 $ 399 $ 402 $ 104 $ 226 $ 207 $ 287 $ (2 ) $ 151 $ 352 $ 2,374 2005 (103 ) (214 ) (133 ) (47 ) (91 ) (5 ) 6 (6 ) (6 ) (599 ) 2006 (140 ) (148 ) (213 ) (118 ) (45 ) (7 ) (69 ) 2 (738 ) 2007 (49 ) (113 ) (156 ) (71 ) (15 ) (67 ) 10 (461 ) 2008 (39 ) 1 (31 ) (1 ) (37 ) (13 ) (120 ) 2009 (39 ) (13 ) (24 ) (8 ) 7 (77 ) 2010 245 3 61 (22 ) 287 2011 36 148 (4 ) 180 2012 19 19 2013 (98 ) (98 ) Total strengthening (release) $ 248 $ 296 $ 48 $ (226 ) $ (186 ) $ (196 ) $ 367 $ (4 ) $ 192 $ 228 $ 767 59 Reserve changes for accident years 2004 & Prior The largest impacts of net reserve re-estimates are shown in the 2004 & Prior accident years. The reserve deterioration is driven, in part, by deterioration of reserves for asbestos, environmental, assumed casualty reinsurance, workers compensation, and general liability claims. Numerous actuarial assumptions on assumed casualty reinsurance turned out to be low, including loss cost trends, particularly on excess of loss business, and the impact of deteriorating terms and conditions. The reserve re-estimates in calendar years 2005 through 2006 were largely attributable to reductions in the reinsurance recoverable asset associated with older, long-term casualty liabilities, and unexpected development on mature claims in both general liability and workers compensation. In addition, catastrophe reserves related to the 2004 hurricanes developed favorably in 2006. During the 2007 calendar year, the Company refined its processes for allocating incurred but not reported ( IBNR ) reserves by accident year, resulting in a reclassification of $347 of IBNR reserves from the 2003 to 2006 accident years to the 2002 and prior accident years. This reclassification of reserves by accident year had no effect on total recorded reserves within any segment or on total recorded reserves for any line of business within a segment. The reserve re-estimates during calendar year 2008 were largely driven by increases in asbestos, environmental and general liability reserves. The reserve re-estimates in calendar years 2009, 2010, 2011, 2013 and 2014 were largely due to increases in asbestos and environmental reserves, resulting from the Company annual evaluations of these liabilities. These reserve evaluations reflect deterioration in the litigation environment surrounding asbestos and environmental liabilities during this period. Reserve changes for accident years 2005 through 2009 During calendar year 2006, favorable re-estimates occurred in both loss and allocated loss adjustment expenses for the 2005 accident year. In addition, catastrophe reserves related to the 2005 hurricanes developed favorably in 2006. During calendar years 2006 through 2008 for the 2005 through 2007 accident years, the Company recognized favorable re-estimates of both loss and allocated loss adjustment expenses on workers compensation claims, driven, in part, by state regulatory reforms in California and Florida, underwriting actions, and expense reduction initiatives that had a greater impact in controlling costs than originally estimated. Even after considering the reclassification of IBNR reserves, accident years 2005 through 2007 show favorable development in calendar years 2006 through 2011. A portion of the release comes from short-tail lines of business, where results emerge quickly. In 2007, the Company released reserves for package business claims as reported losses emerged favorably to previous expectations. In 2007 through 2009, the Company released reserves for general liability claims due to the favorable emergence of losses for high hazard and umbrella general liability claims. Reserves for professional liability claims were released in 2008 and 2009 related to the 2005 through 2007 accident years due to a lower estimate of claim severity on both directors and officers insurance claims and errors and omissions insurance claims. Reserves of auto liability claims, within Personal Lines, were released in 2008 due largely to an improvement in emerged claim severity for the 2005 to 2007 accident years. Accident year 2009 remains reasonably close to original estimates. Modest favorable reserve re-estimates during calendar periods 2009 through 2014 are primarily related to liability lines of business. Reserve changes for accident years 2010 through 2011 Unfavorable reserve re-estimates in calendar year 2011 on accident year 2010 are largely driven by workers' compensation. Loss cost trends were higher than initially expected as an increase in frequency outpaced a moderation of severity trends. Unfavorable reserve re-estimates in calendar year 2013 on accident year 2010 and 2011 are primarily related workers compensation and commercial auto liability. Workers compensation loss cost trends were higher than initially expected as an increase in frequency outpaced a moderation of severity trends. Commercial auto liability was driven by higher frequency of large loss bodily injury claims. Reserves were released in calendar year 2014 for accident year 2010 due to lower frequency of professional liability reported claims, favorable bond claim emergence, and lower frequency of late emerging liability claims. Reserve changes for accident year 2012 Accident year 2012 remains reasonably close to the original estimate. Modest unfavorable reserve re-estimates during calendar year 2013 are primarily related to commercial auto liability driven by higher frequency of large loss bodily injury claims offset by reserve releases related to Storm Sandy. Reserve changes for accident year 2013 Reserves were released in calendar year 2014 on accident year 2013 due to lower estimated claim handling costs for workers' compensation and lower frequency of reported claims for professional liability. Reserves were also released in calendar year 2014 for accident year 2013 due to favorable development of fourth quarter catastrophes and favorable emergence of losses for property lines of business. 60 Estimated Gross Profits Used in the Valuation and Amortization of Assets and Liabilities Associated with Variable Annuity and Other Universal Life-Type Contracts Estimated gross profits are used in the amortization of the deferred policy acquisition costs ("DAC") asset, sales inducement assets ( SIA ) and unearned revenue reserves ( URR ). Portions of EGPs are also used in the valuation of reserves for death and other insurance benefit features on variable annuity and other universal life type contracts. The most significant EGP based balances are as follows: Talcott Resolution As of December 31, 2014 2013 DAC [1] $ 1,200 $ 1,552 SIA $ 89 $ 149 URR $ $ 50 Death and Other Insurance Benefit Reserves, net of reinsurance [2] $ 331 $ 565 [1] For additional information on DAC, see Note 8 - Deferred Policy Acquisition Costs and Present Value of Future Profits of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. [2] For additional information on death and other insurance benefit reserves, see Note 10 - Separate Accounts, Death Benefits and Other Insurance Benefit Features of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Unlocks The benefit (charge) to income from continuing operations, net of tax by asset and liability as a result of the Unlocks is as follows: Talcott Resolution For the years ended December 31, 2014 2013 2012 DAC $ (136 ) $ (199 ) $ (214 ) SIA (35 ) (20 ) (82 ) URR 42 16 12 Death and Other Insurance Benefit Reserves 34 36 73 Total (before tax) $ (95 ) $ (167 ) $ (211 ) Income tax effect (33 ) (58 ) (73 ) Total (after-tax) $ (62 ) $ (109 ) $ (138 ) The Unlock charge for the year ended December 31, 2014 was primarily due to lower future estimated gross profits on the fixed annuity block driven by the continued low interest rate environment as well as higher variable annuity units costs due to higher than expected surrenders, partially offset by actual separate account returns being above our aggregated estimated returns during the period. The Unlock charge for the year ended December 31, 2013 was primarily due to assumption changes in connection with the annual policyholder behavior assumption study, partially offset by actual separate account returns above our aggregated estimated returns during the period. The Unlock charge for the year ended December 31, 2012 was driven primarily by policyholder assumption changes which reduced expected future gross profits including additional costs associated with the U.S. variable annuity macro hedge program, partially offset by actual separate account returns above our aggregated estimated return. For most annuity contracts, the Company estimates gross profits over 20 years as EGPs emerging subsequent to that time frame are immaterial. Products sold in a particular year are aggregated into cohorts. Future gross profits for each cohort are projected over the estimated lives of the underlying contracts, based on future account value projections for variable annuity. The projection of future account values requires the use of certain assumptions including: separate account returns; separate account fund mix; fees assessed against the contract holder account balance; surrender and lapse rates; interest margin; mortality; and the extent and duration of hedging activities and hedging costs. Changes in these assumptions and, in addition, changes to other policyholder behavior assumptions such as resets, partial surrenders, reaction to price increases, and asset allocations causes EGPs to fluctuate which impacts earnings. 61 The Company determines EGPs from a single deterministic reversion to mean ( RTM ) separate account return projection which is an estimation technique commonly used by insurance entities to project future separate account returns. Through this estimation technique, the Company DAC model is adjusted to reflect actual account values at the end of each quarter. Through consideration of recent market returns, the Company will unlock, or adjust, projected returns over a future period so that the account value returns to the long-term expected rate of return, providing that those projected returns do not exceed certain caps. This Unlock for future separate account returns is determined each quarter. Under RTM, the expected long term weighted average rate of return is 8.3% . In the third quarter of 2014, the Company completed a comprehensive non-market related policyholder behavior assumption study and incorporates the results of those studies into its projection of future gross profits. Additionally, throughout the year, the Company evaluates various aspects of policyholder behavior and periodically revises its policyholder assumptions as credible emerging data indicates that changes are warranted. The Company will continue to evaluate its assumptions related to policyholder behavior as initiatives to reduce the size of the variable annuity business are implemented by management. Upon completion of an annual assumption study or evaluation of credible new information, the Company will revise its assumptions to reflect its current best estimate. These assumption revisions will change the projected account values and the related EGPs in the DAC, SIA and URR amortization models, as well as the death and other insurance benefit reserving model. Beginning in 2015, the annual comprehensive non-market related policyholder behavior assumption study will be completed in the fourth quarter of the year. All assumption changes that affect the estimate of future EGPs including the update of current account values, the use of the RTM estimation technique and policyholder behavior assumptions are considered an Unlock in the period of revision. An Unlock adjusts DAC, SIA, URR and death and other insurance benefit reserve balances in the Consolidated Balance Sheets with an offsetting benefit or charge in the Consolidated Statements of Operations in the period of the revision. An Unlock that results in an after-tax benefit generally occurs as a result of actual experience or future expectations of product profitability being favorable compared to previous estimates. An Unlock that results in an after-tax charge generally occurs as a result of actual experience or future expectations of product profitability being unfavorable compared to previous estimates. EGPs are also used to determine the expected excess benefits and assessments included in the measurement of death and other insurance benefit reserves. These excess benefits and assessments are derived from a range of stochastic scenarios that have been calibrated to the Company RTM separate account returns. The determination of death and other insurance benefit reserves is also impacted by discount rates, lapses, volatilities, mortality assumptions and benefit utilization, including assumptions around annuitization rates. An Unlock revises EGPs, on a quarterly basis, to reflect market updates of policyholder account value and the Company current best estimate assumptions. Modifications to the Company hedging programs may impact EGPs, and correspondingly impact DAC recoverability. After each quarterly Unlock, the Company also tests the aggregate recoverability of DAC by comparing the DAC balance to the present value of future EGPs. The margin between the DAC balance and the present value of future EGPs for U.S. individual variable annuities was 36% as of December 31, 2014 . If the margin between the DAC asset and the present value of future EGPs is exhausted, then further reductions in EGPs would cause portions of DAC to be unrecoverable and the DAC asset would be written down to equal future EGPs. Evaluation of Other-Than-Temporary Impairments on Available-for-Sale Securities and Valuation Allowances on Mortgage Loans The Company has a monitoring process that is overseen by a committee of investment and accounting professionals which identifies investments that are subject to an enhanced evaluation on a quarterly basis to determine if an other-than-temporary impairment ( impairment ) is present for AFS securities or a valuation allowance is required for mortgage loans. This evaluation is a quantitative and qualitative process, which is subject to risks and uncertainties. For further discussion of the accounting policies, see the Significant Investment Accounting Policies Section in Note 1 - Basis of Presentation and Significant Accounting Policies of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. For a discussion of impairments recorded, see the Other-Than-Temporary Impairments within the Investment Portfolio Risks and Risk Management section of the MD&A. 62 Living Benefits Required to be Fair Valued (in Other Policyholder Funds and Benefits Payable ) Fair values for GMWBs classified as embedded derivatives are calculated using the income approach based upon internally developed models, because active and observable markets do not exist for those items. The fair value of these GMWBs and the related reinsurance and customized freestanding derivatives are calculated as an aggregation of the following components: Best Estimate Claim Payments; Credit Standing Adjustment; and Margins. The resulting aggregation is reconciled or calibrated, if necessary, to market information that is, or may be, available to the Company, but may not be observable by other market participants, including reinsurance discussions and transactions. The Company believes the aggregation of these components, as necessary and as reconciled or calibrated to the market information available to the Company, results in an amount that the Company would be required to transfer or receive, for an asset, to or from market participants in an active liquid market, if one existed, for those market participants to assume the risks associated with the guaranteed minimum benefits and the related reinsurance and customized derivatives. The fair value is likely to materially diverge from the ultimate settlement of the liability as the Company believes settlement will be based on our best estimate assumptions rather than those best estimate assumptions plus risk margins. In the absence of any transfer of the guaranteed benefit liability to a third party, the release of risk margins is likely to be reflected as realized gains in future periods net income. Oversight of the Company's valuation policies and processes for product and GMWB reinsurance derivatives is performed by a multidisciplinary group comprised of finance, actuarial and risk management professionals. This multidisciplinary group reviews and approves changes and enhancements to the Company's valuation model as well as associated controls For further discussion on the impact of fair value changes from living benefits see Note 5 - Fair Value Measurements of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, and for a discussion on the sensitivities of certain living benefits due to capital market factors see Variable Product Guarantee Risks and Risk Management section of the MD&A. Goodwill Impairment Goodwill balances are reviewed for impairment at least annually or more frequently if events occur or circumstances change that would indicate that a triggering event for a potential impairment has occurred. The goodwill impairment test follows a two-step process. In the first step, the fair value of a reporting unit is compared to its carrying value. If the carrying value of a reporting unit exceeds its fair value, the second step of the impairment test is performed for purposes of measuring the impairment. In the second step, the fair value of the reporting unit is allocated to all of the assets and liabilities of the reporting unit to determine an implied goodwill value. If the carrying amount of the reporting unit goodwill exceeds the implied goodwill value, an impairment loss is recognized in an amount equal to that excess. Management determination of the fair value of each reporting unit incorporates multiple inputs into discounted cash flow calculations including assumptions that market participants would make in valuing the reporting unit. Assumptions include levels of economic capital, future business growth, earnings projections, assets under management for Mutual Funds, and the weighted average cost of capital used for purposes of discounting. Decreases in the amount of legal entity capital held or economic capital allocated to a reporting unit, decreases in business growth, decreases in earnings projections and increases in the weighted average cost of capital will all cause a reporting unit fair value to decrease. A reporting unit is defined as an operating segment or one level below an operating segment. The Company reporting units, for which goodwill has been allocated, are equivalent to the Company operating segments of Group Benefits, Personal Lines and Mutual Funds. The carrying value of goodwill is $498 as of December 31, 2014 and is comprised of $138 for Group Benefits, $119 for Personal Lines, and $241 for Mutual Funds. The annual goodwill assessment for the Group Benefits, Personal Lines and Mutual Funds reporting units was completed during the fourth quarter of 2014, which resulted in no write-downs of goodwill for the year ended December 31, 2014. The reporting units passed the first step of the annual impairment test with a significant margin with the exception of the Group Benefits reporting unit. Group Benefits passed the first step of its annual impairment test with less than a 10% margin. The fair value of the Group Benefits reporting unit is based on discounted cash flows using earnings projections on in force business and future business growth. There could be a positive or negative impact on the results of step one in future periods if assumptions change about the level of economic capital, future business growth, earnings projections or the weighted average cost of capital. Please see Note 9 - Goodwill for information regarding the 2013 and 2012 impairment tests. 63 Valuation of Investments and Derivative Instruments Fixed Maturities, AFS; Equity Securities, AFS; Equity Securities, FVO, Fixed Maturities, FVO; Equity Securities, Trading; and Short-term Investments The fair value of AFS securities, fixed maturities, FVO, equity securities, trading, and short-term investments in an active and orderly market (i.e., not distressed or forced liquidation) are determined by management after considering one of three primary sources of information: third-party pricing services, independent broker quotations or pricing matrices. Security pricing is applied using a waterfall approach whereby publicly available prices are first sought from third-party pricing services, any remaining unpriced securities are submitted to independent brokers for prices, or lastly, securities are priced using a pricing matrix. Typical inputs used by these pricing methods include, but are not limited to, reported trades, benchmark yields, issuer spreads, bids, offers, and/or estimated cash flows, prepayment speeds and default rates. Based on the typical trading volumes and the lack of quoted market prices for fixed maturities, third-party pricing services will normally derive the security prices through recent reported trades for identical or similar securities making adjustments through the reporting date based upon available market observable information as outlined above. If there are no recent reported trades, the third party pricing services and brokers may use matrix or model processes to develop a security price where future cash flow expectations are developed based upon collateral performance and discounted at an estimated market rate. Included in the pricing of asset-backed-securities ("ABS") and residential mortgage-backed securities ("RMBS") are estimates of the rate of future prepayments of principal over the remaining life of the securities. Such estimates are derived based upon the characteristics of the underlying structure and prepayment speeds previously experienced at the interest rate levels projected for the underlying collateral. Actual prepayment experience may vary from these estimates. For further discussion, see the AFS Securities, Equity Securities, FVO Fixed Maturities, FVO, Equity Securities, Trading, and Short-Term Investments section in Note 5 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. The Company has analyzed the third-party pricing services' valuation methodologies and related inputs, and has also evaluated the various types of securities in its investment portfolio to determine an appropriate fair value hierarchy level based upon trading activity and the observability of market inputs. For further discussion of fair value measurement, see Note 5 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Derivative Instruments, including embedded derivatives within investments The fair value of derivative instruments is determined using pricing valuation models for over-the-counter ("OTC") derivatives that utilize market data inputs, quoted market prices for exchanged-traded derivatives and transactions cleared through central clearing houses ("OTC-cleared"), or independent broker quotations. Excluding embedded and reinsurance related derivatives, as of December 31, 2014 and 2013 , 96% and 97% , respectively, of derivatives, based upon notional values, were priced by valuation models or quoted market prices. The remaining derivatives were priced by broker quotations. The derivatives are valued using mid-market level inputs that are predominantly observable in the market with the exception of the customized swap contracts that hedge GMWB liabilities. Inputs used to value derivatives include, but are not limited to, swap interest rates, foreign currency forward and spot rates, credit spreads and correlations, interest and equity volatility and equity index levels. For further discussion on derivative instrument valuation methodologies, see the Derivative Instruments, including embedded derivatives within the investments section in Note 5 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. For further discussion on GMWB and other guaranteed living benefits valuation methodologies, see the Living Benefits Required to be Fair Valued section in Note 5 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Limited partnerships and other alternative investments Limited partnerships and other alternative investments include hedge funds where investment company accounting has been applied to a wholly-owned fund of funds measured at fair value. These funds are fair valued using the net asset value per share or equivalent ( NAV ), as a practical expedient, calculated on a monthly basis and is the amount at which a unit or shareholder may redeem their investment, if redemption is allowed. Certain impediments to redemption include, but are not limited to the following: 1) redemption notice periods vary and may be as long as 90 days, 2) redemption may be restricted (e.g. only be allowed on a quarter-end), 3) a holding period referred to as a lock-up may be imposed whereby an investor must hold their investment for a specified period of time before they can make a notice for redemption, 4) gating provisions may limit all redemptions in a given period to a percentage of the entities' equity interests, or may only allow an investor to redeem a portion of their investment at one time and 5) early redemption penalties may be imposed that are expressed as a percentage of the amount redeemed. The Company assesses impediments to redemption and current market conditions that will restrict the redemption at the end of the notice period. For further discussion of fair value measurement, see Note 5 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. In addition, certain limited partnerships and other alternative investments are accounted for under the equity method of accounting. For further discussion, see the Investments - Overview section of Note 1 of Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. 64 Valuation Allowance on Deferred Tax Assets Deferred tax assets represent the tax benefit of future deductible temporary differences and operating loss and tax credit carryovers. Deferred tax assets are measured using the enacted tax rates expected to be in effect when such benefits are realized if there is no change in tax law. Under U.S. GAAP, we test the value of deferred tax assets for impairment on a quarterly basis at the entity level within each tax jurisdiction, consistent with our filed tax returns. Deferred tax assets are reduced by a valuation allowance if, based on the weight of available evidence, it is more likely than not that some portion, or all, of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. The determination of the valuation allowance for our deferred tax assets requires management to make certain judgments and assumptions. In evaluating the ability to recover deferred tax assets, we have considered all available evidence as of December 31, 2014 , including past operating results, the existence of cumulative losses in the most recent years, forecasted earnings, future taxable income, and prudent and feasible tax planning strategies. In the event we determine it is not more likely than not that we will not be able to realize all or part of our deferred tax assets in the future, an increase to the valuation allowance would be charged to earnings in the period such determination is made. Likewise, if it is later determined that it is more likely than not that those deferred tax assets would be realized, the previously provided valuation allowance would be reversed. Our judgments and assumptions are subject to change given the inherent uncertainty in predicting future performance and specific industry and investment market conditions. The Company has recorded a deferred tax asset valuation allowance that is adequate to reduce the total deferred tax asset to an amount that will be more likely than not realized. The deferred tax asset valuation allowance was $181 , relating mostly to the U.S. capital loss carryover, as of December 31, 2014 and $4 , relating mostly to U.S. net operating losses, as of December 31, 2013. In assessing the need for a valuation allowance, management considered future taxable temporary difference reversals, future taxable income exclusive of reversing temporary differences and carryovers, taxable income in open carry back years, as well as other tax planning strategies. These tax planning strategies include holding a portion of debt securities with market value losses until recovery, altering the level of tax exempt securities held, making investments that allow utilization of foreign tax credits, business considerations such as asset-liability matching, and making investments which have specific tax characteristics. Management views such tax planning strategies as prudent and feasible, and would implement them, if necessary, to realize the deferred tax asset. Contingencies Relating to Corporate Litigation and Regulatory Matters Management evaluates each contingent matter separately. A loss is recorded if probable and reasonably estimable. Management establishes reserves for these contingencies at its best estimate, or, if no one number within the range of possible losses is more probable than any other, the Company records an estimated reserve at the low end of the range of losses. The Company has a quarterly monitoring process involving legal and accounting professionals. Legal personnel first identify outstanding corporate litigation and regulatory matters posing a reasonable possibility of loss. These matters are then jointly reviewed by accounting and legal personnel to evaluate the facts and changes since the last review in order to determine if a provision for loss should be recorded or adjusted, the amount that should be recorded, and the appropriate disclosure. The outcomes of certain contingencies currently being evaluated by the Company, which relate to corporate litigation and regulatory matters, are inherently difficult to predict, and the reserves that have been established for the estimated settlement amounts are subject to significant changes. Management expects that the ultimate liability, if any, with respect to such lawsuits, after consideration of provisions made for estimated losses, will not be material to the consolidated financial condition of the Company. In view of the uncertainties regarding the outcome of these matters, as well as the uncertainties regarding tax-deductibility of payments, it is possible that the ultimate cost to the Company of these matters could exceed the reserve by an amount that would have a material adverse effect on the Company results of operations or liquidity in a particular quarterly or annual period. 65 KEY PERFORMANCE MEASURES AND RATIOS The Company considers the measures and ratios discussed below to be key performance indicators for its businesses. Management believes that these ratios and measures are useful in understanding the underlying trends in The Hartford businesses. However, these key performance indicators should only be used in conjunction with, and not in lieu of, the results presented in the segment discussions that follow in this MD&A. These ratios and measures may not be comparable to other performance measures used by the Company competitors. Definitions of Non-GAAP and other measures and ratios Account Value Account value includes policyholders balances for investment contracts and reserves for future policy benefits for insurance contracts. Account value is a measure used by the Company because a significant portion of the Company fee income is based upon the level of account value. These revenues increase or decrease with a rise or fall in the amount of account value whether caused by changes in the market or through net flows. After-tax core earnings margin, excluding buyouts After-tax core earnings margin, excluding buyouts, is a non-GAAP financial measure that the Company uses to evaluate, and believes is an important measure of, the Group Benefits segment operating performance. After-tax margin is the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP measure. The Company believes that after-tax core earnings margin, excluding buyouts, provides investors with a valuable measure of the performance of Group Benefits because it reveals trends in the business that may be obscured by the effect of buyouts. After-tax core earnings margin, excluding buyouts, should not be considered as a substitute for after-tax margin and does not reflect the overall profitability of Group Benefits. Therefore, the Company believes it is important for investors to evaluate both after-tax core earnings margin, excluding buyouts, and after-tax margin when reviewing performance. After-tax core earnings margin, excluding buyouts is calculated by dividing core earnings excluding buyouts by revenues excluding buyouts and realized gains (losses). A reconciliation of after-tax margin to after-tax core earnings margin, excluding buyouts for the years ended December 31, 2014 , 2013 and 2012 is set forth in the After-tax margin section within MD&A - Group Benefits. Assets Under Management Assets under management ( AUM ) include account values and mutual fund assets. AUM is a measure used by the Company because a significant portion of the Company revenues are based upon asset values. These revenues increase or decrease with a rise or fall in the amount of account value whether caused by changes in the market or through net flows. Catastrophe ratio The catastrophe ratio (a component of the loss and loss adjustment expense ratio) represents the ratio of catastrophe losses incurred in the current calendar year (net of reinsurance) to earned premiums and includes catastrophe losses incurred for both the current and prior accident years. A catastrophe is an event that causes $25 or more in industry insured property losses and affects a significant number of property and casualty policyholders and insurers. The catastrophe ratio includes the effect of catastrophe losses, but does not include the effect of reinstatement premiums. Combined ratio The combined ratio is the sum of the loss and loss adjustment expense ratio, the expense ratio and the policyholder dividend ratio. This ratio is a relative measurement that describes the related cost of losses and expenses for every $100 of earned premiums. A combined ratio below 100 demonstrates underwriting profit; a combined ratio above 100 demonstrates underwriting losses. Combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development The combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development, a non-GAAP financial measure, represents the combined ratio for the current accident year, excluding the impact of catastrophes. Combined ratio is the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP measure. A reconciliation of combined ratio to combined ratio before prior accident year reserve development for the years ended December 31, 2014 , 2013 and 2012 is set forth in MD&A - Commercial Lines and Personal Lines. 66 Core Earnings Core earnings, a non-GAAP measure, is an important measure of the Company operating performance. The Company believes that core earnings provides investors with a valuable measure of the performance of the Company ongoing businesses because it reveals trends in our insurance and financial services businesses that may be obscured by including the net effect of certain realized capital gains and losses, discontinued operations, pension settlements, loss on extinguishment of debt, gains and losses on business disposition transactions, certain restructuring and other costs and the impact of Unlocks to DAC, SIA, URR and death and other insurance benefit reserve balances. Some realized capital gains and losses are primarily driven by investment decisions and external economic developments, the nature and timing of which are unrelated to the insurance and underwriting aspects of our business. Accordingly, core earnings excludes the effect of all realized gains and losses (net of tax and the effects of DAC) that tend to be highly variable from period to period based on capital market conditions. The Company believes, however, that some realized capital gains and losses are integrally related to our insurance operations, so core earnings includes net realized gains and losses such as net periodic settlements on credit derivatives. These net realized gains and losses are directly related to an offsetting item included in the income statement such as net investment income. Net income (loss) is the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP measure. Core earnings should not be considered as a substitute for net income (loss) and does not reflect the overall profitability of the Company business. Therefore, the Company believes that it is useful for investors to evaluate both net income (loss) and core earnings when reviewing the Company performance. A reconciliation of net income to core earnings is set forth below: For the years ended December 31, 2014 2013 2012 Net income (loss) $ 798 $ 176 $ (38 ) Less: Unlock charge, after-tax (62 ) (109 ) (138 ) Less: Restructuring and other costs, after-tax (49 ) (44 ) (129 ) Less: Loss from discontinued operations, after-tax (551 ) (1,049 ) (258 ) Less: Pension settlement, after-tax (83 ) Less: Loss on extinguishment of debt, after-tax (138 ) (587 ) Less: Net reinsurance gain (loss) on dispositions, after-tax 15 (24 ) (388 ) Less: Net realized capital gains (losses), after-tax and DAC, excluded from core earnings [1] (20 ) 121 340 Core earnings $ 1,548 $ 1,419 $ 1,122 [1] Excludes net realized gain on dispositions of $1.0 billion , after-tax, for the year ended December 31, 2013 relating to the sales of the Retirement Plans and Individual Life businesses which are included in net reinsurance loss on dispositions, after-tax. Current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes The current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes is a measure of the cost of non-catastrophe claims incurred in the current accident year divided by earned premiums. Management believes that the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes is a performance measure that is useful to investors as it removes the impact of volatile and unpredictable catastrophe losses and prior accident year reserve development. Expense ratio The expense ratio for the underwriting segments of Commercial Lines and Personal Lines is the ratio of underwriting expenses to earned premiums. Underwriting expenses include the amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs and insurance operating costs and expenses, including certain centralized services and bad debt expense. Deferred policy acquisition costs include commissions, taxes, licenses and fees and other underwriting expenses and are amortized over the policy term. The expense ratio for Group Benefits is expressed as the ratio of insurance operating costs and other expenses and amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs, to premiums and other considerations, excluding buyout premiums. Fee Income Fee income is largely driven from amounts collected as a result of contractually defined percentages of assets under management. These fees are generally collected on a daily basis. Therefore, the growth in assets under management either through positive net flows or net sales, or favorable equity market performance will have a favorable impact on fee income. Conversely, either negative net flows or net sales, or unfavorable equity market performance will reduce fee income. 67 Full Surrender Rates Full surrender rates are an internal measure of contract surrenders calculated using annualized full surrenders divided by a two-point average of annuity account values. The full surrender rate represents full contract liquidation and excludes partial withdrawals. Loss and loss adjustment expense ratio The loss and loss adjustment expense ratio is a measure of the cost of claims incurred in the calendar year divided by earned premium and includes losses incurred for both the current and prior accident years, as well as the costs of mortality and morbidity and other contractholder benefits to policyholders. Among other factors, the loss and loss adjustment expense ratio needed for the Company to achieve its targeted return on equity fluctuates from year to year based on changes in the expected investment yield over the claim settlement period, the timing of expected claim settlements and the targeted returns set by management based on the competitive environment. The loss and loss adjustment expense ratio is affected by claim frequency and claim severity, particularly for shorter-tail property lines of business, where the emergence of claim frequency and severity is credible and likely indicative of ultimate losses. Claim frequency represents the percentage change in the average number of reported claims per unit of exposure in the current accident year compared to that of the previous accident year. Claim severity represents the percentage change in the estimated average cost per claim in the current accident year compared to that of the previous accident year. As one of the factors used to determine pricing, the Company practice is to first make an overall assumption about claim frequency and severity for a given line of business and then, as part of the ratemaking process, adjust the assumption as appropriate for the particular state, product or coverage. Loss ratio, excluding buyouts The loss ratio is utilized for the Group Benefits segment and is expressed as a ratio of benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses to premiums and other considerations, excluding buyout premiums. Since Group Benefits occasionally buys a block of claims for a stated premium amount, the Company excludes this buyout from the loss ratio used for evaluating the underwriting results of the business as buyouts may distort the loss ratio. Buyout premiums represent takeover of open claim liabilities and other non-recurring premium amounts. Mutual Fund Assets Mutual fund assets are owned by the shareholders of those funds and not by the Company and therefore are not reflected in the Company consolidated financial statements. Mutual fund assets are a measure used by the Company because a significant portion of the Company revenues are based upon asset values. These revenues increase or decrease with a rise or fall in the amount of account value whether caused by changes in the market or through net flows. New business written premium New business written premium represents the amount of premiums charged for policies issues to customers who were not insured with the Company in the previous policy term. New business written premium plus renewal policy written premium equals total written premium. Policies in force Policies in force represent the number of policies with coverage in effect as of the end of the period. The number of policies in force is a growth measure used for Personal Lines and standard commercial lines within Commercial Lines and is affected by both new business growth and policy count retention. Policy count retention Policy count retention represents the ratio of the number of policies renewed during the period divided by the number of policies available to renew. The number of policies available to renew represents the number of policies, net of any cancellations, written in the previous policy term. Policy count retention is affected by a number of factors, including the percentage of renewal policy quotes accepted and decisions by the Company to non-renew policies because of specific policy underwriting concerns or because of a decision to reduce premium writings in certain classes of business or states. Policy count retention is also affected by advertising and rate actions taken by competitors. Policyholder dividend ratio The policyholder dividend ratio is the ratio of policyholder dividends to earned premium. Prior accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio The prior year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio represents the increase (decrease) in the estimated cost of settling catastrophe and non-catastrophe claims incurred in prior accident years as recorded in the current calendar year divided by earned premiums. 68 Reinstatement premiums Reinstatement premium represents additional ceded premium paid for the reinstatement of the amount of reinsurance coverage that was reduced as a result of a reinsurance loss payment. Renewal earned price increase (decrease) Written premiums are earned over the policy term, which is six months for certain personal lines auto business and twelve months for substantially all of the remainder of the Company property and casualty business. Because the Company earns premiums over the six to twelve month term of the policies, renewal earned price increases (decreases) lag renewal written price increases (decreases) by six to twelve months. Renewal written price increase (decrease) Renewal written price increase (decrease) represents the combined effect of rate changes, amount of insurance and individual risk pricing decisions per unit of exposure since the prior year. The rate component represents the change in rate filings during the period and the amount of insurance represents the change in the value of the rating base, such as model year/vehicle symbol for auto, building replacement costs for property and wage inflation for workers compensation. A number of factors affect renewal written price increases (decreases) including expected loss costs as projected by the Company pricing actuaries, rate filings approved by state regulators, risk selection decisions made by the Company underwriters and marketplace competition. Renewal written price changes reflect the property and casualty insurance market cycle. Prices tend to increase for a particular line of business when insurance carriers have incurred significant losses in that line of business in the recent past or the industry as a whole commits less of its capital to writing exposures in that line of business. Prices tend to decrease when recent loss experience has been favorable or when competition among insurance carriers increases. Renewal written price statistics are subject to change from period to period, based on a number of factors, including changes in actuarial estimates and the effect of subsequent cancellations and non-renewals on rate achieved, and modifications made to better reflect ultimate pricing achieved. Return on Assets ( ROA ), core earnings ROA, core earnings, is a non-GAAP financial measure that the Company uses to evaluate, and believes is an important measure of, certain of the segment operating performance. ROA is the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP measure. The Company believes that ROA, core earnings, provides investors with a valuable measure of the performance of certain of the Company on-going businesses because it reveals trends in our businesses that may be obscured by the effect of realized gains (losses). ROA, core earnings, should not be considered as a substitute for ROA and does not reflect the overall profitability of our businesses. Therefore, the Company believes it is important for investors to evaluate both ROA, core earnings, and ROA when reviewing the Company performance. ROA is calculated by dividing core earnings by a two-point average AUM. A reconciliation of ROA to ROA, core earnings for the years ended December 31, 2014 , 2013 and 2012 is set forth in the ROA section within MD&A - Mutual Funds. Underwriting gain (loss) The Company's management evaluates profitability of the P&C businesses primarily on the basis of underwriting gain (loss). Underwriting gain (loss) is a before-tax measure that represents earned premiums less incurred losses, loss adjustment expenses and underwriting expenses. Underwriting gain (loss) is influenced significantly by earned premium growth and the adequacy of the Company's pricing. Underwriting profitability over time is also greatly influenced by the Company's pricing and underwriting discipline, which seeks to manage exposure to loss through favorable risk selection and diversification, its management of claims, its use of reinsurance and its ability to manage its expense ratio, which it accomplishes through economies of scale and its management of acquisition costs and other underwriting expenses. Net income (loss) is the most directly comparable GAAP measure . The Company believes that underwriting gain (loss) provides investors with a valuable measure of before-tax profitability derived from underwriting activities, which are managed separately from the Company's investing activities. A reconciliation of underwriting gain (loss) to net income (loss) for Commercial Lines, Personal Lines and Property & Casualty Other Operations is set forth in their respective discussions herein. 69 Written and earned premiums Written premium is a statutory accounting financial measure which represents the amount of premiums charged for policies issued, net of reinsurance, during a fiscal period. Earned premium is a U.S. GAAP and statutory measure. Premiums are considered earned and are included in the financial results on a pro rata basis over the policy period. Management believes that written premium is a performance measure that is useful to investors as it reflects current trends in the Company sale of property and casualty insurance products. Written and earned premium are recorded net of ceded reinsurance premium. Traditional life insurance type products, such as those sold by Group Benefits, collect premiums from policyholders in exchange for financial protection for the policyholder from a specified insurable loss, such as death or disability. These premiums together with net investment income earned from the overall investment strategy are used to pay the contractual obligations under these insurance contracts. Two major factors, new sales and persistency, impact premium growth. Sales can increase or decrease in a given year based on a number of factors, including but not limited to, customer demand for the Company product offerings, pricing competition, distribution channels and the Company reputation and ratings. Persistency refers to the percentage of policies remaining in-force from year-to-year. 70 COMMERCIAL LINES Results of Operations Underwriting Summary 2014 2013 2012 Written premiums $ 6,381 $ 6,208 $ 6,209 Change in unearned premium reserve 92 5 (50 ) Earned premiums 6,289 6,203 6,259 Losses and loss adjustment expenses Current accident year before catastrophes 3,733 3,897 4,178 Current accident year catastrophes 109 105 325 Prior accident years 13 83 72 Total losses and loss adjustment expenses 3,855 4,085 4,575 Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs 919 905 927 Underwriting expenses 1,086 1,082 1,034 Dividends to policyholders 15 16 14 Underwriting gain (loss) 414 115 (291 ) Net servicing income [2] 23 21 17 Net investment income 958 984 924 Net realized capital gains (losses) (30 ) 72 67 Other expenses (3 ) (1 ) (6 ) Income from continuing operations before income taxes 1,362 1,191 711 Income tax expense 385 320 159 Income from continuing operations, net of tax 977 871 552 Income (loss) from discontinued operations, net of tax [1] 6 (1 ) (5 ) Net income $ 983 $ 870 $ 547 [1] Represents the residual income (loss) from operations and sale in 2011 of Specialty Risk Services ( SRS ). [2] Includes servicing revenues of $113 , $112 , and $102 for the years ended December 31, 2014 , December 31, 2013 , and December 31, 2012 respectively. Premium Measures [1] 2014 2013 2012 New business premium $ 1,088 $ 1,035 $ 968 Standard commercial lines policy count retention 84 % 81 % 83 % Standard commercial lines renewal written pricing increase 5 % 7 % 7 % Standard commercial lines renewal earned pricing increase 7 % 8 % 6 % Standard commercial lines policies in-force as of end of period (in thousands) 1,277 1,250 1,263 [1] Standard commercial premium measures exclude Middle Market specialty programs and livestock lines of business. Ratios 2014 2013 2012 Loss and loss adjustment expense ratio Current accident year before catastrophes 59.4 62.8 66.8 Current accident year catastrophes 1.7 1.7 5.2 Prior year development 0.2 1.3 1.2 Total loss and loss adjustment expense ratio 61.3 65.9 73.1 Expense ratio 31.9 32.0 31.3 Policyholder dividend ratio 0.2 0.3 0.2 Combined ratio 93.4 98.1 104.6 Current accident year catastrophes and prior year development 1.9 3.0 6.4 Combined ratio before catastrophes and prior year development 91.5 95.1 98.3 71 2015 Outlook The Company expects economic conditions to continue to improve slowly driving a modest increase in exposures, while pricing is anticipated to moderate. As such, the Company expects low-to-mid single-digit written premiums growth in 2015 driven by small commercial and middle market where the Company continues to develop comprehensive product solutions, deeper relationships with distribution partners, differentiating customer experiences and enhanced ease of doing business processes and technologies. In specialty lines, the Company expects modest written premium growth in professional liability. The Company expects the combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development will be between approximately 89.5 and 91.5 for 2015, compared to 91.5 in 2014, due to stable to slightly improving margins as earned pricing increases are expected to be slightly ahead of long-term loss costs trends. Year ended December 31, 2014 compared to the year ended December 31, 2013 Overview Net income, as compared to the prior year period, increased in 2014 primarily due to an improvement in underwriting results, driven by lower current accident year losses and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes and lower prior accident years development, partially offset by a shift to net realized capital losses in the current year from net realized capital gains in the prior year period. Underwriting expenses, compared to the prior year period, reflect a reduction of $49, before tax, in the Company's estimated liability for NY State Workers' Compensation Board assessments. Revenues - Earned and Written Premiums Earned premiums increased in 2014, reflecting the impact of higher written premiums primarily in small commercial and to a lesser extent in middle market, partially offset by written premium declines in specialty lines. Written premium increased in all small commercial lines of business, driven by favorable renewal premium due to higher policy count retention and higher written pricing, as well as an increase in new business and higher audit premium on workers' compensation policies. Written premium increases in middle market were driven primarily by higher renewal written premium in property, general liability and auto, partially offset by the impact of underwriting actions that reduced written premium in the programs business. Written premium decreases in specialty lines were primarily the result of underwriting actions to improve profitability of the captives business, partially offset by growth in national accounts and bond. Losses and Loss Adjustment Expenses Losses and loss adjustment expenses reflect favorable current accident year losses before catastrophes in all lines of business and lower unfavorable prior accident years development. The reduction in the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes in 2014 was primarily driven by a lower loss and loss adjustment expense ratio in workers' compensation due to earned pricing increases and favorable frequency and severity trends. Accordingly, the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes decreased by 3.4 points to 59.4 in 2014 from 62.8 in 2013. Current accident year catastrophe losses of $109 , before tax, in 2014, compared to $105 , before tax, in 2013. Losses in 2014 were primarily due to multiple winter storm and wind and hail events across various U.S. geographic regions. Losses in 2013 were primarily due to multiple wind and hail and tornado events across various U.S. geographic regions. For additional information, see MD&A - Critical Accounting Estimates, Property and Casualty Insurance Product Reserves, Net of Reinsurance. Prior accident years reserve strengthening of $13 , before tax, in 2014, compared to $83 , before tax, in 2013. Development in 2014 was primarily due to discount accretion on workers' compensation and strengthening related to commercial auto liability, partially offset by a release of professional and general liability reserves. Development in 2013 was primarily due to strengthening related to commercial auto liability and the closing of the New York Section 25A Fund for Reopened Cases, partially offset by a release of professional and general liability reserves. For additional information, see MD&A - Critical Accounting Estimates, Reserve Roll-forwards and Development. Underwriting Ratios The combined ratio, before catastrophes and prior year development, improved 3.6 points to 91.5 in 2014 from 95.1 in 2013. The improvement primarily reflects a decrease in the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes, as well as a decrease in the expense ratio (including a 0.8 point favorable impact on the expense ratio related to a reduction in NY State Workers' Compensation Board assessments). 72 Investment Results Investment income decreased in 2014, as compared to the prior year period. For discussion of consolidated investment results, see MD&A - Investment Results, Net Investment Income (Loss) and Net Realized Capital Gains (Losses). Income Taxes The effective tax rate, in both periods, differs from the U.S. Federal statutory rate primarily due to permanent differences related to investments in tax exempt securities. For further discussion of income taxes, see Note 13 - Income Taxes of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Year ended December 31, 2013 compared to the year ended December 31, 2012 Overview Net income, as compared to the prior year period, increased in 2013 primarily due to improvements in underwriting results, driven by lower current accident year losses and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes and lower current accident year catastrophe losses. Revenues - Earned and Written Premium Earned premiums decreased in 2013, reflecting the impact of lower written premiums primarily in middle market and specialty lines, partially offset by written premium growth in small commercial. Written premium increases in small commercial, primarily in workers compensation business, were driven by favorable audit premium as well as favorable renewal premium due to higher earned pricing, partially offset by lower policy count retention. Written premium decreases in middle market were driven primarily by lower renewal premium in workers' compensation business partially offset by new business premium growth in property, general liability and auto and favorable overall inforce policy retention. Written premium decreases in specialty lines were primarily the result of underwriting actions to reposition the captives business and exit unprofitable programs partially offset by new business growth in national accounts. The Company ceased writing all transportation programs effective January 1, 2014. Losses and Loss Adjustment Expenses Losses and loss adjustment expenses reflect favorable current accident year losses before catastrophes in all three businesses and a significant decline in current accident year catastrophes partially offset by unfavorable prior accident years development. Favorable current accident year losses and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes were primarily driven by lower loss and loss adjustment expenses in workers compensation due to favorable severity and frequency. The current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes decreased accordingly by 4.0 points to 62.8 in 2013 from 66.8 in 2012. Current accident year catastrophe losses of $105, before tax, in 2013, compared to $325, before tax, in 2012. Losses in 2013 were primarily due to multiple thunderstorm, hail and tornado events across various U.S. geographic regions. Losses in 2012 were primarily driven by $207 related to Storm Sandy and multiple thunderstorm, hail and tornado events across various U.S. geographic regions. For additional information, see MD&A - Critical Accounting Estimates, Property and Casualty Insurance Product Reserves, Net of Reinsurance. Prior accident years reserve strengthening of $83, before tax, in 2013, compared to $72, before tax, in 2012. Development in 2013 was primarily due to strengthening related to commercial auto liability and the closing of the New York Section 25A Fund for Reopened Cases partially offset by a release of general liability reserves. Development in 2012 was primarily due to strengthening related to commercial auto liability claims, professional liability directors and officers claims and workers compensation partially offset by a release of general liability and catastrophe reserves. For additional information, see MD&A - Critical Accounting Estimates, Reserve Roll-forwards and Development. Underwriting Ratios The combined ratio, before catastrophes and prior year development, improved 3.2 points to 95.1 in 2013 from 98.3 in 2012. The improvement primarily reflects a decrease in the current accident year before catastrophes loss and loss adjustment expense ratio. Investment Results Investment income increased in 2013, as compared to the prior year period. For discussion of consolidated investment results, see MD&A - Investment Results, Net Investment Income (Loss) and Net Realized Capital Gains (Losses). Income Taxes The effective tax rate, in both periods, differs from the U.S. Federal statutory rate primarily due to permanent differences related to investments in tax exempt securities. For further discussion of income taxes, see Note 13 - Income Taxes of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 73 PERSONAL LINES Results of Operations Operating Summary 2014 2013 2012 Written premiums $ 3,861 $ 3,719 $ 3,630 Change in unearned premium reserve 55 59 (6 ) Earned premiums 3,806 3,660 3,636 Losses and loss adjustment expenses Current accident year before catastrophes 2,498 2,412 2,390 Current accident year catastrophes 232 207 381 Prior accident years (46 ) (39 ) (141 ) Total losses and loss adjustment expenses 2,684 2,580 2,630 Amortization of DAC 348 332 332 Underwriting expenses 604 634 635 Underwriting gain 170 114 39 Net servicing income [1] 3 34 23 Net investment income 129 145 159 Net realized capital gains (losses) (5 ) 34 12 Other income (expenses) 2 2 (2 ) Income before income taxes 299 329 231 Income tax expense 92 100 65 Net income $ 207 $ 229 $ 166 [1] Includes servicing revenues of $163 and $155 for years ended December 31, 2013 and 2012 , respectively. Written Premiums 2014 2013 2012 Product Line Automobile $ 2,659 $ 2,562 $ 2,514 Homeowners 1,202 1,157 1,116 Total $ 3,861 $ 3,719 $ 3,630 Earned Premiums Product Line Automobile $ 2,613 $ 2,522 $ 2,526 Homeowners 1,193 1,138 1,110 Total $ 3,806 $ 3,660 $ 3,636 74 Premium Measures 2014 2013 2012 Policies in-force at year end (in thousands) Automobile 2,049 2,019 2,015 Homeowners 1,309 1,319 1,319 Total policies in-force at year end 3,358 3,338 3,334 New business written premium Automobile $ 415 $ 374 $ 332 Homeowners $ 130 $ 131 $ 117 Policy count retention Automobile 85 % 86 % 85 % Homeowners 86 % 87 % 86 % Renewal written pricing increase Automobile 5 % 5 % 3 % Homeowners 8 % 7 % 6 % Renewal earned pricing increase Automobile 5 % 5 % 6 % Homeowners 8 % 6 % 7 % Underwriting Ratios 2014 2013 2012 Loss and loss adjustment expense ratio Current accident year before catastrophes 65.6 65.9 65.7 Current accident year catastrophes 6.1 5.7 10.5 Prior year development (1.2 ) (1.1 ) (3.9 ) Total loss and loss adjustment expense ratio 70.5 70.5 72.3 Expense ratio 25.0 26.4 26.6 Combined ratio 95.5 96.9 98.9 Current accident year catastrophes and prior year development 4.9 4.6 6.6 Combined ratio before catastrophes and prior year development 90.6 92.3 92.3 Product Combined Ratios 2014 2013 2012 Automobile 98.4 99.0 99.1 Homeowners 90.0 90.7 98.2 2015 Outlook The Company expects moderate written premium growth driven by AARP Direct and AARP Agency. The Company expects the combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development will be between approximately 89.0 and 91.0 for 2015 compared to 90.6 in 2014 . The current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes is expected to improve modestly for 2015, driven by continued focus on rate adequacy. For auto, the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes is expected to decline slightly in 2015, driven by earned pricing increases partially offset by moderate average claim severity. For homeowners, the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes is expected to decline in 2015, driven by earned pricing increases and lower claim frequency partially offset by increased average claim severity. 75 Year ended December 31, 2014 compared to the year ended December 31, 2013 Overview Net income, as compared to the prior year period, decreased in 2014 primarily due to a change to net realized capital losses and a decrease in net servicing income, partially offset by improvements in underwriting results, driven by higher earned premiums and lower underwriting expenses. Revenues - Earned and Written Premiums Earned and written premiums increased in 2014 reflecting new business written premium growth in auto, primarily from AARP Direct and AARP Agency, improved earned pricing increases in both auto and homeowners, and continued high levels of premium retention. Losses and Loss Adjustment Expenses Losses and loss adjustment expenses reflect an increase in current accident year loss and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes and higher current accident year catastrophes, partially offset by higher favorable prior accident years development. Current accident year losses and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes increased in 2014 compared to 2013 driven by growth in earned premium, partially offset by a decline in the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes to 65.6 in 2014 from 65.9 in 2013. Current accident year catastrophe losses of $232 , before tax, in 2014 compared to $207 , before tax, in 2013. Losses in 2014 were primarily due to multiple thunderstorm and winter storm events across various U.S. geographic regions. Losses in 2013 were primarily due to multiple thunderstorm, hail and tornado events across various U.S. geographic regions. For additional information, see MD&A - Critical Accounting Estimates, Property and Casualty Insurance Product Reserves, Net of Reinsurance. Prior accident years reserve releases of $46 , before tax, in 2014 compared to $39 , before tax, in 2013. Reserve releases in 2014 were primarily related to prior accident year catastrophes, as well as prior accident year homeowners and extra contractual liability reserves. Reserve releases in 2013 were primarily related to Storm Sandy. For additional information, see MD&A - Critical Accounting Estimates, Property and Casualty Insurance Product Reserves, Net of Reinsurance. Underwriting Ratios The combined ratio, before current accident year catastrophes and prior year development, improved to 90.6 in 2014 from 92.3 in 2013. Investment Results Investment income decreased in 2014, as compared to the prior year period. For discussion of consolidated investment results, see MD&A - Investment Results, Net Investment Income (Loss) and Net Realized Capital Gains (Losses). Income Taxes The effective tax rates in 2014 and 2013 differ from the U.S. Federal statutory rate of 35% primarily due to permanent differences related to investments in tax exempt securities. For further discussion of income taxes, see Note 13 - Income Taxes of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Year ended December 31, 2013 compared to the year ended December 31, 2012 Overview Net income, as compared to the prior year period, increased in 2013 primarily due to improvements in underwriting results, driven by lower current year catastrophes partially offset by lower favorable prior year development. Revenues - Earned and Written Premiums Earned and written premiums increased in 2013, reflecting new business written premium growth in auto and home, primarily from the AARP Direct and AARP through agents distribution channels and improved policy count retention in auto and home due to initiatives implemented over the last two years. 76 Losses and Loss Adjustment Expenses Losses and loss adjustment expenses reflect a decline in current accident year catastrophes partially offset by lower favorable prior accident years development. Current accident year losses and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes increased in 2013 compared to 2012 in line with the growth in earned premium and as reflected by the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes of 65.9 in 2013 as compared with 65.7 in 2012. Current accident year catastrophe losses of $207, before tax, in 2013 compared to $381, before tax in 2012. Losses in 2013 were primarily due to multiple thunderstorm, hail and tornado events across various U.S. geographic regions. Losses in 2012 were primarily driven by losses from Storm Sandy of $143 along with other thunderstorm and hail events across various U.S. geographic regions. For additional information, see MD&A - Critical Accounting Estimates, Property and Casualty Insurance Product Reserves, Net of Reinsurance. Prior accident years reserve releases of $39, before tax, in 2013 compared to $141, before tax, in 2012. Reserve releases in 2013 were primarily related to Storm Sandy. Reserve releases in 2012 were due to favorable emergence of losses in auto liability, homeowners and catastrophes. For additional information, see MD&A - Critical Accounting Estimates, Property and Casualty Insurance Product Reserves, Net of Reinsurance. Underwriting Ratios The combined ratio, before current accident year catastrophes and prior year development, stayed consistent at 92.3 for 2012 and 2013. Investment Results Investment income increased in 2014, as compared to the prior year period. For discussion of consolidated investment results, see MD&A - Investment Results, Net Investment Income (Loss) and Net Realized Capital Gains (Losses). Income Taxes The effective tax rates in 2013 and 2012 differ from the U.S. Federal statutory rate of 35% primarily due to permanent differences related to investments in tax exempt securities. For further discussion of income taxes, see Note 13 - Income Taxes of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 77 PROPERTY & CASUALTY OTHER OPERATIONS Results of Operations Underwriting Summary 2014 2013 2012 Written premiums $ 2 $ 2 $ 8 Change in unearned premium reserve 1 1 10 Earned premiums 1 1 (2 ) Losses and loss adjustment expenses Prior accident years 261 148 65 Total losses and loss adjustment expenses 261 148 65 Underwriting expenses 37 29 34 Underwriting loss (297 ) (176 ) (101 ) Net servicing expense (1 ) Net investment income 129 141 149 Net realized capital gains 3 12 17 Other income 6 2 6 Income (loss) before income taxes (159 ) (22 ) 71 Income tax expense (benefit) (51 ) (20 ) 14 Net income (loss) $ (108 ) $ (2 ) $ 57 Year ended December 31, 2014 compared to the year ended December 31, 2013 Net loss, as compared to the prior year period, increased in 2014 primarily due to an increase in net asbestos and environmental reserve strengthening. As part of its annual ground-up asbestos and environmental reserve evaluations in 2014, the Company strengthened its associated reserves by $212 and $27, before tax, respectively. In 2013, the Company strengthened its net asbestos and environmental reserves by $130 and $10, before tax, respectively. Year ended December 31, 2013 compared to the year ended December 31, 2012 Net income, as compared to the prior year period, decreased in 2013 primarily due to net asbestos and environmental reserve strengthening. As part of its annual ground-up asbestos and environmental reserve evaluations in 2013, the Company strengthened its associated reserves by $130 and $10, before tax, respectively. In 2012, the Company strengthened its net asbestos and environmental reserves by $48 and $3, before tax, respectively. The effective tax rates in 2014, 2013 and 2012 differ from the U.S. Federal statutory rate of 35% primarily due to permanent differences related to investments in tax exempt securities. For further discussion of income taxes, see the Income Taxes section within Note 1 - Basis of Presentation and Significant Accounting Policies of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. For information on net asbestos and environmental reserves, see Property & Casualty Other Operations Claims within the Property and Casualty Insurance Product Reserves, Net of Reinsurance section in Critical Accounting Estimates. 78 GROUP BENEFITS Results of Operations Operating Summary 2014 2013 2012 Premiums and other considerations [1] $ 3,095 $ 3,330 $ 3,810 Net investment income 374 390 405 Net realized capital gains 15 50 40 Total revenues 3,484 3,770 4,255 Benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses 2,362 2,518 3,029 Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs 32 33 33 Insurance operating costs and other expenses 836 964 1,033 Total benefits, losses and expenses 3,230 3,515 4,095 Income before income taxes 254 255 160 Income tax expense 63 63 31 Net income [1] $ 191 $ 192 $ 129 Premiums and other considerations Fully insured ongoing premiums $ 3,014 $ 3,272 $ 3,745 Buyout premiums 20 1 3 Other 61 57 62 Total premiums and other considerations 3,095 3,330 3,810 Fully insured ongoing sales, excluding buyouts $ 326 $ 393 $ 405 Ratios, excluding buyouts Group disability loss ratio 83.5 % 84.0 % 92.2 % Group life loss ratio 70.5 % 69.5 % 69.0 % Total loss ratio 76.2 % 75.6 % 79.5 % Expense ratio 28.2 % 29.9 % 28.0 % Selected ratios excluding Association - Financial Institutions Group life loss ratio, excluding Association - Financial Institutions 72.8 % 76.2 % 77.1 % Total loss ratio, excluding Association - Financial Institutions 77.4 % 79.3 % 84.1 % Expense ratio, excluding Association - Financial Institutions 27.2 % 26.8 % 24.1 % After-tax margin After-tax margin (excluding buyouts) 5.5 % 5.1 % 3.0 % Effect of net realized gains, net of tax on after-tax margin 0.3 % 0.8 % 0.6 % After-tax core earnings margin (excluding buyouts) 5.2 % 4.3 % 2.4 % [1] Group Benefits has a block of Association - Financial Institution business that is subject to a profit sharing arrangement with third parties. The Association - Financial Institutions business represented $72 , $277 and $321 of premiums and other considerations, and $1 , $1 and $2 of net income in 2014 , 2013 and 2012 , respectively. 2015 Outlook The Company expects premiums to increase for 2015 due primarily to higher expected sales than prior year and continued strong book persistency. The Company expects Group Benefits' disability results to improve as a result of continued pricing actions, and lower incidence partially offset by lower life results due to less favorable life mortality compared to 2014. The Company expects Group Benefits' after-tax core earnings margin (excluding buyouts) will be between approximately 5.0% and 5.5% for 2015 as compared to 5.2% in 2014. 79 Year ended December 31, 2014 compared to the year ended December 31, 2013 Net income slightly decreased in 2014, as compared to the prior year period, primarily due to lower premiums and other considerations, net investment income and net realized capital gains, offset by lower benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses and insurance operating costs and other expenses. Premiums and other considerations decreased in 2014, as compared to the prior year period, due primarily to management actions related to the Association - Financial Institutions block of business. Insurance operating costs and other expenses decreased in 2014, compared to the prior year period, due primarily to lower profit sharing expense related to the Association - Financial Institutions block of business. Fully insured ongoing sales, excluding buyouts declined 17% in 2014, as compared to prior year period. Excluding Association - Financial Institutions block of business, fully insured ongoing sales, excluding buyouts decreased 12% in 2014 primarily due to lower large case sales. The total loss ratio increased by 0.6 points in 2014, as compared to the prior year period. Excluding the Association - Financial Institutions block of business, the loss ratio improved 1.9 points in 2014 due to improvements in both the life and disability loss ratios. The life loss ratio improvement reflects favorable mortality experience, improved pricing, and the impact of changes in reserve assumptions. The disability loss ratio improvement reflects improved accident year incidence and pricing partially offset by higher new claim severity and less favorable development on prior accident year recoveries. The expense ratio improved 1.7 points in 2014, compared to the prior year period, primarily due to lower profit sharing expense related to the Association - Financial Institutions block of business in relation to lower premium and other considerations. The after-tax core earnings margin, excluding buyouts, improved 0.9 points in 2014, compared to the prior year period. The improvement was primarily due to the improved loss ratio excluding the Association - Financial Institutions block of business. Investment income and net realized capital gains decreased in 2014, as compared to the prior year period. For discussion of consolidated investment results, see MD&A - Investment Results, Investment Income (Loss) and Net Realized Capital Gains (Losses). The effective tax rate, in both periods, differs from the U.S. Federal statutory rate primarily due to permanent differences related to investments in tax exempt securities. For further discussion of income taxes, see Note 13 - Income Taxes of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Year ended December 31, 2013 compared to the year ended December 31, 2012 Net income, as compared to the prior year period, increased in 2013 driven primarily by an improvement in the loss ratio and lower insurance operating costs and other expenses, partially offset by a decrease in premiums and other considerations. The decrease in premiums was driven by continued pricing discipline, our decision not to renew our largest account effective January 1, 2013 due to pricing and other considerations and management actions to reduce the association business. Insurance operating costs and other expenses decreased in 2013 as compared to the prior year due to lower commission payments as a result of overall lower premiums. The improvement in the loss ratio in 2013 was primarily attributable to the long-term disability product driven by favorable claim recoveries from claims incurred in 2013 and prior years, lower incidence trends and improved renewal pricing. Additionally, the 2012 loss ratio reflected unfavorable long-term disability severity. The increase in after-tax core earnings margin, excluding buyouts, was primarily due to an improved loss ratio. The effective tax rate, in both periods, differs from the U.S. Federal statutory rate primarily due to permanent differences related to investments in tax exempt securities. For further discussion of income taxes, see Note 13 - Income Taxes of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 80 MUTUAL FUNDS Results of Operations Operating Summary 2014 2013 2012 Fee income and other revenue $ 723 $ 668 $ 626 Net investment loss (3 ) Net realized capital losses Total revenues 723 668 623 Amortization of DAC 28 39 35 Insurance operating costs and other expenses 559 511 479 Total benefits, losses and expenses 587 550 514 Income before income taxes 136 118 109 Income tax expense 49 42 38 Net income $ 87 $ 76 $ 71 Average Total Mutual Funds segment AUM $ 95,177 $ 92,191 $ 86,592 Return on Assets ("ROA") 9.1 8.2 8.2 Effect of restructuring, net of tax (0.5 ) (0.2 ) (0.3 ) Effect of net realized gains, net of tax and DAC (0.1 ) ROA, core earnings 9.6 8.5 8.5 Mutual Funds segment AUM Mutual Fund AUM - beginning of period $ 70,918 $ 61,611 $ 57,925 Sales 15,249 15,172 11,841 Redemptions [1] (16,636 ) (19,696 ) (16,258 ) Net flows (1,387 ) (4,524 ) (4,417 ) Change in market value and other 3,504 13,831 8,103 Mutual Fund AUM - end of period $ 73,035 $ 70,918 $ 61,611 Talcott AUM [2] $ 20,584 $ 25,817 $ 26,036 Total Mutual Funds segment AUM $ 93,619 $ 96,735 $ 87,647 Mutual Fund AUM by Asset Class Equity $ 45,221 $ 42,426 $ 35,843 Fixed Income 14,046 14,632 14,524 Multi-Strategy Investments [3] 13,768 13,860 11,244 Mutual Fund AUM $ 73,035 $ 70,918 $ 61,611 [1] The year ended December 31, 2014 includes a planned asset transfer of $0.7 billion to the HIMCO Variable Insurance Trust ( HVIT ) which supports legacy retirement mutual funds and runoff mutual funds (see footnote [3]). HVIT's invested assets are managed by Hartford Investment Management Company, a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company. [2] Talcott AUM (formerly Annuity Mutual Fund Assets) consist of Company-sponsored mutual fund assets held in separate accounts supporting variable insurance and investment products. The year ended December 31, 2014 includes a planned asset transfer of $2.0 billion to HVIT. [3] Includes balanced, allocation, target date and alternative investment products. 2015 Outlook The primary objective of Mutual Funds is to grow total AUM and core earnings. Strong fund performance, market appreciation, developing and maintaining client relationships and positive net flows are all factors that can increase AUM. Assuming normal market conditions, Mutual Funds expects moderate 2015 earnings growth driven by improved earnings from Mutual Fund assets offset by the runoff of the Talcott assets supporting the Hartford's legacy variable insurance products. The relationship with Wellington Management, sole sub-advisor for Mutual Funds, provides clients with a diversified lineup of domestic and international equity, fixed income, alternative, and asset allocation funds. These products combined with our strong long-term fund performance and expanded key client relationships are critical to drive improved net flows and future earnings. 81 Year ended December 31, 2014 compared to the year ended December 31, 2013 Net income, as compared to the prior year period, increased in 2014 primarily due to higher fee revenue driven by higher Mutual Fund average AUM. AUM increased reflecting positive market performance of the Mutual Fund assets throughout the year coupled with year over year improvements in net flows offset by expected runoff of Talcott assets. Redemptions in 2014 included fund liquidations of $0.7 billion and a transfer of HVIT assets within the Hartford of $2.7 billion. Year ended December 31, 2013 compared to the year ended December 31, 2012 Net income, as compared to the prior year period, increased in 2013 primarily due to higher fee revenue driven by higher Mutual Fund average AUM and partially offset by increased sales related expenses. AUM increased reflecting positive market performance of the Mutual Fund assets throughout the year offset by expected runoff of Talcott assets. Redemptions in 2013 included a portfolio rebalance at a key distributor and an institutional redemption, together totaling $2.5 billion. 82 TALCOTT RESOLUTION Results of Operations Operating Summary 2014 2013 2012 Earned premiums [1] $ 206 $ 94 $ (4 ) Fee income and other [1] 1,201 1,369 2,712 Net investment income 1,542 1,577 2,462 Net realized capital gains 26 1,719 236 Total revenues 2,975 4,759 5,406 Benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses 1,643 1,717 2,896 Amortization of DAC 402 485 663 Insurance operating costs and other expenses 567 645 1,277 Reinsurance (gain) loss on disposition in 2014 and 2013, respectively, goodwill impairment of $224 in 2012 and premium deficiency of $191 in 2012 (23 ) 1,505 415 Total benefits, losses and expenses 2,589 4,352 5,251 Income from continuing operations, before income taxes 386 407 155 Income tax expense (benefit) 16 (7 ) (99 ) Income from continuing operations 370 414 254 Loss from discontinued operations, net of tax [2] (557 ) (1,048 ) (253 ) Net income (loss) [5] $ (187 ) $ (634 ) $ 1 Assets Under Management (end of period) Variable annuity account value $ 52,861 $ 81,942 $ 94,371 Fixed Market Value Adjusted annuity and other account value 8,748 13,203 14,755 Institutional annuity account value 15,636 16,857 17,744 Other account value [4] 107,697 108,133 102,429 Total account value [3] $ 184,942 $ 219,127 $ 228,143 Variable Annuity Account Value [6] Account value, beginning of period $ 61,812 $ 64,824 $ 68,760 Net outflows (11,726 ) (14,598 ) (11,388 ) Change in market value and other 2,775 11,586 7,452 Account value, end of period $ 52,861 $ 61,812 $ 64,824 [1] Includes earned premiums, fee income and other related to the Retirement Plans business of $38 and $368 and the Individual Life business of $2 and $866 , for the years ended December 31, 2013 and 2012, respectively. [2] Represents the loss from operations and sale of HLIKK in 2014, 2013 and 2012, and HLIL in 2013 and 2012. For additional information, see Note 19 Discontinued Operations of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. [3] Included in the balance is approximately $(1.0) billion and $(1.2) billion for the years ended December 31, 2013 and 2012 , respectively, related to a Talcott Resolution intra-segment funding agreement which eliminates in consolidation. [4] Other account value includes $53.0 billion , $14.9 billion , and $39.8 billion as of December 31, 2014 , and $54.7 billion , $14.7 billion , and $38.7 billion as of December 31, 2013 , for the Retirement Plans, Individual Life, and Private Placement Life Insurance businesses; respectively. Account values a ssociated with the Retirement Plans, and Individual Life businesses no longer generate asset-based fee income due to the sales of these businesses through reinsurance. [5] Includes net losses for the year ended December 31, 2012, related to the Retirement Plans and Individual Life businesses sold in 2013 of $39 and $172 , respectively. For further discussion of the disposed businesses, see Note 2 - Business Dispositions of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. [6] Excludes account value related to the Japan business sold on June 30, 2014. 83 2015 Outlook The principal goal for Talcott Resolution is to reduce the size and risk associated with the Company's in-force variable annuities. As a result, the Company expects account values and consequently earnings to decline due to surrenders, policyholder initiatives or transactions with third parties, that will reduce the size of this legacy book of business. Risk-reducing transactions may also cause a reduction in statutory capital and shareholders equity. As the Company's annuity book continues to run off, earnings will continue to decline. A key driver to the decline in earnings will be the pace at which customers surrender their contracts. In 2014, the Company continued to experience double digit variable annuities surrender rates driven by market appreciation, continued aging of the block and in-force management initiatives. Contract counts decreased 13% for variable annuities in 2014. Looking forward, the Company expects variable annuity surrender rates to decline in 2015, as 2014 included the effect of in-force management initiatives. The decline in policy counts will likely result in unit cost increases and margin compression because expenses will not reduce at the same pace as the annuity block, further contributing to a decline in earnings over time. Year ended December 31, 2014 compared to the year ended December 31, 2013 The net loss for the year ended December 31, 2014 decreased compared to the net loss for the year ended December 31, 2013 primarily due to the decrease in the loss from discontinued operations, net of tax, related to the sale of HLIKK. Also contributing to the decrease in net loss were lower amortization of DAC, and lower insurance operating costs and other expenses, including lower costs associated with the enhanced surrender value program, and higher income from limited partnerships and other alternative investments, partially offset by a decline in earned fee income attributable to the continued run off of the business, and a decline in net investment income excluding that from limited partnerships and other alternative investments. Account values for Talcott Resolution decreased to approximately $185 billion at year ended December 31, 2014 from approximately $219 billion at year ended December 31, 2013 due primarily to the sale of HLIKK, and net outflows partially offset by market value appreciation in variable annuities. For the year ended December 31, 2014 variable annuity net outflows decreased by approximately $2.9 billion as compared to the prior year period due to lower outflows from in-force management initiatives. For the year ended December 31, 2014 the annualized full surrender rate on variable annuities declined to 13.5% compared to 16.7% for the year ended December 31, 2013. This decline was primarily due to lower surrenders from in-force management initiatives. Contract counts decreased 13% for variable annuities at year ended December 31, 2014 compared to year ended December 31, 2013 primarily due to market appreciation, in-force management initiatives and the continued aging of the block. The effective tax rates in 2014 and 2013 differ from the U.S. Federal statutory rate of 35% primarily due to permanent differences related to investments in separate account DRD. For further discussion of income taxes, see Note 13 - Income Taxes of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Year ended December 31, 2013 compared to the year ended December 31, 2012 The net loss for the year ended December 31, 2013 was primarily driven by Unlock charges of $806 , before tax, during the current year period compared to an Unlock benefit of $47 , before tax, in the prior year period. The Unlock charge for the year ended 2013 includes a charge of $887 , before tax, for hedge cost assumption changes associated with expanding the Japan variable annuity hedging program in the first quarter of 2013 . In addition, variable annuity hedge program losses for the year ended 2013 were $1,558 , before tax, including international losses of $1,586 , compared to losses of $1,288 before tax, including international losses of $1,467 , for the prior year period. Lower fee income in 2013 due to the continued runoff of the variable annuity business, as well as costs associated with an enhanced surrender value program in the U.S., also contributed to the net loss for the year ended December 31, 2013 . In addition, 2012 results of operations reflect the reinsurance loss on disposition related to the disposition of the Individual Life business, and losses in 2012 from the operations of the Retirement Plans and Individual Life businesses sold in 2013 . For further discussion of investment results and the results of the variable annuity hedge program, see MD&A Investment Results, Net Investment Income (Loss) and Net Realized Capital Gains (Losses). For further discussion of Unlocks, see MD&A - Critical Accounting Estimates, Estimated Gross Profits Used in the Valuation and Amortization of Assets and Liabilities Associated with Variable Annuity and Other Universal Life-Type Contracts. The 2013 and 2012 effective tax rates differ from the U.S. Federal statutory rate of 35% primarily due to permanent differences related to investments in separate account DRD. For further discussion of income taxes, see Note 13 - Income Taxes of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 84 Account value decreased to approximately $219 billion at December 31, 2013 from approximately $228 billion at December 31, 2012 due primarily to increased net outflows and negative currency translation impacts, partially offset by market value appreciation in variable annuities. In addition, the net decrease in account value reflects the disposition of $1.8 billion of variable annuities related to the sold U.K. business. In 2013 variable annuity net outflows increased by approximately $9.1 billion as compared to the prior year period driven by increased net outflows in the Japan variable annuities as a result of market appreciation and the expiration of the surrender charge period as the block of business ages. The annualized full surrender rate on U.S. variable annuities rose to 16.7% for the year ended December 31, 2013 compared to 11.1% for the prior year period. The annualized full surrender rate on Japan variable annuities rose to 28.8% for the year ended December 31, 2013 compared to 3.4% for the prior year period. Surrender activity in Japan has increased significantly over the past nine months as market appreciation has resulted in an increased number of account values exceeding guaranteed amounts. 85 CORPORATE Results of Operations Operating Summary 2014 2013 2012 Fee income [1] $ 10 $ 12 $ 168 Net investment income 22 27 31 Net realized capital gains (losses) 7 (89 ) 125 Total revenues 39 (50 ) 324 Insurance operating costs and other expenses 114 78 365 Pension settlement 128 Loss on extinguishment of debt 213 910 Reinsurance loss on disposition in 2013, and goodwill impairment in 2012 69 118 Interest expense 376 397 457 Total benefits, losses and expenses 618 757 1,850 Loss from continuing operations before income taxes (579 ) (807 ) (1,526 ) Income tax benefit (204 ) (252 ) (517 ) Net loss $ (375 ) $ (555 ) $ (1,009 ) [1] Fee income includes the income associated with the sales of non-proprietary insurance products in the Company broker-dealer subsidiaries that has an offsetting commission expense in insurance operating costs and other expenses. Year ended December 31, 2014 compared to the year ended December 31, 2013 Net loss, as compared to the prior year period, decreased in 2014 primarily due to decreases in the loss on extinguishment of debt, a change to net realized capital gains, decreases in the reinsurance loss on disposition, and a lower effective income tax rate benefit in 2013. The pension settlement charge in 2014 is related to voluntary lump-sum settlements with vested participants in the Company's defined benefit pension plan who had separated from service, but who had not yet commenced annuity benefits. For additional information regarding the pension settlement, see Note 17 - Employee Benefit Plans of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Insurance operating costs and other expenses increased in 2014 primarily due to benefits recognized in 2013 related to an insurance company recovery and the favorable resolution in 2013 of items under the Company's spin-off agreement with its former parent company. Interest expense declined in 2014 due to a decrease in outstanding debt from debt maturities and the paydown of $800 of senior notes in 2013. In 2014, $200 of the Company's senior notes matured. For additional information regarding debt, see Note 12 - Debt of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. For a reconciliation of the tax provision at the U.S. Federal statutory rate to the provision (benefit) for income taxes, see Note 13 - Income Taxes of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Year ended December 31, 2013 compared to the year ended December 31, 2012 Net loss, as compared to the prior year period, decreased in 2013 primarily due to decreases in insurance operating costs and other expenses, the reinsurance loss on disposition, the loss on extinguishment of debt and interest expense. The net loss in 2013 was partially driven by net realized capital losses due to higher long-term interest rates and global credit hedging losses due to increases in the equity market as compared with net realized capital gains in 2012. Insurance operating costs and other expenses decreased due to a benefit of $57 , before tax, for an insurance recovery from the Company's insurers for past legal expenses associated with closed litigation and a benefit of $19 , before tax, from the resolution of items under the Company's spin-off agreement with its former parent company. Restructuring costs, included in Corporate insurance operating costs and other expenses and related to the implementation of certain strategic initiatives, decreased to $64 in 2013 from $121 in 2012. The reinsurance loss on disposition of $69 in 2013 consisted of the write-off of all of the goodwill held in Corporate allocated to the Retirement Plans business sold in 2013. The reinsurance loss on disposition of $118 in 2012 consisted of an impairment of goodwill related to the Individual Life business sold in 2013. For additional information regarding goodwill, see Note 9 - Goodwill of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 86 In 2013, the Company repurchased approximately $800 of senior notes at a premium to the face amount of the then outstanding debt. In 2012, the Company repurchased all outstanding 10% fixed-to-floating rate junior subordinated debentures due 2068 with a $1.75 billion aggregate principal amount held by Allianz. Loss on extinguishment of debt consists of the premium associated with repurchasing the debentures at an amount greater than the face amount, the write-off of the unamortized discount and debt issuance and other costs related to the repurchase transactions. For additional information regarding debt, see Note 12 - Debt of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. For a reconciliation of the tax provision at the U.S. Federal statutory rate to the provision (benefit) for income taxes, see Note 13 - Income Taxes of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 87 ENTERPRISE RISK MANAGEMENT The Company has an enterprise risk management function ( ERM ) that is charged with providing analysis of the Company risks on an individual and aggregated basis and with ensuring that the Company risks remain within its risk appetite and tolerances. The Company has established the Enterprise Risk and Capital Committee ( ERCC ) that includes the Company CEO, President, Chief Financial Officer, Chief Investment Officer, Chief Risk Officer, General Counsel and others as deemed necessary by the committee chair. The ERCC is responsible for managing the Company risks and overseeing the enterprise risk management program. The Company categorizes its main risks as follows: Insurance Risk Operational Risk Financial Risk Insurance Risk Management The Company categorizes its insurance risks across both property-casualty and life products. The Company's insurance operations are vested in the ability to add value through the effective underwriting, pooling, and pricing of insurance risks. The Company has developed a disciplined approach to insurance risk management that is well integrated into the organization's underwriting, pricing, reinsurance, claims, and capital management processes. At the same time, the Company has policies and procedures to manage concentrations or correlations of insurance risk, including ERM policies governing the risks related to natural and man-made property catastrophes such as hurricanes, earthquakes, tornado/hailstorms, winter storms, pandemics, terrorism, and casualty catastrophes. The Company establishes risk limits to control potential loss and actively monitors the risk exposures as a percent of statutory surplus or total available capital resources. The Company also uses reinsurance to transfer insurance risk to well-established and financially secure reinsurers. For additional information, see MD&A - Enterprise Risk Management, Reinsurance as a Risk Management Strategy. Non-Catastrophic Insurance Risks Non-catastrophic insurance risks exist within each of the Company's divisions and include, but are not limited to, the following: Property: Risk of loss to personal or commercial property from automobile related accidents, weather, explosions, smoke, shaking, fire, theft, vandalism, inadequate installation, faulty equipment, collisions and falling objects, and/or machinery mechanical breakdown resulting in physical damage and other covered perils. Liability: Risk of loss from automobile related accidents, uninsured and underinsured drivers, lawsuits from accidents, defective products, breach of warranty, negligent acts by professional practitioners, environmental claims, latent exposures, fraud, coercion, forgery, failure to fulfill obligations per contract surety, liability from errors and omissions, derivative lawsuits, and other securities actions and covered perils. Mortality: Risk of loss from unexpected trends in insured deaths impacting timing of payouts from life insurance or annuity products, personal or commercial automobile related accidents, and death of employees or executives during the course of employment, while on disability, or while collecting workers compensation benefits. Morbidity : Risk of loss to an insured from illness incurred during the course of employment or illness from other covered perils. Disability: Risk of loss incurred from personal or commercial automobile related losses, accidents arising outside of the workplace, injuries or accidents incurred during the course of employment, or from equipment, with each loss resulting in short term or long term disability payments. Longevity: Risk of loss from increased life expectancy trends among policyholders receiving long term benefit payments or annuity payouts. The Company's processes for managing these risks include disciplined underwriting protocols, exposure controls, sophisticated risk based pricing, risk modeling, risk transfer, and capital management strategies. The Company has established underwriting guidelines for both individual risks, including individual policy limits, and risks in the aggregate, including aggregate exposure limits by geographic zone and peril. Pricing indications for each line of business are set independently by the Company's pricing actuaries and are integrated into the reserve review process to ensure consistency between pricing and reserving. Monthly reports track loss cost trends relative to pricing objectives within each state and product, and the Company's reserving actuaries provide an independent report to the Board on the Company's reserve position and loss cost trends. 88 Natural Catastrophe Risk Natural catastrophe risk is defined as the exposure arising from natural phenomena (e.g., weather, earthquakes, wildfires, etc.) that create a concentration or aggregation of loss across the Company's insurance or asset portfolios. The Company uses both internal and third-party models to estimate the potential loss resulting from various catastrophe events and the potential financial impact those events would have on the Company's financial position and results of operations across the property-casualty, life, and asset management businesses. For natural catastrophe perils, the Company generally limits its estimated pre-tax loss as a result of natural catastrophes for property & casualty exposures from a single 250-year event to less than 30% of statutory surplus of the property and casualty insurance subsidiaries prior to reinsurance and to less than 15% of statutory surplus of the property and casualty insurance subsidiaries after reinsurance. The Company's modeled loss estimates are derived by averaging 21 modeled loss events representing a 250-year return period loss. For the peril of earthquake, the 21 events averaged to determine the modeled loss estimate include events occurring in California as well as the Northeastern, Southeastern, Northwestern, Midwestern and New Madrid regions of the United States with associated magnitudes ranging from 6.0 to 8.2 on the Moment Magnitude scale. For the peril of hurricane, the 21 events averaged to determine the modeled loss estimate include category 2, 3, 4 and 5 events in Florida, as well as other Gulf, Mid Atlantic and Northeastern region landfalls. While Enterprise Risk Management has a process to track and manage these limits, from time to time, the estimated loss to natural catastrophes from a single 250-year event prior to reinsurance may fluctuate above or below these limits due to changes in modeled loss estimates, exposures, or statutory surplus. Currently, the Company's estimated pre-tax loss to a single 250-year natural catastrophe event prior to reinsurance is less than 30% of the statutory surplus of the property and casualty insurance subsidiaries and the Company's estimated pre-tax loss net of reinsurance is less than 15% of statutory surplus of the property and casualty operations. The estimated 250 year pre-tax probable maximum losses from hurricane events are estimated to be $1.5 billion and $570, before and after reinsurance, respectively. The estimated 250 year pre-tax probable maximum loss from earthquake events is estimated to be $736 before reinsurance and $471 net of reinsurance. The loss estimates represent total property losses for hurricane events and property and workers compensation losses for earthquake events resulting from a single event. The estimates provided are based on 250-year return period loss estimates that have a 0.4% likelihood of being exceeded in any single year. The net loss estimates provided above assume that the Company is able to recover all losses ceded to reinsurers under its reinsurance programs. There are various methodologies used in the industry to estimate the potential property and workers compensation losses that would arise from various catastrophe events and companies may use different models and assumptions in their estimates. Therefore, the Company's estimates of gross and net losses arising from a 250-year hurricane or earthquake event may not be comparable to estimates provided by other companies. Furthermore, the Company's estimates are subject to significant uncertainty and could vary materially from the actual losses that would arise from these events and the loss estimates provided by other companies. The Company also manages natural catastrophe risk for group life and group disability, which in combination with property and workers compensation loss estimates are subject to separate enterprise risk management net aggregate loss limits as a percent of enterprise surplus. Terrorism Risk The Company defines terrorism risk as the risk of losses from terrorist attacks, including losses caused by single-site and multi-site conventional attacks, as well as the potential for attacks using nuclear, biological, chemical or radiological weapons ( NBCR ). The Company monitors aggregations of terrorism risk exposure around key landmarks primarily in major metropolitan areas that span the Company's insurance portfolio. ERM limits for terrorism apply to aggregations of risk across property-casualty, group benefits and specific asset portfolios and are defined based on a deterministic, single-site conventional terrorism attack scenario. The Company manages its potential estimated loss from a conventional terrorism loss scenario to less than $1.3 billion. In addition, the Company monitors exposures monthly and employs both internally developed and vendor-licensed loss modeling tools as part of its risk management discipline. While our modeled exposures to conventional terrorist attacks around landmark locations may fluctuate above and below $1.3 billion, currently, all such terrorism exposures are within ERM limits. For a discussion on risks related to terrorist attacks, see the risk factor, "The occurrence of one or more terrorist attacks in the geographic areas we serve or the threat of terrorism in general may have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, results of operations and liquidity." 89 Pandemic Risk Pandemic risk is the exposure to loss arising from widespread influenza or other pathogens or bacterial infections that create an aggregation of loss across the Company's insurance or asset portfolios. Consistent with industry practice, the Company assesses exposure to pandemics by analyzing the potential impact from a variety of pandemic scenarios based on conditions consistent with historical outbreaks of flu-like viruses such as the Severe 1918 Spanish Flu, the Asian flu of 1957, the Hong Kong flu of 1968, and the 2009 outbreak of the swine flu. For pandemic risk, the Company generally limits its estimated pre-tax loss from a single 250 year event to less than 10% of total available capital resources. In evaluating these scenarios, the Company assesses the impact on group life policies, short-term and long term disability, annuities, COLI, property & casualty claims, and losses in the investment portfolio associated with market declines in the event of a widespread pandemic. While ERM has a process to track and manage these limits, from time to time, the estimated loss for pandemics may fluctuate above or below these limits due to changes in modeled loss estimates, exposures, or statutory surplus. Currently, the Company's estimated pre-tax loss for pandemic is less than 10% of enterprise statutory surplus. Reinsurance as a Risk Management Strategy The Hartford utilizes reinsurance to transfer risk to affiliated and unaffiliated insurers. Reinsurance is used to manage aggregation of risk as well as to transfer certain risk to reinsurance companies based on specific geographic or risk concentrations. All reinsurance processes are aligned under a single enterprise reinsurance risk management policy. Reinsurance purchasing is a centralized function across Commercial Lines, Personal Lines and Talcott Resolution to support a consistent strategy and to ensure that the reinsurance activities are fully integrated into the organization's risk management processes. A variety of traditional reinsurance products are used as part of the Company's risk management strategy, including excess of loss occurrence-based products that protect property and workers compensation exposures, and individual risk or quota share arrangements, that protect specific classes or lines of business. The Company has no significant finite risk contracts in place and the statutory surplus benefit from all such prior year contracts is immaterial. Facultative reinsurance is used by the Company to manage policy-specific risk exposures based on established underwriting guidelines. The Hartford also participates in governmentally administered reinsurance facilities such as the Florida Hurricane Catastrophe Fund ( FHCF ), the Terrorism Risk Insurance Program established under The Terrorism Risk Insurance Program Reauthorization Act of 2015 ( TRIPRA ) and other reinsurance programs relating to particular risks or specific lines of business. Reinsurance for Catastrophes The Company has several catastrophe reinsurance programs, including reinsurance treaties that cover property and workers compensation losses aggregating from single catastrophe events. The following table summarizes the primary catastrophe treaty reinsurance coverages that the Company has in place as of January 1, 2015: Coverage Effective for the period % of layer(s) reinsurance Per occurrence limit Retention Principal property catastrophe program covering property catastrophe losses from a single event [1] 1/1/2015 to 1/1/2016 90% $ 850 $ 350 Reinsurance with the FHCF covering Florida Personal Lines property catastrophe losses from a single event 6/1/2014 to 6/1/2015 90% $ 109 [2] $ 41 Workers compensation losses arising from a single catastrophe event [3] 7/1/2014 to 7/1/2015 80% $ 350 $ 100 [1] Certain aspects of our catastrophe treaty have terms that extend beyond the traditional one year term. [2] The per occurrence limit on the FHCF treaty is $109 for the 6/1/2014 to 6/1/2015 treaty year based on the Company's election to purchase the required coverage from FHCF. Coverage is based on the best available information from FHCF, which was updated in January 2015. [3] In addition to the limit shown above, the workers compensation reinsurance includes a non-catastrophe, industrial accident layer, 80% placement of a $30 per event limit in excess of a $20 retention. In addition to the property catastrophe reinsurance coverage described in the above table, the Company has other catastrophe and working layer treaties and facultative reinsurance agreements that cover property catastrophe losses on an aggregate excess of loss and on a per risk basis. The principal property catastrophe reinsurance program and certain other reinsurance programs include a provision to reinstate limits in the event that a catastrophe loss exhausts limits on one or more layers under the treaties. In addition, covering the period from January 1, 2014 to December 31, 2016, the Company has an aggregate loss treaty in place which provides one limit of $200 over the three-year period of aggregate qualifying property catastrophe losses in excess of a net retention of $860. 90 In addition to the reinsurance protection provided by The Hartford's traditional property catastrophe reinsurance program described above, until February 18, 2015, the Hartford had a fully collateralized reinsurance coverage from Foundation Re III for losses sustained from qualifying hurricane loss events. Under the terms of the treaty, the Company had coverage for losses from hurricanes using a customized industry index contract designed to replicate The Hartford's own catastrophe losses, with a provision that the actual losses incurred by the Company for covered events, net of reinsurance recoveries, cannot be less than zero. The following table summarizes the terms of the reinsurance treaty with Foundation Re III that was in place as of December 31, 2014: Covered perils Treaty term Covered losses Bond amount issued by Foundation Re III Hurricane loss events affecting the Gulf and Eastern Coast of the United States 2/18/2011 to 2/18/2015 At the time of the purchase, 67.5% of $200 in losses in excess of an index loss trigger equating to approximately $1.4 billion in losses to The Hartford $135 There have been no events that are expected to trigger a recovery under the Foundation Re III reinsurance program and, accordingly, the Company has not recorded any recoveries from the associated reinsurance treaty. The Company did not replace the Foundation Re III treaty when it expired in February 2015. Reinsurance for Terrorism For the risk of terrorism, private sector catastrophe reinsurance capacity is generally limited and largely unavailable for terrorism losses caused by nuclear, biological, chemical or radiological weapons attacks. As such, the Company's principal reinsurance protection against large-scale terrorist attacks is the coverage currently provided through the TRIPRA 2015. On January 12, 2015, the President signed TRIPRA 2015, extending TRIPRA 2007, through the end of 2020. TRIPRA 2015 provides a backstop for insurance-related losses resulting from any act of terrorism , which is certified by the Secretary of Homeland Security and Attorney General and requires consultation by the Secretary of Treasury, for losses that that exceed a threshold of industry losses of $100 in 2015, and continue to increase to $200 by 2020. Under the program, in any one calendar year, the federal government would pay losses of 85% in 2015, which then continue to decrease 1% annually, starting on January 1st, 2016, down to 80% by the year 2020, from a certified act of terrorism after an insurer's losses exceed 20% of the Company's eligible direct commercial earned premiums of the prior calendar year up to a combined annual aggregate limit for the federal government and all insurers of $100 billion. The Company's estimated deductible under the program is $1.19 billion for 2015. If an act of terrorism or acts of terrorism result in covered losses exceeding the $100 billion annual industry aggregate limit, a future Congress would be responsible for determining how additional losses in excess of $100 billion will be paid. Among other items, TRIPRA required that the President's Working Group on Financial Markets ( PWG ) continue to perform an analysis regarding the long-term availability and affordability of insurance for terrorism risk. Among the findings detailed in the PWG's initial report, released October 2, 2006, were that the high level of uncertainty associated with predicting the frequency of terrorist attacks, coupled with the unwillingness of some insurance policyholders to purchase insurance coverage, makes predicting long-term development of the terrorism risk market difficult, and that there is likely little potential for future market development for NBCR coverage. The January 2011 PWG report notes some improvements in capacity and modeling, but also noted that take-up rates for terrorism coverage remained relatively flat over the past three years and that insurers remain uncertain about the ability of models to predict the frequency and severity of terrorist attacks. The April 2014 PWG report notes that the availability and affordability of insurance for terrorism risk has not changed appreciably since 2010. Take up rates have increased since the first year of TRIA and are stable at 60% in the aggregate. The private market does not have capacity to provide reinsurance for terrorism risk to the extent provided by TRIPRA. With respect to NBCR coverage, a December 2008 study by the U.S. Government Accountability Office ( GAO ) found that property and casualty insurers still generally seek to exclude NBCR coverage from their commercial policies when permitted. However, while nuclear, pollution and contamination exclusions are contained in many property and liability insurance policies, the GAO report concluded that such exclusions may be subject to challenges in court because they were not specifically drafted to address terrorist attacks. Furthermore, workers compensation policies generally have no exclusion or limitations. The GAO found that commercial property and casualty policyholders, including companies that own high-value properties in large cities, generally reported that they could not obtain NBCR coverage. Commercial property and casualty insurers generally remain unwilling to offer NBCR coverage because of uncertainties about the risk and the potential for catastrophic losses. 91 Reinsurance Recoverables Reinsurance Security To manage reinsurer credit risk, a reinsurance security review committee evaluates the credit standing, financial performance, management and operational quality of each potential reinsurer. Through this process, the Company maintains a centralized list of reinsurers approved for participation in reinsurance transactions. Only reinsurers approved through this process are eligible to participate in new reinsurance transactions. The Company's approval designations reflect the differing credit exposure associated with various classes of business. Participation eligibility is categorized based upon the nature of the risk reinsured, including the expected liability payout duration. In addition to defining participation eligibility, the Company regularly monitors credit risk exposure to each reinsurance counterparty and has established limits tiered by counterparty credit rating. For further discussion on how the Company manages and mitigates third party credit risk, see MD&A - Enterprise Risk Management, Credit Risk. Property and Casualty Insurance Product Reinsurance Recoverables Property and casualty insurance product reinsurance recoverables represent loss and loss adjustment expense recoverables from a number of entities, including reinsurers and pools. The components of the gross and net reinsurance recoverables are summarized as follows: As of December 31, Reinsurance Recoverables 2014 2013 Paid loss and loss adjustment expenses $ 133 $ 138 Unpaid loss and loss adjustment expenses 2,868 2,841 Gross reinsurance recoverables 3,001 2,979 Less: Allowance for uncollectible reinsurance (271 ) (244 ) Net reinsurance recoverables $ 2,730 $ 2,735 Distribution of Gross Reinsurance Recoverables As shown in the following table, a portion of the total gross reinsurance recoverables relates to the Company mandatory participation in various involuntary assigned risk pools and the value of annuity contracts held under structured settlement agreements. Reinsurance recoverables due from mandatory pools are backed by the financial strength of the property and casualty insurance industry. Annuities purchased from third-party life insurers under structured settlements are recognized as reinsurance recoverables in cases where the Company has not obtained a release from the claimant. Of the remaining gross reinsurance recoverables, the portion of recoverables due from companies rated by A.M. Best is as follows: As of December 31, Distribution of gross reinsurance recoverables 2014 2013 Gross reinsurance recoverables $ 3,001 $ 2,979 Less: mandatory (assigned risk) pools and structured settlements (567 ) (569 ) Gross reinsurance recoverables excluding mandatory pools and structured settlements $ 2,434 $ 2,410 % of Total % of Total Rated A- (Excellent) or better by A.M. Best [1] $ 1,561 64.1 % $ 1,558 64.6 % Other rated by A.M. Best 4 0.2 % 4 0.2 % Total rated companies 1,565 64.3 % 1,562 64.8 % Voluntary pools 92 3.8 % 96 4.0 % Captives 488 20.0 % 499 20.7 % Other not rated companies 289 11.9 % 253 10.5 % Total $ 2,434 100.0 % $ 2,410 100.0 % [1] Based on A.M. Best ratings as of December 31, 2014 and 2013 , respectively. Where its contracts permit, the Company secures future claim obligations with various forms of collateral, including irrevocable letters of credit, secured trusts, funds held accounts and group wide offsets. As part of its reinsurance recoverable review, the Company analyzes recent developments in commutation activity between reinsurers and cedants, recent trends in arbitration and litigation outcomes in disputes between cedants and reinsurers and the overall credit quality of the Company reinsurers. As indicated in the above table, 64.1% of the gross reinsurance recoverables due from reinsurers rated by A.M. Best were rated A- (excellent) or better as of December 31, 2014 . Due to the inherent uncertainties as to collection and the length of time before such amounts will be due, it is possible that future adjustments to the Company reinsurance recoverables, net of the allowance, could be required, which could have a material adverse effect on the Company consolidated results of operations or cash flows in a particular quarterly or annual period. 92 Annually, the Company completes evaluations of the reinsurance recoverable asset associated with older, long-term casualty liabilities reported in the Property & Casualty Other Operations reporting segment, and the allowance for uncollectible reinsurance reported in the Commercial Lines reporting segment. For a discussion regarding the results of these evaluations, see MD&A - Critical Accounting Estimates, Property and Casualty Insurance Product Reserves, Net of Reinsurance. Life Insurance Product Reinsurance Recoverables Life insurance product reinsurance recoverables represent future policy benefits and unpaid loss and loss adjustment expenses and other policyholder funds and benefits payable that are recoverable from a number of reinsurers. The components of the gross and net reinsurance recoverables are as follows: As of December 31, Reinsurance Recoverables 2014 2013 Future policy benefits and unpaid loss and loss adjustment expenses and other policyholder funds and benefits payable 20,190 20,595 Gross reinsurance recoverables $ 20,190 $ 20,595 Less: Allowance for uncollectible reinsurance [1] Net reinsurance recoverables $ 20,190 $ 20,595 [1] No allowance for uncollectible reinsurance is required as of December 31, 2014 and 2013. As of December 31, 2014 , the Company has reinsurance recoverables from MassMutual and Prudential of $8.6 billion and $10.4 billion, respectively. As of December 31, 2013 the Company has reinsurance recoverables from MassMutual and Prudential of $9.5 billion and $9.9 billion , respectively. These reinsurance recoverables are secured by invested assets held in trust for the benefit of the Company in the event of a default by the reinsurers. As of December 31, 2014 , the fair value of assets held in trust securing the reinsurance recoverables from MassMutual and Prudential is $9.0 billion for each of these parties. As of December 31, 2014 , the Company has no reinsurance-related concentrations of credit risk greater than 10% of the Company consolidated stockholders equity. Guaranty Funds and Other Insurance-related Assessments As part of its risk management strategy, the Company regularly monitors the financial wherewithal of other insurers and, in particular, activity by insurance regulators and various state guaranty associations relating to troubled insurers. In all states, insurers licensed to transact certain classes of insurance are required to become members of a guaranty fund. In most states, in the event of the insolvency of an insurer writing any such class of insurance in the state, members of the funds are assessed to pay certain claims of the insolvent insurer. A particular state's fund assesses its members based on their respective written premiums in the state for the classes of insurance in which the insolvent insurer was engaged. Assessments are generally limited for any year to one or two percent of the premiums written per year depending on the state. The amount and timing of assessments related to past insolvencies is unpredictable. Citizens Property Insurance Corporation in Florida ( Citizens ), a non-affiliate insurer, provides property insurance to Florida homeowners and businesses that are unable to obtain insurance from other carriers, including for properties deemed to be high risk. Citizens maintains a Personal Lines account, a Commercial Lines account and a High Risk account. If Citizens incurs a deficit in any of these accounts, Citizens may impose a regular assessment on other insurance carriers in the state, such as the Company, to fund the deficits, subject to certain restrictions and subject to approval by the Florida Office of Insurance Regulation. Carriers are then permitted to surcharge policyholders to recover the assessments over the next few years. Citizens may also opt to finance a portion of the deficits through issuing bonds and may impose emergency assessments on other insurance carriers to fund the bond repayments. Unlike with regular assessments, however, insurance carriers only serve as a collection agent for emergency assessments and are not required to remit surcharges for emergency assessments to Citizens until they collect surcharges from policyholders. Under U.S. GAAP, the Company is required to accrue for regular assessments in the period the assessments become probable and estimable and the obligating event has occurred. Surcharges to recover the amount of regular assessments may not be recorded as an asset until the related premium is written. Emergency assessments that may be levied by Citizens are not recorded in the income statement. Operational Risk Management The Hartford has an Operational Risk Management ( ORM ) function whose responsibility is to provide a comprehensive and enterprise-wide view of the Company's operational risk on an aggregate basis. The Company defines operational risk as the risk of loss resulting from inadequate or failed internal processes, people and systems, or from external events. Operational risk is inherent in our business and functional areas. It includes legal risk and considers reputational risk as an impact. ORM is responsible for establishing, maintaining and communicating the framework, principles and guidelines of The Hartford's operational risk management program. In addition, ORM also manages business continuity, model risk management, the ORM system, and risk assessments. Responsibility for day-to-day management of operational risk lies within each business unit and functional area. 93 ORM works closely with the Operational Risk Committee ( ORC ), an enterprise wide governance group comprised of senior leaders from functional areas such as ORM, Operations and Technology, Claims, Legal, Compliance, Finance and Internal Audit. The ORC meets regularly and provides a forum for ensuring the effective identification, assessment, control, ownership, management and reporting of operational risks across the enterprise. Individual committees, such as the Enterprise Privacy and Security Committee, Enterprise Health, Environment and Safety Committee, and the Model Oversight Committees focus on specific operational risk issues. ORM has various tools and processes for identifying, monitoring, measuring, prioritizing, and reporting operational risks. ORM facilitates the business risk assessment process which is used to identify the top risks in the business and functional areas, evaluate controls to mitigate those risks, and monitor control improvements. ORM also facilitates loss event collection and analysis, scenario analysis, and aggregated reporting of risks. ORM uses a centralized Governance, Risk, and Compliance (GRC) system to help manage operational risk primarily within the Company's finance, legal, compliance, data security, and information technology functions. Financial Risk Management The Company identifies the following categories of financial risk: Liquidity Risk Interest Rate Risk Equity Risk Foreign Currency Exchange Risk Credit Risk Financial risks include direct and indirect risks to the Company's financial objectives coming from events that impact market conditions or prices. Financial risk also includes exposure to events that may cause correlated movement in multiple risk factors. The primary sources of financial risks are the Company's general account assets and the liabilities and the guarantees which the company has written over various liability products, particularly its portfolio of variable annuities. The Company assesses its financial risk on a U.S. GAAP, statutory and economic basis. The Hartford has developed a disciplined approach to financial risk management that is well integrated into the Company's underwriting, pricing, hedging, claims, asset and liability management, new product, and capital management processes. Consistent with its risk appetite, the Company establishes financial risk limits to control potential loss. Exposures are actively monitored, and mitigated where appropriate. The Company uses various risk management strategies, including reinsurance and derivative-based hedging to transfer risk to well-established and financially secure counterparties. Liquidity Risk Liquidity risk is the risk to current or prospective earnings or capital arising from the Company's inability or perceived inability to meet its contractual cash obligations at the legal entity level when they come due over given horizons without incurring unacceptable costs and without relying on uncommitted funding sources. Liquidity risk includes the inability to manage unplanned increases or accelerations in cash outflows, decreases or changes in funding sources, and changes in market conditions that affect the ability to liquidate assets quickly to meet obligations with minimal loss in value. Components of liquidity risk include funding risk, transaction risk and market liquidity risk. Funding risk is the gap between sources and uses of cash under normal and stressed conditions taking into consideration structural, regulatory and legal entity constraints. Changes in institution-specific conditions that affect the Company's ability to sell assets or otherwise transact business without incurring a significant loss in value is transaction risk. Changes in general market conditions that affect the institution's ability to sell assets or otherwise transact business without incurring a significant loss in value is market liquidity risk. The Company has defined ongoing monitoring and reporting requirements to assess liquidity across the enterprise. The Company measures and manages liquidity risk exposures and funding needs within prescribed limits and across legal entities, business lines and currencies, taking into account legal, regulatory and operational limitations to the transferability of liquidity. The Company also monitors internal and external conditions, identifies material risk changes and emerging risks that may impact liquidity. The Company's CFO has primary responsibility for liquidity risk. For further discussion on liquidity see the section on Capital Resources and Liquidity. 94 Interest Rate Risk Interest rate risk is the risk of financial loss due to adverse changes in the value of assets and liabilities arising from movements in interest rates. Interest rate risk encompasses exposures with respect to changes in the level of interest rates, the shape of the term structure of rates and the volatility of interest rates. Interest rate risk does not include exposure to changes in credit spreads. The Company has exposure to interest rates arising from its fixed maturity securities, interest sensitive liabilities and discount rate assumptions associated with the Company pension and other post retirement benefit obligations. An increase in interest rates from current levels is generally a favorable development for the Company. Interest rate increases are expected to provide additional net investment income, reduce the cost of the variable annuity hedging program, limit the potential risk of margin erosion due to minimum guaranteed crediting rates in certain Talcott Resolution products. Conversely, if long-term interest rates rise dramatically within a six to twelve month time period, certain Talcott Resolution businesses may be exposed to disintermediation risk. Disintermediation risk refers to the risk that policyholders will surrender their contracts in a rising interest rate environment requiring the Company to liquidate assets in an unrealized loss position. In conjunction with the interest rate risk measurement and management techniques, certain of Talcott Resolution's fixed income product offerings have market value adjustment provisions at contract surrender. An increase in interest rates may also impact the Company tax planning strategies and in particular its ability to utilize tax benefits of previously recognized realized capital losses. A decline in interest rates results in certain mortgage-backed and municipal securities being more susceptible to paydowns and prepayments or calls. During such periods, the Company generally will not be able to reinvest the proceeds at comparable yields. Lower interest rates will also likely result in lower net investment income, increased hedging cost associated with variable annuities and, if declines are sustained for a long period of time, it may subject the Company to reinvestment risk, higher pension costs expense and possibly reduced profit margins associated with guaranteed crediting rates on certain Talcott Resolution products. Conversely, the fair value of the investment portfolio will increase when interest rates decline and the Company interest expense will be lower on its variable rate debt obligations. The Company manages its exposure to interest rate risk by constructing investment portfolios that maintain asset allocation limits and asset/liability duration matching targets which may include the use of derivatives. The Company analyzes interest rate risk using various models including parametric models and cash flow simulation under various market scenarios of the liabilities and their supporting investment portfolios, which may include derivative instruments. Key metrics that the Company uses to quantify its exposure to interest rate risk inherent in its invested assets and interest rate sensitive liabilities include duration, convexity and key rate duration. Duration is the price sensitivity of a financial instrument or series of cash flows to a parallel change in the underlying yield curve used to value the financial instrument or series of cash flows. For example, a duration of 5 means the price of the security will change by approximately 5% for a 100 basis point change in interest rates. Convexity is used to approximate how the duration of a security changes as interest rates change in a parallel manner. Key rate duration analysis measures the price sensitivity of a security or series of cash flows to each point along the yield curve and enables the Company to estimate the price change of a security assuming non-parallel interest rate movements. To calculate duration, convexity, and key rate durations, projections of asset and liability cash flows are discounted to a present value using interest rate assumptions. These cash flows are then revalued at alternative interest rate levels to determine the percentage change in fair value due to an incremental change in the entire yield curve for duration and convexity, or a particular point on the yield curve for key rate duration. Cash flows from corporate obligations are assumed to be consistent with the contractual payment streams on a yield to worst basis. Yield to worst is a basis that represents the lowest potential yield that can be received without the issuer actually defaulting. The primary assumptions used in calculating cash flow projections include expected asset payment streams taking into account prepayment speeds, issuer call options and contract holder behavior. Mortgage-backed and asset-backed securities are modeled based on estimates of the rate of future prepayments of principal over the remaining life of the securities. These estimates are developed by incorporating collateral surveillance and anticipated future market dynamics. Actual prepayment experience may vary from these estimates. The Company is also exposed to interest rate risk based upon the discount rate assumption associated with the Company pension and other postretirement benefit obligations. The discount rate assumption is based upon an interest rate yield curve comprised of bonds rated AA with maturities primarily between zero and thirty years. For further discussion of discounting pension and other postretirement benefit obligations, refer to Note 17 - Employee Benefit Plans of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. In addition, management evaluates performance of certain Talcott Resolution products based on net investment spread which is, in part, influenced by changes in interest rates. For further discussion, see the Talcott Resolution section of the MD&A. The investments and liabilities primarily associated with interest rate risk are included in the following discussion. Certain product liabilities, including those containing GMWB or GMDB, expose the Company to interest rate risk but also have significant equity risk. These liabilities are discussed as part of the Variable Product Guarantee Risks and Risk Management section below. 95 Fixed Maturity Investments The Company investment portfolios primarily consist of investment grade fixed maturity securities. The fair value of fixed maturity investments was $59.9 billion and $63.2 billion at December 31, 2014 and 2013 , respectively. The fair value of these and other invested assets fluctuates depending on the interest rate environment and other general economic conditions. The weighted average duration of the portfolio, including fixed maturities, commercial mortgage loans, certain derivatives, and cash equivalents, was approximately 5.3 years as of both December 31, 2014 and 2013 . As of December 31, 2013, the weighted average duration of the portfolio, excluding the Japan variable and fixed annuity business, was approximately 5.2 years. Liabilities The Company issued investment contracts and certain insurance product liabilities, other than non-guaranteed separate accounts, include asset accumulation vehicles such as fixed annuities, guaranteed investment contracts, other investment and universal life-type contracts and certain insurance products such as long-term disability. Asset accumulation vehicles primarily require a fixed rate payment, often for a specified period of time, such as fixed rate annuities with a market value adjustment feature. The term to maturity of these contracts generally range from less than one year to ten years. In addition, certain products such as corporate owned life insurance contracts and the general account portion of Talcott Resolutions variable annuity products, credit interest to policyholders subject to market conditions and minimum interest rate guarantees. The term to maturity of the asset portfolio supporting these products may range from short to intermediate. While interest rate risk associated with many of these products has been reduced through the use of market value adjustment features and surrender charges, the primary risk associated with these products is that the spread between investment return and credited rate may not be sufficient to earn targeted returns. The Company also manages the risk of certain insurance liabilities similarly to investment type products due to the relative predictability of the aggregate cash flow payment streams. Products in this category may contain significant reliance upon actuarial (including mortality and morbidity) pricing assumptions and do have some element of cash flow uncertainty. Product examples include structured settlement contracts, on-benefit annuities (i.e., the annuitant is currently receiving benefits thereon) and short-term and long-term disability contracts. The cash outflows associated with these policy liabilities are not interest rate sensitive but do vary based on the timing and amount of benefit payments. The primary risks associated with these products are that the benefits will exceed expected actuarial pricing and/or that the actual timing of the cash flows will differ from those anticipated, or interest rate levels may deviate from those assumed in product pricing, ultimately resulting in an investment return lower than that assumed in pricing. The average duration of the liability cash flow payments can range from less than one year to in excess of fifteen years. Derivatives The Company utilizes a variety of derivative instruments to mitigate interest rate risk associated with its investment portfolio or hedge liabilities. Interest rate swaps are primarily used to convert interest receipts or payments to a fixed or variable rate. The use of such swaps enable the Company to customize contract terms and conditions to desired objectives and manage the duration profile within established tolerances. Interest rate swaps are also used to hedge the variability in the cash flow of a forecasted purchase or sale of fixed rate securities due to changes in interest rates. Interest rate caps, floors, swaps, swaptions, and futures may be used to manage portfolio duration. As of December 31, 2014 and 2013 notional amounts pertaining to derivatives utilized to manage interest rate risk, including offsetting positions, totaled $ 19.3 billion and $ 15.3 billion , respectively ($ 19.2 billion and $ 15.1 billion , respectively, related to investments and $ 0.1 billion and $ 0.2 billion , respectively, related to Talcott Resolution liabilities). The fair value of these derivatives was $ (468) and $ (603) as of December 31, 2014 and 2013 , respectively. These amounts do not include derivatives associated with the Variable Annuity Hedging Program. 96 Interest Rate Sensitivity Invested Assets Supporting Fixed Liabilities Included in the following table is the before-tax change in the net economic value of investment contracts (e.g., fixed annuity contracts) issued by the Company Talcott Resolution segment, as well as certain insurance product liabilities (e.g., disability contracts) issued by the Company Group Benefits segment, for which the payment rates are fixed at contract issuance and the investment experience is substantially absorbed by the Company operations, along with the corresponding invested assets. Also included in this analysis are the interest rate sensitive derivatives used by the Company to hedge its exposure to interest rate risk in the investment portfolios supporting these contracts. This analysis does not include the assets and corresponding liabilities of certain insurance products such as auto, property, term life insurance, and certain life contingent annuities. Certain financial instruments, such as limited partnerships and other alternative investments, have been omitted from the analysis due to the fact that the investments generally lack sensitivity to interest rate changes. Separate account assets and liabilities are excluded from the analysis because gains and losses in separate accounts accrue to policyholders. The calculation of the estimated hypothetical change in net economic value below assumes a 100 basis point upward and downward parallel shift in the yield curve. Interest rate sensitivity of fixed liabilities and invested assets supporting them Change in Net Economic Value as of December 31, 2014 2013 [1] Basis point shift -100 +100 -100 +100 Increase (decrease) in economic value, before tax $ (452 ) $ 304 $ (234 ) $ 128 [1] The table above excludes all assets and liabilities associated with the Company's former Japan variable and fixed annuity business. The carrying value of fixed maturities, commercial mortgage loans and short-term investments related to the businesses included in the table above was $27.2 billion and $28.6 billion, as of December 31, 2014 and 2013 , respectively. The hypothetical change in net economic value increased as compared to December 31, 2013 , primarily as a result of the impact of higher asset fair values driven by lower interest rates. The assets supporting the fixed liabilities are monitored and managed within set duration guidelines, and are evaluated on a daily basis, as well as annually using scenario simulation techniques in compliance with regulatory requirements. Invested Assets Not Supporting Fixed Liabilities The following table provides an analysis showing the estimated before-tax change in the fair value of the Company investments and related derivatives, excluding assets supporting fixed liabilities which are included in the table above, assuming 100 basis point upward and downward parallel shifts in the yield curve as of December 31, 2014 and 2013 . Certain financial instruments, such as limited partnerships and other alternative investments, have been omitted from the analysis due to the fact that the investments are accounted for under the equity method and generally lack sensitivity to interest rate changes. Interest rate sensitivity of invested assets not supporting fixed liabilities Change in Fair Value as of December 31, 2014 2013 [1] Basis point shift -100 +100 -100 +100 Increase (decrease) in fair value, before tax $ 2,182 $ (2,083 ) $ 2,100 $ (2,005 ) [1] The table above excludes all assets associated with the Company's former Japan variable and fixed annuity business. The carrying value of fixed maturities, commercial mortgage loans and short-term investments related to the businesses included in the table above was $43.1 billion and $40.7 billion, as of December 31, 2014 and 2013 , respectively. The selection of the 100 basis point parallel shift in the yield curve was made only as an illustration of the potential hypothetical impact of such an event and should not be construed as a prediction of future market events. Actual results could differ materially from those illustrated above due to the nature of the estimates and assumptions used in the above analysis. The Company sensitivity analysis calculation assumes that the composition of invested assets and liabilities remain materially consistent throughout the year and that the current relationship between short-term and long-term interest rates will remain constant over time. As a result, these calculations may not fully capture the impact of portfolio re-allocations, significant product sales or non-parallel changes in interest rates. Equity Risk Equity risk is defined as the risk of financial loss due to changes in the value of global equities or equity indices. The Company has exposure to equity risk from assets under management, embedded derivatives within the Company variable annuities and assets that support the Company pension plans. Equity Risk on the Company Variable Annuity products is mitigated through various hedging programs. (See the Variable Annuity Hedge Program Section) 97 The Company's exposure to equity risk includes the potential for lower earnings associated with certain businesses such as mutual funds and variable annuities where fee income is earned based upon the value of the assets under management. For further discussion of equity risk, see the Variable Product Guarantee Risks and Risk Management section below. In addition, Talcott Resolution includes certain guaranteed benefits, primarily associated with variable annuity products, which increase the Company's potential benefit exposure in the periods that equity markets decline. The Company is also subject to equity risk based upon the assets that support its pension plans. The asset allocation mix is reviewed on a periodic basis. In order to minimize risk, the pension plans maintain a listing of permissible and prohibited investments. In addition, the pension plans have certain concentration limits and investment quality requirements imposed on permissible investment options. For further discussion of equity risk associated with the pension plans, see the Critical Accounting Estimates section of the MD&A under Pension and Other Postretirement Benefit Obligations and Note 17 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Variable Product Guarantee Risks and Risk Management The Company variable products are significantly influenced by the U.S. and other equity markets. Increases or declines in equity markets impact certain assets and liabilities related to the Company variable products and the Company earnings derived from those products. The Company variable products currently include U.S. variable annuity contracts and mutual funds. Generally, declines in equity markets will: reduce the value of assets under management and the amount of fee income generated from those assets; increase the liability for GMWB benefits resulting in realized capital losses; increase the value of derivative assets used to hedge product guarantees resulting in realized capital gains; increase the costs of the hedging instruments we use in our hedging program; increase the Company net amount at risk ("NAR") for GMDB and GMWB benefits; increase the amount of required assets to be held backing variable annuity guarantees to maintain required regulatory reserve levels and targeted risk based capital ratios; and decrease the Company estimated future gross profits, resulting in a DAC unlock charge. See Estimated Gross Profits Used in the Valuation and Amortization of Assets and Liabilities Associated with Variable Annuity Contracts within the Critical Accounting Estimates section of the MD&A for further information. Generally, increases in equity markets will reduce the value of the hedge derivative assets, resulting in realized capital losses, and will generally have the inverse impact of those listed above. For additional information, see Risk Hedging - Variable Annuity Hedging Program section. Variable Annuity Guaranteed Benefits The Company variable annuities include GMDB and certain contracts include GMWB features. Declines in the equity markets will increase the Company liability for these benefits. Generally, a GMWB contract is in the money if the contract holder guaranteed remaining benefit becomes greater than the account value. The NAR is generally defined as the guaranteed minimum benefit amount in excess of the contract holder current account value. Variable annuity account values with guarantee features were $52.9 billion and $81.9 billion (including HLIKK) as of December 31, 2014 and December 31, 2013 , respectively. 98 The following tables summarize the account values of the Company variable annuities with guarantee features and the NAR split between various guarantee features (retained net amount at risk does not take into consideration the effects of the variable annuity hedge programs in place as of each balance sheet date): Total Variable Annuity Guarantees As of December 31, 2014 ($ in billions) Account Value Gross Net Amount at Risk Retained Net Amount at Risk % of Contracts In the Money[2] % In the Money [2] [3] U.S. Variable Annuity [1] GMDB $ 52.9 $ 3.8 $ 0.8 23 % 14 % GMWB 24.8 0.2 0.1 6 % 11 % Total Variable Annuity Guarantees As of December 31, 2013 ($ in billions) Account Value Gross Net Amount at Risk Retained Net Amount at Risk % of Contracts In the Money [2] % In the Money [2] [3] U.S. Variable Annuity [1] GMDB $ 61.8 $ 4.3 $ 1.0 16 % 26 % GMWB 30.3 0.2 0.1 5 % 12 % Japan Variable Annuity [1] [4] GMDB 20.1 0.8 0.6 31 % 8 % GMIB [5] 18.5 0.1 0.1 20 % 3 % [1] Policies with a guaranteed living benefit also have a guaranteed death benefit. The net amount at risk ( NAR ) for each benefit is shown; however these benefits are not additive. When a policy terminates due to death, any NAR related to GMWB is released. Similarly, when a policy goes into benefit status on a GMWB, its GMDB NAR is reduced to zero. [2] Excludes contracts that are fully reinsured. [3] For all contracts that are in the money , this represents the percentage by which the average contract was in the money. [4] On June 30, 2014, the Company completed the sale of the Japan variable annuity business of HLIKK. For further information of the sale of Japan variable annuity business, HLIKK in 2014, see Note 2 - Business Dispositions of Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. [5] Includes small amount of GMWB and GMAB. Many policyholders with a GMDB also have a GMWB. Policyholders that have a product that offer both guarantees can only receive the GMDB or GMWB. The GMDB NAR disclosed in the tables above is a point in time measurement and assumes that all participants utilize the GMDB benefit on that measurement date. For additional information on the Company's GMDB liability, see Note 10 - Separate Accounts, Death Benefits and Other Insurance Benefit Features of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. The Company expects to incur GMDB payments in the future only if the policyholder has an in the money GMDB at their death. If the account value is reduced to a specified level, the contract holder will receive an annuity equal to the guaranteed remaining balance ("GRB"). For the Company life-time GMWB products, this annuity can exceed the GRB. As the account value fluctuates with equity market returns on a daily basis and the life-time GMWB payments may exceed the GRB, the ultimate amount to be paid by the Company, if any, is uncertain and could be significantly more or less than the Company current carried liability. For additional information on the Company GMWB liability, see Note 5 - Fair Value Measurements of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 99 Variable Annuity Market Risk Exposures The following table summarizes the broad Variable Annuity Guarantees offered by the Company and the market risks to which the guarantee is most exposed from a U.S. GAAP accounting perspective. Variable Annuity Guarantees [1] U.S. GAAP Treatment [1] Primary Market Risk Exposures [1] GMDB and life-contingent component of the GMWB Accumulation of the portion of fees required to cover expected claims, less accumulation of actual claims paid Equity Market Levels GMWB (excluding life-contingent portions) Fair Value Equity Market Levels / Implied Volatility / Interest Rates [1] Each of these guarantees and the related U.S. GAAP accounting volatility will also be influenced by actual and estimated policyholder behavior. Risk Hedging Variable Annuity Hedging Program The Company variable annuity hedging is primarily focused on reducing the economic exposure to market risks associated with guaranteed benefits that are embedded in our variable annuity contracts through the use of reinsurance and capital market derivative instruments. The variable annuity hedging also considers the potential impacts on Statutory accounting results. Reinsurance The Company uses reinsurance for a portion of contracts with GMWB riders issued prior to the third quarter of 2003 and GMWB risks associated with a block of business sold between the third quarter of 2003 and the second quarter of 2006. The Company also uses reinsurance for a majority of the GMDB issued. Capital Market Derivatives GMWB Hedge Program The Company enters into derivative contracts to hedge market risk exposures associated with the GMWB liabilities that are not reinsured. These derivative contracts include customized swaps, interest rate swaps and futures, and equity swaps, options, and futures, on certain indices including the S&P 500 index, EAFE index, and NASDAQ index. Additionally, the Company holds customized derivative contracts to provide protection from certain capital market risks for the remaining term of specified blocks of non-reinsured GMWB riders. These customized derivative contracts are based on policyholder behavior assumptions specified at the inception of the derivative contracts. The Company retains the risk for differences between assumed and actual policyholder behavior and between the performance of the actively managed funds underlying the separate accounts and their respective indices. While the Company actively manages this dynamic hedging program, increased U.S. GAAP earnings volatility may result from factors including, but not limited to: policyholder behavior, capital markets, divergence between the performance of the underlying funds and the hedging indices, changes in hedging positions and the relative emphasis placed on various risk management objectives. Macro Hedge Program The Company macro hedging program uses derivative instruments such as options and futures on equities and interest rates to provide protection against the statutory tail scenario risk arising from GMWB and GMDB liabilities, on the Company statutory surplus. These macro hedges cover some of the residual risks not otherwise covered by specific dynamic hedging programs. Management assesses this residual risk under various scenarios in designing and executing the macro hedge program. The macro hedge program will result in additional U.S. GAAP earnings volatility as changes in the value of the macro hedge derivatives, which are designed to reduce statutory reserve and capital volatility, may not be closely aligned to changes in GAAP liabilities. Variable Annuity Hedging Program Sensitivities The underlying guaranteed living benefit liabilities and the related hedge assets within the GMWB (excluding the life-contingent GMWB benefits) and Macro hedge programs are carried at fair value, with the exception of liabilities within the Macro hedge program. 100 The following table presents our estimates of the potential instantaneous impacts from sudden market stresses related to equity market prices, interest rates, implied market volatilities, and foreign currency exchange rates. The sensitivities below represent: (1) the net estimated difference between the change in the fair value of GMWB liabilities and the underlying hedge instruments and (2) the estimated change in fair value of the hedge instruments for the macro program, before the impacts of amortization of DAC, and taxes. As noted above, certain hedge assets are used to hedge liabilities that are not carried at fair value and will not have a liability offset in the GAAP sensitivity analysis. All sensitivities are measured as of year end and are related to the fair value of liabilities and hedge instruments in place as of year end for the Company variable annuity hedge programs. The impacts presented in the table below are estimated individually and measured without consideration of any correlation among market risk factors. GAAP Sensitivity Analysis As of December 31, 2014 (before tax and DAC) [1] GMWB Macro Equity Market Return (20 )% (10 )% 10 % (20 )% (10 )% 10 % Potential Net Fair Value Impact $ (19 ) $ (10 ) $ 8 $ 61 $ 22 $ (16 ) Interest Rates -50bps -25bps 25bps -50bps -25bps 25bps Potential Net Fair Value Impact $ (2 ) $ $ (1 ) $ 14 $ 7 $ (7 ) Implied Volatilities 10 % 2 % (10 )% 10 % 2 % (10 )% Potential Net Fair Value Impact $ 20 $ 4 $ (13 ) $ 74 $ 15 $ (76 ) [1] These sensitivities are based on the following key market levels as of December 31, 2014: 1) S&P of 2059 ; 2) 10yr US swap rate of 2.34 %; and 3) S&P 10yr volatility of 26.58 % The above sensitivity analysis is an estimate and should not be used to predict the future financial performance of the Company's variable annuity hedge programs. The actual net changes in the fair value liability and the hedging assets illustrated in the above table may vary materially depending on a variety of factors which include but are not limited to: The sensitivity analysis is only valid as of the measurement date and assumes instantaneous changes in the capital market factors and no ability to rebalance hedge positions prior to the market changes; Changes to the underlying hedging program, policyholder behavior, and variation in underlying fund performance relative to the hedged index, which could materially impact the liability; and The impact of elapsed time on liabilities or hedge assets, any non-parallel shifts in capital market factors, or correlated moves across the sensitivities. Foreign Currency Exchange Risk Foreign currency exchange risk is defined as the risk of financial loss due to changes in the relative value between currencies. The Company foreign currency exchange risk is related to non-U.S. dollar denominated investments, which primarily consist of fixed maturity investments, and a yen denominated fixed payout annuity that is reinsured from HLIKK, a former, indirect wholly-owned subsidiary that was sold on June 30, 2014. For further discussion of the sale, see Note 2 - Business Dispositions of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. In addition, the Company Talcott Resolution operations formerly issued non-U.S. dollar denominated funding agreement liability contracts. A significant portion of the Company foreign currency exposure is mitigated through the use of derivatives. Fixed Maturity Investments The risk associated with the non-U.S. dollar denominated fixed maturities relates to potential decreases in value and income resulting from unfavorable changes in foreign exchange rates. The fair value of the non-U.S. dollar denominated fixed maturities at December 31, 2014 and 2013 were approximately $ 0.5 billion and $ 2.6 billion , respectively. Included in these amounts are $ 0.4 billion and $ 2.4 billion at December 31, 2014 and 2013 , respectively, related to non-U.S. dollar denominated fixed maturity securities that directly support liabilities denominated in the same currencies. At December 31, 2014 and 2013 , the derivatives used to hedge currency exchange risk related to the remaining non-U.S. dollar denominated fixed maturities had a total notional amount of $ 137 and $ 194 , respectively, and total fair value of $ 2 and $ (13) , respectively. Based on the fair values of the Company non-U.S. dollar denominated securities and derivative instruments as of December 31, 2014 and 2013 , management estimates that a 10% unfavorable change in exchange rates would decrease the fair values by a before-tax total of approximately $38 and $165 , respectively. The estimated impact was based upon a 10% change in December 31 spot rates. The selection of the 10% unfavorable change was made only for illustration of the potential hypothetical impact of such an event and should not be construed as a prediction of future market events. Actual results could differ materially from those illustrated above due to the nature of the estimates and assumptions used in the above analysis. 101 Liabilities The Company has foreign currency exchange risk associated with the yen denominated Japan fixed payout annuities reinsured from HLIKK. The Company has entered into pay U.S. dollar, receive yen swap contracts to hedge the currency exposure between the U.S. dollar denominated assets and the yen denominated fixed liability reinsurance payments. Talcott Resolution previously issued non-U.S. dollar denominated funding agreement liability contracts. The Company hedged the foreign currency risk associated with these liability contracts with currency rate swaps. At December 31, 2014 and 2013 , the derivatives used to hedge foreign currency exchange risk related to foreign denominated liability contracts had a total notional amount of $ 94 and a total fair value of $ (20) and $(1) , respectively. Financial Risk on Statutory Capital Statutory surplus amounts and risk-based capital ( RBC ) ratios may increase or decrease in any period depending upon a variety of factors and may be compounded in extreme scenarios or if multiple factors occur at the same time. At times the impact of changes in certain market factors or a combination of multiple factors on RBC ratios can be counterintuitive. Factors include: In general, as equity market levels and interest rates decline, the amount and volatility of both our actual potential obligation, as well as the related statutory surplus and capital margin for death and living benefit guarantees associated with variable annuity contracts can be materially negatively affected, sometimes at a greater than linear rate. Other market factors that can impact statutory surplus, reserve levels and capital margin include differences in performance of variable subaccounts relative to indices and/or realized equity and interest rate volatilities. In addition, as equity market levels increase, generally surplus levels will increase. RBC ratios will also tend to increase when equity markets increase. However, as a result of a number of factors and market conditions, including the level of hedging costs and other risk transfer activities, reserve requirements for death and living benefit guarantees and RBC requirements could increase with rising equity markets, resulting in lower RBC ratios. Non-market factors, which can also impact the amount and volatility of both our actual potential obligation, as well as the related statutory surplus and capital margin, include actual and estimated policyholder behavior experience as it pertains to lapsation, partial withdrawals, and mortality. As the value of certain fixed-income and equity securities in our investment portfolio decreases, due in part to credit spread widening, statutory surplus and RBC ratios may decrease. As the value of certain derivative instruments that do not qualify for hedge accounting decreases, statutory surplus and RBC ratios may decrease. Our statutory surplus is also impacted by widening credit spreads as a result of the accounting for the assets and liabilities in our fixed market value adjusted ("MVA") annuities. Statutory separate account assets supporting the fixed MVA annuities are recorded at fair value. In determining the statutory reserve for the fixed MVA annuities, we are required to use current crediting rates in the U.S. In many capital market scenarios, current crediting rates in the U.S. are highly correlated with market rates implicit in the fair value of statutory separate account assets. As a result, the change in statutory reserve from period to period will likely substantially offset the change in the fair value of the statutory separate account assets. However, in periods of volatile credit markets, such as we experienced in 2008 and 2009, actual credit spreads on investment assets may increase sharply for certain sub-sectors of the overall credit market, resulting in statutory separate account asset market value losses. As actual credit spreads are not fully reflected in the current crediting rates in the U.S. the calculation of statutory reserves will not substantially offset the change in fair value of the statutory separate account assets resulting in reductions in statutory surplus. This has resulted and may continue to result in the need to devote significant additional capital to support the product. With respect to our fixed annuity business, sustained low interest rates may result in a reduction in statutory surplus and an increase in NAIC required capital. Most of these factors are outside of the Company control. The Company financial strength and credit ratings are significantly influenced by the statutory surplus amounts and RBC ratios of our insurance company subsidiaries. In addition, rating agencies may implement changes to their internal models that have the effect of increasing or decreasing the amount of statutory capital we must hold in order to maintain our current ratings. The Company has reinsured approximately 26% of its risk associated with GMWB and 79% of its risk associated with the aggregate GMDB exposure. These reinsurance agreements serve to reduce the Company exposure to changes in the statutory reserves and the related capital and RBC ratios associated with changes in the capital markets. The Company also continues to explore other solutions for mitigating the capital market risk effect on surplus, such as external reinsurance solutions, modifications to our hedging program, changes in product design, increasing pricing and expense management. 102 Credit Risk Credit risk is defined as the risk to earnings or capital due to uncertainty of an obligor or counterparty ability or willingness to meet its obligations in accordance with contractually agreed upon terms. The majority of the Company credit risk is concentrated in its investment holdings but is also present in reinsurance and insurance portfolios. Credit risk is comprised of three major factors: the risk of change in credit quality, or credit migration risk; the risk of default; and the risk of a change in value of a financial instrument due to changes in credit spread that are unrelated to changes in obligor credit quality. A decline in creditworthiness is typically associated with an increase in an investment credit spread, potentially resulting in an increase in other-than-temporary impairments and an increased probability of a realized loss upon sale. The objective of the Company enterprise credit risk management strategy is to identify, quantify, and manage credit risk on an aggregate portfolio basis and to limit potential losses in accordance with an established credit risk management policy. The Company manages to its credit risk appetite by primarily holding a diversified mix of investment grade issuers and counterparties across its investment, reinsurance, and insurance portfolios. Potential losses are also limited within portfolios by diversifying across geographic regions, asset types, and sectors. The Company manages credit risk exposure from its inception to its maturity or sale. Both the investment and reinsurance areas have formulated procedures for counterparty approvals and authorizations. Although approval processes may vary by area and type of credit risk, approval processes establish minimum levels of creditworthiness and financial stability. Credits considered for investment are subjected to prudent and conservative underwriting reviews. Within the investment portfolio, private securities, such as commercial mortgages, and private placements, must be presented to their respective review committees for approval. Credit risks are managed on an on-going basis through the use of various processes and analyses. At the investment, reinsurance, and insurance product levels, fundamental credit analyses are performed at the issuer/counterparty level on a regular basis. To provide a holistic review within the investment portfolio, fundamental analyses are supported by credit ratings, assigned by nationally recognized rating agencies or internally assigned, and by quantitative credit analyses. The Company utilizes a credit value at risk ("VaR") to measure default and migration risk on a monthly basis. Issuer and security level risk measures are also utilized. In the event of deterioration in credit quality, the Company maintains watch lists of problem counterparties within the investment and reinsurance portfolios. The watch lists are updated based on regular credit examinations and management reviews. The Company also performs quarterly assessments of probable expected losses in the investment portfolio. The process is conducted on a sector basis and is intended to promptly assess and identify potential problems in the portfolio and to recognize necessary impairments. Credit risk policies at the enterprise and operation level ensure comprehensive and consistent approaches to quantifying, evaluating, and managing credit risk under expected and stressed conditions. These policies define the scope of the risk, authorities, accountabilities, terms, and limits, and are regularly reviewed and approved by senior management and ERM. Aggregate counterparty credit quality and exposure is monitored on a daily basis utilizing an enterprise-wide credit exposure information system that contains data on issuers, ratings, exposures, and credit limits. Exposures are tracked on a current and potential basis. Credit exposures are reported regularly to the ERCC and to the Finance, Investment and Risk Management Committee. Exposures are aggregated by ultimate parent across investments, reinsurance receivables, insurance products with credit risk, and derivative counterparties. The credit database and reporting system are available to all key credit practitioners in the enterprise. The Company exercises various and differing methods to mitigate its credit risk exposure within its investment and reinsurance portfolios. Some of the reasons for mitigating credit risk include financial instability or poor credit, avoidance of arbitration or litigation, future uncertainty, and exposure in excess of risk tolerances. Credit risk within the investment portfolio is most commonly mitigated through asset sales or the use of derivative instruments. Counterparty credit risk is mitigated through the practice of entering into contracts only with highly creditworthy institutions and through the practice of holding and posting of collateral. In addition, transactions cleared through a central clearing house reduce risk due to their ability to require daily variation margin, monitor the Company's ability to request additional collateral in the event of a counterparty downgrade, and be an independent valuation source. Systemic credit risk is mitigated through the construction of high-quality, diverse portfolios that are subject to regular underwriting of credit risks. For further discussion of the Company investment and derivative instruments, see MD&A - Enterprise Risk Management, Portfolio Risks and Risk Management and Note 6 - Investments and Derivative Instruments of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. For further discussion on managing and mitigating credit risk from the use of reinsurance via an enterprise security review process, see MD&A - Enterprise Risk Management, Insurance Risk Management, Reinsurance as a Risk Management Strategy. 103 As of December 31, 2014, the Company had no exposure to any credit concentration risk of a single issuer or counterparty greater than 10% of the Company's stockholders' equity, other than the U.S. government and certain U.S. government securities. As of December 31, 2013, the Company's only exposure to any credit concentration risk of a single issuer or counterparty greater than 10% of the Company's stockholders' equity, other than the U.S. government and certain U.S. government securities, were the Government of Japan. The Government of Japan securities represented $2.6 billion , or 14% of stockholders' equity, and 3% of total invested assets. For further discussion of concentration of credit risk in the investment portfolio, see the Concentration of Credit Risk section in Note 6 - Investments and Derivative Instruments of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Derivative Instruments The Company utilizes a variety of OTC, OTC-cleared and exchange-traded derivative instruments as a part of its overall risk management strategy, as well as to enter into replication transactions. Derivative instruments are used to manage risk associated with interest rate, equity market, credit spread, issuer default, price, and currency exchange rate risk or volatility. Replication transactions are used as an economical means to synthetically replicate the characteristics and performance of assets that are permissible investments under the Company investment policies. For further information on the Company use of derivatives, see Note 6 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Derivative activities are monitored and evaluated by the Company compliance and risk management teams and reviewed by senior management. In addition, the Company monitors counterparty credit exposure on a monthly basis to ensure compliance with Company policies and statutory limitations. The notional amounts of derivative contracts represent the basis upon which pay or receive amounts are calculated and are not reflective of credit risk. Downgrades to the credit ratings of The Hartford insurance operating companies may have adverse implications for its use of derivatives including those used to hedge benefit guarantees of variable annuities. In some cases, downgrades may give derivative counterparties for OTC derivatives and clearing brokers for OTC-cleared derivatives the right to cancel and settle outstanding derivative trades or require additional collateral to be posted. In addition, downgrades may result in counterparties and clearing brokers becoming unwilling to engage in or clear additional derivatives or may require collateralization before entering into any new trades. This will restrict the supply of derivative instruments commonly used to hedge variable annuity guarantees, particularly long-dated equity derivatives and interest rate swaps. The Company uses various derivative counterparties in executing its derivative transactions. The use of counterparties creates credit risk that the counterparty may not perform in accordance with the terms of the derivative transaction. The Company has derivative counterparty exposure policies which limit the Company exposure to credit risk. The Company policies with respect to derivative counterparty exposure establishes market-based credit limits, favors long-term financial stability and creditworthiness of the counterparty and typically requires credit enhancement/credit risk reducing agreements. The Company minimizes the credit risk of derivative instruments by entering into transactions with high quality counterparties primarily rated A or better, which are monitored and evaluated by the Company risk management team and reviewed by senior management. The Company also generally requires that OTC derivative contracts be governed by an International Swaps and Derivatives Association ("ISDA") Master Agreement, which is structured by legal entity and by counterparty and permits right of offset. The Company has developed credit exposure thresholds which are based upon counterparty ratings. Credit exposures are measured using the market value of the derivatives, resulting in amounts owed to the Company by its counterparties or potential payment obligations from the Company to its counterparties. The Company enters into credit support annexes in conjunction with the ISDA agreements, which require daily collateral settlement based upon agreed upon thresholds. For purposes of daily derivative collateral maintenance, credit exposures are generally quantified based on the prior business day market value and collateral is pledged to and held by, or on behalf of, the Company to the extent the current value of the derivatives exceed the contractual thresholds. In accordance with industry standard and the contractual agreements, collateral is typically settled on the next business day. The Company has exposure to credit risk for amounts below the exposure thresholds which are uncollateralized, as well as for market fluctuations that may occur between contractual settlement periods of collateral movements. For the company derivative programs, the maximum uncollateralized threshold for a derivative counterparty for a single legal entity is $ 10 . The Company currently transacts OTC derivatives in five legal entities that have a threshold greater than zero; and therefore the maximum combined threshold for a single counterparty across all legal entities that use derivatives is $ 50 . In addition, the Company may have exposure to multiple counterparties in a single corporate family due to a common credit support provider. As of December 31, 2014 the maximum combined threshold for all counterparties under a single credit support provider across all legal entities that use derivatives is $ 100 . Based on the contractual terms of the collateral agreements, these thresholds may be immediately reduced due to a downgrade in either party credit rating. For further discussion, see the Derivative Commitments section of Note 15 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. For the year ended December 31, 2014 , the Company has incurred no losses on derivative instruments due to counterparty default. 104 In addition to counterparty credit risk, the Company may also introduce credit risk through the use of credit default swaps that are entered into to manage credit exposure. Credit default swaps involve a transfer of credit risk of one or many referenced entities from one party to another in exchange for periodic payments. The party that purchases credit protection will make periodic payments based on an agreed upon rate and notional amount, and for certain transactions there will also be an upfront premium payment. The second party, who assumes credit risk, will typically only make a payment if there is a credit event as defined in the contract and such payment will be typically equal to the notional value of the swap contract less the value of the referenced security issuer debt obligation. A credit event is generally defined as default on contractually obligated interest or principal payments or bankruptcy of the referenced entity. The Company uses credit derivatives to purchase credit protection and to assume credit risk with respect to a single entity, referenced index, or asset pool. The Company purchases credit protection through credit default swaps to economically hedge and manage credit risk of certain fixed maturity investments across multiple sectors of the investment portfolio. The Company also enters into credit default swaps that assume credit risk as part of replication transactions. Replication transactions are used as an economical means to synthetically replicate the characteristics and performance of assets that are permissible investments under the Company investment policies. These swaps reference investment grade single corporate issuers and baskets, which include customized diversified portfolios of corporate issuers, which are established within sector concentration limits and may be divided into tranches which possess different credit ratings. As of December 31, 2014 and 2013 , the notional amount related to credit derivatives that purchase credit protection was $ 0.6 billion and $ 1.3 billion , respectively, while the fair value was $ (6) and $ (10) , respectively. As of December 31, 2014 and 2013 , the notional amount related to credit derivatives that assume credit risk was $ 1.5 billion and $ 1.9 billion , respectively, while the fair value was $ 3 and $ 33 , respectively. For further information on credit derivatives, see Note 6 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Investment Portfolio Risks and Risk Management Investment Portfolio Composition The following table presents the Company fixed maturities, AFS, by credit quality. The average credit ratings referenced below and throughout this section are based on availability, and are the midpoint of the applicable ratings among Moody s, S&P, Fitch and Morningstar. If no rating is available from a rating agency, then an internally developed rating is used. Fixed Maturities by Credit Quality December 31, 2014 December 31, 2013 Amortized Cost Fair Value Percent of Total Fair Value Amortized Cost Fair Value Percent of Total Fair Value United States Government/Government agencies $ 7,135 $ 7,596 12.8 % $ 8,231 $ 8,208 13.2 % AAA 6,963 7,251 12.2 % 6,215 6,376 10.2 % AA 9,258 10,056 16.9 % 12,054 12,273 19.7 % A 15,250 16,717 28.2 % 14,777 15,498 24.9 % BBB 13,464 14,397 24.2 % 15,555 16,087 25.7 % BB & below 3,292 3,367 5.7 % 3,809 3,915 6.3 % Total fixed maturities, AFS $ 55,362 $ 59,384 100 % $ 60,641 $ 62,357 100 % The value of securities in the AA category declined as compared to December 31, 2013, primarily due to the sale of Japan Government bonds concurrent with the disposition of the Japan variable and fixed annuity business. The value of securities in the A category increased as a percentage of total as a result of the reduction in the AA rated securities discussed above. In addition, the value of securities in the BBB and BB & below categories has declined, as a result of sales of certain emerging market securities, primarily within the foreign government and corporate sectors. Fixed maturities, FVO, are not included in the above table. For further discussion on fair value option securities, see Note 5 - Fair Value Measurements of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 105 The following table presents the Company AFS securities by type, as well as fixed maturities and equity, FVO. Securities by Type December 31, 2014 December 31, 2013 Cost or Amortized Cost Gross Unrealized Gains Gross Unrealized Losses Fair Value Percent of Total Fair Value Cost or Amortized Cost Gross Unrealized Gains Gross Unrealized Losses Fair Value Percent of Total Fair Value ABS Consumer loans $ 2,052 $ 14 $ (28 ) $ 2,038 3.4 % $ 1,982 $ 11 $ (48 ) $ 1,945 3.1 % Small business 166 14 (8 ) 172 0.3 % 194 3 (16 ) 181 0.3 % Other 252 11 (1 ) 262 0.4 % 228 11 239 0.4 % Collateralized debt obligations ("CDOs") Collateralized loan obligations ( CLOs ) 2,279 4 (17 ) 2,266 3.8 % 1,781 3 (34 ) 1,750 2.8 % Commercial real estate ("CREs") 114 88 (9 ) 193 0.3 % 176 88 (16 ) 248 0.4 % Other [1] 383 6 (10 ) 382 0.6 % 383 17 (9 ) 389 0.6 % Commercial mortgage-backed securities ("CMBS") Agency backed [2] 1,136 45 (1 ) 1,180 2.0 % 1,068 20 (12 ) 1,076 1.7 % Bonds 2,594 126 (4 ) 2,716 4.6 % 2,836 168 (31 ) 2,973 4.8 % Interest only ( IOs ) 505 25 (11 ) 519 0.9 % 384 28 (15 ) 397 0.6 % Corporate Basic industry 1,673 105 (22 ) 1,756 3.0 % 2,085 106 (38 ) 2,153 3.5 % Capital goods 1,880 192 (4 ) 2,068 3.5 % 2,077 161 (14 ) 2,224 3.6 % Consumer cyclical 1,647 128 (8 ) 1,767 3.0 % 1,801 119 (17 ) 1,903 3.1 % Consumer non-cyclical 3,473 335 (5 ) 3,803 6.4 % 3,600 288 (21 ) 3,867 6.2 % Energy [3] 3,092 252 (49 ) 3,295 5.5 % 3,407 242 (21 ) 3,628 5.8 % Financial services 4,942 405 (94 ) 5,253 8.8 % 5,044 287 (145 ) 5,186 8.3 % Tech./comm. 3,150 370 (12 ) 3,508 5.9 % 3,223 223 (28 ) 3,418 5.5 % Transportation 891 82 (4 ) 969 1.6 % 972 65 (13 ) 1,024 1.6 % Utilities [3] 4,278 496 (13 ) 4,761 8.0 % 4,582 318 (47 ) 4,853 7.8 % Other 162 17 179 0.3 % 222 14 (2 ) 234 0.4 % Foreign govt./govt. agencies 1,592 73 (29 ) 1,636 2.8 % 4,228 52 (176 ) 4,104 6.6 % Municipal Taxable 1,135 135 (2 ) 1,268 2.1 % 1,299 32 (67 ) 1,264 2.0 % Tax-exempt 10,600 1,006 (3 ) 11,603 19.5 % 10,633 393 (117 ) 10,909 17.5 % RMBS Agency 2,448 98 (2 ) 2,544 4.3 % 3,366 59 (38 ) 3,387 5.4 % Non-agency 81 3 84 0.1 % 86 86 0.1 % Alt-A 55 1 56 0.1 % % Sub-prime 1,231 20 (17 ) 1,234 2.1 % 1,187 31 (44 ) 1,174 1.9 % U.S. Treasuries 3,551 326 (5 ) 3,872 6.5 % 3,797 7 (59 ) 3,745 6.0 % Fixed maturities, AFS 55,362 4,377 (358 ) 59,384 100 % 60,641 2,746 (1,028 ) 62,357 100 % Equity securities Financial services 149 13 162 23.2 % 233 11 (29 ) 215 24.8 % Other 527 37 (27 ) 537 76.8 % 617 56 (20 ) 653 75.2 % Equity securities, AFS 676 50 (27 ) 699 100 % 850 67 (49 ) 868 100 % Total AFS securities $ 56,038 $ 4,427 $ (385 ) $ 60,083 $ 61,491 $ 2,813 $ (1,077 ) $ 63,225 Fixed maturities, FVO $ 488 $ 844 Equity, FVO [4] $ 348 $ [1] Gross unrealized gains (losses) exclude the fair value of bifurcated embedded derivative features of certain securities. Changes in value are recorded in net realized capital gains (losses). [2] Includes securities with pools of loans issued by the Small Business Administration which are backed by the full faith and credit of the U.S. government. 106 [3] Securities with an amortized cost and fair value of $1.0 billion and $1.1 billion, respectively, as of December 31, 2013, were reclassified in 2014 from utilities to energy as a result of an update to the Barclays bond index which is the primary component used in determining the classification in the above table. The balances as of December 31, 2013 have been reclassified to reflect the categorization as of December 31, 2014. [4] Included in equity securities, AFS on the Consolidated Balance Sheets. The decline in the fair value of AFS and FVO securities as compared to December 31, 2013 is primarily attributable to the sale of the Japan variable and fixed annuity buisness. In addition assets declined due to the effect of net outflows as a result of the continued runoff of Talcott Resolution, partially offset by higher valuations as a result of a decrease in long term interest rates and tighter credit spreads. Energy Exposure Market values of securities in the energy sector have experienced volatility in the second half of 2014 largely because prices for crude oil have declined significantly. West Texas Intermediate (WTI) crude oil is the benchmark for oil prices in the United States. Prices for WTI futures contracts for one month forward delivery have declined more than 51% from the June 2014 high of $108 a barrel, to $53 a barrel as of December 31, 2014. The drop in oil prices is primarily due to an increase in supply, lower than expected growth in global demand, and a stronger U.S. dollar. The speed and severity of the decline in oil prices has caused credit spreads to widen in the second half of 2014 for corporate and sovereign issuers that generate a large portion of their revenues from oil. The impact was more pronounced on issuers with below investment grade credit. Ultimately, the impact on these issuers will be determined by the severity and duration of the decline in oil prices and the ability of the issuers to adjust their cost structure or find other sources of revenue. The Company has limited direct exposure within its investment portfolio to the energy sector, totaling only 5% of total invested assets as of December 31, 2014 , and is primarily comprised of corporate and sovereign debt. The Company's exposure is primarily comprised of investment grade securities and the exposure is diversified by issuer and in different sub sectors of the energy market. The Company selectively reduced its exposure to the energy sector by approximately $300 in the fourth quarter of 2014. The table below summarizes the Company's exposure to the energy sector by sector and credit quality. December 31, 2014 Corporate & Equity Securities [1] Foreign govt./govt. agencies [1][2] Total Amortized Cost Fair Value Amortized Cost Fair Value Amortized Cost Fair Value Investment grade $ 2,923 $ 3,162 $ 268 $ 266 $ 3,191 $ 3,428 Below investment grade 288 266 36 32 324 298 Equity, AFS 23 21 23 21 Total energy exposure $ 3,234 $ 3,449 $ 304 $ 298 $ 3,538 $ 3,747 December 31, 2013 Corporate & Equity Securities [1] Foreign govt./govt. agencies [1][2] Total Amortized Cost Fair Value Amortized Cost Fair Value Amortized Cost Fair Value Investment grade $ 3,114 $ 3,338 $ 355 $ 340 $ 3,469 $ 3,678 Below investment grade 320 324 84 78 404 402 Equity, AFS 20 22 20 22 Total energy exposure $ 3,454 $ 3,684 $ 439 $ 418 $ 3,893 $ 4,102 [1] Included in fixed maturities, AFS and FVO, equity, AFS and short-term investments on the Consolidated Balance Sheets. Excludes equity securities, FVO with cost and fair value of $45 and $45, respectively, that are hedged with total return swaps. [2] Includes sovereigns for which oil exports are greater than 4% of gross domestic product. The Company manages the credit risk associated with the energy sector within the investment portfolio on an on-going basis using macroeconomic analysis and issuer credit analysis. The Company considers alternate scenarios including oil prices remaining at low levels for an extended period and/or declining significantly below current levels. For additional details regarding the Company management of credit risks, see the Credit Risk Section of this MD&A. The Company has evaluated all available-for-sale securities for potential other-than-temporary impairments as of December 31, 2014 and 2013 and concluded that for the securities in an unrealized loss position, it is more likely than not that we will recover our entire amortized cost basis in the securities. In addition, the Company does not currently have the intent-to-sell, nor will we be required to sell, the securities discussed above. For additional details regarding the Company impairment process, see the Other-Than-Temporary Impairments Section of this MD&A. 107 Emerging Market Exposure Early in 2014, emerging market securities were negatively impacted by lower European interest rates, increased political tension in eastern Europe, softer-than-expected economic growth, as well as trade and budget deficits, raising the potential for destabilizing capital outflows and rapid currency depreciation, causing bondholders to demand a higher yield which caused the fair value of securities held to decline. The decline in oil prices during the second half of 2014 has put added strain on certain emerging markets that rely on revenues derived from the energy sector. As a result of these factors, credit spreads for emerging market securities have been volatile and we expect continued sensitivity to geopolitical events, the ongoing evolution of Fed policy and other economic factors, including contagion risk. The Company has limited direct exposure within its investment portfolio to emerging market issuers, totaling only 2% of total invested assets as of December 31, 2014 , and is primarily comprised of sovereign and corporate debt issued in US dollars. The Company identifies exposures with the issuers ultimate parent country of domicile, which may not be the country of the security issuer. The following table presents the Company exposure to securities within certain emerging markets currently under the greatest stress, defined as countries that have a sovereign S&P credit rating of B- or below; or countries that have had a current account deficit and has an average inflation level greater than 5% over the past six months. December 31, 2014 December 31, 2013 Amortized Cost Fair Value Amortized Cost Fair Value Argentina $ 2 $ 2 $ 38 $ 40 Brazil 123 120 274 257 India 37 37 62 62 Indonesia 82 80 107 93 Kazakhstan 79 73 88 83 Lebanon 29 29 26 26 South Africa 54 53 65 60 Turkey 65 67 88 79 Ukraine 3 3 50 50 Uruguay 16 17 27 25 Venezuela 4 2 67 60 Other 97 96 50 50 Total [1] $ 591 $ 579 $ 942 $ 885 [1] Includes an amortized cost and fair value of $137 and $131, respectively, as of December 31, 2014 and an amortized cost and fair value of $254 and $237, respectively, as of December 31, 2013 included in the exposure to the energy sector table above. The Company manages the credit risk associated with emerging market securities within the investment portfolio on an on-going basis using macroeconomic analysis and issuer credit analysis subject to diversification and individual credit risk management limits. For additional details regarding the Company management of credit risk, see the Credit Risk section of this MD&A. Due to increased political tensions in Argentina, Ukraine, and Venezuela, the Company selectively reduced its exposure to these economies during the first quarter of 2014 . In addition, the Company has limited exposure to the Russian Federation, with a total amortized cost and fair value of $23 and $20 , respectively, as of December 31, 2014 . The exposure is primarily comprised of government and government agency bonds, but also includes corporate bonds. European Exposure Certain economies in the European region have experienced adverse economic conditions, specifically in Europe peripheral region (Greece, Ireland, Italy, Portugal and Spain), that were precipitated in part by elevated unemployment rates weighing on inflation rates, government debt levels and the slowing growth of the region. However, austerity measures aimed at reducing sovereign debt levels and the European Central Bank plan to institute a bond buying program to provide liquidity and credit support, has reduced the risk of default on the sovereign debt of the countries within the region. As a result, economic conditions in the region have shown signs of improvement in the current period through stabilized credit ratings in Ireland, Portugal and Spain. Though economic conditions in the region have improved, continued slow GDP growth and elevated unemployment levels may continue to put pressure on sovereign debt. 108 The Company manages the credit risk associated with the European securities within the investment portfolio on an on-going basis using several processes which are supported by macroeconomic analysis and issuer credit analysis. For additional details regarding the Company management of credit risk, see the Credit Risk section of this MD&A. The Company periodically considers alternate scenarios, including a base-case and both positive and negative tail scenarios that includes a partial or full break-up of the Eurozone. The outlook for key factors is evaluated, including the economic prospects for key countries, the potential for the spread of sovereign debt contagion, and the likelihood that policymakers and politicians pursue sufficient fiscal discipline and introduce appropriate backstops. Given the inherent uncertainty in the outcome of developments in the Eurozone, however, the Company has been focused on controlling both absolute levels of exposure and the composition of that exposure through both bond and derivative transactions. The Company has limited direct European exposure, totaling only 6% of total invested assets as of December 31, 2014. The following tables present the Company European securities included in the Securities by Type table above. The Company identifies exposures with the issuers ultimate parent country of domicile, which may not be the country of the security issuer. The European countries within Europe peripheral region are separately listed below because of the current significant economic strains persisting in these countries. The following tables present the Company European securities included in the Securities by Type table above. December 31, 2014 Corporate & Equity, AFS Non-Finan. [1] Corporate & Equity, AFS Financials Foreign Govt./ Govt. Agencies Total Amortized Cost Fair Value Amortized Cost Fair Value Amortized Cost Fair Value Amortized Cost Fair Value Italy $ 1 $ 1 $ $ $ $ $ 1 $ 1 Spain [3] 21 23 1 1 22 24 Ireland 31 35 31 35 Portugal Greece Peripheral region 53 59 1 1 54 60 Europe excluding peripheral region [4] 2,832 3,068 971 1,052 373 396 4,176 4,516 Total Europe $ 2,885 $ 3,127 $ 972 $ 1,053 $ 373 $ 396 $ 4,230 $ 4,576 Europe exposure net of credit default swap protection [2] $ 4,186 $ 4,576 December 31, 2013 Corporate & Equity, AFS Non-Finan. [1] Corporate & Equity, AFS Financials Foreign Govt./ Govt. Agencies Total Amortized Cost Fair Value Amortized Cost Fair Value Amortized Cost Fair Value Amortized Cost Fair Value Italy $ 2 $ 2 $ $ $ $ $ 2 $ 2 Spain [3] 35 36 21 21 56 57 Ireland 47 48 3 3 50 51 Portugal Greece Peripheral region 84 86 24 24 108 110 Europe excluding peripheral region [4] 3,083 3,304 1,015 1,074 634 634 4,732 5,012 Total Europe $ 3,167 $ 3,390 $ 1,039 $ 1,098 $ 634 $ 634 $ 4,840 $ 5,122 Europe exposure net of credit default swap protection [2] $ 4,650 $ 5,121 [1] Includes amortized cost and fair value of $ 4 as of December 31, 2014 and $ 34 as of December 31, 2013 related to limited partnerships and other alternative investments. [2] Includes a notional amount and fair value of $ 44 and $ 0 , respectively, as of December 31, 2014 and $ 190 and $ (1) , respectively, as of December 31, 2013 related to credit default swap protection. This includes a notional amount of $ 3 and $ 55 as of December 31, 2014 and December 31, 2013 , respectively, related to single name corporate issuers in the financial services sector. [3] As of December 31, 2014 and 2013, the Company had credit default swap protection with a notional amount of $3 related and $23 related to Corporate and Equity, AFS, respectively. [4] Includes an amortized cost and fair value of $389 and $407, respectively, as of December 31, 2014 and an amortized cost and fair value of $574 and $590, respectively, as of December 31 2013 included in the exposure to the energy sector table above. 109 The Company European investment exposure largely relates to corporate entities which are domiciled in or generated a significant portion of its revenue within the United Kingdom, Germany, the Netherlands and Switzerland. Entities domiciled in the United Kingdom comprise the Company's largest exposure; as of December 31, 2014 and 2013 , the exposure totals less than 3% of total invested assets. The majority of the European investments are U.S. dollar-denominated, and those securities that are pound and euro-denominated are hedged to U.S. dollars or support foreign-denominated liabilities. For a discussion of foreign currency risks, see the Foreign Currency Exchange Risk section of this MD&A. The Company does not hold any sovereign exposure to the peripheral region and does not hold any exposure to issuers in Greece. As of December 31, 2014 and 2013 , the Company unfunded commitments associated with its investment portfolio was immaterial, and the weighted average credit quality of European investments was A- and A-, respectively. As of December 31, 2014 and 2013 , the Company credit default swaps that provide credit protection on European issuers had a notional amount of $ 44 and $ 190 , respectively, and a fair value of $ 0 and $ (1) , respectively. As of December 31, 2014 and 2013 these credit default swaps that reference single name corporate and financial European issuers, of which a notional value of $ 3 and $ 23 , respectively, related to the peripheral region. The maturity dates of credit defaults swaps are primarily consistent with the hedged bonds. For further information on the use of the Company credit derivatives and counterparty credit quality, see Derivative Instruments within the Credit Risk section of this MD&A. In addition to the credit risk associated with the investment portfolio, the Company has $231 of reinsurance recoverables due from legal entity counterparties domiciled within Europe. For a more detail discussion of the Company's reinsurance arrangements, see Note 7 - Reinsurance of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Financial Services The Company exposure to the financial services sector is predominantly through investment grade banking and insurance institutions. The following table presents the Company fixed maturity, AFS and equity, AFS securities in the financial services sector that are included in the Securities by Type table above. December 31, 2014 December 31, 2013 Amortized Cost Fair Value Net Unrealized Amortized Cost Fair Value Net Unrealized AAA $ 31 $ 34 $ 3 $ 49 $ 52 $ 3 AA 401 436 35 468 493 25 A 2,610 2,804 194 2,518 2,616 98 BBB 1,681 1,734 53 1,978 1,952 (26 ) BB & below 368 407 39 264 288 24 Total $ 5,091 $ 5,415 $ 324 $ 5,277 $ 5,401 $ 124 The Company's exposure to the financial services sector remained relatively consistent, as the impact of sales was largely offset by higher valuations due to a decline in interest rates. Commercial Real Estate Commercial real estate market fundamentals, including property prices, financial conditions, transaction volume, and delinquencies, continue to improve. In addition, the availability of credit has increased and there is now less concern about the ability of borrowers to refinance as loans come due. 110 The following table presents the Company exposure to CMBS bonds by current credit quality and vintage year, included in the Securities by Type table above. Credit protection represents the current weighted average percentage of the outstanding capital structure subordinated to the Company investment holding that is available to absorb losses before the security incurs the first dollar loss of principal and excludes any equity interest or property value in excess of outstanding debt. CMBS Bonds [1] December 31, 2014 AAA AA A BBB BB and Below Total Amortized Cost Fair Value Amortized Cost Fair Value Amortized Cost Fair Value Amortized Cost Fair Value Amortized Cost Fair Value Amortized Cost Fair Value 2003 & Prior $ 8 $ 8 $ 6 $ 6 $ 6 $ 6 $ $ $ 15 $ 20 $ 35 $ 40 2004 5 5 52 58 1 1 58 64 2005 175 188 78 80 99 101 83 84 46 46 481 499 2006 287 300 108 115 121 127 63 66 22 23 601 631 2007 211 221 169 182 78 82 31 31 72 73 561 589 2008 40 43 40 43 2009 11 11 11 11 2010 18 20 18 20 2011 56 62 6 6 62 68 2012 40 41 14 14 12 12 66 67 2013 16 16 95 99 71 76 12 13 194 204 2014 350 360 64 66 53 54 467 480 Total $ 1,217 $ 1,275 $ 572 $ 606 $ 443 $ 461 $ 207 $ 212 $ 155 $ 162 $ 2,594 $ 2,716 Credit protection 33.0% 25.7% 20.2% 19.5% 18.0% 27.2% December 31, 2013 AAA AA A BBB BB and Below Total Amortized Cost Fair Value Amortized Cost Fair Value Amortized Cost Fair Value Amortized Cost Fair Value Amortized Cost Fair Value Amortized Cost Fair Value 2003 & Prior $ 10 $ 10 $ 35 $ 36 $ 6 $ 6 $ 10 $ 10 $ 31 $ 33 $ 92 $ 95 2004 79 80 77 83 29 29 13 13 7 12 205 217 2005 307 324 79 82 101 104 71 71 68 75 626 656 2006 336 362 107 116 120 127 102 106 224 238 889 949 2007 188 202 211 218 112 127 130 125 641 672 2008 43 49 43 49 2009 11 11 11 11 2010 18 19 18 19 2011 63 66 6 5 69 71 2012 35 34 8 8 11 10 54 52 2013 30 29 89 86 59 58 10 9 188 182 Total $ 1,120 $ 1,186 $ 598 $ 621 $ 435 $ 459 $ 223 $ 224 $ 460 $ 483 $ 2,836 $ 2,973 Credit protection 31.9% 25.9% 19.7% 19.8% 12.2% 24.6% [1] The vintage year represents the year the pool of loans was originated. The Company also has AFS exposure to CRE CDOs with an amortized cost and fair value of $ 114 and $ 193 , respectively, as of December 31, 2014 and $ 176 and $ 248 , respectively, as of December 31, 2013 . These securities are comprised of diversified pools of commercial mortgage loans or equity positions of other CMBS securitizations. We continue to monitor these investments as economic and market uncertainties regarding future performance impact market liquidity and security premiums. 111 In addition to CMBS bonds and CRE CDOs, the Company has exposure to commercial mortgage loans as presented in the following table. These loans are collateralized by a variety of commercial properties and are diversified both geographically throughout the United States and by property type. These loans are primarily in the form of whole loans, where the Company is the sole lender, or may include participations. Loan participations are loans where the Company has purchased or retained a portion of an outstanding loan or package of loans and participates on a pro-rata basis in collecting interest and principal pursuant to the terms of the participation agreement. In general, A-Note participations have senior payment priority, followed by B-Note participations and then mezzanine loan participations. As of December 31, 2014 , loans within the Company mortgage loan portfolio that have had extensions or restructurings other than what is allowable under the original terms of the contract are immaterial. Commercial Mortgage Loans December 31, 2014 December 31, 2013 Amortized Cost [1] Valuation Allowance Carrying Value Amortized Cost [1] Valuation Allowance Carrying Value Agricultural $ 51 $ (5 ) $ 46 $ 132 $ (7 ) $ 125 Whole loans 5,333 (13 ) 5,320 5,223 (10 ) 5,213 A-Note participations 154 154 192 192 B-Note participations 17 17 99 (50 ) 49 Mezzanine loans 19 19 19 19 Total $ 5,574 $ (18 ) $ 5,556 $ 5,665 $ (67 ) $ 5,598 [1] Amortized cost represents carrying value prior to valuation allowances, if any. The overall decrease in mortgage loans is attributed to an increase in loan payoffs in the agricultural loan and loan participations portfolios, partially offset by loan originations in the whole loan portfolio. Since December 31, 2013 , the Company funded $604 of commercial whole loans with a weighted average loan-to-value ( LTV ) ratio of 61% and a weighted average yield of 4.0% . The Company continues to originate commercial whole loans within primary markets, such as office, industrial and multi-family, focusing on loans with strong LTV ratios and high quality property collateral. Included in the table above are mortgage loans held-for-sale with a carrying value and valuation allowance of $61 and $3 , respectively, as of December 31, 2013 . There were no mortgage loans held for sale a of December 31, 2014. 112 Municipal Bonds The following table summarizes the amortized cost, fair value, and weighted average credit quality of the Company's available-for-sale investments in securities backed by states, municipalities and political subdivisions ( municipal bonds ). December 31, 2014 December 31, 2013 Amortized Cost Fair Value Weighted Average Credit Quality Amortized Cost Fair Value Weighted Average Credit Quality General Obligation $ 2,259 $ 2,480 AA $ 2,358 $ 2,455 AA Pre-Refunded [1] 716 748 AAA 567 605 AAA Revenue Transportation 1,599 1,781 A+ 1,880 1,879 A Health Care 1,412 1,560 AA- 1,305 1,335 AA Water & Sewer 1,204 1,308 AA 1,455 1,476 AA- Education 1,115 1,232 AA 1,077 1,105 AA Sales Tax 916 1,020 AA- 793 795 AA- Leasing [2] 772 858 AA- 877 897 AA- Power 739 814 A+ 706 722 A+ Housing 148 153 AA 177 171 AA Other 855 917 AA- 737 733 A+ Total Revenue 8,760 9,643 AA- 9,007 9,113 AA- Total Municipal $ 11,735 $ 12,871 AA- $ 11,932 $ 12,173 AA- [1] Pre-refunded bonds are bonds for which an irrevocable trust containing sufficient U.S. treasury, agency, or other securities has been established to fund the remaining payment of principal and interest. [2] Leasing revenue bonds are generally the obligations of a financing authority established by the municipality that leases municipal facilities to a municipality. The notes are typically secured by lease payments made by the municipality that is leasing the facilities financed by the issue. Lease payments may be subject to annual appropriation by the municipality or the municipality may be obligated to appropriate general tax revenues to make lease payments. The overall increase in the fair value of municipal bonds is primarily due to the decline in interest rates and tighter credit spreads. As of December 31, 2014 and December 31, 2013 , the largest issuer concentrations were the states of Illinois , California and Massachusetts , which each comprised less than 3 % of the municipal bond portfolio and were primarily comprised of general obligation and taxable bonds . Limited Partnerships and Other Alternative Investments The following table presents the Company investments in limited partnerships and other alternative investments which include hedge funds, mortgage and real estate funds, mezzanine debt funds, and private equity and other funds. Hedge funds are comprised of approximately half credit and equity related funds and approximately half global macro related funds with a market neutral focus. Mortgage and real estate funds consist of investments in funds whose assets consist of mortgage loans, mortgage loan participations, mezzanine loans or other notes which may be below investment grade, as well as equity real estate and real estate joint ventures. Mezzanine debt funds include investments in funds whose assets consist of subordinated debt that often incorporates equity-based options such as warrants and a limited amount of direct equity investments. Private equity and other funds primarily consist of investments in funds whose assets typically consist of a diversified pool of investments in small to mid-sized non-public businesses with high growth potential. December 31, 2014 December 31, 2013 Amount Percent Amount Percent Hedge funds $ 1,187 40.3 % $ 1,341 44.1 % Mortgage and real estate funds 561 19.1 % 534 17.6 % Mezzanine debt funds 61 2.1 % 82 2.7 % Private equity and other funds 1,133 38.5 % 1,083 35.6 % Total $ 2,942 100 % $ 3,040 100 % 113 Available-for-Sale Securities Unrealized Loss Aging The total gross unrealized losses were $ 385 as of December 31, 2014 , and have decreased $ 692 , or 64% , from December 31, 2013 , primarily due to a decrease in interest rates as well as sales. As of December 31, 2014 , $324 of the gross unrealized losses were associated with securities depressed less than 20% of cost or amortized cost. The remaining $61 of gross unrealized losses were associated with securities depressed greater than 20% . The securities depressed more than 20% are primarily corporate and equity securities within the energy sector, and securities with exposure to commercial real estate that have market spreads that are wider than the spreads at the securities' respective purchase dates. Unrealized losses on corporate and equity securities in the energy sector is primarily the result of the recent decline in oil prices previously discussed; see Exposure to the Energy Sector in the Investment Portfolio Risks and Risk Management section of this MD&A. Unrealized losses on securities with exposure to commercial and residential real estate are largely due to the continued market and economic uncertainties surrounding the performance of certain structures or vintages. Based on the Company cash flow modeling and current market and collateral performance assumptions, these securities with exposure to commercial real estate have sufficient credit protection levels to receive contractually obligated principal and interest payments. As part of the Company ongoing security monitoring process, the Company has reviewed its AFS securities in an unrealized loss position and concluded that these securities are temporarily depressed and are expected to recover in value as the securities approach maturity or as real estate related market spreads continue to improve. For these securities in an unrealized loss position where a credit impairment has not been recorded, the Company best estimate of expected future cash flows are sufficient to recover the amortized cost basis of the security. Furthermore, the Company neither has an intention to sell nor does it expect to be required to sell these securities. For further information regarding the Company impairment analysis, see Other-Than-Temporary Impairments in the Investment Portfolio Risks and Risk Management section of this MD&A. The following table presents the Company unrealized loss aging for AFS securities by length of time the security was in a continuous unrealized loss position. December 31, 2014 December 31, 2013 Consecutive Months Items Cost or Amortized Cost Fair Value Unrealized Loss [1] Items Cost or Amortized Cost Fair Value Unrealized Loss [1] Three months or less 1,412 $ 4,014 $ 3,963 $ (51 ) 1,184 $ 10,056 $ 9,939 $ (117 ) Greater than three to six months 643 1,739 1,665 (74 ) 349 1,200 1,167 (33 ) Greater than six to nine months 220 417 404 (13 ) 956 6,362 5,988 (374 ) Greater than nine to eleven months 102 148 142 (6 ) 148 413 374 (39 ) Twelve months or more 688 4,667 4,429 (241 ) 578 5,625 5,109 (514 ) Total 3,065 $ 10,985 $ 10,603 $ (385 ) 3,215 $ 23,656 $ 22,577 $ (1,077 ) [1] Unrealized losses exclude the fair value of bifurcated embedded derivative features of certain securities as changes in value are recorded in net realized capital gains (losses). The following tables present the Company unrealized loss aging for AFS securities continuously depressed over 20% by length of time (included in the table above). December 31, 2014 December 31, 2013 Consecutive Months Items Cost or Amortized Cost Fair Value Unrealized Loss [1] Items Cost or Amortized Cost Fair Value Unrealized Loss [1] Three months or less 137 $ 152 $ 113 $ (39 ) 63 $ 213 $ 162 $ (51 ) Greater than three to six months 39 17 11 (6 ) 20 177 130 (47 ) Greater than six to nine months 11 4 1 (3 ) 28 449 336 (113 ) Greater than nine to eleven months 9 1 (1 ) 10 4 3 (1 ) Twelve months or more 49 31 19 (12 ) 58 132 93 (39 ) Total 245 $ 205 $ 144 $ (61 ) 179 $ 975 $ 724 $ (251 ) [1] Unrealized losses exclude the fair value of bifurcated embedded derivatives features of certain securities as changes in value are recorded in net realized capital gains (losses). 114 Other-Than-Temporary Impairments The following table presents the Company impairments recognized in earnings by security type excluding intent-to-sell impairment relating to the sales of Retirement Plans and Individual Life businesses. For the years ended December 31, 2014 2013 2012 [1] ABS $ $ 9 $ 29 CRE CDOs 2 10 CMBS Bonds 2 17 24 IOs 1 4 3 Corporate 35 20 28 Equity 11 15 65 Municipal 3 Agency 3 RMBS Non-agency RMBS Alt-A 1 Sub-prime 1 6 12 Other 3 Total $ 59 $ 73 $ 172 [1] Excludes $177 of intent-to-sell impairments related to the sales of the Retirement Plans and Individual Life businesses. Year ended December 31, 2014 For the year ended December 31, 2014 , impairments recognized in earnings were comprised of credit impairments of $ 37 , securities that the Company intends to sell of $17 , impairments on equity securities of $2 , and other impairments of $3 . Impairments for the year ended December 31, 2014 were primarily credit impairments concentrated in corporate securities. The corporate securities were impaired due to certain issuers that have experienced financial difficulty and either defaulted or are expected to default on contractually obligated principal and interest payments. Also included in credit impairments for the year ended December 31, 2014 , were private placements that were impaired due to declines in expected cash flows related to the underlying referenced securities. The Company determination of expected future cash flows used to calculate the credit loss amount is a quantitative and qualitative process. The Company incorporates its best estimate of future cash flows using internal assumptions and judgments that are informed by economic and industry specific trends, as well as our expectation with respect to security specific developments. Credit impairments for the year ended December 31, 2014 were primarily identified through security specific reviews and resulted from changes in the financial condition and near term prospects of certain issuers. Other impairments for the year ended December 31, 2014 primarily related to certain equity, AFS securities with debt-like characteristics that the Company intends to sell. In addition to the credit impairments recognized in earnings, the Company recognized non-credit impairments in other comprehensive income of $ 5 for the year ended December 31, 2014 , predominantly concentrated in corporate securities and CMBS. These non-credit impairments represent the difference between fair value and the Company best estimate of expected future cash flows discounted at the security effective yield prior to impairment, rather than at current market implied credit spreads. These non-credit impairments primarily represent increases in market liquidity premiums and credit spread widening that occurred after the securities were purchased, as well as a discount for variable-rate coupons which are paying less than at purchase date. In general, larger liquidity premiums and wider credit spreads are the result of deterioration of the underlying collateral performance of the securities, as well as the risk premium required to reflect future uncertainty in the real estate market. Future impairments may develop as the result of changes in intent to sell specific securities or if actual results underperform current modeling assumptions, which may be the result of, but are not limited to, macroeconomic factors and security-specific performance below current expectations. Ultimate loss formation will be a function of macroeconomic factors and idiosyncratic security-specific performance. 115 Year ended December 31, 2013 For the year ended December 31, 2013 , impairments recognized in earnings were comprised of credit impairments of $32 , primarily concentrated in corporate and fixed rate CMBS bonds. Also, included were impairments on debt securities for which the Company had the intent-to-sell of $26 , primarily related to structured securities with exposure to commercial and residential real estate and corporate securities. In addition, impairments recognized in earnings included impairments on equity securities of $15 that were in an unrealized loss position and the Company no longer believed the securities would recover in the foreseeable future. Year ended December 31, 2012 For the year ended December 31, 2012 , impairments recognized in earnings were comprised of intent-to-sell impairments of $238 , which included $177 related to the sale of the Retirement Plans and Individual Life businesses. Also included were impairments on equity securities of $ 63 largely comprised of downgraded preferred equity securities of financial institutions. The Company's credit impairments totaled $48 , primarily concentrated in structured securities associated with residential and commercial real estate, as well as ABS small business. Valuation Allowances on Mortgage Loans The following table presents (additions)/reversals to valuation allowances on mortgage loans. For the years ended December 31, 2014 2013 2012 Credit-related concerns $ (4 ) $ (2 ) $ 14 Year ended December 31, 2014 For the year ended December 31, 2014 , the change in valuation allowances on mortgage loan additions of $4 was largely driven by individual property performance. Continued improvement in commercial real estate property valuations will positively impact future loss development, with future impairments driven by idiosyncratic loan-specific performance, as well as the necessity of risk reduction in the portfolio, rather than overall deteriorating market fundamentals. Year ended December 31, 2013 For the year ended December 31, 2013 , the change in valuation allowances on mortgage loan additions of $2 was largely driven by individual property performance. Year ended December 31, 2012 For the year ended December 31, 2012 , the change in valuation allowances on mortgage loan reversals of $14 was largely driven by recovery of the property collateralizing a B-Note. The valuation allowance was reversed due to an increase in the valuation of the underlying collateral as a result of improved occupancy rates and performance of the property. 116 CAPITAL RESOURCES AND LIQUIDITY The following section discusses the overall financial strength of The Hartford and its insurance operations including their ability to generate cash flows from each of their business segments, borrow funds at competitive rates and raise new capital to meet operating and growth needs over the next twelve months. Liquidity Requirements and Sources of Capital The Hartford Financial Services Group, Inc. The liquidity requirements of the holding company of The Hartford Financial Services Group, Inc. ( HFSG Holding Company ) have been and will continue to be met by HFSG Holding Company fixed maturities, short-term investments and cash, dividends from its subsidiaries, principally its insurance operations, as well as the issuance of common stock, debt or other capital securities and borrowings from its credit facilities, as needed. As of December 31, 2014 , HFSG Holding Company held fixed maturities, short-term investments and cash of $2.1 billion . Expected liquidity requirements of the HFSG Holding Company for the next twelve months include interest on debt of approximately $360 and common stockholder dividends, subject to discretion of the Board of Directors, of approximately $300 . The Hartford has an intercompany liquidity agreement that allows for short-term advances of funds among the HFSG Holding Company and certain affiliates of up to $2.0 billion for liquidity and other general corporate purposes. The Connecticut Insurance Department granted approval for certain affiliated insurance companies that are parties to the agreement to treat receivables from a parent, including the HFSG Holding Company, as admitted assets for statutory accounting purposes. As of December 31, 2014 , there were no amounts outstanding from the HFSG holding company. Equity In 2014, the Board of Directors approved increases aggregating $1.525 billion in the Company's authorized equity repurchase program, bringing the total authorization for equity repurchases to $2.775 billion for the period January 1, 2014 through December 31, 2015 , with $979 remaining as of December 31, 2014 . In December 2014 the Company completed an ASR program, repurchasing a total of 13.9 million common shares under the ASR program for $525 million , including the initial delivery of 11.2 million common shares in July 2014 and 2.7 million common shares delivered in December 2014. During the year ended December 31, 2014 , the Company repurchased 49.5 million common shares for $1,796 . During the period January 1, 2015 to February 24, 2015 , the Company repurchased 4.1 million common shares, for $165 . Debt In 2014, the Board also authorized the Company to allocate up to $500 , including any premium or associated costs, to reduce debt outstanding. Initially expected to be completed prior to year end 2014, any repurchase of debt under the debt reduction allocation is now intended to occur in 2015 dependent on market conditions. In addition, the Company intends to repay at maturity the 4% senior notes due March 2015 and the 7.3% senior notes due November 2015 totaling $456 . On April 18, 2013, the Company issued $300 aggregate principal amount of 4.3% Senior Notes (the "4.3% Notes") due April 15, 2043. On March 26, 2013, the Company repurchased principal amounts of approximately $800 , plus a payment for unpaid interest on senior notes due through the settlement date. The Company recognized a loss on extinguishment in 2013 of approximately $213 , before tax, representing the excess of the repurchase price over the principal repaid and the write-off of the unamortized discount and debt issuance costs. For further information regarding debt, see Note 12 - Debt of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Intercompany Liquidity Agreements Until April 1, 2014, Hartford Life and Annuity Insurance Company ("HLAI"), a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company, ceded certain variable annuity contracts and their associated riders as well as certain payout annuities issued by HLAI or assumed by it to White River Life Reinsurance Company ("WRR"), an affiliate captive reinsurer which was dissolved on April 30, 2014. Upon dissolution, WRR repaid an intercompany note payable to the Company in the amount of $655 and returned $367 in capital to the Company, all of which was contributed as capital to HLAI to support the recaptured business. Effective April 1, 2014, the Company recaptured all reinsured risks from WRR to HLAI. This transaction received required regulatory approvals. This arrangement provided the Company with a vehicle to provide more efficient financing of the risk associated with this business with internal funds. The reinsurance arrangement between HLAI and WRR did not impact the Company's reserving methodology or the amount of required regulatory capital associated with the reinsured business. The effects of this intercompany arrangement were eliminated in consolidation. 117 On January 29, 2015 Hartford Insurance Company of the Midwest, an indirect wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company, issued a Revolving Note (the "Note") in the principal amount of $58 to Hartford Fire Insurance Company, a subsidiary of the Company, under the intercompany liquidity agreement. The Note bears interest at 0.20% and matures on March 31, 2015. Dividends On February 26, 2015, The Hartford Board of Directors declared a quarterly dividend of $0.18 per common share payable on April 1, 2015 to common shareholders of record as of March 9, 2015 . There are no current restrictions on the HFSG Holding Company's ability to pay dividends to its shareholders. For a discussion of restrictions on dividends to the HFSG Holding Company from its insurance subsidiaries, see "Dividends from Insurance Subsidiaries" below. For a discussion of potential restrictions on the HFSG Holding Company's ability to pay dividends, see Part I, Item 1A, Risk Factors for the risk factor "Our ability to declare and pay dividends is subject to limitations" . Pension Plans and Other Postretirement Benefits While the Company has significant discretion in making voluntary contributions to the U. S. qualified defined benefit pension plan, the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, as amended by the Pension Protection Act of 2006, the Worker, Retiree, and Employer Recovery Act of 2008, the Preservation of Access to Care for Medicare Beneficiaries and Pension Relief Act of 2010, the Moving Ahead for Progress in the 21st Century Act of 2012 (MAP-21) and Internal Revenue Code regulations mandate minimum contributions in certain circumstances. The Company made contributions to the U. S. qualified defined benefit pension plan of $100, $100 and $200 in 2014, 2013 and 2012, respectively. No contributions were made to the other postretirement plans in 2014, 2013 and 2012. The Company 2014, 2013 and 2012 required minimum funding contributions were immaterial. The Company does not have a 2015 required minimum funding contribution for the U.S. qualified defined benefit pension plan and the funding requirements for all pension plans are expected to be immaterial. The Company has not determined whether, and to what extent, contributions may be made to the U. S. qualified defined benefit pension plan in 2015. The Company will monitor the funded status of the U.S. qualified defined benefit pension plan during 2015 to make this determination. In September 2014, the Company extended a limited time voluntary lump sum offer to vested participants in the U.S. qualified defined benefit pension plan who had separated from service, but who had not yet commenced annuity benefits. These participants had until November 2014 to elect to receive their benefit in a lump-sum payment, rather than as an annuity. The Company made benefit payments in December 2014 using assets from the U.S. qualified defined benefit pension plan. The Company recognized a pre-tax settlement charge of $128 in 2014. The pension settlement charge was offset by a corresponding increase in accumulated other comprehensive income and therefore did not impact consolidated stockholders equity. For further discussion of the settlement, see Note 17 - Employee Benefit Plans of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Dividends from Insurance Subsidiaries Dividends to the HFSG Holding Company from its insurance subsidiaries are restricted by insurance regulation. The payment of dividends by Connecticut-domiciled insurers is limited under the insurance holding company laws of Connecticut. These laws require notice to and approval by the state insurance commissioner for the declaration or payment of any dividend, which, together with other dividends or distributions made within the preceding twelve months, exceeds the greater of (i) 10% of the insurer policyholder surplus as of December 31 of the preceding year or (ii) net income (or net gain from operations, if such company is a life insurance company) for the twelve-month period ending on the thirty-first day of December last preceding, in each case determined under statutory insurance accounting principles. In addition, if any dividend of a Connecticut-domiciled insurer exceeds the insurer earned surplus, it requires the prior approval of the State of Connecticut Insurance Department ("CTDOI"). The insurance holding company laws of the other jurisdictions in which The Hartford insurance subsidiaries are incorporated (or deemed commercially domiciled) generally contain similar (although in certain instances somewhat more restrictive) limitations on the payment of dividends. Dividends paid to HFSG Holding Company by its life insurance subsidiaries are further dependent on cash requirements of HLI and other factors. In addition to statutory limitations on paying dividends, the Company also takes other items into consideration when determining dividends from subsidiaries. These considerations include, but are not limited to, expected earnings and capitalization of the subsidiary, regulatory capital requirements and liquidity requirements of the individual operating company. In 2014, HFSG Holding Company received approximately $2.5 billion in dividends from its property-casualty insurance subsidiaries through a series of transactions affecting the property and casualty and life insurance subsidiaries, including $1.4 billion of extraordinary dividends. As a result of the extraordinary dividend received in July 2014, Hartford Fire has no remaining ordinary dividend capacity for the twelve months following. As such, the Company does not anticipate taking any dividends from Hartford Fire until the third quarter of 2015. The dividends received from its property-casualty subsidiaries included $97 related to funding interest payments on an intercompany note between Hartford Holdings, Inc. ( HHI ) and Hartford Fire Insurance Company. 118 In 2015, the Company property-casualty insurance subsidiaries are permitted to pay up to a maximum of approximately $1.5 billion in dividends to HFSG Holding Company without prior approval from the applicable insurance commissioner. In 2015 , HFSG Holding Company anticipates receiving approximately $600 in dividends from its property-casualty insurance subsidiaries, net of any dividends paid by its property-casualty subsidiaries to fund interest payments on an intercompany note between HHI and Hartford Fire Insurance Company. On January 30, 2015, HLA paid an extraordinary dividend of $100, based on approval received from the CTDOI. As a result of dividends and distributions taken in the preceding twelve months, effective March 3, 2015, HLA will have approximately $155 of ordinary dividend capacity available for the remainder of 2015. HFSG Holding Company anticipates receiving an additional $100 of dividends from HLA during 2015. On January 30, 2015, HLIC paid an extraordinary dividend of $500, based on approval received from the CTDOI. As a result of this dividend, HLIC has no ordinary dividend capacity for the remainder of 2015. HFSG Holding Company anticipates receiving an additional $500 of extraordinary dividends from HLIC during 2015. Other Sources of Capital for the HFSG Holding Company The Hartford endeavors to maintain a capital structure that provides financial and operational flexibility to its insurance subsidiaries, ratings that support its competitive position in the financial services marketplace (see the Ratings section below for further discussion), and shareholder returns. As a result, the Company may from time to time raise capital from the issuance of equity, equity-related debt or other capital securities and is continuously evaluating strategic opportunities. The issuance of debt, common equity, equity-related debt or other capital securities could result in the dilution of shareholder interests or reduced net income due to additional interest expense. Shelf Registrations On August 9, 2013, The Hartford filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission (the SEC ) an automatic shelf registration statement (Registration No. 333-190506) for the potential offering and sale of debt and equity securities. The registration statement allows for the following types of securities to be offered: debt securities, junior subordinated debt securities, preferred stock, common stock, depositary shares, warrants, stock purchase contracts, and stock purchase units. In that The Hartford is a well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in Rule 405 under the Securities Act of 1933, the registration statement went effective immediately upon filing and The Hartford may offer and sell an unlimited amount of securities under the registration statement during the three-year life of the registration statement. Contingent Capital Facility The Hartford is party to a put option agreement that provides The Hartford with the right to require the Glen Meadow ABC Trust, a Delaware statutory trust, at any time and from time to time, to purchase The Hartford junior subordinated notes in a maximum aggregate principal amount not to exceed $500 . Under the Put Option Agreement, The Hartford will pay the Glen Meadow ABC Trust premiums on a periodic basis, calculated with respect to the aggregate principal amount of notes that The Hartford had the right to put to the Glen Meadow ABC Trust for such period. The Hartford has agreed to reimburse the Glen Meadow ABC Trust for certain fees and ordinary expenses. The Company holds a variable interest in the Glen Meadow ABC Trust where the Company is not the primary beneficiary. As a result, the Company did not consolidate the Glen Meadow ABC Trust. As of December 31, 2014 , The Hartford has not exercised its right to require Glen Meadow ABC Trust to purchase the Notes. As a result, the notes remain a source of capital for the HFSG Holding Company. Commercial Paper and Revolving Credit Facility Commercial Paper On December 18, 2014 the Board of Directors revised the Company's commercial paper issuance authorization from $2.0 billion to $1.0 billion to align the program with the Company's $1.0 billion five year revolving credit facility which became effective on October 31, 2014. On December 23, 2014, the Company entered into an agreement with a dealer under the commercial paper program. While The Hartford maximum borrowings available under its commercial paper program are $1.0 billion , the Company is dependent upon market conditions to access short-term financing through the issuance of commercial paper to investors. As of December 31, 2014 there is no commercial paper outstanding. 119 Revolving Credit Facilities On October 31, 2014, the Company entered into a senior unsecured five-year revolving credit facility (the Credit Facility ) that provides for up to $1.0 billion of unsecured credit through October 31, 2019, available in U.S. dollars, Euro, Sterling, Canadian dollars, and Japanese Yen, and terminated its $1.75 billion credit facility expiring January 6, 2016. As of December 31, 2014 , there were no borrowings outstanding under the Credit Facility. The Credit Facility is available for general corporate purposes. Of the total availability under the Credit Facility, up to $250 is available to support letters of credit issued on behalf of the Company or subsidiaries of the Company. Under the Credit Facility, the Company must maintain a minimum level of consolidated net worth of $13.5 billion . The definition of consolidated net worth under the terms of the Credit Facility excludes AOCI and includes the Company outstanding junior subordinated debentures and perpetual preferred securities, net of discount. In addition, the Company maximum ratio of consolidated total debt to consolidated total capitalization permitted under the Credit Facility is 35% , and the maximum ratio of subsidiary debt to consolidated total capitalization is 10% . As of December 31, 2014 , the Company was in compliance with all financial covenants under the Credit Facility. HLIKK previously had four revolving credit facilities in support of operations. These credit facilities were transfered with the sale of HLIKK on June 30, 2014. Derivative Commitments Certain of the Company derivative agreements contain provisions that are tied to the financial strength ratings of the individual legal entity that entered into the derivative agreement as set by nationally recognized statistical rating agencies. If the legal entity financial strength were to fall below certain ratings, the counterparties to the derivative agreements could demand immediate and ongoing full collateralization and in certain instances demand immediate settlement of all outstanding derivative positions traded under each impacted bilateral agreement. The settlement amount is determined by netting the derivative positions transacted under each agreement. If the termination rights were to be exercised by the counterparties, it could impact the legal entity ability to conduct hedging activities by increasing the associated costs and decreasing the willingness of counterparties to transact with the legal entity. The aggregate fair value of all derivative instruments with credit-risk-related contingent features that are in a net liability position as of December 31, 2014 was $1.0 billion . Of this $1.0 billion the legal entities have posted collateral of $1.3 billion in the normal course of business. In addition, the Company has posted collateral of $41 associated with a customized GMWB derivative. Based on derivative market values as of December 31, 2014 , a downgrade of one level below the current financial strength ratings by either Moody or S&P could require approximately an additional $4 to be posted as collateral. Based on derivative market values as of December 31, 2014 , a downgrade by either Moody or S&P of two levels below the legal entities current financial strength ratings could require approximately an additional $18 of assets to be posted as collateral. These collateral amounts could change as derivative market values change, as a result of changes in our hedging activities or to the extent changes in contractual terms are negotiated. The nature of the collateral that we would post, if required, would be primarily in the form of U.S. Treasury bills, U.S. Treasury notes and government agency securities. As of December 31, 2014 , the aggregate notional amount and fair value of derivative relationships that could be subject to immediate termination in the event of rating agency downgrades to either BBB+ or Baa1 was $ 388 and $ 3 , respectively. Insurance Operations Current and expected patterns of claim frequency and severity or surrenders may change from period to period but continue to be within historical norms and, therefore, the Company insurance operations current liquidity position is considered to be sufficient to meet anticipated demands over the next twelve months, including any obligations related to the Company restructuring activities. For a discussion and tabular presentation of the Company current contractual obligations by period, refer to Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements and Aggregate Contractual Obligations within the Capital Resources and Liquidity section of the MD&A. The principal sources of operating funds are premiums, fees earned from assets under management and investment income, while investing cash flows originate from maturities and sales of invested assets. The primary uses of funds are to pay claims, claim adjustment expenses, commissions and other underwriting expenses, taxes, to purchase new investments and to make dividend payments to the HFSG Holding Company. The Company insurance operations consist of property and casualty insurance products (collectively referred to as Property & Casualty Operations ) and life insurance and legacy annuity products (collectively referred to as Life Operations ). 120 Property & Casualty Operations Property & Casualty Operations holds fixed maturity securities including a significant short-term investment position (securities with maturities of one year or less at the time of purchase) to meet liquidity needs. As of December 31, 2014 , Property & Casualty Operations fixed maturities, short-term investments, and cash are summarized as follows: Fixed maturities $ 25,610 Short-term investments 1,038 Cash 119 Less: Derivative collateral 125 Total $ 26,642 Liquidity requirements that are unable to be funded by Property & Casualty Operation short-term investments would be satisfied with current operating funds, including premiums received or through the sale of invested assets. A sale of invested assets could result in realized losses. Life Operations Life Operations total general account contractholder obligations are supported by $ 44 billion of cash and total general account invested assets, which includes a significant short-term investment position to meet liquidity needs. As of December 31, 2014 , Life Operations fixed maturities, short-term investments, and cash are summarized as follows: Fixed maturities $ 33,166 Short-term investments 2,853 Cash 280 Less: Derivative collateral 1,282 Total $ 35,017 Capital resources available to fund liquidity, upon contractholder surrender, are a function of the legal entity in which the liquidity requirement resides. Generally, obligations of Group Benefits will be funded by Hartford Life and Accident Insurance Company. Obligations of Talcott Resolution will generally be funded by Hartford Life Insurance Company and Hartford Life and Annuity Insurance Company. Contractholder obligations of the former Retirement Plans business were funded by Hartford Life Insurance Company and of the former Individual Life business were funded by both Hartford Life Insurance Company and Hartford Life and Annuity Insurance Company. See Note 2 - Business Dispositions of Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements as to the sale of the Retirement Plans and Individual Life businesses and related transfer of invested assets in 2013. HLIC, an indirect wholly owned subsidiary, became a member of the Federal Home Loan Bank of Boston ( FHLBB ) in May 2011. Membership allows HLIC access to collateralized advances, which may be used to support various spread-based businesses and enhance liquidity management. The Connecticut Department of Insurance ( CTDOI ) will permit HLIC to pledge up to $1.39 billion in qualifying assets to secure FHLBB advances for 2015. The amount of advances that can be taken are dependent on the asset types pledged to secure the advances. The pledge limit is recalculated annually based on statutory admitted assets and capital and surplus. HLIC would need to seek the prior approval of the CTDOI if there were a desire to exceed these limits. As of December 31, 2014 , HLIC had no advances outstanding under the FHLBB facility. 121 As of Contractholder Obligations December 31, 2014 Total Life contractholder obligations $ 186,943 Less: Separate account assets [1] 134,702 General account contractholder obligations $ 52,241 Composition of General Account Contractholder Obligations Contracts without a surrender provision and/or fixed payout dates [2] $ 22,135 U.S. Fixed MVA annuities and Other [3] 8,748 Guaranteed investment contracts ( GIC ) [4] 26 Other [5] 21,332 General account contractholder obligations $ 52,241 [1] In the event customers elect to surrender separate account assets or international statutory separate accounts, Life Operations will use the proceeds from the sale of the assets to fund the surrender, and Life Operations liquidity position will not be impacted. In many instances Life Operations will receive a percentage of the surrender amount as compensation for early surrender (surrender charge), increasing Life Operations liquidity position. In addition, a surrender of variable annuity separate account or general account assets (see below) will decrease Life Operations obligation for payments on guaranteed living and death benefits. [2] Relates to contracts such as payout annuities or institutional notes, other than guaranteed investment products with an MVA feature (discussed below) or surrenders of term life, group benefit contracts or death and living benefit reserves for which surrenders will have no current effect on Life Operations liquidity requirements. [3] Relates to annuities that are recorded in the general account (under U.S. GAAP), as the contractholders are subject to the Company's credit risk, although these annuities are held in a statutory separate account. In the statutory separate account, Life Operations is required to maintain invested assets with a fair value equal to the MVA surrender value of the Fixed MVA contract. In the event assets decline in value at a greater rate than the MVA surrender value of the Fixed MVA contract, Life Operations is required to contribute additional capital to the statutory separate account. Life Operations will fund these required contributions with operating cash flows or short-term investments. In the event that operating cash flows or short-term investments are not sufficient to fund required contributions, the Company may have to sell other invested assets at a loss, potentially resulting in a decrease in statutory surplus. As the fair value of invested assets in the statutory separate account are generally equal to the MVA surrender value of the Fixed MVA contract, surrender of Fixed MVA annuities will have an insignificant impact on the liquidity requirements of Life Operations. [4] GICs are subject to discontinuance provisions which allow the policyholders to terminate their contracts prior to scheduled maturity at the lesser of the book value or market value. Generally, the market value adjustment reflects changes in interest rates and credit spreads. As a result, the market value adjustment feature in the GIC serves to protect the Company from interest rate risks and limit Life Operations liquidity requirements in the event of a surrender. [5] Surrenders of, or policy loans taken from, as applicable, these general account liabilities, which include the general account option for Life Operations' individual variable annuities and the variable life contracts of the former Individual Life business, the general account option for annuities of the former Retirement Plans business and universal life contracts sold by the former Individual Life business, may be funded through operating cash flows of Life Operations, available short-term investments, or Life Operations may be required to sell fixed maturity investments to fund the surrender payment. Sales of fixed maturity investments could result in the recognition of realized losses and insufficient proceeds to fully fund the surrender amount. In this circumstance, Life Operations may need to take other actions, including enforcing certain contract provisions which could restrict surrenders and/or slow or defer payouts. The Company has ceded reinsurance in connection with the sales of its Retirement Plans and Individual Life businesses in 2013 to MassMutual and Prudential, respectively. 122 Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements and Aggregate Contractual Obligations The Company does not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that are reasonably likely to have a material effect on the financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, or capital resources of the Company, except for the contingent capital facility described above, as well as unfunded commitments to purchase investments in limited partnerships and other alternative investments, private placements, and mortgage loans of $865 as disclosed in Note 14 - Commitments and Contingencies of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. The following table summarizes the Company aggregate contractual obligations as of December 31, 2014 : Payments due by period Total Less than 1 year 1-3 years 3-5 years More than 5 years Property and casualty obligations [1] $ 22,362 $ 5,282 $ 5,377 $ 2,611 $ 9,092 Life, annuity and disability obligations [2] 272,187 20,308 35,122 28,151 188,606 Operating lease obligations [3] 154 42 64 36 12 Long-term debt obligations [4] 11,986 822 1,657 1,264 8,243 Purchase obligations [5] 1,990 1,215 433 331 11 Other liabilities reflected on the balance sheet [6] 1,362 593 392 376 1 Total $ 310,041 $ 28,262 $ 43,045 $ 32,769 $ 205,965 [1] The following points are significant to understanding the cash flows estimated for obligations under property and casualty contracts: Reserves for Property & Casualty unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses include IBNR and case reserves. While payments due on claim reserves are considered contractual obligations because they relate to insurance policies issued by the Company, the ultimate amount to be paid to settle both case reserves and IBNR is an estimate, subject to significant uncertainty. The actual amount to be paid is not finally determined until the Company reaches a settlement with the claimant. Final claim settlements may vary significantly from the present estimates, particularly since many claims will not be settled until well into the future. In estimating the timing of future payments by year, the Company has assumed that its historical payment patterns will continue. However, the actual timing of future payments could vary materially from these estimates due to, among other things, changes in claim reporting and payment patterns and large unanticipated settlements. In particular, there is significant uncertainty over the claim payment patterns of asbestos and environmental claims. In addition, the table does not include future cash flows related to the receipt of premiums that may be used, in part, to fund loss payments. Under U.S. GAAP, the Company is only permitted to discount reserves for losses and loss adjustment expenses in cases where the payment pattern and ultimate loss costs are fixed and determinable on an individual claim basis. For the Company, these include claim settlements with permanently disabled claimants. As of December 31, 2014 , the total property and casualty reserves in the above table are gross of a reserve discount of $556 . [2] Estimated life, annuity and disability obligations include death and disability claims, policy surrenders, policyholder dividends and trail commissions offset by expected future deposits and premiums on in-force contracts. Estimated life, annuity and disability obligations are based on mortality, morbidity and lapse assumptions comparable with the Company historical experience, modified for recent observed trends. The Company has also assumed market growth and interest crediting consistent with other assumptions. In contrast to this table, the majority of the Company obligations are recorded on the balance sheet at the current account values and do not incorporate an expectation of future market growth, interest crediting, or future deposits. Therefore, the estimated obligations presented in this table significantly exceed the liabilities recorded in reserve for future policy benefits and unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses, other policyholder funds and benefits payable, and separate account liabilities. Due to the significance of the assumptions used, the amounts presented could materially differ from actual results. See Note 2 - Business Dispositions of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further information as to Retirement Plans and Individual Life reinsurance transactions. [3] Includes future minimum lease payments on operating lease agreements. See Note 14 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional discussion on lease commitments. [4] Includes contractual principal and interest payments. See Note 12 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional discussion of long-term debt obligations. [5] Includes $865 in commitments to purchase investments including approximately $604 of limited partnership and other alternative investments, $15 of private placements, and $246 of mortgage loans. Outstanding commitments under these limited partnerships and mortgage loans are included in payments due in less than 1 year since the timing of funding these commitments cannot be reliably estimated. The remaining commitments to purchase investments primarily represent payables for securities purchased which are reflected on the Company Consolidated Balance Sheets. Also included in purchase obligations is $980 relating to contractual commitments to purchase various goods and services such as maintenance, human resources, and information technology in the normal course of business. Purchase obligations exclude contracts that are cancelable without penalty or contracts that do not specify minimum levels of goods or services to be purchased. [6] Includes cash collateral of $327 which the Company has accepted in connection with the Company derivative instruments. Since the timing of the return of the collateral is uncertain, the return of the collateral has been included in the payments due in less than 1 year. Also included in other long-term liabilities are net unrecognized tax benefits of $48 , retained Japan fixed payout annuity liabilities of $886 , and consumer notes of $74 . Consumer notes include principal payments and contractual interest for fixed rate notes and interest based on current rates for floating rate notes. 123 Capitalization The capital structure of The Hartford as of December 31, 2014 and 2013 consisted of debt and stockholders equity, summarized as follows: December 31, 2014 December 31, 2013 Change Short-term debt (includes current maturities of long-term debt) $ 456 $ 200 128 % Short-term due on revolving credit facility 238 (100 )% Long-term debt 5,653 6,106 (7 )% Total debt [1] 6,109 6,544 (7 )% Stockholders equity excluding accumulated other comprehensive income (loss), net of tax ( AOCI ) 17,792 18,984 (6 )% AOCI, net of tax 928 (79 ) NM Total stockholders equity $ 18,720 $ 18,905 (1 )% Total capitalization including AOCI $ 24,829 $ 25,449 (2 )% Debt to stockholders equity 33 % 35 % Debt to capitalization 25 % 26 % [1] Total debt of the Company excludes $71 and $84 of consumer notes as of December 31, 2014 and December 31, 2013 , respectively . The Hartford total capitalization decreased $620 million , or 2% , from December 31, 2014 to December 31, 2013 primarily due to decreases in total debt. Total stockholders' equity, remained flat from December 31, 2013 to December 31, 2014 due to share repurchases during the period, offset by an increase in AOCI, primarily due to an increase in net unrealized capital gains from securities. For additional information AOCI, net of tax, see Note 2 - Business Dispositions and Note 16 - Changes In and Reclassifications From Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, respectively. Cash Flow 2014 2013 2012 Net cash provided by operating activities $ 1,886 $ 1,237 $ 2,681 Net provided by (used for) for investing activities $ 1,696 $ 3,745 $ (2,557 ) Net cash used for financing activities $ (4,476 ) $ (5,820 ) $ (228 ) Cash end of year $ 399 $ 1,428 $ 2,421 Year ended December 31, 2014 compared to the year ended December 31, 2013 Cash provided by operating activities in 2014 reflect an increase in premiums collected and a decrease in loss and loss adjustment expenses paid, partially offset by an increase in payments for payables and accruals. Operating cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2014, and 2013 have been adequate to meet liquidity requirements. On June 30, 2014, the Company completed the sale of its Japan annuity business. The operations of this business are reported as discontinued operations and are primarily in Net cash provided by operating activities. For further information regarding these transactions, see Note 2 - Business Dispositions of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Cash used for investing activities in 2014 primarily relates to net proceeds from available-for-sale securities of $2.8 billion, and proceeds from the business sold of $963, partially offset by net payments for short-term investments of $1.8 billion. Cash used for investing activities in 2013 primarily relates to net proceeds from the sale of available-for-sale securities of $4.9 billion, and proceeds from the business sold of $815, partially offset by net payments on derivatives of $2.2 billion. Cash used for financing activities in 2014 primarily relates to $2.2 billion related to net activity for investment and universal life products, and acquisition of treasury stock of $1.8 billion. Cash used for financing activities in 2013 primarily consists of net outflows on investment and universal life-type contracts of $2.1 billion, decrease in securities loaned or sold under agreements to repurchase of $1.9 billion, repayment of long term debt of $ 1.3 billion and treasury stock acquired of $600. Year ended December 31, 2013 compared to the year ended December 31, 2012 Cash provided by operating activities decreased primarily due to realized capital losses of $1.5 billion in 2013, compared to an increase in income taxes received of $486 in 2012. 124 Cash used for investing activities in 2013 primarily relates to net proceeds of available-for-sale securities of $4.9 billion and proceeds from business sold of $815 offset by net payments on derivatives of $2.2 billion. Cash used for investing activities in 2012 primarily relates to net payments on derivatives of $2.7 billion, purchases of mortgage loans of $968 and net payments for the purchases of partnerships of $695, partially offset by net proceeds of available-for-sale securities of $1.7 billion and net receipts of fixed maturities, fair value option of $101. Cash used for financing activities in 2013 primarily consists of net outflows on investment and universal life-type contracts of $2.1 billion, decrease in securities loaned or sold under agreements to repurchase of $1.9 billion, repayment of long term debt of $ 1.3 billion and treasury stock acquired of $600. Cash used for financing activities in 2012 primarily consists of net outflows on investment and universal life-type contracts of $1.4 billion, repurchase of warrants of $300, as well as share repurchases and dividends paid on common and preferred stock. These were partially offset by net increases in securities loaned or sold of $1.9 billion. Equity Markets For a discussion of the potential impact of the equity markets on capital and liquidity, see the Financial Risk on Statutory Capital and Liquidity Risk section in this MD&A. Ratings Ratings are an important factor in establishing a competitive position in the insurance marketplace and impact the Company's ability to access financing and its cost of borrowing. There can be no assurance that the Company ratings will continue for any given period of time, or that they will not be changed. In the event the Company ratings are downgraded, the Company competitive position, ability to access financing, and its cost of borrowing, may be adversely impacted. On March 6, 2014, Moody Investors Service ( Moody ) affirmed the debt ratings of The Hartford Financial Services Group, Inc. and the insurance financial strength ratings of its property and casualty subsidiaries and Hartford Life and Accident Insurance Company. The outlook on these entities was changed to positive from stable. Moody downgraded the insurance financial strength rating of Hartford Life Insurance Company to Baa2 from A3. Moody affirmed the insurance financial strength rating of Hartford Life and Annuity Insurance Company. Moody's outlook for Hartford Life Insurance Company and Hartford Life and Annuity Insurance Company is stable. On April 3, 2014, A.M. Best revised the outlook to positive from stable and affirmed the issuer credit ratings and debt ratings of The Hartford Financial Services Group, Inc. and the financial strength ratings and issuer credit ratings of the property and casualty subsidiaries. A.M. Best upgraded the financial strength rating of Hartford Life and Accident Insurance Company to A from A- and affirmed the ratings of Hartford Life Insurance Company and Hartford Life and Annuity Insurance Company. A.M. Best's outlook for Hartford Life and Accident Insurance Company, Hartford Life Insurance Company and Hartford Life and Annuity Insurance Company is stable. On April 15, 2014 Standard & Poor ( S&P ) raised its long-term financial strength rating and counterparty credit ratings on Hartford Life and Accident Insurance Company to A from A-. At the same time S&P raised the rating on Hartford Life Inc. to BBB from BBB-. The outlook for Hartford Life and Accident Insurance Company and Hartford Life, Inc. is stable. On August 29, 2014 Fitch Ratings affirmed and withdrew the ratings on the HFSG holding company, as well as the insurer financial strength rating of its insurance subsidiaries for commercial reasons. The following table summarizes The Hartford significant member companies financial ratings from the major independent rating organizations as of February 24, 2015 : Insurance Financial Strength Ratings: A.M. Best Standard & Poor's Moody's Hartford Fire Insurance Company A A A2 Hartford Life and Accident Insurance Company A A A3 Hartford Life Insurance Company A- BBB+ Baa2 Hartford Life and Annuity Insurance Company A- BBB+ Baa2 Other Ratings: The Hartford Financial Services Group, Inc.: Senior debt bbb+ BBB Baa3 Commercial paper AMB-2 A-2 P-3 These ratings are not a recommendation to buy or hold any of The Hartford securities and they may be revised or revoked at any time at the sole discretion of the rating organization. 125 The agencies consider many factors in determining the final rating of an insurance company. One consideration is the relative level of statutory surplus necessary to support the business written. Statutory surplus represents the capital of the insurance company reported in accordance with accounting practices prescribed by the applicable state insurance department. See Part I, Item 1A. Risk Factors Downgrades in our financial strength or credit ratings, which may make our products less attractive, could increase our cost of capital and inhibit our ability to refinance our debt, which would have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, results of operations and liquidity. Statutory Surplus The table below sets forth statutory surplus for the Company insurance companies as of December 31, 2014 and 2013 : 2014 2013 U.S. life insurance subsidiaries, includes domestic captive insurance subsidiaries in 2013 $ 7,157 $ 6,639 Property and casualty insurance subsidiaries 8,069 8,022 Total $ 15,226 $ 14,661 Statutory capital and surplus for the U.S. life insurance subsidiaries, including domestic captive insurance subsidiaries in 2013, increased by $518 , primarily due to variable annuity surplus impacts of $788, net income from non-variable annuity business of $187, increases in unrealized gains from other invested assets carrying values of $138, partially offset by returns of capital of $500, and changes in reserves on account of change in valuation basis of $100. Effective April 30, 2014 the last domestic captive ceased operations. Statutory capital and surplus for the property and casualty insurance increased by $47 , primarily due to statutory net income of $1.1 billion, and unrealized gains on investments of $1.4 billion, largely offset by dividends to the HFSG Holding Company of $2.5 billion. The Company also held regulatory capital and surplus for its former operations in Japan until the sale of those operations on June 30, 2014. Under the accounting practices and procedures governed by Japanese regulatory authorities, the Company statutory capital and surplus was $1.2 billion as of December 31, 2013 . 126 Statutory Capital The Company stockholders equity, as prepared using U.S. generally accepted accounting principles ( U.S. GAAP ) was $18.7 billion as of December 31, 2014 . The Company estimated aggregate statutory capital and surplus, as prepared in conformity with statutory accounting practices prescribed or permitted by the applicable state insurance department ( U.S. STAT ) was $15.2 billion as of December 31, 2014 . Significant differences between U.S. GAAP stockholders equity and aggregate statutory capital and surplus prepared in accordance with U.S. STAT include the following: U.S. STAT excludes equity of non-insurance and foreign insurance subsidiaries not held by U.S. insurance subsidiaries. Costs incurred by the Company to acquire insurance policies are deferred under U.S. GAAP while those costs are expensed immediately under U.S. STAT. Temporary differences between the book and tax basis of an asset or liability which are recorded as deferred tax assets are evaluated for recoverability under U.S. GAAP while those amounts deferred are subject to limitations under U.S. STAT. The assumptions used in the determination of Life benefit reserves is prescribed under U.S. STAT, while the assumptions used under U.S. GAAP are generally the Company best estimates. The methodologies for determining life insurance reserve amounts may also be different. For example, reserving for living benefit reserves under U.S. STAT is generally addressed by the Commissioners Annuity Reserving Valuation Methodology and the related Actuarial Guidelines, while under U.S. GAAP, those same living benefits may be considered embedded derivatives and recorded at fair value or they may be considered SOP 03-1 reserves. The sensitivity of these life insurance reserves to changes in equity markets, as applicable, will be different between U.S. GAAP and U.S. STAT. The difference between the amortized cost and fair value of fixed maturity and other investments, net of tax, is recorded as an increase or decrease to the carrying value of the related asset and to equity under U.S. GAAP, while U.S. STAT only records certain securities at fair value, such as equity securities and certain lower rated bonds required by the NAIC to be recorded at the lower of amortized cost or fair value. U.S. STAT for life insurance companies establishes a formula reserve for realized and unrealized losses due to default and equity risks associated with certain invested assets (the Asset Valuation Reserve), while U.S. GAAP does not. Also, for those realized gains and losses caused by changes in interest rates, U.S. STAT for life insurance companies defers and amortizes the gains and losses, caused by changes in interest rates, into income over the original life to maturity of the asset sold (the Interest Maintenance Reserve) while U.S. GAAP does not. Goodwill arising from the acquisition of a business is tested for recoverability on an annual basis (or more frequently, as necessary) for U.S. GAAP, while under U.S. STAT goodwill is amortized over a period not to exceed 10 years and the amount of goodwill admitted as an asset is limited. In addition, certain assets, including a portion of premiums receivable and fixed assets, are non-admitted (recorded at zero value and charged against surplus) under U.S. STAT. U.S. GAAP generally evaluates assets based on their recoverability. Risk-Based Capital The Company's U.S. insurance companies' states of domicile impose risk-based capital ( RBC ) requirements. The requirements provide a means of measuring the minimum amount of statutory capital and surplus (referred to collectively as "capital") appropriate for an insurance company to support its overall business operations, based on its size and risk profile. Regulatory compliance is determined by a ratio of a company's total adjusted capital ( TAC ) to its authorized control level RBC ( ACL RBC ). Companies below specific trigger points or ratios are classified within certain levels, each of which requires specified corrective action. The minimum level of TAC before corrective action commences ( Company Action Level ) is two times the ACL RBC. The adequacy of a company's capital is determined by the ratio of a company's TAC to its Company Action Level, known as the "RBC ratio". All of the Company's operating insurance subsidiaries had RBC ratios in excess of the minimum levels required by the applicable insurance regulations. On an aggregate basis, The Company's U.S. property and casualty insurance companies' RBC ratio was in excess of 200% of its Company Action Level as of December 31, 2014 and 2013. The RBC ratios for the Company's principal life insurance operating subsidiaries were all in excess of 425% of their respective Company Action Levels as of December 31, 2014 and 2013. The reporting of RBC ratios is not intended for the purpose of ranking any insurance company, or for use in connection with any marketing, advertising or promotional activities. Similar to the RBC ratios that are employed by U.S. insurance regulators, regulatory authorities in the international jurisdictions in which The Company operates generally establish minimum solvency requirements for insurance companies. All of The Hartford's international insurance subsidiaries have solvency margins in excess of the minimum levels required by the applicable regulatory authorities. 127 Sensitivity In any particular year, statutory surplus amounts and RBC ratios may increase or decrease depending upon a variety of factors. The amount of change in the statutory surplus or RBC ratios can vary based on individual factors and may be compounded in extreme scenarios or if multiple factors occur at the same time. At times the impact of changes in certain market factors or a combination of multiple factors on RBC ratios can be counterintuitive. For further discussion on these factors and the potential impacts to the life insurance subsidiaries, see the Financial Risk on Statutory Capital section within Enterprise Risk Management. Statutory capital at the property and casualty subsidiaries has historically been maintained at or above the capital level required to meet AA level ratings from rating agencies. Statutory capital generated by the property and casualty subsidiaries in excess of the capital level required to meet AA level ratings is available for use by the enterprise or for corporate purposes. The amount of statutory capital can increase or decrease depending on a number of factors affecting property and casualty results including, among other factors, the level of catastrophe claims incurred, the amount of reserve development, the effect of changes in interest rates on investment income and the discounting of loss reserves, and the effect of realized gains and losses on investments. In addition, the Company can access the $500 Glen Meadow trust contingent capital facility and maintains the ability to access $1.0 billion of capacity under its revolving credit facility. Contingencies Legal Proceedings For a discussion regarding contingencies related to The Hartford legal proceedings, please see the information contained under Litigation and Asbestos and Environmental Claims, in Note 14 - Commitments and Contingencies of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, which is incorporated herein by reference. For a discussion of terrorism reinsurance legislation and how it affects The Hartford, see MD&A - Enterprise Risk Management, Insurance Risk Management, Terrorism Risk. Tax proposals and regulatory initiatives which have been or are being considered by Congress and/or the United States Treasury Department could have a material effect on the insurance business. These proposals and initiatives include, or could include, new taxes or assessments on large financial institutions, changes pertaining to the income tax treatment of insurance companies and life insurance products and annuities, repeal or reform of the estate tax and comprehensive federal tax reform, and changes to the regulatory structure for financial institutions. The nature and timing of any Congressional or regulatory action with respect to any such efforts is unclear. Legislative Developments Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act of 2010 (the Dodd-Frank Act ) The Dodd-Frank Act was enacted on July 21, 2010, mandating changes to the regulation of the financial services industry. Implementation of the Dodd-Frank Act is ongoing and may affect our operations and governance in ways that could adversely affect our financial condition and results of operations. The Dodd-Frank Act requires central clearing of, and imposes new margin requirements on, certain derivatives transactions, which increases the costs of our hedging program. Other provisions in the Dodd-Frank Act that may impact us include: the new Federal Insurance Office within Treasury; the possible adverse impact on the pricing and liquidity of the securities in which we invest resulting from the proprietary trading and market making limitation of the Volcker Rule; the possible adverse impact on the market for insurance-linked securities, including catastrophe bonds, resulting from the limitations of banking entity involvement in and ownership of certain asset-backed securities transactions; and enhancements to corporate governance, especially regarding risk management. The Dodd-Frank Act vests the Financial Stability Oversight Council ( FSOC ) with the power to designate systemically important institutions, which will be subject to special regulatory supervision and other provisions intended to prevent, or mitigate the impact of, future disruptions in the U.S. financial system. Based on its most current financial data, The Hartford is below the quantitative thresholds used by the FSOC to determine which nonbank companies merit consideration. However, the FSOC has indicted it will review on a quarterly basis whether nonbank financial institutions meet the metrics for further review. If we were to be designated as a systemically important institution, we could be subject to heightened regulation under the Federal Reserve, which could impact requirements regarding our required level of capital, liquidity and leverage as well as our business and investment conduct. In addition, we could be subject to assessments to pay for the orderly liquidation of other systemically important financial institutions that have become insolvent. 128 Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2010 (the "Affordable Care Act") On March 23, 2010, the President signed the Affordable Care Act. The impact to The Hartford as an employer is consistent with other large employers. It is too early to tell how the Affordable Care Act will impact The Hartford's businesses. The Hartford core business does not involve the issuance of health insurance and we do not issue any products that insure customers under the Affordable Care Act individual mandate. There may be, nevertheless, impacts to The Hartford's businesses that are too early to identify as key aspects of the law are still not fully implemented. For example, private exchanges may provide The Hartford additional opportunities to market our group benefit products and services. Conversely, access to medical care and medical costs are a substantial component of both disability and workers compensation products offered by The Hartford. We are monitoring the impact of the Affordable Care Act on consumer, broker and medical provider behavior for leading indicators of changes in medical costs or loss payments primarily on the Company's workers' compensation and disability liabilities. Budget of the United States Government On February 2, 2015, the Obama Administration released its Fiscal Year 2016, Budget of the U.S. Government (the Budget ). Although the Administration has not released proposed statutory language, the Budget includes proposals that if enacted, would affect the taxation of life insurance companies and certain life insurance products. In particular, the proposals would change the method used to determine the amount of dividend income received by a life insurance company on assets held in separate accounts used to support products, including variable life insurance and variable annuity contracts, which are eligible for the dividends received deduction ( DRD ). The DRD reduces the amount of dividend income subject to tax and is a significant component of the difference between the Company's actual tax expense and expected amount determined using the federal statutory tax rate of 35%. If this proposal were enacted, the Company's actual tax expense could increase, reducing earnings. Terrorism Risk Insurance Program Reauthorization Act of 2015 ( TRIPRA ) On January 12, 2015, the President signed TRIPRA, extending a backstop for insurance-related losses resulting from acts of terrorism through the end of 2020. For additional information, see Part II, Item 7, MD&A - Enterprise Risk Management, Reinsurance as a Risk Management Strategy, Reinsurance for Terrorism. Guaranty Fund and Other Insurance-related Assessments For a discussion regarding Guaranty Fund and Other Insurance-related Assessments, see Note 14 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. IMPACT OF NEW ACCOUNTING STANDARDS For a discussion of accounting standards, see Note 1 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 
