CIK: 874761
Company Name: AES CORP
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2007-05-23


ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS. The accompanying management discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations set forth in this Item 7 is restated to reflect the correction of errors that were contained in the Company consolidated financial statements and other financial information for the years ended December 31, 2002 through 2005 as discussed below and in Note 1 of the Consolidated Financial Statements. In addition, the prior period financial statements have been restated to reflect the change in the Company segments as discussed below and in Note 22 of the Consolidated Financial Statements. The following management discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our restated consolidated financial statements and the related notes. 76 Restatement Of Consolidated Financial Statements Background The Company has previously identified certain material weaknesses related to its system of internal control over financial reporting. These material weaknesses, as described in the Company previously filed Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2005 included the following general areas: Aggregation of control deficiencies at our Cameroonian subsidiary; Lack of U.S. GAAP expertise in Brazilian businesses; Treatment of intercompany loans denominated in other than the functional currency; Derivative accounting; and Income taxes. In part, the continuing remediation of these material weaknesses resulted in the identification of certain material financial statement errors. The Company has restated its financial statements for years ended prior to December 31, 2005 on March 30, 2005, January 19, 2006 and April 4, 2006 largely as a result of material weaknesses. As part of the Company plan to eliminate these material weaknesses in internal control over financial reporting, the Company has embarked on a program, over a several year period, to improve the quality of its people, processes and financial systems. This has included a broad restructuring of the global finance organization to operate on a more centralized basis and the recruitment of additional accounting, financial reporting, income tax, internal control and internal audit staff around the world. During the fourth quarter of 2006, in conjunction with these improvements, continued remediation of some of our material weaknesses and overall strengthening of controls across our businesses, the Company identified certain additional errors which required the restatement of previously issued consolidated financial statements for the years ended December 31, 2004 and 2005; and for the previously issued interim periods ending March 31, June 30 and September 30, 2005 and 2006. The Company remediation efforts for certain material weaknesses reported as of December 31, 2005, as well as improvements to controls across the Company, resulted in the identification of errors included in the current restatement. In addition, a number of immaterial errors were identified as a result of the continued strengthening of the global finance organization. The Company believes that the increase in technical tax and accounting expertise, increased staffing levels at certain of our businesses and at our corporate office, and a focused effort on increasing the number of financial audit activities have contributed to the overall improvement of the accuracy of our financial statements. It also resulted in the identification of material weaknesses in areas not previously reported, although not all weaknesses contributed to the need to restate the consolidated financial statements. For further discussion of our material weaknesses, see Item 9A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The restatement adjustments resulted in a decrease to previously reported income from continuing operations and net income of $24 million for the year ended December 31, 2005 and an increase of $2 million for the year ended December 31, 2004. It also resulted in a decrease to previously reported income from continuing operations and net income of $3 million for the three months ending March 31, 2006, an increase to net income of $10 million for the six months ending June 30, 2006 and an increase to net income of $30 million for the nine months ending September 30, 2006. These interim period adjustments for the first three quarters of 2006 were largely the result of reversing errors previously corrected in these periods, which were not previously considered material either to the period in which they were corrected or the prior period to which they actually arose. Additionally, the cumulative adjustment for all periods prior to 2004 resulted in an increase to retained deficit of $50 million. 77 The following table quantifies the net impact of the restatement corrections by key income statement line items for the years ended December 31, 2005 and 2004 and includes the resulting impact on diluted earnings per share from continuing operations. The primary line items affected include revenue, cost of sales, gain (loss) on foreign currency transactions, income tax expense and the related impacts on minority interest expense. Year Ended December 31, 2005 2004 (in millions, except per share amounts) Income from continuing operations as previously reported $ 598 $ 266 Changes in income from continuing operations from restatement due to: Increase in revenue 25 1 Decrease in cost of sales 5 18 (Increase) decrease in general and administrative expense (4 ) 1 Increase in other income 11 1 (Increase) in goodwill and asset impairment expense (6 ) (1 ) (Increase) decrease in foreign currency transaction losses (13 ) 27 Decrease in equity earnings of affiliates (6 ) (7 ) (Increase) in income tax expense (27 ) (24 ) (Increase) in minority interest and other (1) (9 ) (14 ) (Decrease) increase in income from continuing operations (24 ) 2 Income from continuing operations as restated $ 574 $ 268 Diluted earnings per share from continuing operations as previously reported $ 0.90 $ 0.41 Changes due to restatement effects (0.03) Diluted earnings per share from continuing operations as restated $ 0.87 $ 0.41 Diluted shares outstanding 664.6 648.1 (1) Minority interest and other includes $12 million and $13 million of minority interest expense for the periods ending December 31, 2005 and December 31, 2004, respectively, related to the impact of the restatement adjustments at entities with minority interests. The Company has been cooperating with an informal inquiry by the SEC Staff concerning the Company restatements and related matters, and has been providing information and documents to the SEC Staff on a voluntary basis. Because the Company is unable to predict the outcome of this inquiry and the SEC Staff may disagree with the manner in which the Company has accounted for and reported the financial impact of the adjustments to previously filed financial statements, there may be a risk that the inquiry by the SEC could lead to circumstances in which the Company may have to further restate previously filed financial statements, amend prior filings or take other actions not currently contemplated. The restatement adjustments include several key categories as described below: Brazil Adjustments Prior year errors related to certain subsidiaries in Brazil include the following: decrease of the U.S. GAAP fixed asset basis and related depreciation at Eletropaulo of $21 million in 2005 and $16 million in 2004 (the impact net of tax and minority interest is $4 million in 2005 and $4 million in 2004); and other errors identified through account reconciliation or review procedures. 78 The cumulative impact on net income was an increase of $6 million and $3 million for the years ended December 31, 2005 and 2004, respectively. EDC Prior year errors related to the Company Venezuelan subsidiary, EDC, include the following: $22 million revenue increase predominantly related to an error in updating the current tariff rates in the unbilled revenue calculation for 2005, $10 million increase in foreign currency transaction expense posted incorrectly to the balance sheet in 2005, and other errors identified through account reconciliation or review procedures. The cumulative impact of all EDC adjustments on net income was an increase of $2 million for each of the years ended December 31, 2005 and 2004. Capitalization of Certain Costs Certain errors were discovered with fixed asset balances at several of the Company facilities related to capitalization of development costs, overhead and capitalized interest. The cumulative impact on net income for capitalization errors was a decrease of $4 million for the year ended December 31, 2005 and a decrease of $2 million for the year ended December 31, 2004. Derivatives Adjustments were identified resulting from the detailed review of certain prior year contracts and include the following: the evaluation of hedge effectiveness; and the identification and evaluation of derivatives. The most significant adjustment involved a power sales agreement signed in 2002 between the Company generation facility in Cartagena, Spain, an unconsolidated subsidiary accounted for using the equity method of accounting, and its power offtaker. The power sales agreement had a pricing component that was tied to the U.S. dollar, although the entity own functional currency was the Euro and that of the offtaker was the Euro. In addition, a maintenance service agreement related to the Cartagena facility included a pricing mechanism that was tied to changes in the U.S. dollar, when the entity functional currency was the Euro and the service provider functional currency was the Yen. Under the guidance of Statement of Financial Accounting Standard ( SFAS ) No. 133, Accounting for Derivative Instruments and Hedging Activities, these contracts contained embedded derivatives that are required to be bifurcated from the contract and recorded at fair value with changes in fair value recognized in the results of operations. The net result of these adjustments was a decrease of $3 million and an increase of $4 million in equity in earnings of affiliates for the years ended December 31, 2005 and 2004, respectively. The cumulative impact of all derivative adjustments on net income was a decrease of $4 million in 2005 and an increase of $5 million in 2004. Income Tax Adjustments Income tax adjustments relate primarily to the following: A $20 million adjustment to correct income tax expense in the fourth quarter of 2005 as a result of an incorrect 2004 tax return to accrual adjustment, previously disclosed in the Company Form 10-Q for September 30, 2006; and 79 A $21 million adjustment to record income tax benefit in 2004 as a result of a change in local income tax reporting for leases in Qatar, offset by adjustments to correct income tax expense for certain state deferred tax assets and other miscellaneous items. The net impact of individual income tax adjustments resulted in an increase to income tax expense of approximately $18 million in 2005 and $7 million in 2004. The cumulative impact on income tax expense as a result of all restatement adjustments was an increase of approximately $27 million for the year ended December 31, 2005 and an increase of approximately $24 million for the year ended December 31, 2004. Other Adjustments As a result of work performed in the course of our year end closing process, certain other adjustments were identified which decreased net income by $6 million for the year ended December 31, 2005 and increased net income by $1 million for the year ended December 31, 2004. Balance Sheet Adjustments Adjustments at certain businesses in Brazil The Company Brazilian business, Sul, records customer receipts used to provide line extensions as an offset against property, plant and equipment. However, the regulatory body of Brazil never issued any guidance with respect to the treatment of these customer receipts. As such, we believe that a more appropriate classification of these customer receipts would have been as a regulatory liability given that the actual treatment as an offset against property, plant and equipment was never approved by the regulatory body of Brazil. Additionally, the regulatory liability treatment provides for the possibility of a future obligation back to the customers, which was confirmed by a recent regulatory ruling. The increase to property, plant and equipment and increase to long-term regulatory liabilities was $93 million and $62 million at December 31, 2005 and 2004, respectively. Cartagena Deconsolidation Upon the Company adoption of Financial Interpretation No.46, Variable Interest Entities ( FIN No. 46R ), as of January 1, 2004, the Company incorrectly continued to consolidate our business in Cartagena, Spain. An adjustment was made to deconsolidate the Cartagena balance sheet and statement of operations and to reflect AES share of the results of its operations using the equity method of accounting. This resulted in a decrease to investments in affiliates of $55 and $39 million; a decrease in net property, plant and equipment of $570 and $387 million; and a decrease in non-recource debt of $579 and $497 million at December 31, 2005 and 2004, respectively. Restricted Cash Certain balance sheet reclassifications were recorded at December 31, 2005 and December 31, 2004 that were the result of errors in the presentation of restricted cash. These reclasses resulted in a reduction in cash and cash equivalents and an increase in restricted cash by $63 million and $97 million, in 2005 and 2004, respectively Share-based Compensation The Company recently concluded an internal review of accounting for share-based compensation (the LTC Review ), which originally was disclosed in the Company Form 8-K filed on February 26, 2007. As a result of the LTC Review, the Company identified certain errors in its previous accounting for share-based compensation. These errors required adjustments to the Company previous accounting for these awards under the guidance of Accounting Principles Board Opinion No. 25, Accounting for Stock Issued to Employees ( APB No. 25 ), Financial Accounting Standards Board ( FASB ) Statement No. 123, Accounting for Stock-Based Compensation ( FAS No. 123 ) and FASB Statement No. 123R (revised 2004), 80 Share-Based Payment ( FAS No. 123R ). As described below, the Company is recording adjustments to its prior financial statements resulting in additional cumulative pre-tax compensation expense for the years 2000-2005 of $36 million ($26 million net of taxes). None of these adjustments, individually or in the aggregate, is quantitatively material to any period presented. In addition, the Company has identified accounting for share-based compensation as a material weakness and has prepared a remediation plan to strengthen further its granting and accounting practices to avoid similar errors in the future. See Item 9A Disclosure Controls and Procedures of this Form 10-K for further explanation of the material weakness and the Company remediation plans. Background of the LTC Review Beginning in mid-2006 the Company conducted limited assessments of its share-based compensation practices. Based on those assessments, it did not appear likely that the potential accounting adjustments relating to share-based compensation issues identified as of that time would be material to the Company prior period financial statements. However, information subsequently developed by the Company Internal Audit group indicated that there had been control deficiencies and inadequate oversight related to historical granting practices and accounting for share-based compensation. Following consideration of this information, the Company determined that a more comprehensive review of prior period awards was warranted. Accordingly, in early February 2007, the Company requested that an outside consulting firm assist with the collection and processing of data relating to the Company share-based compensation awards. The outside consulting firm also provided a team of forensic accountants to assist the Company with its: (i) evaluation of relevant Securities and Exchange Commission ( SEC ) and FASB guidance relating to share-based compensation; (ii) implementation of procedures for review of electronic data, including e-mails; and (iii) analysis of the information used to determine measurement dates, strike prices and valuations required to reach the resulting accounting adjustments. The Company also asked an outside law firm to assist the Company with the LTC Review. This law firm had already been assisting the Company in responding to requests for documents and information from the SEC Staff principally relating to the Company restatements for the years 2002-2005. As disclosed in a Form 8-K filed on March 19, 2007, the Financial Audit Committee of the Company Board of Directors formed an Ad Hoc Committee of three independent directors to review the Company procedures, conclusions and recommendations regarding the LTC Review, as described herein. Purposes and Scope of the LTC Review The LTC Review was designed and conducted principally to determine whether any adjustments to the Company prior period financial statements were required as a result of incorrect accounting for share-based compensation, which includes stock options and restricted stock units. A secondary purpose of the LTC Review was to evaluate the Company historical practices and procedures for making share-based compensation awards, including the conduct of individuals involved in the granting process. The Company determined that a ten-year review period covering the years 1997-2006 (the Review Period ) was appropriate. Supporting documentation was more readily available in more recent years and, in many instances, the Company experienced difficulty locating and/or gathering documentation for the years 1997-1999. Therefore, the Company determined that a review of years preceding 1997 was unlikely to result in information susceptible to meaningful analysis. A significant accounting issue identified in the LTC Review related to the determination of the measurement date with respect to share-based compensation awards. During the Review Period, the Company had generally used the indicated grant date as the measurement date for accounting purposes, when in many cases the indicated grant date actually preceded the measurement date as correctly defined under Generally Accepted Accounting Principles ( GAAP ). The U.S. GAAP technical accounting 81 literature in effect during the accounting periods under review defined the measurement date for purposes of determining share-based compensation expense as the date on which the Company finalized an individual share-based award, to include the number of units awarded at a determinable strike price. The Company gathered documentation and conducted analysis related to measurement dates with respect to all of the grants awarded in the Review Period, a total of approximately 29,600 stock option grants, representing approximately 45,380,000 options as well as approximately 4,000,000 restricted stock units for non-directors. These grants included both the Company annual compensation awards, known as on-cycle grants, and all awards made at other times, referred to as off-cycle grants. The LTC Review was designed to assess the appropriate measurement date for each of the various types of grants awarded during the Review Period. The Company considered SEC guidance and GAAP in evaluating known facts and circumstances in an attempt reasonably to determine the date that the share-based compensation awards were final. The Company collected information through targeted searches of various sources, including human resources and accounting databases, paper and electronic files and servers, Board of Directors and Compensation Committee meeting minutes, payroll records, and acquisition and business development documentation. The Company also interviewed certain current and former employees, officers and directors. Although there generally was less documentation readily available for the years 1997-1999, the Company did review grants in those years, and based on available information, attempted to make a reasonable assessment of the correct measurement dates and potential accounting adjustments for the purposes of assessing whether any charge from that period could be material to the Company financial statements in those years. Based on this analysis, the Company determined that any errors identified during that period would not have resulted in a material impact to the Company stockholders equity and no adjustments were made. The Company Accounting Adjustments As a result of the LTC Review, the Company has determined that adjustments resulting in charges for share-based compensation should be recorded for the years 2000 through 2005. The additional cumulative pre-tax compensation expense totals $36 million ($26 million net of taxes). The effect of recognizing additional non-cash, share-based compensation expense resulting from the charges mentioned above by year is as follows: Fiscal Year Ended (in millions) Pre-Tax Expense After-Tax Expense 2000 $ 8 $ 6 2001 $ 15 $ 11 2002 $ 8 $ 5 2003 $ 4 $ 3 2004 $ $ 2005 $ 1 $ 1 The Company also is recording a charge of $0.6 million (pre-tax) relating to the first three previously reported quarters of 2006, which primarily relate to prior year grants in which expense was carried forward to 2006. None of these adjustments, individually or in the aggregate, is quantitatively material to any period presented; however, the Company will reflect these adjustments by reducing stockholders equity by $25.2 million as of January 1, 2004 for the cumulative effect of the correction of errors for the periods from January 1, 2000 through December 31, 2003. General and administrative expense will be adjusted for the years ending December 31, 2004 and 2005 and the first three quarters of 2006 as outlined above. 82 Annual On-Cycle Awards. Compensation charges for annual on-cycle grants were determined based upon facts and circumstances relating to the dates the awards were final and the selection of the appropriate strike prices. The Company determined new measurement dates based on a determination of the date an award was final using the following methodology. Grants to Executive Officers and certain other senior executives ( Senior Leaders ) were considered to be final for accounting purposes upon Compensation Committee approval of a fixed number of options at a specific exercise price, or in certain years based on subsequent action by the Company establishing the grant date and strike price. Grants to all other employees were considered to be final for accounting purposes on the date that management completed its allocation of substantially all awards to the pool of employees receiving awards. In addition to measurement date changes, the LTC Review identified three years in which the Company had set the strike price for the annual on-cycle grants either as the opening price or as the intra-day low trading price of the Company stock during a four-day period over which a Board meeting was held. To determine the fair market value of the stock on the re-determined measurement date for accounting purposes, the Company used the closing price of the stock on that date. Accordingly, for financial accounting purposes, the amount of compensation expense recorded by the Company reflects both measurement date changes and intrinsic value changes for annual on-cycle awards. The predominant causes of the charges relating to on-cycle grants were (i) with respect to Executive Officers and Senior Leaders, use of a grant date associated with an annual Board meeting, where the grant date and strike price had not been determined with finality until several days after the meeting; and (ii) with respect to all other employees, the failure to finalize a complete and accurate schedule of the awards to be made to the employees contemporaneously with the intended grant date. Off-Cycle Grants. Compensation charges for off-cycle grants also were based primarily upon the dates the awards were final. The majority of the measurement date changes with respect to off-cycle grants related to the following five categories: (1) awards to newly hired employees; (2) awards upon promotions of existing employees or other change in status; (3) awards made in conjunction with transactions or other successful business development efforts; (4) Founders and other similar awards made in recognition of outstanding service, and (5) corrections to previous awards subsequently determined to have been erroneous. The predominant cause of the measurement date errors in each of these categories of awards was the lack of adequate contemporaneous documentation supporting the intended grant. Accordingly, the amount of compensation expense recorded by the Company for these categories of off-cycle awards is based primarily upon measurement date changes. The adjustments reflect available evidence concerning the dates on which: (i) the recipients were entitled to receive the awards, (ii) the grants were intended to be made, and (iii) the terms of the grants were final. In addition to the categories above, off-cycle grants also were defined to include modifications of prior grants. Compensation charges for grant modifications were based upon an analysis of changes to vesting and exercise periods. As a result of its review, the Company has determined that certain modifications were calculated using an incorrect method and others were not communicated to appropriate accounting personnel. The most significant modification relates to a grant to a former CEO that was erroneously accounted for by using an intrinsic value calculation instead of a fair value calculation following the Company decision to adopt FAS 123 effective January 1, 2003. The Company is recording a $3 million charge to account for this error for the year 2003. Summary of Significant Charges By Grant Year Set forth in this section is a summary of the charges resulting from grants awarded in the years 2000, 2001 and 2003, which make up more than 95% of the additional expenses requiring adjustments to the prior period financial statements. This information is different than the discussion and table above, which described the effect of recognizing these additional charges over the applicable accounting periods in the 83 Company financial statements. For these years, further information concerning the type of grant (on-cycle or off-cycle), the categories of the recipients and the nature of the change resulting in the adjustment is set out below. For grants made in 2000, the total charge resulting from the LTC Review is approximately $23 million. Of that amount, approximately $4 million resulted from the changes to the on-cycle grants to Executive Officers and Senior Leaders. Of the remaining amount, approximately $17 million resulted from the changes to the on-cycle grants to all other employees, and approximately $2 million resulted from off-cycle grants. For grants made in 2001, the total charge resulting from the LTC Review is approximately $9 million. Of that amount, approximately $7 million resulted from the changes to on-cycle grants to Executive Officers and Senior Leaders. Of the remaining amount, approximately $250,000 resulted from the changes to the on-cycle grants to all other employees, and approximately $1 million resulted from off-cycle grants. For grants made in 2003, the total charge is approximately $6 million. Of this amount, $3 million related to the modification to a grant to a former CEO as described above, and approximately $800,000 related to a grant to a director approved by shareholders where the grant date was recorded as having been finalized on the date of an earlier Board meeting. The remaining charges resulted from changes to certain on-cycle and off-cycle grants. The Company Review of Historic Practices As noted, the primary purpose of the LTC Review was to conduct a comprehensive review of the Company accounting for share-based compensation and to record any required adjustments in its financial statements. The LTC Review was not an independent investigation relating to historic practices and procedures. However, during the course of the LTC Review, the Company identified certain historical practices raising issues relating to share-based compensation and conducted a review of those practices, limited in scope as noted herein. Based on the information to date, the Company has identified certain historical issues and practices of concern relating to the annual on-cycle and off-cycle grants, which fall within the following five categories: (1) with respect to the 1997-1998 annual on-cycle grants, reported ratification of undocumented prior on-cycle grants by the Compensation Committee; (2) with respect to the 1999-2001 annual grants, after-the-fact selection of low strike prices within the four-day period during which Board meetings were held, and inaccurate Compensation Committee meeting minutes relating to grant date and strike price selection; (3) issuance of off-cycle grants prior to 2004 based on apparent, but not actual, delegation of authority, as well as general deficiencies in administration of off-cycle grants; (4) failure to establish and/or comply with certain formal corporate governance procedures in periods through 2004; and (5) lack of and/or insufficient controls and procedures, and/or lack of knowledge of applicable accounting standards, in connection with administration of share-based compensation. The Company notes that the senior officers who were primarily involved in the selection of the prices of the annual on-cycle grants from 1999-2001 were the Company President and CEO at the time, who retired in 2002; the Company CFO at the time, who left full time employment with the Company in early 2006 (he remains under an employment agreement through March 2008, although he is not active in management); and the Company General Counsel at the time, who presently is the Company Executive Vice President and President, Alternative Energy and is no longer involved in the Company legal functions or Board consideration or approval of share-based compensation. The information developed in the LTC Review did not establish that any officer or director of the Company manipulated the selection of grant dates or strike prices with actual knowledge that they were violating or causing the Company to violate accounting principles or requirements of the Company stock options plans, or that there was any effort to conceal information relating to the selection of grant dates or strike prices from the Company outside auditors. However, all of the matters described herein with respect to the Company general views and issues arising from the LTC Review are qualified by the fact 84 that, in light of the limitations discussed herein, there may be additional documents, witnesses or other information not reviewed that might have indicated a different result. The limitations of the LTC Review include the fact that the Company did not review backups of data from the First Class System ( First Class ), the Company e-mail system prior to January 1, 2002, when the Company switched to Microsoft Outlook. The Company also did not attempt to restore approximately 460 computer tapes (the Backup Tapes ) that are stored by an off-site storage vendor. The Company believes that these tapes comprise backups of certain Company electronic data (including e-mail) backed up on certain dates from approximately late 2001 through early 2004, but the Company has not located an index identifying the contents of the tapes. The Company decided not to attempt to restore and review First Class or the Backup Tapes because: (i) the Company was able to review certain electronic data, including for the years 1997-2002, as well as paper files and other available information relating to the majority of the grants made during the Review Period; (ii) the Company believes that it is unlikely that information from these sources would materially alter the accounting adjustments that have been determined to be necessary; (iii) the Company has implemented or will implement measures necessary to provide effective controls and procedures in these areas; (iv) of the senior officers who were primarily involved in the selection of the prices of the annual on-cycle grants from 1999-2001, the former CEO is no longer with the Company, the former CFO is no longer an officer and is not active in the Company management, and the former General Counsel has a different position in the Company that does not involve corporate legal responsibilities or participation in Board consideration or approval of share-based compensation; and (v) based on consultation with a reputable information technology vendor, the Company determined that neither First Class nor the Backup Tapes could be restored for review without causing substantial delays in the LTC Review. In addition, while the Company conducted more than twenty interviews with persons who, by virtue of their position or otherwise, were believed to be most likely to have relevant knowledge, the Company did not interview every director or employee who may have had any involvement with options grants or accounting for share-based compensation. Sale of EDC On February 22, 2007, we entered into a definitive agreement with Petr leos de Venezuela, S.A., ( PDVSA ), pursuant to which we have agreed to sell to PDVSA all of our shares of EDC. The agreement is dated as of February 15, 2007. Subject to the terms and conditions in the agreement, PDVSA has agreed to pay us a purchase price of US$739 million at closing, net of any withholding taxes. In addition, the agreement provided for the payment of a US$120 million dividend in 2007. On March 1, 2007, the shareholders of EDC approved and declared a US$120 million dividend, payable on March 16, 2007, to all shareholders on record as of March 9, 2007. A wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company is the owner of 82.14% of the outstanding shares of EDC, and therefore, on March 16, 2007, this subsidiary received the equivalent of approximately US$99 million in Bolivares that is currently being held in trust at a U.S. bank until the funds can be converted to U.S. Dollars. Under the terms of the purchase and sale agreement with the Republic of Venezuela, PDVSA has agreed to ensure that the Company portion of the dividend is converted by the Venezuelan government Foreign Exchange Commission, CADIVI, from Bolivares into U.S. Dollars at the current official exchange rate within 90 days of the dividend payment date. As of the date of this filing, the conversion of the Company portion of the dividend from Bolivares to U.S. Dollars has been submitted to CADIVI and is awaiting their approval. The agreement provided that PDVSA would acquire our EDC common shares in a tender offer. PDVSA commenced and publicly announced the commencement of concurrent tender offers in Venezuela and the United States (the Offers ), on April 9, 2007. The Offers provided for the purchase of 2,704,445,687 of EDC common shares at a U.S. Dollar equivalent amount of $0.2734 per common share, 85 which is consistent with the price per share implied by the purchase price within the agreement. The closing of the Offers occurred on May 8, 2007 and the actual transfer of the shares along with payment of the purchase price occurred on May 16, 2007. As a result of signing this agreement, we have concluded that a material impairment of our investment in EDC has occurred, which will be recorded in the first quarter ending March 31, 2007. This material impairment represents the net book value of our investment less the estimated purchase price. Management estimates that this pre-tax, non-cash charge will be in the range of $600 to $650 million. We purchased a controlling interest in EDC in 2000. EDC is the largest private electric utility in Venezuela. It is a provider of power and light to approximately one million customers in the Caracas metropolitan area. EDC also owns and operates five generation plants with a total of 2,616 MW of generation capacity. These facilities collectively represent approximately 14% of the electricity consumed in Venezuela. For the year ended December 31, 2006, EDC represented 5% of AES consolidated revenues and 12% of the Latin America Utilities segment revenues, 5% of AES consolidated gross margin and 17% of the Latin America Utilities segment gross margin. In addition, EDC represented 37% of AES consolidated net income and 36% of basic earnings per share. Excluding the net after-tax loss impact of $512 million related to the sale of Eletropaulo shares and debt restructuring, EDC represented 12% of AES consolidated net income and 12% of basic earnings per share. AES received a dividend of approximately $101 million from EDC in 2006. EDC five generation plants represented approximately 7% of AES approximate 35 gigawatts of capacity installed. Executive Summary AES is one of the world largest global power companies, providing essential electricity services in 27 countries on five continents. Our goal is to continue building on our traditional lines of business, while expanding into other essential energy-related areas. We believe that this is a natural expansion for us. As we move into new lines of business, we will leverage the competitive advantages that result from our unique global footprint, local market insights and our operational and business development expertise. We also will build on our existing capabilities in areas beyond power including greenhouse gas emissions offset projects, electricity transmission, water desalinization, and other businesses. As we continue to expand and grow our business we will maintain a focus on efforts to improve our business operations and management processes, including our internal controls over financial reporting. Our business strategy is focused on global growth in our core generation and utilities businesses along with growth in related markets such as Alternative Energy, electricity transmission and water desalinization. We continue to emphasize growth through greenfield development, platform expansion, privatization of government-owned assets, and mergers and acquisitions and continue to develop and maintain a strong development pipeline of projects and opportunities. The Company sees growth investments as the most significant contributor to long-term shareholder value creation. The Company growth strategies are complemented by an increased emphasis on portfolio management through which AES has and will continue to sell or monetize a portion of certain businesses or assets when market values appear significantly higher than the Companies own assessment of value in the AES portfolio. Underpinning this growth focus is an operating model which benefits from a diverse power generation portfolio that is largely contracted, reducing fuel cost and demand risks, and from an electric utility portfolio heavily weighted to faster-growing emerging markets. 86 The Company anticipates that success with its business development activities will be the single most important factor in its financial success in terms of value creation and it is directing increasing resources in support of business development globally. The Company also anticipates that high oil prices, increasing regulation of greenhouse gases, faster than expected global economic growth and a weak dollar present opportunities for value creation, based on the Company current business portfolio and business strategies. Slower global economic growth, which will impact demand growth for Utilities and some Generation businesses, is the most significant downside scenario affecting value creation. Other important scenarios that could impair future value include low oil prices and a strong dollar. Business Overview We are a global power holding company incorporated in Delaware in 1981. Through our subsidiaries, we operate a portfolio of electricity generation and distribution businesses and investments on five continents and in 27 countries. Our Businesses We operate two types of businesses. The first is our distribution and transmission business, which we refer to as Utilities, in which we operate electric utilities and sell power to customers in the retail (including residential), commercial, industrial and governmental sectors. These customers are typically end users of electricity. The second is our Generation business, where we sell power to wholesale customers such as utilities or other intermediaries. The revenues and earnings growth of both our Utilities and Generation businesses vary with changes in electricity demand. Our Utilities business consists primarily of 13 distribution companies in seven countries with over 10 million end-user customers. All of these companies operate in a defined service area. This segment is composed of: integrated utilities located in: the United States Indianapolis Power & Light ( IPL ), Cameroon AES SONEL. distribution companies located in: Brazil AES Eletropaulo and AES Sul, Argentina Empresa Distribuidora La Plata S.A. ( EDELAP ), Empresa Distribuidora de Energia Norte ( EDEN ) and Empresa Distribuidora de Energia Sure ( EDES ), El Salvador Compa ia de Alumbrado El ctrico de San Salvador, S.A. de C.V. ( CAESS ), Compania, S. En C. de C.V. ( AES CLESA ), Distribuidora Electrica de Usulutan, S.A. de C.V. ( DEUSEM ) and Empresa Electrica de Oriente ( EEO ), and Ukraine Kievoblenergo and Rivneenergo. Performance drivers for these businesses include, among other things, reliability of service, management of working capital, negotiation of tariff adjustments, compliance with extensive regulatory requirements and, in developing countries, reduction of commercial and technical losses. Utilities face relatively little direct competition due to significant barriers to entry which are present in these markets. In this segment, we primarily face competition in our efforts to acquire businesses. We compete against a number of other participants, some of which have greater financial resources, have been engaged in distribution related businesses for periods longer than we have, and have accumulated more significant portfolios. Relevant competitive factors for Utilities include financial resources, governmental assistance, regulatory restrictions and access to non-recourse financing. In certain locations, our utilities 87 face increased competition as a result of changes in laws and regulations which allow wholesale and retail services to be provided on a competitive basis. We can provide no assurance that deregulation will not adversely affect the future operations, cash flows and financial condition of our Utilities business. The results of operations of our Utilities business are sensitive to changes in economic growth and regulation, abnormal weather conditions in the area in which they operate, as well as the success of the operational changes that have been implemented (especially in emerging markets). In our Generation business, we generate and sell electricity primarily to wholesale customers. Performance drivers for our Generation business include, among other things, plant reliability, fuel costs and fixed-cost management. Growth in this business is largely tied to securing new power purchase agreements, expanding capacity in our existing facilities and building new power plants. Our Generation business includes our interests in 97 power generation facilities owned or operated under management agreements totaling over 35 gigawatts of capacity installed in 21 countries. Approximately 68% of the revenues from our Generation business are from plants that operate under power purchase agreements of five years or longer for 75% or more of the output capacity. These long-term contracts reduce the risk associated with volatility in the market price for electricity. We also reduce our exposure to fuel supply risks by entering into long-term fuel supply contracts or through fuel tolling contracts where the customer assumes full responsibility for purchasing and supplying the fuel to the power plant. As a result of these contractual agreements, these facilities have relatively predictable cash flows and earnings. These facilities face most of their competition prior to the execution of a power sales agreement, during the development phase of a project. Our competitors for these contracts include other independent power producers and equipment manufacturers, as well as various utilities and their affiliates. During the operational phase, we traditionally have faced limited competition due to the long-term nature of the generation contracts. However, since competitive power markets have been introduced and new market participants have been added, we have and will continue to encounter increased competition in attracting new customers and maintaining our current customers as our existing contracts expire. The balance of our Generation business sells power through competitive markets under short term contracts or directly in the spot market. As a result, the cash flows and earnings associated with these facilities are more sensitive to fluctuations in the market price for electricity, natural gas, coal and other fuels. However, for a number of these facilities, including our plants in New York, which include a fleet of low-cost coal fired plants, we have hedged the majority of our exposure to fuel, energy and emissions pricing for the next several years. These facilities compete with numerous other independent power producers, energy marketers and traders, energy merchants, transmission and distribution providers and retail energy suppliers. Competitive factors for these facilities include price, reliability, operational cost and third party credit requirements. As described above, AES operates within two primary businesses, the generation of electricity and the distribution of electricity. AES previously reported its financial results in three business segments: contract generation, competitive supply and regulated utilities. As of December 31, 2006, we have changed the definition of our segments in order to report information by geographic region and by line of business. We believe this change more accurately reflects the manner in which we manage the Company. Our businesses include Utilities and Generation within four defined geographic regions: (1) North America, (2) Latin America, (3) Europe, CIS and Africa, which we refer to as Europe & Africa and (4) Asia and the Middle East, which we refer to as Asia . Three regions, North America, Latin America and Europe & Africa, are engaged in both our Generation and Utility businesses. Our Asia region only has Generation businesses. Accordingly, these businesses and regions account for seven segments. Corporate and Other includes corporate overhead costs which are not directly associated with the operations of our seven primary operating segments; interest income and expense; other intercompany charges such as management fees and self-insurance premiums which are fully eliminated in consolidation; and 88 development and operational costs related to our Alternative Energy business which is currently not material to our presentation of operating segments. Recent Initiatives We are developing an Alternative Energy business. Alternative Energy includes strategic initiatives such as wind generation and other renewable energy sources, liquefied natural gas regasification ( LNG ), greenhouse gas emissions offset projects and new technologies. Of these initiatives, we currently only have wind generation facilities that are operational. Our Buffalo Gap wind project, which is located in Texas, began full commercial operations in April 2006. An expansion of Buffalo Gap, called Buffalo Gap 2, is currently under construction. We also acquired wind generation assets in California from Enron Wind Systems. In Europe, we have acquired stakes in wind development businesses in Scotland, France, and Bulgaria. We currently have three LNG projects that are in pre-construction phases of development. We are also pursuing projects which will allow us to develop greenhouse gas emission offsets. To that end, we have developed a joint venture with AgCert International called AES AgriVerde, which will deploy greenhouse gas emissions reduction technology in selected countries in Asia, Europe and North Africa. Although, Alternative Energy represents a very small portion of our business compared to Utilities and Generation, Alternative Energy is an important initiative in our long-term strategy because we believe it may represent a significant growth opportunity for us. Some of the important drivers of performance for us developing our alternative energy businesses include continued government support through regulation and incentives, continued progress towards liquid and transparent markets, particularly in the area of greenhouse gas emission credit trading and the successful identification, execution and commercialization of new market opportunities in these nascent markets. While this initiative represents a growth opportunity for us, alternative energy is not material to our financial statements at this time. 2006 Performance Highlights December 31, 2006 2005 2004 ($ in millions) Revenue $ 12,299 $ 11,021 $ 9,392 Gross Margin 3,631 3,199 2,791 Gross Margin as a % of Revenue 29.5 % 29.0 % 29.7 % Diluted Earnings (Loss) Per Share from Continuing Operations 0.43 0.87 0.41 Net Cash Provided by Operating Activities 2,411 2,154 1,608 Revenue We achieved record revenues of $12.3 billion, an increase of 11.8% from $11.0 billion last year. Higher power prices, largely driven by the pass-through of higher fuel costs, together with increased demand and favorable foreign currency trends were the primary contributors. Gross margin We achieved record gross margin of $3.6 billion, an increase of 12.5% from $3.2 billion in 2005. Favorable volume and foreign currency translation were the primary contributors to the increase. Earnings per share Diluted earnings per share from continuing operations were $0.43 compared to $0.87 in 2005. This decrease was primarily driven by the Brazil restructuring charges. Excluding the Brazil restructuring charges, earnings per share increased due to higher gross margin (primarily Latin American volume and foreign exchange) and lower net interest expense (debt retirements and lower interest rates). These gains were partially offset by higher general and administrative expenses resulting from increased 89 development spending. The restructuring of our Brazil holding company, Brasiliana, eliminated restrictions on dividend payments to AES from three of our four principal Brazil businesses (Eletropaulo, Tiete, and Uruguiana). The restructuring resulted in non-cash after-tax charges totaling $512 million, or $0.76 per share, primarily related to a loss on sale of Eletropaulo stock in a secondary offering recognizing deferred currency adjustments and certain debt prepayment premiums, partially offset by favorable tax benefits. Net cash from operating activities We also achieved record cash flows from operating activities of $2.4 billion, 9.1% higher than 2005. Higher operating cash flows primarily reflect an increase in net earnings adjusted for non cash items. Key Initiatives People Development People development continues to be a major initiative as we look to improve our technical and leadership skills. We continued to expand the AES learning Center, a program developed in partnership with the University of Virginia Darden School of Business, which offers a range of courses on effective leadership, general management and functional skills, such as finance. In 2006, the Center launched a Financial Leadership Development Program to elevate performance among our financial groups worldwide. We also expanded the program internationally to Brazil, Cameroon, Kazakhstan, the Middle East and Ukraine. In addition to classroom training, we added an online AES Learning Center and now have an inventory of more than 150 technical and managerial courses offered online, making these classes available on a real-time basis. We continue to place top priority on ensuring a safe working environment for AES people, contractors and customers. In 2006, we saw continuing improvements in the number of lost time accidents (LTAs) at our businesses. Material Weaknesses Over the course of the past year, the Company has worked diligently to continue to strengthen its controls over financial reporting, with particular emphasis on remediating its material weaknesses related to: US GAAP accounting expertise in Brazil; Income tax accounting; Derivative accounting; and Foreign currency implications of certain intercompany loans. This effort involved a continuing review of current processes, implementation of remediation plans and a focus on staffing with the right level and quality of technical accounting resources. We have focused our internal audit resources on performing additional targeted financial statement audits and have brought in outside expertise in the areas of derivatives and tax to help us expedite our improvement plans. In addition to this specific focus, the Company embarked upon a program to assess the capabilities of its financial staff on a worldwide basis and develop related hiring and training programs. We have approved a program to accelerate our implementation of integrated financial systems for our generation plants, which will allow for further automation of currently manual processes and more timely submission and review of financial statements. As a result of these continued efforts, we did identify certain prior year errors which caused the Company to restate prior year results again. Even so, we feel confident that the financial and control 90 organizations are taking the right steps, with full management support, to help us ensure that we are able to produce accurate and timely financial statements in the future. Debt Restructuring Our existing businesses continued to focus on plant and distribution system operational excellence, reliability and customer service. We also benefited from favorable debt capital markets in a number of countries to restructure and refinance debt, extend maturities, and increase liquidity. In many instances favorable market conditions permitted refinancing dollar-denominated obligations into local currency, to reduce overall foreign exchange exposure. Growth Projects and Building a Pipeline of New Initiatives Portfolio management, which can include business restructuring and sale of all or a portion of businesses, was an important area of focus and success in 2006. We achieved important milestones in restructuring several of our Brazil businesses through a secondary offering of shares in our Eletropaulo subsidiary and using the proceeds to retire debt that had restrictive covenants precluding dividend payments to be received by AES. We sold a minority share of our Gener subsidiary in Chile, which increased the liquidity of those shares and we believe reduced the discount the local Chile stock market had been placing on Gener shares due to the prior illiquidity. We also sold our 50% equity position in a power project in Canada and sold a power plant in the U.K., both in negotiated transactions. We have worked hard to manage operational and financial risk through appropriate use of interest rate, energy, and foreign exchange risk management instruments and through effective procurement strategies. We continued to build a robust business development pipeline and extend that pipeline into new areas such as greenhouse gas emission reduction projects and electricity transmission. In the core Generation business, we brought one new power project into service in 2006, a 1,200 MW, $920 million gas-fired power project in Cartagena, Spain (included in Europe & Africa generation). We began construction on a new 670 MW lignite-fired power plant in Bulgaria, supported by a long-term customer contract and included in Europe & Africa generation, and have secured new long-term customer contracts for new projects in Chile, Jordan and Panama. We also entered into purchase agreements to acquire two generation facilities in Mexico, which we consummated in February 2007. The Company growth project backlog (growth projects under construction) as of December 31, 2006 totaled over 1,500 gross MW of new generation capacity with total expected investment of approximately $3.2 billion through 2011. This includes fossil-fueled projects in Chile and Bulgaria, a hydroelectric project in Panama, and a wind project in the US. We also secured early-stage memorandums of understanding to develop power projects in countries such as Vietnam, Indonesia, and India. In addition to the wind project mentioned above, significant 2006 developments in the Company Alternative Energy business included acquisition of 73 MW of wind generation assets in California and interests in wind project development pipelines totaling approximately 1,360 MW in Scotland (U.K.), France, and Bulgaria. The Company made its first significant strides in the greenhouse gas emission area, acquiring a 9.9% ownership interest in AgCert International ( AgCert ) for $52 million. AgCert is an Ireland-based company which uses agricultural sources to produce greenhouse gas emission offsets under the Kyoto protocol. AES and AgCert also formed a joint venture, AES AgriVerde, to produce greenhouse gas emission offsets in selected countries in Asia, Europe and North Africa. The Company expects to fund growth investments from available cash, net cash from operating activities and/or the proceeds from the issuance of debt, common stock, other securities, asset sales, and partner equity contributions. Certain of the Alternative Energy businesses may be considered start-up businesses that will need to be funded internally through cash equity contributions, and may have limited 91 debt financing opportunities initially. We see sufficient attractive investment opportunities that may exceed available cash and net cash from operating activities in future periods. Critical Accounting Estimates The consolidated financial statements of AES are prepared in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States of America, which requires the use of estimates, judgments, and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the periods presented. AES significant accounting policies are described in Note 1 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K. An accounting estimate is considered critical if: the estimate requires management to make assumptions about matters that were highly uncertain at the time the estimate was made; different estimates reasonably could have been used; or the impact of the estimates and assumptions on financial condition or operating performance is material. Management believes that the accounting estimates employed are appropriate and the resulting balances are reasonable; however, actual results could differ from the original estimates, requiring adjustments to these balances in future periods. Listed below are certain significant estimates and assumptions used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements. Revenue Recognition The revenue of the Utilities businesses is classified as regulated on the consolidated statement of operations. Revenues from the sale of energy are recognized in the period in which the energy is delivered. The calculation of revenues earned but not yet billed is based on the number of days not billed in the month, the estimated amount of energy delivered during those days and the estimated average price per customer class for that month. The revenues from the Generation segment are classified as non-regulated and are recorded based upon output delivered and capacity provided at rates as specified under contract terms or prevailing market rates. Revenues from power sales contracts entered into after 1991 with decreasing scheduled rates are recognized based on the output delivered at the lower of the amount billed or the average rate over the contract term. Allowance for Doubtful Accounts The Company maintains an allowance for doubtful accounts for estimated uncollectible accounts receivable. The allowance is based on the Company assessment of known delinquent accounts, historical experience, and other currently available evidence of the collectibility and aging of accounts receivable. There is an increased level of exposure related to the Company regulated utilities receivables in certain non U.S. locations which are due from local municipalities and other governmental agencies. These customers are often large and normally pay within extended timeframes. The amount of historical experience is limited in some cases due to the recent nature of AES acquisitions subsequent to privatization. In addition, local political and economic factors often play a part in a municipality current ability or willingness to pay. The Company monitors these situations closely and continues to refine its reserving policy based on both historical experience and current knowledge of the related political/economic environments. 92 Income Tax Reserves We are subject to income taxes in both the United States and numerous foreign jurisdictions. Our worldwide income tax provision requires significant judgment and is based on calculations and assumptions that are subject to examination by the Internal Revenue Service and other taxing authorities. The Company and certain of its subsidiaries are under examination by relevant taxing authorities for various tax years. The Company regularly assesses the potential outcome of these examinations in each of the taxing jurisdictions when determining the adequacy of the provision for income taxes. Tax reserves have been established, which the Company believes to be adequate in relation to the potential for additional assessments. Once established, reserves are adjusted only when there is more information available or when an event occurs necessitating a change to the reserves. While the Company believes that the amount of the tax estimates is reasonable, it is possible that the ultimate outcome of current or future examinations may exceed current reserves in amounts that could be material. Through December 31, 2006 the Company determined its tax liabilities in accordance with SFAS No. 5 Accounting for Contingencies ( SFAS No. 5 ). Effective January 1, 2007 the Company adopted the provisions set forth in FIN No. 48 Accounting for Uncertainty in Income Taxes . Under FIN No. 48, positions taken on the Company income tax return which satisfy a more-likely-than-not threshold will be recognized in the financial statements. Long-Lived Assets In accordance with SFAS No. 144 Accounting for the Impairment or Disposal of Long-Lived Assets , ( SFAS No. 144 ), we periodically review the carrying value of our long-lived assets held and used, other than goodwill and intangible assets with indefinite lives, and assets to be disposed of when circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of such assets may not be recoverable or the assets meet the held for sale criteria under SFAS No. 144. These events or circumstances may include the relative pricing of wholesale electricity by region and the anticipated demand and cost of fuel. If the carrying amount is not recoverable, an impairment charge is recorded for the amount by which the carrying value of the long-lived asset exceeds its fair value. For regulated assets, an impairment charge could be offset by the establishment of a regulatory asset, if rate recovery was probable. For non-regulated assets, an impairment charge would be recorded as a charge against earnings. The fair value of an asset is the amount at which that asset could be bought or sold in a current transaction between willing parties, that is, other than a forced or liquidation sale. Quoted market prices in active markets are the best evidence of fair value and are used as the basis for measurement, if available. In the absence of quoted market prices for identical or similar assets in active markets, fair value is estimated using various internal and external valuation methods including cash flow projections or other indicators of fair value such as bids received, comparable sales or independent appraisals. In connection with the periodic evaluation of long-lived assets in accordance with the requirements of SFAS No. 144, the fair value of the asset can vary if different estimates and assumptions would have been used in our applied valuation techniques. In cases of impairment described in Note 16 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K, we made our best estimate of fair value using valuation methods based on the most current information. We have been in the process of divesting certain assets and their sales values can vary from the recorded fair value as described in Note 19 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K. Fluctuations in realized sales proceeds versus the estimated fair value of the asset are generally due to a variety of factors including differences in subsequent market conditions, the level of bidder interest, timing and terms of the transactions, and management analysis of the benefits of the transaction. 93 Goodwill We test goodwill for impairment annually and whenever events or circumstances make it more likely than not that impairment may have occurred, such as a significant adverse change in the business climate or a decision to sell or dispose all or a portion of a business unit. Determining whether an impairment has occurred requires valuation of the respective business unit, which we estimate using a discounted cash flow method. In applying this methodology, we rely on a number of factors, including actual operating results, future business plans, economic projections and market data. If this analysis indicates goodwill is impaired, measuring the impairment requires a fair value estimate of each identified tangible and intangible asset. In this case, we supplement the cash flow approach discussed above with independent appraisals, as appropriate. Pension and Other Postretirement Obligations Certain of our foreign and domestic subsidiaries maintain defined benefit pension plans ( the plan ) covering substantially all of their respective employees. Pension benefits are generally based on years of credited service, age of the participant and average earnings. The measurement of our pension obligations, costs and liabilities is dependent on a variety of assumptions used by our actuaries. These assumptions include estimates of the present value of projected future pension payments to all plan participants, taking into consideration the likelihood of potential future events such as salary increases and demographic experience. These assumptions may have an effect on the amount and timing of future contributions. The plan actuary conducts an independent valuation of the fair value of pension plan assets. The assumptions used in developing the required estimates include the following key factors: Discount rates; Salary growth; Retirement rates; Inflation; Expected return on plan assets; and Mortality rates. The effects of actual results differing from our assumptions are accumulated and amortized over future periods and, therefore, generally affect our recognized expense in such future periods. Sensitivity of our pension funded status and stockholders equity to the indicated increase or decrease in the discount rate assumption is shown below. Note that these sensitivities may be asymmetric, and are specific to the base conditions at year-end 2006. They also may not be additive, so the impact of changing multiple factors simultaneously cannot be calculated by combining the individual sensitivities shown. The December 31, 2006 funded status is affected by December 31, 2006 assumptions. Pension expense for 2006 is affected by December 31, 2005 assumptions. The impact on pension expense from a one percentage point change in these assumptions is shown in the table below (in millions): Increase of 1% in the discount rate $ (7 ) Decrease of 1% in the discount rate $ 22 Increase of 1% in the long-term rate of return on plan assets $ (23 ) Decrease of 1% in the long-term rate of return on plan assets $ 23 94 Regulatory Assets and Liabilities The Company accounts for certain of its regulated operations under the provisions of SFAS No. 71, Accounting for the Effects of Certain Types of Regulation ( SFAS No. 71 ) . As a result, AES records assets and liabilities that result from the regulated ratemaking process that would not be recorded under GAAP for non-regulated entities. Regulatory assets generally represent incurred costs that have been deferred because such costs are probable of future recovery in customer rates. Regulatory liabilities generally represent obligations to make refunds to customers for previous collections for costs that are not likely to be incurred or included in future rate initiatives. Management continually assesses whether the regulatory assets are probable of future recovery by considering factors such as applicable regulatory changes, recent rate orders applicable to other regulated entities and the status of any pending or potential deregulation legislation. If future recovery of costs ceases to be probable, the asset write-offs would be required to be recognized in operating income. Accounting for Derivative Instruments and Hedging Activities We enter into various derivative transactions in order to hedge our exposure to certain market risks. We primarily use derivative instruments to manage our interest rate, commodity, and foreign currency exposures. We do not enter into derivative transactions for trading purposes. Under SFAS No. 133, Accounting for Derivative Instruments and Hedging Activities as amended ( SFAS No. 133 ), we recognize all derivatives as either assets or liabilities in the balance sheet and measure those instruments at fair value. Changes in fair value of derivatives are recognized in earnings unless specific hedge criteria are met. Income and expense related to derivative instruments are recorded in the same category as generated by the underlying asset or liability. SFAS No. 133 enables companies to designate qualifying derivatives as hedging instruments based on the exposure being hedged. These hedge designations include fair value hedges and cash flow hedges. Changes in the fair value of a derivative that is highly effective and is designated and qualifies as a fair value hedge, are recognized in earnings as offsets to the changes in fair value of the exposure being hedged. Changes in the fair value of a derivative that is highly effective and is designated as and qualifies as a cash flow hedge, are deferred in accumulated other comprehensive income and are recognized into earnings as the hedged transactions occur. Any ineffectiveness is recognized in earnings immediately. For all hedge contracts, the Company provides formal documentation of the hedge and effectiveness testing in accordance with SFAS No. 133. As a result of uncertainty, complexity and judgment, accounting estimates related to derivative accounting could result in material changes to our financial statements under different conditions or utilizing different assumptions. As a part of accounting for these derivatives, we make estimates concerning volatilities, market liquidity, future commodity prices, interest rates, credit ratings, and exchange rates. AES generally uses quoted exchange prices to the extent they are available to determine the fair value of derivatives. In the absence of actively quoted market prices, we seek indicative price information from external sources, including broker quotes and industry publications. If pricing information from external sources is not available, AES will estimate prices, when possible, based on available historical and near-term future price information as well as utilizing statistical methods. When external valuation models are not available, the company utilizes internal models for valuation. For individual contracts, the use of different valuation models or assumptions could have a material effect on the calculated fair value. 95 Consolidated Results of Operations Overview Year Ended December 31, Results of operations 2006 2005 Restated 2004 Restated $ change 2006 vs. 2005 $ change 2005 vs. 2004 (in millions, except per share data) Revenue: Latin America Generation $ 2,616 $ 2,145 $ 1,584 $ 471 $ 561 Latin America Utilities 5,246 4,796 3,824 450 972 North America Generation 1,900 1,809 1,704 91 105 North America Utilities 1,032 951 885 81 66 Europe & Africa Generation 852 735 697 117 38 Europe & Africa Utilities 571 505 463 66 42 Middle East & Asia Generation 840 642 570 198 72 Corporate and Other(1) (758 ) (562 ) (335 ) (196 ) (227 ) Total Revenue $ 12,299 $ 11,021 $ 9,392 $ 1,278 $ 1,629 Gross Margin: Latin America Generation $ 1,054 $ 857 $ 616 $ 197 $ 241 Latin America Utilities 1,071 834 754 237 80 North America Generation 556 590 590 (34 ) North America Utilities 277 301 303 (24 ) (2 ) Europe & Africa Generation 249 186 182 63 4 Europe & Africa Utilities 112 112 60 52 Middle East & Asia Generation 255 284 252 (29 ) 32 Total Corporate and Other(2) (248 ) (190 ) (147 ) (58 ) (43 ) Interest expense (1,802 ) (1,893 ) (1,920 ) 91 27 Interest income 443 395 283 48 112 Other income 115 171 157 (56 ) 14 Other expense (308 ) (132 ) (123 ) (176 ) (9 ) Gain (loss) on sale of investments 98 (1 ) 98 1 Loss on sale of subsidiary stock (539 ) (24 ) (539 ) 24 Asset impairment expense (29 ) (16 ) (50 ) (13 ) 34 Foreign currency transaction losses on net monetary position (77 ) (101 ) (136 ) 24 35 Equity in earnings of affiliates 72 70 63 2 7 Income tax expense (403 ) (525 ) (380 ) 122 (145 ) Minority interest expense (610 ) (369 ) (211 ) (241 ) (158 ) Income from continuing operations 286 574 268 (288 ) 306 (Loss) income from operations of discontinued businesses (46 ) 34 32 (80 ) 2 Extraordinary items 21 21 Cumulative effect of accounting change (3 ) 3 (3 ) Net income $ 261 $ 605 $ 300 $ (344 ) $ 305 December 31, Per share data: 2006 2005 Restated 2004 Restated $ change 2006 vs. 2005 $ change 2005 vs. 2004 Basic income per share from continuing operations $ 0.44 $ 0.89 $ 0.42 $ (0.45 ) $ 0.47 Diluted income per share from continuing operations $ 0.43 $ 0.87 $ 0.41 $ (0.44 ) $ 0.46 (1) Corporate and Other includes revenues from Alternative Energy and intersegment eliminations of revenues related to transfers of electricity from Tiete (generation) to Eletropaulo (utility). (2) Total Corporate and Other expenses include corporate general and administrative expenses as well as certain inter-segment eliminations, primarily corporate charges for management fees and self insurance premiums. 96 Segment Analysis Latin America The following table summarizes revenue for our Generation and Utilities segments in Latin America for the periods indicated (in millions): Latin America For the Years Ended December 31, 2006 2005 2004 Revenue Revenue % of Total Revenue Revenue % of Total Revenue Revenue % of Total Revenue Latin America Generation $ 2,616 21 % $ 2,145 19 % $ 1,584 17 % Latin America Utilities 5,246 43 % 4,796 44 % 3,824 41 % Fiscal Year 2006 versus 2005 Revenue Generation revenue increased $471 million, or 22%, due to increased intercompany volume sales and contract energy prices from Tiete to Eletropaulo in Brazil, the acquisition of the controlling shares of Itabo (which resulted in full consolidation of Itabo beginning in June 2006) in the Dominican Republic and an increase in spot market and contract energy prices at Gener in Chile and Alicura and Parana in Argentina. Utilities revenue increased $450 million, or 9%, due to favorable foreign currency translation impacts, increased demand at EDC in Venezuela from new customers, increased demand at Eletropaulo primarily from increased volume for industrial and commercial customers due to improved economic conditions and increased tariff rates at CAESS/EEO in El Salvador. Fiscal Year 2005 versus 2004 Revenue Generation revenue increased $561 million, or 35% due to increased intercompany volume sales and contract energy prices from Tiete to Eletropaulo in Brazil, higher contract energy prices at Gener in Chile and increased volume at Alicura in Argentina and Gener. Utilities revenue increased $972 million, or 25% due to favorable foreign currency translation impacts, the recognition of a retroactive tariff increase as well as an increase in the average customer tariff due to a rate increase at Eletropaulo in Brazil in 2005. Fiscal Year 2006 versus 2005 Gross Margin The following table summarizes gross margin for the Generation and Utilities segments in Latin America for the periods indicated (in millions): Latin America For the Years Ended December 31, 2006 2005 2004 Gross Margin Gross Margin % of Total Gross Margin Gross Margin % of Total Gross Margin Gross Margin % of Total Gross Margin Latin America Generation $ 1,054 29 % $ 857 27 % $ 616 22 % Latin America Utilities 1,071 29 % 834 26 % 754 27 % Generation gross margin increased $197 million, or 23%, due to increased intercompany volume sales and contract energy prices from Tiete to Eletropaulo in Brazil, an increase in spot market and contract energy prices at Gener in Chile and the acquisition of the controlling shares of Itabo in the Dominican Republic, partially offset by higher purchased electricity and fuel prices at Uruguaiana in Brazil and higher transmission costs, regulator fees and unfavorable foreign exchange rates at Tiete in Brazil. 97 Utilities gross margin increased $237 million, or 28%, due to the recording of $192 million of gross bad debts reserve in the second quarter of 2005 related to the collectibility of certain municipal receivables at Eletropaulo and Sul in Brazil, favorable foreign exchange rates in Eletropaulo, a decrease in purchased electricity volume and prices at Eletropaulo, and favorable tariff rates at EDC in Venezuela. The increase in Utilities gross margin was partially offset by the increase for legal reserves at Eletropaulo and certain contingencies at EDC. Fiscal Year 2005 versus 2004 Gross Margin Generation gross margin increased $241 million, or 39%, due to higher contract energy prices at Gener in Chile, partially offset by increased purchased electricity and fuel volumes at Andres in the Dominican Republic, unfavorable foreign exchange rates at Gener and Tiete in Brazil and higher transmission costs at Gener. Utilities gross margin increased $80 million, or 11%, due to higher overall revenues and favorable foreign exchange rates at Eletropaulo in Brazil combined with increased volume at EDC in Venezuela. The increase in Utilities gross margin was partially offset by the recording of $192 million of gross bad debts reserve in the second quarter of 2005 related to the collectibility of certain municipal receivables at Eletropaulo and Sul in Brazil, increased transmissions costs and legal reserves at Eletropaulo. North America The following table summarizes revenue for our Generation and Utilities segments in North America for the periods indicated (in millions): North America For the Years Ended December 31, 2006 2005 2004 Revenue Revenue % of Total Revenue Revenue % of Total Revenue Revenue % of Total Revenue North America Generation $ 1,900 15 % $ 1,809 16 % $ 1,704 18 % North America Utilities 1,032 8 % 951 9 % 885 9 % Fiscal Year 2006 versus 2005 Revenue Generation revenue increased $91 million, or 5%, primarily due to higher spot market prices of $75 million in New York, increased charge rates for fuel and variable maintenance costs of $20 million in Puerto Rico, increased tariff rates and volume of $11 million at Deepwater in Texas primarily due to a new contract, a $9 million increase in sales of emission allowances in New York, higher volumes at Thames in Connecticut, and improved operating performance at Southland in California. These increases were partially offset by lower volume and an outage in 2006 at Merida III in Mexico. Utilities revenue increased $81 million, or 9%, primarily due to higher pricing at IPL in Indiana due to the pass through of higher fuel costs and an increase in costs recovered from a NOx compliance construction program, slightly offset by a decrease in quantity of kWh sold, due to a 20% decrease in the cooling degree days and a 10% decrease in heating degree days compared to 2005. 98 Fiscal Year 2005 versus 2004 Revenue Generation revenue increased $105 million, or 6%, primarily due to higher prices of $43 million and an increase in the sale of emission allowances at our business in New York, higher contract prices of $33 million at Merida III in Mexico, higher prices of $24 million in Puerto Rico, and favorable currency impacts of $9 million in Mexico. These increases were partially offset by a decrease in contract price at Shady Point in Oklahoma and outages at Thames in Connecticut. Utilities revenue increased $66 million, or 7%, primarily due to increase in tariffs and volume at IPL in Indiana. The volume increase was primarily due to a 37% increase in cooling degree days compared to 2004, as well as an increased customer base of approximately 4,300 customers or 1% during 2005. Fiscal Year 2006 versus 2005 Gross Margin The following table summarizes gross margin for the Generation and Utilities segments in North America for the periods indicated (in millions): North America For the Years Ended December 31, 2006 2005 2004 Gross Margin Gross Margin % of Total Gross Margin Gross Margin % of Total Gross Margin Gross Margin % of Total Gross Margin North America Generation $ 556 15 % $ 590 18 % $ 590 23 % North America Utilities 277 8 % 301 9 % 303 11 % Generation gross margin decreased $34 million, or 6%, primarily due to outages in 2006 at Warrior Run in Maryland, Hawaii, Ironwood in Pennsylvania and several plants in New York, as well as a scheduled reduction in pricing of the power purchase agreements for our Hawaii plant. The decrease was partly off set by higher energy margins and sales of emission allowances by $9 million in New York and increased contract prices at Deepwater in Texas. Utilities gross margin decreased $24 million, or 8%, primarily due to higher maintenance costs at IPL in Indiana due to a scheduled outage on one of its large based load coal fired units that coincided with a project to enhance environmental emission technology to significantly reduce emissions as well as increased emissions allowances. Fiscal Year 2005 versus 2004 Gross Margin Generation gross margin was flat at $590 million with an increase in sale of emissions allowances in New York of $43 million, an increase in contract prices at Deepwater in Texas and higher volume at Warrior Run in Maryland and our Hawaii plant. These increases were partly offset by a decrease in contract pricing at Shady Point in Oklahoma, outages incurred at Thames in Connecticut, and lower dispatch at Southland in California. Utilities gross margin decreased $2 million or 1% primarily due to IPL in Indiana having produced a greater portion of their electricity during 2005 using peaking unit resources as a result of higher electricity demand caused by higher average temperatures in the third quarter of 2005 as well as an increase in market price of purchased power. 99 Europe & Africa The following table summarizes revenue for the Generation and Utilities segments in Europe & Africa for the periods indicated (in millions): Europe & Africa For the Years Ended December 31, 2006 2005 2004 Revenue Revenue % of Total Revenue Revenue % of Total Revenue Revenue % of Total Revenue Europe/Africa Generation $ 852 7 % $ 735 7 % $ 697 7 % Europe/Africa Utilities 571 5 % 505 5 % 463 5 % Fiscal Year 2006 versus 2005 Revenue Generation revenue increased $117 million, or 16%, primarily due to increased volume sales and contract energy prices at Tisza II in Hungary and at Ekibastuz in Kazakhstan, increased sales in Kazakhstan through our centralized trading office in Altai, and CO 2 emission allowance sales by Tisza II in Hungary and Bohemia in the Czech Republic. Utilities revenue increased $66 million, or 13%, primarily due to increased demand and tariff rates at Sonel in Cameroon and at our businesses in the Ukraine. Fiscal Year 2005 versus 2004 Revenue Generation revenue increased $38 million, or 5%, primarily due to increased volume sales and contract energy prices at both Borsod and Tisza II in Hungary and at Ekibastuz in Kazakhstan and increased sales in Kazakhstan through our centralized trading office in Altai. Utilities revenue increased $42 million, or 9%. Excluding the impact of foreign currency translation, Utilities revenue increased primarily due to higher volume sales and tariff rates at our businesses in the Ukraine and higher volumes at Sonel in Cameroon. Fiscal Year 2006 versus 2005 Gross Margin The following table summarizes gross margin for the Generation and Utilities segments in Europe & Africa for the periods indicated (in millions): Europe & Africa For the Years Ended December 31, 2006 2005 2004 Gross Margin Gross Margin % of Total Gross Margin Gross Margin % of Total Gross Margin Gross Margin % of Total Gross Margin Europe/Africa Generation $ 249 7 % $ 186 6 % $ 182 7 % Europe/Africa Utilities 112 3 % 112 4 % 60 2 % Generation gross margin increased $63 million, or 34%, primarily due to higher pricing on improved volumes at Ekibastuz and our centralized trading office Altai, both in Kazakhstan, margin on CO 2 emission allowance sales by Tisza II in Hungary and Bohemia in the Czech Republic. Utilities gross margin was flat compared to the prior year primarily due to higher expenses at Sonel in Cameroon, offset by improved volume sales and tariff rates for Sonel and our businesses in Ukraine. Fiscal Year 2005 versus 2004 Gross Margin Generation gross margin increased $4 million, or 2%, primarily due to higher sales volumes at Tisza II in Hungary, partially offset by increased costs at the Maikuben coal mine in Kazakhstan. 100 Utilities gross margin increased $52 million, or 87%, primarily due to higher overall revenues, better demand and lower fixed expenses at Sonel in Cameroon. Asia The following table summarizes revenue for the Generation segment in Asia for the periods indicated (in millions): Asia/Middle East For the Years Ended December 31, 2006 2005 2004 Revenue Revenue % of Total Revenue Revenue % of Total Revenue Revenue % of Total Revenue Asia/Middle East Generation $ 840 7 % $ 642 6 % $ 570 6 % Fiscal Year 2006 versus 2005 Revenue Asia revenues increased $198 million, or 31%, to $840 million in 2006 from $642 million in 2005. Excluding the estimated impacts of foreign currency translation, revenues would have remained constant at 31% from 2005 to 2006. The Asia business consists entirely of Generation revenue. Revenues increased primarily due to increased dispatch of approximately $150 million at the two Pakistan power generation plants, Lal Pir and Pak Gen, as well as $31 million of improvements at Kelanitissa primarily due to favorable dispatch which accounted for $16 million of the increase and increased rates which accounted for $15 million of that increase. Fiscal Year 2005 versus 2004 Revenue Asia Generation revenue increased $72 million, or 13%, to $642 million in 2005 from $570 million in 2004. Excluding the estimated impacts of foreign currency translation, revenues would have remained constant at 13% from 2004 to 2005. Revenue increased primarily due to increased volumes at Ras Laffan in Qatar of $35 million; at Kelanitissa in Sri Lanka for $12 million; and at Lal Pir in Pakistan for $8 million. Fiscal Year 2006 versus 2005 Gross Margin The following table summarizes gross margin for the Generation segment in Asia for the periods indicated (in millions): Asia/Middle East For the Years Ended December 31, 2006 2005 2004 Gross Margin Gross Margin % of Total Gross Margin Gross Margin % of Total Gross Margin Gross Margin % of Total Gross Margin Asia/Middle East Generation $ 255 8 % $ 284 10 % $ 252 10 % The gross margin of Asia decreased $29 million, or 10%, to $255 million in 2006 from $284 million in 2005. Gross margins decreased primarily due to a $16.4 million increase in unfavorable variable operating and maintenance costs and $5.5 million of increases associated with a rural grid fund tax. 101 Fiscal Year 2005 versus 2004 Gross Margin Gross margin increased $32 million, or 13%, to $284 million in 2005 from $252 million in 2004. Generation gross margin increased $32 million, or 13%, primarily due to improved volume in the Middle East markets of $53 million, which was partially offset by an increase in unfavorable rate variances and depreciation of $17 million and $8 million respectively. Corporate and Other Expense Corporate and other expenses include general and administrative expenses related to corporate staff functions and/or initiatives primarily executive management, finance, legal, human resources, information systems and certain development costs which are not allocable to our business segments. In addition, this line item includes net operating results from other businesses which are immaterial for the purposes of separate segment disclosure and,the effects of eliminating transactions, such as management fee arrangements and self-insurance charges, between the operating segments and corporate. Corporate and other expenses increased $58 million, or 30.5%, to $248 million in 2006 from $190 million 2005. The increase is primarily due to increases in higher corporate development spending primarily in support of our Alternative Energy and Latin American businesses. Corporate and other expenses increased $43 million, or 29.3%, to $190 million in 2005 from $147 million in 2004. This increase was primarily the result of higher professional and consulting fees associated with the restatement of the company financial statements as well as increased compensation costs. For both years ended December 31, 2006 and 2005, Corporate and Other were 2% of total revenues. Interest expense Interest expense decreased $91 million, or 5%, to $1,802 million in 2006 from $1,893 million in 2005. Interest expense decreased primarily due to the benefits of debt retirements principally in the U.S., Brazil, Venezuela, and the Dominican Republic, lower interest rates at certain of our businesses, and decreased amortization of deferred financing costs, offset by negative impacts from foreign currency translation in Brazil. Interest expense decreased $27 million, or 1%, to $1,893 million in 2005 from $1,920 million in 2004. Interest expense decreased primarily due to the benefits of debt retirements principally in the U.S. and Venezuela and lower interest rate hedge related costs, offset by negative impacts from foreign currency translation in Brazil. Interest income Interest income increased $48 million, or 12%, to $443 million in 2006 from $395 million in 2005. Interest income increased primarily due to favorable foreign currency translation on the Brazilian Real and higher cash and short-term investment balances at certain of our subsidiaries. Interest income increased $112 million, or 40%, to $395 million in 2005 from $283 million in 2004. Interest income increased primarily due to favorable foreign currency translation on the Brazilian Real and higher cash and short-term investment balances at certain of our subsidiaries combined with higher short-term interest rates. 102 Other income Years Ended December 31, 2006 2005 2004 (in millions) Gain on extinguishment of liabilities $ 45 $ 82 $ 72 Gain on sale of assets 19 12 14 Insurance proceeds 13 11 Legal/dispute settlement 1 10 11 Other 37 56 60 Total other income $ 115 $ 171 $ 157 Other income decreased $56 million to $115 million in 2006 from $171 million in 2005. Other income decreased primarily due to activity at our Brazilian subsidiaries, including the expiration of a tax liability of $70 million and a gain related to the determination of the collectibility of the Sao Paulo municipality agreement in 2005. Other income increased $14 million to $171 million in 2005 from $157 million in 2004. Other income increased primarily due to the expiration of a tax liability in Brazil during 2005 coupled with gains on liability and debt extinguishments at one of the Company subsidiaries in Latin America and one in Europe and Africa. Other expense Years Ended December 31, 2006 2005 2004 (in millions) Loss on extinguishment of liabilities $ (181 ) $ (17 ) $ (36 ) Write-down of disallowed regulatory assets (36 ) Legal/dispute settlement (30 ) (30 ) (5 ) Loss on sale and disposal of assets (28 ) (53 ) (26 ) Marked-to-market loss on commodity derivatives (5 ) Other (33 ) (32 ) (51 ) Total other expense $ (308 ) $ (132 ) $ (123 ) Other expense increased $176 million to $308 million in 2006 from $132 million in 2005. Other expense increased primarily due to losses associated with the early extinguishment of debt at several of our Latin American businesses and write-down of disallowed regulatory assets at one of our subsidiaries in Brazil. Other expense increased $9 million to $132 million in 2005 from $123 million in 2004. Other expense increased primarily due to higher losses on sales and disposals of assets at one of our subsidiaries in Brazil and increased legal settlement costs at the parent company and one of our North American subsidiaries in 2005, offset by higher losses related to equity swap agreements to retire debt at the parent company in 2004. Asset Impairment Expense As discussed in Note 17 to the consolidated financial statements, asset impairment expense for the year ended 2006 was $29 million and consisted primarily of the following: During the fourth quarter of 2006, there was a pre-tax impairment charge of $6 million related to AES China Generating Co. Ltd. (Chigen) equity investment in Wuhu, a coal-fired plant located in China. The equity impairment in Wuhu was required as a result of a goodwill impairment analysis at Chigen. During the second quarter of 2006, there was a pre-tax impairment charge of $11 million related to 103 AES Ironwood, a gas-fired combined cycle generation plant located in the United States. The fixed asset impairment was caused by a forced outage which was necessary in order to repair a damaged combustion turbine. Asset impairment expense for the year 2005 was $16 million and consisted primarily of the following: During the third quarter of 2005, there was a pre-tax impairment charge of $6 million related to Totem Gas Storage, LLC (Totem). The investment asset impairment was due to AES notification from the sole managing member intention to dissolve, liquidate, and terminate Totem. This charge, combined with a $1.5 million impairment recognized in the fourth quarter of 2004, represented a complete write-down of AES investment in Totem. During the first quarter of 2005, there was a pre-tax impairment charge of $5 million related to AES Southland (Southland). The fixed asset impairment was booked when, in the course of evaluating the impairment of long lived assets in accordance with SFAS No. 144, it was determined that the net book value of the peaker units were not fully realizable. During the fourth quarter of 2005, there was an additional pre-tax impairment charge of $2.5 million which represented the remaining carrying value of these units. Asset impairment expense for the year 2004 was $50 million and consisted primarily of the following: During the fourth quarter of 2004, there was a pre-tax impairment charge of $15 million related to Aixi, a coal-fired power plant located in China. The investment asset impairment was booked when, in the course of evaluating the impairment of long lived assets in accordance with SFAS No. 144, it was determined that the net book value of this facility was not fully realizable due to circumstances surrounding its operational performance. During the fourth quarter of 2004, there was a pre-tax impairment charge of $25 million related to Deepwater, a petroleum coke-fire cogeneration plant. The investment asset impairment of capitalized costs associated with emission-related improvements was recorded when it was determined that a different strategy would be used to reduce emissions and that the improvements had no alternative uses. Gain (loss) on sale of investments Gain on sale of investments was $98 million in 2006 and was primarily comprised of the following: In March 2006, we sold our equity investment in a power project in Canada (Kingston) for a net gain of $87 million. In September 2006, we transferred Infoenergy, a wholly owned AES subsidiary, to Brasiliana for a net gain of $10 million. Brasiliana is 54% owned by BNDES, but controlled by AES. This transaction was part of the Company agreement with BNDES to terminate the Sul Option. There was no gain on sale of investments in 2005 and a $1 million loss on sale of investments in 2004. Loss on sale of subsidiary stock As discussed in Note 14 to the Consolidated Financial Statements, in September 2006, Brasiliana wholly owned subsidiary, Transg sold a 33% economic ownership in Eletropaulo, a regulated electric utility in Brazil. Despite the reduction in economic ownership, there was no change in Brasiliana voting interest in Eletropaulo and Brasiliana continues to control Eletropaulo. Brasiliana received $522 million in net proceeds on the sale. On October 5, 2006 Transg sold an additional 5% economic ownership in Eletropaulo for $80 million. For the twelve months ended December 31, 2006, AES recognized a pre-tax loss of $539 million as a result of the recognition of previously deferred currency translation losses. In December 2004, an IPO of 35% of the shares of Barka was completed pursuant to the terms of the power and water purchase agreement. For the twelve months ended December 31, 2004, AES recognized a pre-tax loss of $24 million as a result of the sale of Barka shares. 104 Foreign currency transaction losses on net monetary position The following table summarizes the losses on the Company net monetary position from foreign currency transaction activities. Years Ended December 31, 2006 2005 2004 (in millions) AES Corporation $ (17 ) $ 10 $ (8 ) Argentina (3 ) (5 ) (6 ) Brazil (56 ) (96 ) (58 ) Venezuela 12 44 (25 ) Dominican Republic 1 (28 ) Pakistan (18 ) (22 ) (17 ) Chile (20 ) (3 ) Kazakhstan 1 (4 ) 14 Columbia (1 ) (5 ) (8 ) Cameroon 2 (4 ) 5 Other 3 (2 ) Total(1) $ (77 ) $ (101 ) $ (136 ) (1) Includes $(58) million, $(122) million and $(97) million of losses on foreign currency derivative contracts for December 30, 2006, 2005 and 2004, respectively. The Company recognized foreign currency transaction losses of $77 million in 2006 compared to losses from foreign currency transactions of $101 million in 2005. The $24 million decrease in losses for 2006 as compared to 2005 was primarily related to lower foreign currency transaction losses in Brazil and Chile offset by lower foreign currency transaction gains in Venezuela and increased foreign currency transaction losses at the parent company. Foreign currency movements typically result from changes in U.S. Dollar exchange rates at subsidiaries whose functional currency is not the U.S. Dollar, as well as gains or losses on monetary assets and liabilities denominated in a currency other than the functional currency of the entity and gains or losses on foreign currency derivatives. The reduction in foreign currency transaction losses in Brazil is primarily due to a reduction in derivative transaction losses as a result of the reduction in U.S. Dollar denominated debt balances at Eletropaulo partially offset by a decrease in foreign currency transaction gains associated with U.S. Dollar denominated debt balances as the Brazilian Real appreciated 13% in 2006 as compared to 2005. The reduction in foreign currency transaction losses in Chile is primarily due to the devaluation of the Chilean Peso by 4% in 2006 versus 2005, resulting in decreased losses on foreign currency derivative contracts at Gener. The reduction in foreign currency transaction gains in Venezuela is primarily due to the 11% devaluation of the Venezuelan Bolivar in 2005 compared to minimal change in 2006. When the Venezuelan Bolivar devalues, gains are recognized related to the remeasurement of Bolivar denominated monetary liabilities, including debt. Thus, lower foreign currency transaction gains of $12 million were realized in 2006 versus $44 million in 2005 as a result of minimal change of the Bolivar in 2006. The Company recognized foreign currency transaction losses of $101 million in 2005 compared to losses from foreign currency transactions of $136 million in 2004. The $35 million decrease in losses for 2005 as compared to 2004 was primarily related to the gains in Venezuela and the Dominican Republic partially offset by losses in Brazil and Chile. Foreign currency transaction losses decreased primarily due to lower annual devaluation in 2005 of the Venezuelan Bolivar of 10.7% compared to 16.7% in 2004 contributing to $69 million of the change over the year. The Dominican Peso devalued 11.3% in 2005 as 105 compared to a 31.2% appreciation in 2004 contributing to $29 million of the change year over year partially related to one of our Dominican businesses which has a net monetary liability position denominated in the Dominican Peso. The Brazilian Real appreciated 11.7% during 2005 compared to 7.5% in 2004 offsetting the overall decrease in foreign currency losses by $38 million. The Chilean Peso appreciated 15.9% during 2005 compared to no change in 2004. The appreciation of the Chilean Peso increased losses of foreign currency derivative contracts in our Chilean businesses offsetting the overall decrease in foreign currency losses by $17 million. Equity in earnings of affiliates Equity in earnings of affiliates increased $2 million, or 3%, to $72 million in 2006 from $70 million in 2005. The increase was primarily due to the settlement of a legal claim in 2006 related to AES Barry, an equity method investment of AES during the first quarter of 2006, and higher earnings at several affiliates in Latin America. The increase was offset by the impact of increased losses at Cartagena, an equity method investment in Spain, in 2006 as compared to 2005. Equity in earnings of affiliates increased $7 million, or 11%, to $70 million in 2005 from $63 million in 2004. The increase was primarily due to a plant fire causing lower earnings in 2004 at our affiliate in Canada, improved operations from our affiliates in India and the Netherlands, partially offset by reduced earnings due to higher coal prices at our affiliates in China. Income taxes Income tax expense related to continuing operations decreased $122 million to $403 million in 2006 from $525 million in 2005. The Company effective tax rates were 31% for 2006 and 36% for 2005. The reduction in the 2006 effective tax rate was due, in part, to the second quarter 2006 release of a $43 million valuation allowance at the Company Brazilian subsidiary, Eletropaulo, related to its deferred tax assets on certain pension obligations, a decrease in U.S. taxes on distributions from certain non-U.S. subsidiaries due to recent changes in tax laws, and the sale of Kingston in the first quarter of 2006, the gain on which was not taxable. Income tax expense related to continuing operations increased $145 million to $525 million in 2005 from $380 million in 2004. The Company effective tax rates were 36% for 2005 and 44% for 2004. The reduction in the 2005 effective tax rate was due, in part, to the reduction of taxes imposed on earnings of and distributions from the Company foreign subsidiaries and adjustments derived from the Company 2004 income tax returns filed in 2005. Minority interest Minority interest expense, net of tax, increased $241 million to $610 million in 2006 from $369 million in 2005. The increase is primarily due to higher earnings from our Brazilian companies offset by a decrease in the third quarter of 2006 in our economic ownership in Eletropaulo from 34% to 16%. We entered into a series of transactions to sell a portion of our shares in Eletropaulo as part of the restructuring of Brasiliana. See Note 14 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for a further discussion of the sale of Eletropaulo shares and Brasiliana restructuring. Minority interest expense, net of tax, increased $158 million to $369 million in 2005 from $211 million in 2004. The increase is primarily due to higher earnings from our subsidiaries in Brazil and Cameroon and the 2004 sale of our interest in Oasis. Discontinued operations As discussed in Note 20 to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K; during 2006 we discontinued certain of our operations including Eden, a regulated utility located in Argentina, AES Indian Queens Power Limited and AES Indian Queens Operations Limited, collectively 106 IQP , which is an Open Cycle Gas Turbine, located in the U.K. Income from operations of discontinued businesses, net of tax, was $11 million in 2006. In May 2006, the Company reached an agreement to sell 100% of its interest in Eden. Governmental approval of the transaction is still pending in Argentina, but the Company has determined that the sale is probable at this time. Therefore, Eden, a wholly-owned subsidiary of AES, has been classified as held for sale and reflected as such on the face of the financial statements. The Company recognized a $62 million impairment charge to adjust the carrying value of Eden assets to their estimated net realizable value. The impairment expense is included in the 2006 loss from disposal of discontinued businesses line item on the financial statements. In September 2006, the Company completed the sale of IQP. Proceeds from the sale were $28 million in cash and the buyer assumption of debt of $30 million. The Company recognized a gain on disposal of discontinued businesses of $5 million. The results of operations of IQP and the associated gain on disposal are reflected in the discontinued operations line items on the financial statements. In 2005, income from operations of discontinued businesses, net of tax, was $34 million. Income from operations of Eden and IQP totaled approximately $3 million for 2005. Additionally, a reversal of approximately $31 million was recorded in the third quarter of 2005 at Eden, related to the release of valuation allowance previously recorded against its net deferred tax assets. Loss from operations of discontinued businesses, net of tax, was $59 million in 2004. This loss was offset by a gain on disposal of discontinued businesses of $91 million during the year. Businesses sold during 2004 included Whitefield, AES Communications Bolivia, Colombia I, Ede Este, Wolf Hollow, Carbones Internacionales del Cesar S.A. and Granite Ridge. These entities were recorded in discontinued operations in prior years. Extraordinary item As discussed in Note 6 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K, in May 2006, AES purchased an additional 25% interest in Itabo, a power generation business located in the Dominican Republic for approximately $23 million. Prior to May, the Company held a 25% interest in Itabo, through its Gener subsidiary, and had accounted for the investment using the equity method of accounting with a corresponding investment balance reflected in the Investments in and advances to affiliates line item on the consolidated balance sheets. As a result of the transaction, the Company consolidates Itabo and, therefore, the investment balance has been reclassified to the appropriate line items on the consolidated balance sheets with a corresponding minority interest liability for the remaining 50% interest not owned by AES. The Company realized an after-tax extraordinary gain of $21 million as a result of the transaction due to an excess of the fair value of the noncurrent assets over the purchase price. Capital Resources And Liquidity Overview We are a holding company that conducts all of our operations through subsidiaries. We have, to the extent achievable, utilized non-recourse debt to fund a significant portion of the capital expenditures and investments required to construct and acquire our electric power plants, distribution companies and related assets. This type of financing is non-recourse to other subsidiaries and affiliates and to us (as the parent company), and is generally secured by the capital stock, physical assets, contracts and cash flow of the related subsidiary or affiliate. At December 31, 2006, we had $4.8 billion of recourse debt and $11.6 billion of non-recourse debt outstanding. For more information on our long-term debt see Note 8 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K. 107 In addition to the non-recourse debt, if available, we, as the parent company, provide a portion, or in certain instances all, of the remaining long-term financing or credit required to fund development, construction or acquisition. These investments have generally taken the form of equity investments or loans, which are subordinated to the project non-recourse loans. We generally obtain the funds for these investments from our cash flows from operations and/or the proceeds from our issuances of debt, common stock, and other securities as well as proceeds from the sales of assets. For example in March 2006, AES sold its interest in Kingston for $110 million. Similarly, in certain of our businesses, we may provide financial guarantees or other credit support for the benefit of lenders or counterparties who have entered into contracts for the purchase or sale of electricity with our subsidiaries. In such circumstances, if a subsidiary defaults on its payment or supply obligation, we will be responsible for the subsidiary obligations up to the amount provided for in the relevant guarantee or other credit support. We intend to continue to seek where possible non-recourse debt financing in connection with the assets or businesses that our affiliates or we may develop, construct or acquire. However, depending on market conditions and the unique characteristics of individual businesses, non-recourse debt may not be available or may not be available on economically attractive terms. If we decide not to provide any additional funding or credit support to a subsidiary that is under construction or has near-term debt payment obligations and that subsidiary is unable to obtain additional non-recourse debt, such subsidiary may become insolvent and we may lose our investment in such subsidiary. Additionally, if any of our subsidiaries lose a significant customer, the subsidiary may need to restructure the non-recourse debt financing. If such subsidiary is unable to successfully complete a restructuring of the non-recourse debt, we may lose our investment in such subsidiary. As a result of AES parent below-investment-grade rating, counter-parties may be unwilling to accept our general unsecured commitments to provide credit support. Accordingly, with respect to both new and existing commitments, we may be required to provide some other form of assurance, such as a letter of credit, to backstop or replace our credit support. We may not be able to provide adequate assurances to such counterparties. In addition, to the extent we are required and able to provide letters of credit or other collateral to such counterparties, this will reduce the amount of credit available to us to meet our other liquidity needs. At December 31, 2006, we had provided outstanding financial and performance related guarantees or other credit support commitments to or for the benefit of our subsidiaries, which were limited by the terms of the agreements, in an aggregate of approximately $995 million (including those collateralized by letters of credit and other obligations discussed below). Management believes that cash on hand, along with cash generated through operations, and our financing availability will be sufficient to fund normal operations, capital expenditures, and debt service requirements. At December 31, 2006, we had $461 million in letters of credit outstanding, which operate to guarantee performance relating to certain project construction and development activities and subsidiary operations. All of these letters of credit were provided under our revolving credit facility and senior unsecured credit facility. We pay letter of credit fees ranging from 1.63% to 2.64% per annum on the outstanding amounts. In addition, we had $ 1 million in surety bonds outstanding at December 31, 2006. Many of our subsidiaries depend on timely and continued access to capital markets to manage their liquidity needs. The inability to raise capital on favorable terms, to refinance existing indebtedness or to fund operations and other commitments during times of political or economic uncertainty may adversely affect those subsidiaries financial condition and results of operations. In addition, changes in the timing of tariff increases or delays in the regulatory determinations under the relevant concessions could affect the cash flows and results of operations in our regulated utility businesses. 108 Capital Expenditures The Company spent $1.5 billion, $0.8 billion and $0.7 billion on capital expenditures in 2006, 2005 and 2004, respectively. We anticipate capital expenditures during 2007 to approximate between $2.3 to $2.5 billion excluding EDC, our former Venezuelan business. Planned capital expenditures include new project construction costs, environmental pollution control construction and expenditures for existing assets to increase their useful lives. Capital expenditures for 2007 are expected to be financed using internally generated cash provided by operations and project level financing and possibly debt or equity financing at the AES parent company level. Cash Flows Favorable/(Unfavorable) Years Ended December 31, 2006 2005 2004 06 vs. 05 05 vs. 04 (in millions) Operating $ 2,411 $ 2,154 $ 1,608 $ 257 $ 546 Investing (902 ) (661 ) (743 ) (241 ) 82 Financing (1,317 ) (1,339 ) (1,285 ) 22 (54 ) At December 31, 2006 we increased cash and cash equivalents by $254 million from December 31, 2005 to a total of $1,575 million. The change in cash balances was impacted by $2,411 million of cash provided by operating activities offset by a use of cash for investing and financing of $902 million and $1,317 million, respectively and the positive effect of foreign currency translation of cash balances of $62 million. Operating Activities Net cash provided by operating activities increased by $257 million to $2,411 million during 2006 compared to $2,154 million during 2005. This increase was primarily due to: $552 million increase in net earnings (adjusted for non cash items) and, $43 million of certain settlement proceeds, partially offset by, $211 million increase in cash taxes paid predominately by our Brazilian subsidiaries, higher long term compensation payments, and one-time cash inflow of $49 million received in the first quarter of 2005 by EDC, our Venezuelan subsidiary, related to a cancelled foreign exchange derivative instrument. The $895 million increase in adjustments to net income was primarily due to the reversal of non-cash adjustments for: a $470 million loss on the sale by Transgas of Eletropaulo shares; $147 million increased losses on debt extinguishment; an increase in minority interest expense of $238 million; $183 million higher reserves for various liabilities, including litigation adjustments for various Brazilian subsidiaries; partially offset by, $172 million decrease in the provision for deferred taxes; and $41 million increased earnings of affiliates. 109 The following table includes details of changes in operating assets and liabilities on the face of the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows: 2006 2005 Change (in millions) Decrease (increase) in accounts receivable $ 84 $ (29 ) $ 113 Increase in inventory (24 ) (70 ) 46 Decrease in prepaid expenses and other current assets 8 94 (86 ) Decrease in other assets 165 84 81 Decrease in accounts payable and accrued liabilities (400 ) (119 ) (281 ) (Decrease) increase in other liabilities (122 ) 45 (167 ) Total $ (289 ) $ 5 $ (294 ) Accounts receivable decreased in the current year primarily due to lower energy pricing at our New York plant. Inventory increased in the current year primarily due to seasonal increases and higher coal pricing at New York and IPL as well as an increase in copper pricing at EDC which is used for cabling. Other assets decreased in the current year due to a decrease in regulatory assets at Eletropaulo as a result of the recovery of energy related costs and a decrease in a long term receivable due from the Government of Cameroon, SONEL largest customer. These decreases were offset by an increase in long term customer receivables at Eletropaulo and a prepayment of an insurance premium at Maritza, in Bulgaria. Accounts payable and other current liabilities declined in the current year mainly due to the release of the SUL option, a decrease in accrued interest due to debt restructuring at Brasiliana and Eletropaulo and a decrease in swap payments due to lower energy pricing at New York. Other liabilities decreased in the current year primarily due to the decrease in pension liabilities at Eletropaulo, IPL, Sul, and EDC. Investing Activities Net cash used in 2006 for investing activities totaled $902 million compared to $661 million for 2005, an increase of $241 million. This increase was primarily attributable to the following: Capital expenditures increased $634 million to $1,460 million during 2006 compared to 2005 mainly due to increased spending of $245 million for the Maritza East 1 lignite-fired power plant in Bulgaria, $161 million for wind development projects at Buffalo Gap 2 in the U.S., $83 million primarily for pollution control technology projects at IPL in the U.S., $41 million primarily for the Greenidge and Westover clean coal projects at New York in the U.S., $37 million at EDC in Venezuela and $33 million at Sul in Brazil. Acquisitions-net of cash acquired totaled $19 million in 2006 and $85 million in 2005, a $66 million reduction over 2005. This included $13 million to acquire an additional 25% of Itabo in the Dominican Republic and approximately $5 million to acquire the remaining shares in Alicura located in Argentina. The $85 million spent in the prior year related to our wind development businesses: the purchase of SeaWest net assets and pre-construction costs for Buffalo Gap. Both operations are located in the U.S. Proceeds from the sale of businesses totaled $898 million in 2006 and $22 million in 2005, an increase of $876 million. The sales included $522 million from the sale by Transgas of Eletropaulo preferred shares and $80 million in a related sale by Brasiliana of its preferred shares in Eletropaulo, $123 million from the sale of approximately 7.6% of our shares in AES Gener, $110 million from the sale of our Kingston business in Canada, $33 million from the sale of unissued shares at EDC and $28 million from the sale of 110 Indian Queens. The proceeds in 2005 included the sale of a minority interest in Barka Holdings, Ltd. for $22 million. The purchase of short-term investments, net of sales, increased $502 million during 2006 as compared to the same period in 2005. These transactions included a $255 million increase in net purchases at Tiete in Brazil due to a change in investment strategy from investing in cash equivalents to Brazilian government bonds, a $158 million decrease in the net sale of investments at EDC due to the release of a collateral deposit on local debt, a $70 million increase in net purchases at Eletropaulo in Brazil, funded by the redemption of financial treasury bills and a $30 million increase in net purchases at Gener as the result of additional time deposits acquired. Restricted cash balances in 2006 increased $102 million over 2005 balances. This change was comprised of the following increases: $59 million at Ras Laffan in Qatar, $31 million at IPL, $30 million at Kilroot in the United Kingdom, $26 million at Southland in the U.S. and $17 million at Parana in Argentina. These increases were offset by decreases of $44 million at New York, $26 million at Eletropaulo in Brazil and $26 million at Panama. Proceeds from the sales of emission allowances totaled $82 million in 2006, a $40 million increase over 2005. Purchases of emission allowances totaled $77 million in 2006, a $58 million increase over 2005. These sales and purchases occurred primarily by businesses located in the U.S. and Europe. Included in the purchases during 2006 was a $45 million commitment to purchase Certified Emission Reduction (CER) credits from AgCert International ( AgCert ). AgCert is an alternative energy, Ireland-based company which uses agricultural sources to produce greenhouse gas emission offsets under the Kyoto protocol. Debt service reserves and other assets totaled $46 million in 2006, a $146 million decrease over the balance in 2005. This was mainly due to decreases of $45 million at Tiete, $42 million at EDC, $22 million at Eletropaulo, $21 million at Ebute in Nigeria, $13 million at Panama, $10 million at Southland and $8 million at Sonel in Africa. These decreases were offset by an increase at Ironwood for $17 million and at Hawaii for $11 million, both located in the U.S. Purchases of long-term available-for-sale securities includes $52 million related to an investment in AgCert in 2006. Financing Activities Net cash used in financing activities decreased by $22 million to $1,317 million during 2006 compared to $1,339 million during 2005. This change was attributable to a decrease in debt, net of issuances of $102 million an increase in contributions from minority interests of $124 million and an increase due to issuance of common stock of $52 million offset by an increase in distributions to minority interests of $149 million, an increase in payments for deferred financing of $65 million and an increase in payments for financed capital expenditures of $51 million. Debt issuances of recourse debt, non-recourse debt and revolving credit facilities, net during 2006 were $3,169 million compared to $1,768 million during 2005. This increase of $1,401 million was due to an increase in borrowings at Brasiliana in Brazil of $744 million, at Maritza in Bulgaria of $240 million, at Itabo in the Dominican Republic of $177 million, at Buffalo Gap 2 in the U.S. of $116 million and at Lal Pir in Pakistan of $64 million. In addition, there were refinancings at Sul in Brazil for $476 million, at Panama for $287 million and at IPL in the U.S. for $156 million as well as bond issuances at CAESS for $207 million and at CLESA for $77 million, both located in El Salvador. These increases were offset by a decrease in borrowings at Eletropaulo in Brazil of $618 million, at Andres in the Dominican Republic of $160 million, at EDC in Venezuela of $141 million, at Wind in the U.S. of $110 million and at Tiete in Brazil of $80 million. There was also a decrease in refinancing at Gener in Chile for $31 million. 111 Debt repayments during 2006 were $4,209 million compared to $2,910 million during 2005. The increase of $1,299 million was primarily due to repayments at Brasiliana for $1,032 million, at Sul for $446 million, at Panama for $281 million, at Tiete for $274 million, at CAESS for $175 million, at IPL for $130 million, at Buffalo Gap for $116 million, at Lal Pir for $57 million and at CLESA for $55 million. This increase was offset by a decrease in repayments at Eletropaulo of $594 million, at EDC of $408 million, at Andres of $112 million, at the parent of $108 million and at Gener of $58 million. Minority contributions during 2006 were $125 million compared to $1 million during 2005. This resulted in an increase of $124 million primarily due to Buffalo Gap in the U.S., which received a contribution from their tax equity partners of $117 million. Minority distributions were $335 million compared to $186 million during 2005. This increase of $149 million was primarily due to Tiete, which paid minority dividends of $170 million during 2006 compared to $66 million in 2005. Payments for deferred financing costs during 2006 were $86 million compared to $21 million during 2005. The $65 million increase in payments was primarily due to new financing at Maritza and refinancing at Sul. Financed capital expenditures increased $51 million during 2006 predominately at Buffalo Gap where we financed these acquisitions by paying for them over a period greater than three months. Contractual Obligations A summary of our contractual obligations, commitments and other liabilities as of December 31, 2006 is presented in the table below (in millions). Contractual Obligations Total Less than 1 year 1-3 years 4-5 years After 5 years Footnote Reference Debt Obligations (1) $ 16,345 $ 1,453 $ 2,639 $ 3,127 $ 9,126 8 Interest Payments on Long-Term Debt (2) 9,819 1,394 2,517 2,012 3,896 n/a Capital Lease Obligations (3) 10 4 5 1 10 Other Long-term Liabilities Reflected on AES Consolidated Balance Sheet under GAAP (4) 892 85 180 152 475 n/a Operating Lease Obligations (5) 178 17 30 22 109 10 Sale Leaseback Obligations (6) 1,316 63 126 134 993 10 Electricity Obligations (7) 23,389 1,430 3,204 3,568 15,187 10 Fuel Obligations (8) 10,509 1,020 1,902 1,554 6,033 10 Other (9) 3,374 1,234 1,058 263 819 10 Total $ 65,832 $ 6,700 $ 11,661 $ 10,833 $ 36,638 (1) Includes non-recourse debt and recourse debt presented on our consolidated financial statements. Non-recourse debt borrowings are not a direct obligation of AES, the parent company, and are primarily collateralized by the capital stock of the relevant subsidiary and in certain cases the physical assets of, and all significant agreements associated with, such subsidiaries. These non-recourse financings include structured project financings, acquisition financing, working capital facilities and all other consolidated debt of the subsidiaries. Recourse debt borrowings are the borrowings of AES, the parent company. Note 8 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K provides disclosure of these obligations. (2) Interest payments are estimated based on final maturity dates of debt securities outstanding at December 31, 2006 and do not reflect anticipated future refinancing, early redemptions, new debt issuances or certain interest on liabilities other than debt. Variable rate interest obligations are estimated based on rates as of December 31, 2006. 112 (3) Several AES subsidiaries lease operating and office equipment and vehicles. These leases have been recorded as capital leases in Property, Plant and Equipment within Electric Generation and Distribution Assets. Minimum contractual obligations include $2 million of imputed interest. (4) Other Long-Term Liabilities reflected on AES consolidated balance sheet under GAAP include only those amounts that are contractual obligations. These amounts do not include (1) current liabilities on the consolidated balance sheet, (2) any taxes or regulatory liabilities, (3) contingencies, (4) pension and other post retirement employee benefit liabilities (see Note 12 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K). (5) As of December 31, 2006, the Company was obligated under long-term non-cancelable operating leases, primarily for office rental and site leases. These amounts exclude amounts related to the sale/leaseback discussed below in item (6). (6) Sale/Leaseback Obligations - In May 1999, a subsidiary of the Company acquired six electric generating stations from New York State Electric and Gas ( NYSEG ). Concurrently, the subsidiary sold two of the plants to an unrelated third party for $666 million and simultaneously entered into a leasing arrangement with the unrelated party. This transaction has been accounted for as a sale/leaseback with operating lease treatment. (7) Operating subsidiaries of the Company have entered into contracts for the purchase of electricity from third parties. (8) Fuel Obligations - Operating subsidiaries of the Company have entered into various contracts for the purchase of fuel subject to termination only in certain limited circumstances. (9) Amounts relate to other contractual obligations where the Company has an agreement to purchase goods or services that is enforceable and legally binding on the Company that specifies all significant terms, including: fixed or minimum quantities to be purchased; fixed, minimum or variable price provisions; and the approximate timing of the transactions. These amounts exclude planned capital expenditures that are not contractually obligated. Parent Company Liquidity Because of the non-recourse nature of most of our indebtedness, The AES Corporation believes that unconsolidated parent company liquidity is an important measure of liquidity. Our principal sources of liquidity at the parent company level are: dividends and other distributions from our subsidiaries, including refinancing proceeds; proceeds from debt and equity financings at the parent company level, including borrowings under our credit facilities; and proceeds from asset sales Our cash requirements at the parent company level are primarily to fund: interest and preferred dividends; principal repayments of debt; acquisitions; construction commitments; other equity commitments; 113 taxes; and parent company overhead and development costs. Since 2002, The AES Corporation has undertaken various initiatives to improve the credit and risk profile of both the parent and the consolidated company while continuing to pursue disciplined growth. On March 3, 2006, The AES Corporation redeemed all of its outstanding 8.875% Senior Subordinated Debentures due 2027 (approximately $115 million aggregate principal amount). The redemption was made pursuant to the optional redemption provisions of the indenture governing the Debentures. The Debentures were redeemed at a redemption price equal to 100% of the principal amount thereof, plus a make-whole premium determined in accordance with the terms of the indenture, plus accrued and unpaid interest up to the redemption date. In December 2006, The AES Corporation exercised its right to increase the revolving credit facility by $100 million to a total of $750 million. As of December 31, 2006, there were no outstanding borrowings against the revolving credit facility. We had $88 million of letters of credit outstanding against the revolving credit facility and $662 million available under the revolving credit facility as of December 31, 2006. The AES Corporation entered into a $500 million senior unsecured credit facility agreement effective March 31, 2006. On May 1, 2006, The AES Corporation exercised its option to extend the total amount of the senior unsecured credit facility by an additional $100 million to a total of $600 million. At December 31, 2006, the Company had no outstanding borrowings under the senior unsecured credit facility. The AES Corporation had $373 million of letters of credit outstanding against the senior unsecured credit facility as of December 31, 2006. The credit facility is being used to support our ongoing share of construction obligations for AES Maritza East 1 and for general corporate purposes. The following table sets forth parent company liquidity as of December 31, for the periods indicated. Parent Company Liquidity 2006 2005 2004 (in millions) Cash and cash equivalents $ 1,575 $ 1,321 $ 1,154 Less: Cash and cash equivalents at subsidiaries 1,338 1,059 867 Parent cash and cash equivalents 237 262 287 Borrowing available under revolving credit facility 662 356 352 Borrowing available under senior unsecured credit facility 227 Cash at qualified holding companies 20 6 4 Total parent liquidity $ 1,146 $ 624 $ 643 Our parent recourse debt at year-end was approximately $4.8 billion, $4.9 billion, and $5.2 billion in 2006, 2005 and 2004, respectively. Our contingent contractual obligations were $995 million, $802 million, and $559 million at the end of 2006, 2005, and 2004, respectively. 114 The following table sets forth our parent company contingent contractual obligations as of December 31, 2006: Contingent Contractual obligations Amount Number of Agreements Exposure Range for Each Agreement (in millions) Guarantees $ 533 $ 32 <$1 - $100 Letters of credit under the revolving credit facility 88 12 <$1 - $26 Letters of credit under the senior unsecured credit facility 373 8 <$1 - $333 Surety bonds 1 1 <$1 Total $ 995 $ 53 We have a varied portfolio of performance related contingent contractual obligations. These obligations are designed to cover potential risks and only require payment if certain targets are not met or certain contingencies occur. The risks associated with these obligations include change of control, construction cost overruns, subsidiary default, political risk, tax indemnities, spot market power prices, supplies support and liquidated damages under power sales agreements for projects in development, under construction and operating. While we do not expect that we will be required to fund any material amounts under these contingent contractual obligations during 2007 or beyond, many of the events which would give rise to such an obligations are beyond our control. We can provide no assurance that we will be able to fund our obligations under these contingent contractual obligations if we are required to make substantial payments thereunder. While we believe that our sources of liquidity will be adequate to meet our needs through the end of 2007, this belief is based on a number of material assumptions, including, without limitation, assumptions about our ability to access the capital markets, the operating and financial performance of our subsidiaries, exchange rates, power market pool prices, and the ability of our subsidiaries to pay dividends. In addition, our subsidiaries ability to declare and pay cash dividends to us (at the parent company level) is subject to certain limitations contained in loans, governmental provisions and other agreements. We can provide no assurance that these sources will be available when needed or that our actual cash requirements will not be greater than anticipated. We have met our interim needs for shorter-term and working capital financing at the parent company level with our revolving credit facility and senior unsecured credit facility. See Item 1A. Risk Factors The AES Corporation is a holding company and its ability to make payments on its outstanding indebtedness, including its public debt securities, is dependent upon the receipt of funds from its subsidiaries by way of dividends, fees, interest, loans or otherwise Various debt instruments at the parent company level, including our senior secured credit facilities, contain certain restrictive covenants. The covenants provide for, among other items: limitations on other indebtedness, liens, investments and guarantees; restrictions on dividends and redemptions and payments of unsecured and subordinated debt and the use of proceeds; restrictions on mergers and acquisitions, sales of assets, leases, transactions with affiliates and off balance sheet and derivative arrangements; maintenance of certain financial ratios; and financial and other reporting requirements. 115 Non-Recourse Debt Financing While the lenders under our non-recourse debt financings generally do not have direct recourse to the parent company, defaults thereunder can still have important consequences for our results of operations and liquidity, including, without limitation: reducing our cash flows as the subsidiary will typically be prohibited from distributing cash to the parent level during the time period of any default; triggering our obligation to make payments under any financial guarantee, letter of credit or other credit support we have provided to or on behalf of such subsidiary; causing us to record a loss in the event the lender forecloses on the assets; and triggering defaults in our outstanding debt at the parent level. For example, our senior secured credit facilities and outstanding debt securities at the parent level include events of default for certain bankruptcy related events involving material subsidiaries. In addition, our revolving credit agreement at the parent level includes events of default related to payment defaults and accelerations of outstanding debt of material subsidiaries. Some of our subsidiaries are currently in default with respect to all or a portion of their outstanding indebtedness. The total debt classified as current in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets related to such defaults was $245 million at December 31, 2006, all of which is non-recourse debt. None of the subsidiaries that are currently in default are owned by subsidiaries that currently meet the applicable definition of materiality in AES corporate debt agreements in order for such defaults to trigger an event of default or permit acceleration under such indebtedness. However, as a result of additional dispositions of assets, other significant reductions in asset carrying values or other matters in the future that may impact our financial position and results of operations, it is possible that one or more of these subsidiaries could fall within the definition of a material subsidiary and thereby upon an acceleration trigger an event of default and possible acceleration of the indebtedness under the AES parent company outstanding debt securities. Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements In May 1999, one of our subsidiaries acquired six electric generating plants from New York State Electric and Gas. Concurrently, the subsidiary sold two of the plants to an unrelated third party for $666 million and simultaneously entered into a leasing arrangement with the unrelated party. We have accounted for this transaction as a sale/leaseback transaction with operating lease treatment. Accordingly, we have not recorded these assets on our books and we expense periodic lease payments, which amounted to $54 million in 2005, as incurred. The lease obligations bear an imputed interest rate of approximately 9% which approximates fair market value. We are not subject to any additional liabilities or contingencies if the arrangement terminates, and we believe that the dissolution of the off-balance sheet arrangement would have minimal effects on our operating cash flows. The terms of the lease include restrictive covenants such as the maintenance of certain coverage ratios. Historically, the plants have satisfied the restrictive covenants of the lease, and there are no known trends or uncertainties that would indicate that the lease will be terminated early. See Note 10 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K for a more complete discussion of this transaction. IPL, a subsidiary of the Company, formed IPL Funding Corporation ( IPL Funding ) in 1996 as a special-purpose entity to purchase retail receivables originated by IPL pursuant to a receivables sale agreement entered into with IPL. At the same time, IPL Funding entered into a purchase facility (the Purchase Facility ) with unrelated parties (the Purchasers ) pursuant to which the Purchasers agree to purchase from IPL Funding, on a revolving basis, up to $50 million, of interests in the pool of receivables 116 purchased from IPL. As collections reduce accounts receivable included in the pool, IPL Funding sells ownership interests in additional receivables acquired from IPL to return the ownership interests sold up to a maximum of $50 million, as permitted by the Purchase Facility. During 2006, the Purchase Facility was extended through May 29, 2007. IPL Funding is included in the consolidated financial statements of IPL. Accounts receivable on the accompanying consolidated balance sheets of IPALCO are stated net of the $50 million sold. IPL retains servicing responsibilities for its role as a collection agent on the amounts due on the sold receivables. However, the Purchasers assume the risk of collection on the purchased receivables without recourse to IPL in the event of a loss. While no direct recourse to IPL exists, it risks loss in the event collections are not sufficient to allow for full recovery of its retained interests. No servicing asset or liability is recorded since the servicing fee paid to IPL approximates a market rate. The carrying values of the retained interest is determined by allocating the carrying value of the receivables between the assets sold and the interests retained based on relative fair value. The key assumptions in estimating fair value are credit losses, the selection of discount rates, and expected receivables turnover rate. As a result of short accounts receivable turnover period and historically low credit losses, the impact of these assumptions have not been significant to the fair value. The hypothetical effect on the fair value of the retained interests assuming both a 10% and a 20% unfavorable variation in credit losses or discount rates is not material due to the short turnover of receivables and historically low credit loss history. The losses recognized on the sales of receivables were $3 million, $2 million and $1 million for 2006, 2005 and 2004, respectively. These losses are included in Other operating expense on the consolidated statements of income. The amount of the losses recognized depends on the previous carrying amount of the financial assets involved in the transfer, allocated between the assets sold and the interests that continue to be held by the transferor based on their relative fair value at the date of transfer, and the proceeds received. There are no proceeds from new securitizations for each of 2006, 2005 and 2004. Servicing fees of $0.6 million were paid for each of 2006, 2005 and 2004. IPL and IPL Funding provide certain indemnities to the Purchasers, including indemnification in the event that there is a breach of representations and warranties made with respect to the purchased receivables. IPL Funding and IPL each have agreed to indemnify the Purchasers on an after-tax basis for any and all damages, losses, claims, liabilities, penalties, taxes, costs and expenses at any time imposed on or incurred by the indemnified parties arising out of or otherwise relating to the purchase facility, subject to certain limitations as defined in the Purchase Facility. Under the Purchase Facility, if IPL fails to maintain certain financial covenants regarding interest coverage and debt-to-capital ratios, it would constitute a termination event. As of December 31, 2006, IPL was in compliance with such covenants. As a result of IPL current credit rating, the facility agent has the ability to (i) replace IPL as the collection agent; and (ii) declare a lock-box event. Under a lock-box event or a termination event, the facility agent has the ability to require all proceeds of purchased receivables of IPL to be directed to lock-box accounts within 45 days of notifying IPL. A termination event would also (i) give the facility agent the option to take control of the lock-box account, and (ii) give the Purchasers the option to discontinue the purchase of additional interests in receivables and cause all proceeds of the purchased interests to be used to reduce the Purchaser investment and to pay other amounts owed to the Purchasers and the facility agent. This would have the effect of reducing the operating capital available to IPL by the aggregate amount of such purchased interests in receivables (currently $50 million). 117 
