CIK: 874766
Company Name: HARTFORD FINANCIAL SERVICES GROUP INC DE
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2016-02-26


Item 7. MANAGEMENT S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS (Dollar amounts in millions, except for per share data, unless otherwise stated) The Hartford provides projections and other forward-looking information in the following discussions, which contain many forward-looking statements, particularly relating to the Company future financial performance. These forward-looking statements are estimates based on information currently available to the Company, are made pursuant to the safe harbor provisions of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 and are subject to the cautionary statements set forth on pages 3 and 4 of this Form 10-K. Actual results are likely to differ, and in the past have differed, materially from those forecast by the Company, depending on the outcome of various factors, including, but not limited to, those set forth in each following discussion and in Part I, Item 1A, Risk Factors. The Hartford undertakes no obligation to publicly update any forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future developments or otherwise. The Hartford defines increases or decreases greater than or equal to 200% as NM or not meaningful. INDEX Description Page The Hartford's Operations 35 Consolidated Results of Operations 37 Investment Results 39 Critical Accounting Estimates 43 Key Performance Measures and Ratios 68 Commercial Lines 73 Personal Lines 76 Property & Casualty Other Operations 80 Group Benefits 81 Mutual Funds 83 Talcott Resolution 85 Corporate 87 Enterprise Risk Management 88 Capital Resources and Liquidity 116 Impact of New Accounting Standards 126 34 THE HARTFORD S OPERATIONS Overview The Hartford conducts business principally in six reporting segments including Commercial Lines, Personal Lines, Property & Casualty Other Operations, Group Benefits, Mutual Funds and Talcott Resolution, as well as a Corporate category. The Hartford includes in its Corporate category the Company capital raising activities (including debt financing and related interest expense), purchase accounting adjustments related to goodwill and other expenses not allocated to the reporting segments. On June 30, 2014 , the Company completed the sale of all of the issued and outstanding equity of Hartford Life Insurance KK, a Japanese company ("HLIKK") to ORIX Life Insurance Corporation, a subsidiary of ORIX Corporation, a Japanese company. HLIKK sold variable and fixed annuity policies in Japan from 2001 to 2009 and had been in runoff since 2009. On December 12, 2013 , the Company completed the sale of Hartford Life International Limited ("HLIL"), which comprised the Company's U.K. variable annuity business, to Columbia Insurance Company, a Berkshire Hathaway company. On January 1, 2013 , the Company completed the sale of its Retirement Plans business to Massachusetts Mutual Life Insurance Company ("MassMutual") and on January 2, 2013 , the Company completed the sale of its Individual Life insurance business to The Prudential Insurance Company of America ("Prudential"), a subsidiary of Prudential Financial, Inc. For further discussion of these transactions, see Note 5 - Reinsurance and Note 18 - Discontinued Operations and Business Dispositions of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. The businesses reinsured to MassMutual and Prudential are included in the Talcott Resolution reporting segment. The Company derives its revenues principally from: (a) premiums earned for insurance coverage; (b) fee income, including asset management fees, on separate account and mutual fund assets and mortality and expense fees, as well as cost of insurance charges; (c) net investment income; (d) fees earned for services provided to third parties; and (e) net realized capital gains and losses. Premiums charged for insurance coverage are earned principally on a pro rata basis over the terms of the related policies in-force. Asset management fees and mortality and expense fees are primarily generated from separate account assets. Cost of insurance charges are assessed on the net amount at risk for investment-oriented life insurance products. The profitability of the Company's property and casualty insurance businesses over time is greatly influenced by the Company underwriting discipline, which seeks to manage exposure to loss through favorable risk selection and diversification, its management of claims, its use of reinsurance, the size of its in force block, actual mortality and morbidity experience, and its ability to manage its expense ratio which it accomplishes through economies of scale and its management of acquisition costs and other underwriting expenses. Pricing adequacy depends on a number of factors, including the ability to obtain regulatory approval for rate changes, proper evaluation of underwriting risks, the ability to project future loss cost frequency and severity based on historical loss experience adjusted for known trends, the Company response to rate actions taken by competitors, its expense levels and expectations about regulatory and legal developments. The Company seeks to price its insurance policies such that insurance premiums and future net investment income earned on premiums received will cover underwriting expenses and the ultimate cost of paying claims reported on the policies and provide for a profit margin. For many of its insurance products, the Company is required to obtain approval for its premium rates from state insurance departments. The financial results in the Company mutual fund and variable annuity businesses depend largely on the amount of the contract holder or shareholder account value or assets under management on which it earns fees and the level of fees charged. Changes in account value or assets under management are driven by two main factors: net flows, and the market return of the funds, which is heavily influenced by the return realized in the equity markets. Net flows are comprised of deposits less withdrawals and surrenders, redemptions, death benefits, policy charges and annuitizations of investment type contracts, such as variable annuity contracts. In the mutual fund business, net flows are known as net sales. Net sales are comprised of new sales less redemptions by mutual fund customers. The Company uses the average daily value of the S&P 500 Index as an indicator for evaluating market returns of the underlying account portfolios. Financial results of variable products are highly correlated to the growth in account values or assets under management since these products generally earn fee income on a daily basis. Equity market movements could also result in benefits for or charges against deferred acquisition costs. The profitability of fixed annuities and other spread-based products depends largely on the Company ability to earn target spreads between earned investment rates on its general account assets and interest credited to policyholders. The investment return, or yield, on invested assets is an important element of the Company earnings since insurance products are priced with the assumption that premiums received can be invested for a period of time before benefits, loss and loss adjustment expenses are paid. Due to the need to maintain sufficient liquidity to satisfy claim obligations, the majority of the Company invested assets have been held in available-for-sale securities, including, among other asset classes, equities, corporate bonds, municipal bonds, government debt, short-term debt, mortgage-backed securities and asset-backed securities and collateralized debt obligations. 35 The primary investment objective for the Company is to maximize economic value, consistent with acceptable risk parameters, including the management of credit risk and interest rate sensitivity of invested assets, while generating sufficient after-tax income to meet policyholder and corporate obligations. Investment strategies are developed based on a variety of factors including business needs, regulatory requirements and tax considerations. For more information on the Company's reporting segments, refer to Part I, Item 1, Business Reporting Segments. Financial Highlights for the Year Ended December 31, 2015 Net income was $1,682 , or $3.96 per diluted share, compared with net income of $798 , or $1.73 per diluted share, in the prior year. Common share repurchases totaled $1,250 , or approximately 28.4 million shares for the year. Book value per diluted common share (excluding AOCI) increased to $43.76 from $40.71 as of the prior year end due to the effect of net income less dividends and the effect of share repurchases for the year. Net investment income decreased 3.9% to $3,030 compared to the prior year primarily due to a decrease in income from limited partnerships and other alternative investments and the effect of the runoff of Talcott Resolution. Annualized investment yield after-tax was 3.0% in 2015, consistent with 2014. New money yield of 3.4% in 2015 decreased from 3.6% , in the prior year, primarily due to lower interest rates. Net unrealized gains, after-tax, in the investment portfolio declined by $1,091 compared to the prior year due primarily to wider credit spreads and increased interest rates. Property & Casualty written premium increased 3% over the prior year, comprised of 4% growth in Commercial Lines and 1% in Personal Lines. Property & Casualty combined ratio, before catastrophes and prior year development, improved to 91.0 from 91.5 in the prior year, with improvement in Commercial Lines partially offset by deterioration in Personal Lines. Catastrophe losses of $332 , before tax, decreased from catastrophe losses of $341 , before tax, in the prior year. Unfavorable prior accident year development, driven primarily by asbestos and environmental reserves, totaled $250 , before tax, compared with unfavorable prior year development of $228 before tax, in the prior year. Group Benefits core earnings margin increased to 5.6% from 5.2% in the prior year. Talcott Resolution after-tax income from continuing operations was $428 , compared with $370 in the prior year. 36 CONSOLIDATED RESULTS OF OPERATIONS The Consolidated Results of Operations should be read in conjunction with the Company's Consolidated Financial Statements and the related Notes beginning on page F-1. 2015 2014 2013 Increase (Decrease) From 2014 to 2015 Increase (Decrease) From 2013 to 2014 Earned premiums $ 13,577 $ 13,336 $ 13,231 $241 $105 Fee income 1,839 1,996 2,105 (157) (109) Net investment income 3,030 3,154 3,264 (124) (110) Net realized capital gains (losses) [1] (156 ) 16 1,798 (172) (1,782) Other revenues 87 112 275 (25) (163) Total revenues 18,377 18,614 20,673 (237) (2,059) Benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses 10,775 10,805 11,048 (30) (243) Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs 1,502 1,729 1,794 (227) (65) Insurance operating costs and other expenses 3,772 4,028 4,176 (256) (148) Loss on extinguishment of debt 21 213 21 (213) Reinsurance (gain) loss on disposition (28 ) (23 ) 1,574 (5) (1,597) Interest expense 357 376 397 (19) (21) Total benefits, losses and expenses 16,399 16,915 19,202 (516) (2,287) Income from continuing operations before income taxes 1,978 1,699 1,471 279 228 Income tax expense 305 350 246 (45) 104 Income from continuing operations, net of tax 1,673 1,349 1,225 324 124 Income (loss) from discontinued operations, net of tax 9 (551 ) (1,049 ) 560 498 Net income $ 1,682 $ 798 $ 176 $884 $622 [1] Includes net realized capital gains in 2013 of $1,575 on investments transferred at fair value in business disposition by reinsurance. Year ended December 31, 2015 compared to the year ended December 31, 2014 The increase in net income from 2014 to 2015 was primarily due to the net effect of the following items: A decrease in the loss from discontinued operations of $560, net of tax, compared to 2014 pertains primarily to the realized capital loss of $659 on the sale of the Japan variable annuity business in 2014. A decrease of $157, before tax, in fee income was primarily due to the continued runoff of the Talcott Resolution annuity business. Net realized capital losses of $156 , before tax, in 2015, largely driven by results of the variable annuity hedge program compared to net realized capital gains of $16 , before tax, in 2014. Net investment income of $3,030 , before tax, in 2015 decreased from $3,154 , before tax, in 2014, primarily due to lower income from limited partnerships and other alternative investments and the continued decline in Talcott Resolution assets under management. For further discussion of investment results, see MD&A - Investment Results, Net Investment Income (Loss). An $80, before tax, improvement in current accident year underwriting results before catastrophes in Property & Casualty resulting from a 1.1 point decrease in the loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development and an increase in earned premium. The increase in earned premiums of 3% or $320, before tax, in 2015, compared to 2014, reflected earned premium growth of 4% in Commercial Lines and 2% in Personal Lines. For a discussion of the Company's operating results by segment, see the segment sections of MD&A. Unfavorable prior accident year reserve development in Property & Casualty of $250 , before tax, in 2015, compared to unfavorable reserve development of $228 , before tax, in 2014. Prior accident year reserve development in 2015 was primarily due to an increase in reserves for asbestos and environmental claims, in part, due to a small percentage of direct accounts having experienced greater than expected claim filings, including mesothelioma claims. Prior accident year reserve development in 2014 was primarily due to an increase in reserves for asbestos and environmental claims, primarily due to a higher than previously estimated number of mesothelioma claim filings and an increase in costs associated with asbestos litigation. A loss on extinguishment of debt of $21 , before tax, in 2015 related to the redemption of $296 aggregate principal amount of outstanding 4.0% senior notes. The resulting loss on extinguishment of debt consists of a make-whole premium. 37 A $227, before tax, decrease in DAC amortization driven, in part, by a favorable unlock in Talcott Resolution in 2015, compared to unfavorable in 2014. Pension settlement charge of $128, before tax, in 2014, within insurance operating costs and other expenses, related to voluntary lump-sum settlements with vested participants in the Company's defined benefit pension plan who had separated from service, but who had not yet commenced annuity benefits. Differences between the Company's effective income tax rate and the U.S. statutory rate of 35% are due primarily to tax-exempt interest earned on invested assets and the dividends received deduction ("DRD"). Income tax expense in 2015, decreased by $45 from $350 in 2014, primarily due to a federal income tax benefit of $36 , related to the release of reserves due to the resolution of uncertain tax positions and a benefit of $94 from the partial reduction of the deferred tax valuation allowance on the capital loss carryover due to taxable gains on the termination of certain derivatives, partially offset by the effect of higher income from continuing operations, before tax. For further discussion of income taxes, see Note 14 - Income Taxes of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Year ended December 31, 2014 compared to the year ended December 31, 2013 The increase in net income from 2013 to 2014 was primarily due to the net effect of the following items: A decrease in the loss from discontinued operations to $551, net of tax, compared to $1,049, net of tax, in 2013. The loss from discontinued operations in 2014 includes the results of operations and the realized capital loss on the sale of HLIKK. The loss from discontinued operations in 2013 includes the results of operations of HLIKK and U.K. annuity businesses and the realized capital loss on the sale of HLIL. The results of operations for HLIKK annuity business in 2013 include the write-off of DAC and higher hedging losses. For further discussion of the sale of these businesses, see Note 18 - Discontinued Operations and Business Dispositions of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. A $299 before tax improvement in current accident year underwriting results before catastrophes in Property & Casualty resulting in a 2.9 point decrease in the combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development. Also contributing to the improvement in underwriting results was an increase in earned premiums of 2% or $232, before tax, in 2014, compared to 2013, reflecting earned premium growth of 1% in Commercial Lines and 4% in Personal Lines. A loss on extinguishment of debt of $213, before tax, in 2013 related to the repurchase of approximately $800 of senior notes at a premium to the face amount of the then outstanding debt. The resulting loss on extinguishment of debt consists of the repurchase premium, the write-off of the unamortized discount and debt issuance and other costs related to the repurchase transaction. Pension settlement charge of $128, before tax, in 2014, in insurance operating costs and other expenses, related to voluntary lump-sum settlements with vested participants in the Company's defined benefit pension plan who had separated from service, but who had not yet commenced annuity benefits. For additional information, see MD&A - Capital Resources and Liquidity, Pension Plans and Other Postretirement Benefits. Net investment income of $3,154, before tax, in 2014, decreased from $3,264, before tax, in 2013. The decrease in net investment income is primarily due to lower income from fixed maturities, as a result of a decline in asset levels, primarily in Talcott Resolution, lower income from repurchase agreements, and the impact of reinvesting at lower interest rates. Current accident year catastrophe losses in Property & Casualty of $341, before tax, in 2014, compared to $312, before tax, in 2013. The increase in current accident year catastrophe losses was primarily due to increased frequency and severity from wind and hail events across various U.S. geographic regions. Unfavorable prior accident year reserve development in Property & Casualty of $228, before tax, in 2014, compared to unfavorable reserve development of $192, before tax, in 2013. Unfavorable prior accident year reserve development in 2014 was primarily related to an increase in reserves for asbestos and environmental claims, primarily due to a higher than previously estimated number of mesothelioma claim filings and an increase in costs associated with asbestos litigation. Unfavorable prior accident year reserve development in 2013 was primarily related to an increase in net asbestos reserves due to higher claim frequency and severity, as well as costs and expenses associated with litigating asbestos coverage matters. Differences between the Company's effective income tax rate and the U.S. statutory rate of 35% are due primarily to tax-exempt interest earned on invested assets and the dividends received deduction ("DRD"). The $104 increase in income tax expense in 2014 compared with 2013 was primarily due to the $228 increase in income from continuing operations, before tax. Income tax expense of $350 and $246 in 2014 and 2013, respectively, includes separate account DRD benefits of $114 and $139, respectively. 38 The following table presents net income (loss) for each reporting segment, as well as the Corporate category. For a discussion of the Company's operating results by segment, see the segment sections of MD&A. Net Income (Loss) by Segment 2015 2014 2013 Increase (Decrease) From 2014 to 2015 Increase (Decrease) From 2013 to 2014 Commercial Lines $ 1,003 $ 983 $ 870 $ 20 $ 113 Personal Lines 187 207 229 (20 ) (22 ) Property & Casualty Other Operations (53 ) (108 ) (2 ) 55 (106 ) Group Benefits 187 191 192 (4 ) (1 ) Mutual Funds 86 87 76 (1 ) 11 Talcott Resolution 430 (187 ) (634 ) 617 447 Corporate (158 ) (375 ) (555 ) 217 180 Net income $ 1,682 $ 798 $ 176 $ 884 $ 622 Investment Results Composition of Invested Assets December 31, 2015 December 31, 2014 Amount Percent Amount Percent Fixed maturities, available-for-sale ("AFS"), at fair value $ 59,196 81.4 % $ 59,384 77.9 % Fixed maturities, at fair value using the fair value option ("FVO") 503 0.7 % 488 0.6 % Equity securities, AFS, at fair value [1] 1,121 1.5 % 1,047 1.4 % Mortgage loans 5,624 7.7 % 5,556 7.3 % Policy loans, at outstanding balance 1,447 2.0 % 1,431 1.9 % Limited partnerships and other alternative investments 2,874 4.0 % 2,942 3.9 % Other investments [2] 120 0.2 % 547 0.7 % Short-term investments 1,843 2.5 % 4,883 6.4 % Total investments $ 72,728 100 % $ 76,278 100 % [1] Includes equity securities at fair value using the FVO of $282 and $348 as of December 31, 2015 and 2014 , respectively. [2] Primarily relates to derivative instruments. Total investments decreased since December 31, 2014 , primarily due to a decrease in short-term investments as well as a decrease in other investments and fixed maturities, AFS. The decrease in short-term investments was primarily the result of the continued run-off of Talcott Resolution, the use of assets for share repurchases and debt repayment, and the reinvestment of short-term investments into longer dated fixed maturities. The decrease in other investments was primarily due to a decline in derivatives resulting from termination of open positions and an increase in interest rates. The decrease in fixed maturities, AFS was due to a decrease in valuations as a result of widening credit spreads and an increase in interest rates, which more than offset the reinvestment of short-term investments. 39 Net Investment Income (Loss) For the years ended December 31, 2015 2014 2013 (Before tax) Amount Yield [1] Amount Yield [1] Amount Yield [1] Fixed maturities [2] $ 2,409 4.2 % $ 2,420 4.2 % $ 2,552 4.3 % Equity securities 25 2.4 % 38 4.8 % 30 3.6 % Mortgage loans 267 4.7 % 265 4.7 % 260 4.9 % Policy loans 82 5.7 % 80 5.6 % 83 5.9 % Limited partnerships and other alternative investments 227 8.0 % 294 10.4 % 287 9.5 % Other [3] 138 179 167 Investment expense (118 ) (122 ) (115 ) Total net investment income $ 3,030 4.3 % $ 3,154 4.4 % $ 3,264 4.4 % Total net investment income excluding limited partnerships and other alternative investments 2,803 4.1 % 2,860 4.1 % 2,977 4.2 % [1] Yields calculated using annualized net investment income divided by the monthly average invested assets at cost, amortized cost, or adjusted carrying value, as applicable, excluding repurchase agreement and securities lending collateral , if any, and derivatives book value. Yield calculations for each period exclude assets associated with the disposition of the Japan annuities business, as applicable. [2] Includes net investment income on short-term investments. [3] Primarily includes income from derivatives that qualify for hedge accounting and hedge fixed maturities. Year ended December 31, 2015 , compared to the year ended December 31, 2014 Total net investment income decreased primarily due to a decrease in income from limited partnerships and other alternative investments. Other factors contributing to the decline in net investment income were reinvesting at lower interest rates and a decrease in invested asset levels, partially offset by make-whole payments on fixed maturities, higher income received from previously impaired securities, and prepayment penalties on mortgage loans. The annualized net investment income yield, excluding limited partnerships and other alternative investments, was 4.1% in 2015 , consistent with 2014 . Excluding make-whole payments on fixed maturities, income received from previously impaired securities, and prepayment penalties on mortgage loans, the annualized investment income yield, excluding limited partnerships and other alternative investments, was 4.0% in 2015 , down from 4.1% in 2014 . The new money yield excluding certain U.S. Treasury securities and cash equivalent securities, for the year ended December 31, 2015 , was approximately 3.4% which was below the average yield of sales and maturities of 3.8% for the same period due to the current interest rate environment. For the year ended December 31, 2015 , the new money yield of 3.4% decreased slightly from 3.6% in 2014 , largely due to lower interest rates. Going forward, if interest rates continue to stay at current levels, we expect the annualized net investment income yield, excluding limited partnerships and other alternative investments, to decline from the current net investment income yield due to lower reinvestment rates. The estimated impact on net investment income is subject to change as the composition of the portfolio changes through portfolio management and trading activities and changes in market conditions. Year ended December 31, 2014 , compared to the year ended December 31, 2013 Total net investment income decreased primarily due to a decrease in income from fixed maturities as a result of a decline in asset levels, lower income from repurchase agreements, and the impact of reinvesting at lower interest rates. The annualized net investment income yield, excluding limited partnerships and other alternative investments, declined to 4.1% in 2014 versus 4.2% in 2013. The decline was primarily attributable to lower income from repurchase agreements and lower reinvestment rates. 40 Net Realized Capital Gains (Losses) For the years ended December 31, (Before tax) 2015 2014 2013 Gross gains on sales [1] $ 460 $ 527 $ 2,313 Gross losses on sales (405 ) (250 ) (659 ) Net other-than-temporary impairment ("OTTI") losses recognized in earnings (102 ) (59 ) (73 ) Valuation allowances on mortgage loans (5 ) (4 ) (1 ) Periodic net coupon settlements on credit derivatives 11 1 (8 ) Results of variable annuity hedge program GMWB derivatives, net (87 ) 5 262 Macro hedge program (46 ) (11 ) (234 ) Total results of variable annuity hedge program (133 ) (6 ) 28 Other, net [2] 18 (193 ) 198 Net realized capital gains (losses) $ (156 ) $ 16 $ 1,798 [1] Includes $1.5 billion of gains relating to the sales of the Retirement Plans and Individual Life businesses in the year ended December 31, 2013. [2] Primarily consists of changes in value of non-qualifying derivatives, including credit derivatives, interest rate derivatives used to manage duration, and the yen denominated fixed payout annuity hedge. Details on the Company net realized capital gains and losses are as follows: Gross Gains and Losses on Sales Gross gains on sales for the year ended December 31, 2015 , were primarily due to gains on the sale of corporate, U.S. treasury, and equity securities. Gross losses on sales for the year ended December 31, 2015 , were primarily the result of losses on the sale of corporate, equity and U.S. treasury securities. The sales were primarily a result of duration, liquidity and credit management, as well as tactical changes to the portfolio as a result of changing market conditions, including sales to reduce exposure to energy, emerging markets and other below investment grade corporate securities. Gross gains on sales for the year ended December 31, 2014 , were primarily due to gains on the sale of corporate securities, CMBS, RMBS, and municipal securities. Gross losses on sales for the year ended December 31, 2014 , were primarily the result of losses on the sale of corporate and foreign government and government agency securities, which included sales resulting from a reduction in our exposure to the emerging market and energy sector securities as well as other portfolio management activities. The sales were primarily a result of duration, liquidity and credit management, as well as tactical changes to the portfolio as a result of changing market conditions. Gross gains on sales for the year ended December 31, 2013 , were predominately from the sale of the Retirement Plans and Individual Life businesses resulting in a gain of $1.5 billion. The remaining gains on sales were primarily due to the sales of corporate securities and tax-exempt municipals. Gross losses on sales were primarily the result of the sales of U.S. Treasuries and mortgage backed securities, predominantly due to duration, liquidity and credit management as well as progress towards sector allocation objectives. Net OTTI Losses See Other-Than-Temporary Impairments within the Investment Portfolio Risks and Risk Management section of the MD&A. Valuation Allowances on Mortgage Loans See Valuation Allowances on Mortgage Loans within the Investment Portfolio Risks and Risk Management section of the MD&A. Variable Annuity Hedge Program For the year ended December 31, 2015 , the loss related to the combined GMWB derivatives, net, which include the GMWB product, reinsurance, and hedging derivatives, was primarily driven by losses of $42 due to liability/model assumption updates, and losses of $18 resulting from an underperformance of the underlying actively managed funds compared to their respective indices. The loss on the macro hedge program for the year ended December 31, 2015 was primarily due to a loss of $44 driven by time decay on options. 41 For the year ended December 31, 2014 , the gain related to the combined GMWB derivatives, net, which include the GMWB product, reinsurance, and hedging derivatives, was primarily driven by gains of $25 on liability/model assumption updates and gains of $15 due to increased volatility, partially offset by a loss of $26 resulting from policyholder behavior primarily related to increased surrenders. The loss on the macro hedge program for the year ended December 31, 2014 was primarily due to a loss of $25 driven by an improvement in the domestic equity markets, partially offset by a gain of $17 related to a decrease in interest rates. For the year ended December 31, 2013 the gain on GMWB related derivatives, net, was primarily related to gains of $203 from revaluing the liability for living benefits largely driven by favorable policyholder behavior related to increased surrenders and gains of $38 due to liability assumption updates for lapses and withdrawal rates. The loss on the macro hedge program for the year ended December 31, 2013 was primarily driven by losses of $114 due to an improvement in domestic equity markets, losses of $56 related to an increase in interest rates, and losses of $31 related to a decrease in equity market volatility. Other, net Other, net gain for the year ended December 31, 2015 was primarily related to gains of $46 related to modified coinsurance reinsurance contracts, primarily driven by widening credit spreads and an increase in interest rates. Modified coinsurance reinsurance contracts are accounted for as embedded derivatives and transfer to the reinsurer the investment experience related to the assets supporting the reinsured policies. Also included were gains of $15 on currency derivatives primarily driven by appreciation of the British pound in comparison to the U.S. dollar. These gains were partially offset by losses of $16 related to fixed payout annuity hedges primarily driven by an increase in U.S. interest rates, losses of $14 on credit derivatives driven by widening credit spreads, and losses of $12 on interest rate derivatives due to an increase in interest rates. Other, net loss for the year ended December 31, 2014 was primarily related to a loss of $172 on interest rate derivatives used to manage the risk of a rise in interest rates and manage duration, driven by a decline in U.S. interest rates. Other, net gain for the year ended December 31, 2013 was primarily related to gains of $71 on interest rate derivatives primarily associated with fixed rate bonds sold as part of the Individual Life and Retirement Plan business dispositions. For further information on the business dispositions, see Note 18 of Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. Additional gains included $69 on interest rate derivatives primarily due to an increase in U.S. interest rates and $42 of gains on credit derivatives due to credit spreads tightening. 42 CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES The preparation of financial statements, in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America ( U.S. GAAP ), requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ, and in the past have differed, from those estimates. The Company has identified the following estimates as critical in that they involve a higher degree of judgment and are subject to a significant degree of variability: property and casualty insurance product reserves, net of reinsurance; estimated gross profits used in the valuation and amortization of assets and liabilities associated with variable annuity and other universal life-type contracts; evaluation of other-than-temporary impairments on available-for-sale securities and valuation allowances on mortgage loans; living benefits required to be fair valued (in other policyholder funds and benefits payable); evaluation of goodwill for impairment; valuation of investments and derivative instruments; valuation allowance on deferred tax assets; and contingencies relating to corporate litigation and regulatory matters. Certain of these estimates are particularly sensitive to market conditions, and deterioration and/or volatility in the worldwide debt or equity markets could have a material impact on the Consolidated Financial Statements. In developing these estimates management makes subjective and complex judgments that are inherently uncertain and subject to material change as facts and circumstances develop. Although variability is inherent in these estimates, management believes the amounts provided are appropriate based upon the facts available upon compilation of the financial statements. Property & Casualty Insurance Product Reserves, Net of Reinsurance The Hartford establishes reserves on its property and casualty insurance products to provide for the estimated costs of paying claims under insurance policies written by the Company. These reserves include estimates for both claims that have been reported and those that have not yet been reported, and include estimates of all expenses associated with processing and settling these claims. Incurred but not reported ( IBNR ) reserves represent the difference between the estimated ultimate cost of all claims and the actual reported loss and loss adjustment expenses ( reported losses ). Reported losses represent cumulative loss and loss adjustment expenses paid plus case reserves for outstanding reported claims. Company actuaries evaluate the total reserves (IBNR and case reserves) on an accident year basis. An accident year is the calendar year in which a loss is incurred, or, in the case of claims-made policies, the calendar year in which a loss is reported. Reserve estimates can change over time because of unexpected changes in the external environment. Potential external factors include (1) changes in the inflation rate for goods and services related to covered damages such as medical care, hospital care, auto parts, wages and home and building repair; (2) changes in the general economic environment that could cause unanticipated changes in the claim frequency per unit insured; (3) changes in the litigation environment as evidenced by changes in claimant attorney representation in the claims negotiation and settlement process; (4) changes in the judicial environment regarding the interpretation of policy provisions relating to the determination of coverage and/or the amount of damages awarded for certain types of damages; (5) changes in the social environment regarding the general attitude of juries in the determination of liability and damages; (6) changes in the legislative environment regarding the definition of damages; and (7) new types of injuries caused by new types of injurious exposure: past examples include pharmaceutical products, silica, lead paint, molestation or abuse and construction defects. Reserve estimates can also change over time because of changes in internal Company operations. Potential internal factors include (1) periodic changes in claims handling procedures; (2) growth in new lines of business where exposure and loss development patterns are not well established; (3) changes in the quality of risk selection in the underwriting process; (4) changes in the geographic mix of business; (5) changes in the mix of business by industry; (6) changes in policy language; or (7) changes in the mix of business by policy limit or deductible. In the case of assumed reinsurance, all of the above risks apply. In addition, changes in ceding company case reserving and reporting patterns can create additional factors that need to be considered in estimating the reserves. Due to the inherent complexity of the assumptions used, final claim settlements may vary significantly from the present estimates, particularly when those settlements may not occur until well into the future. 43 Through both facultative and treaty reinsurance agreements, the Company cedes a share of the risks it has underwritten to other insurance companies. The Company net reserves for loss and loss adjustment expenses include anticipated recovery from reinsurers on unpaid claims. The estimated amount of the anticipated recovery, or reinsurance recoverable, is net of an allowance for uncollectible reinsurance. Reinsurance recoverables include an estimate of the amount of gross loss and loss adjustment expense reserves that may be ceded under the terms of the reinsurance agreements, including IBNR for unpaid losses. The Company calculates its ceded reinsurance projection based on the terms of any applicable facultative and treaty reinsurance, often including an estimate by reinsurance agreement of how IBNR for losses will ultimately be ceded. The Company provides an allowance for uncollectible reinsurance, reflecting management best estimate of reinsurance cessions that may be uncollectible in the future due to reinsurers unwillingness or inability to pay. The Company analyzes recent developments in commutation activity between reinsurers and cedants, recent trends in arbitration and litigation outcomes in disputes between reinsurers and cedants and the overall credit quality of the Company reinsurers. Where its contracts permit, the Company secures funding of future claim obligations with various forms of collateral, including irrevocable letters of credit, secured trusts, funds held accounts and group-wide offsets. The allowance for uncollectible reinsurance was $266 as of December 31, 2015 , comprised of $46 related to Commercial Lines and $220 related to Property & Casualty Other Operations. The Company estimate of reinsurance recoverables, net of an allowance for uncollectible reinsurance, is subject to similar risks and uncertainties as the estimate of the gross reserve for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses. The Hartford, like other insurance companies, categorizes and tracks its insurance reserves for its segments by line of business . Commercial Lines policy packages that include property and general liability coverages are generally referred to as the package line of business. Furthermore, The Hartford regularly reviews the appropriateness of reserve levels at the line of business level, taking into consideration the variety of trends that impact the ultimate settlement of claims for the subsets of claims in each particular line of business. In addition, Property & Casualty Other Operations categorizes reserves as asbestos and environmental ( A&E ), whereby the Company reviews these reserve levels by type of event, rather than by line of business. Adjustments to previously established reserves, which may be material, are reflected in the operating results of the period in which the adjustment is determined to be necessary. In the judgment of management, information currently available has been properly considered in the reserves established for losses and loss adjustment expenses. Loss and loss adjustment expense reserves by line of business as of December 31, 2015 , net of reinsurance are as follows: Commercial Lines Personal Lines Property & Casualty Other Operations Total Property & Casualty Insurance Auto liability $ 701 $ 1,361 $ $ 2,062 Auto physical damage 21 25 46 Homeowners 414 414 Professional liability 508 508 Package business 1,274 1,274 General liability 2,431 25 2,456 Bond 185 185 Commercial property 143 143 A&E 22 1 1,959 1,982 Workers compensation 8,981 8,981 Assumed reinsurance 138 138 All other non-A&E 754 754 Total reserves-net 14,266 1,826 2,851 18,943 Reinsurance and other recoverables 2,293 19 570 2,882 Total reserves-gross $ 16,559 $ 1,845 $ 3,421 $ 21,825 44 Reserving Methodology (See Reserving for Asbestos and Environmental Claims within Property & Casualty Other Operations for a discussion of how A&E reserves are set) How Reserves are Set Reserves are set by line of business within the various segments. A single line of business may be written in more than one segment. Case reserves are established by a claims handler on each individual claim and are adjusted as new information becomes known during the course of handling the claim. Lines of business for which loss data (e.g., paid losses and case reserves) emerge (i.e., is reported) over a long period of time are referred to as long-tail lines of business. Lines of business for which loss data emerge more quickly are referred to as short-tail lines of business. The Company shortest-tail lines of business are property and auto physical damage. The longest tail lines of business include workers compensation, general liability, professional liability and assumed reinsurance. For short-tail lines of business, emergence of paid loss and case reserves is credible and likely indicative of ultimate losses. For long-tail lines of business, emergence of paid losses and case reserves is less credible in the early periods and, accordingly, may not be indicative of ultimate losses. The Company reserving actuaries regularly review reserves for both current and prior accident years using the most current claim data. For most lines of business, these reserve reviews incorporate a variety of actuarial methods and judgments and involve rigorous analysis. These selections incorporate input, as judged by the reserving actuaries to be appropriate, from claims personnel, pricing actuaries and operating management on reported loss cost trends and other factors that could affect the reserve estimates. Most reserves are reviewed fully each quarter, including loss and loss adjustment expense reserves for property, auto physical damage, auto liability, package business, workers compensation, most general liability and professional liability. Other reserves are reviewed semi-annually (twice per year) or annually. These include, but are not limited to, reserves for losses incurred in accident years older than twelve and twenty years, for Personal and Commercial Lines, respectively, bond, assumed reinsurance, latent exposures, such as construction defects, and unallocated loss adjustment expense. For reserves that are reviewed semi-annually or annually, management monitors the emergence of paid and reported losses in the intervening quarters to either confirm that the estimate of ultimate losses should not change or, if necessary, perform a reserve review to determine whether the reserve estimate should change. An expected loss ratio is used in initially recording the reserves for both short-tail and long-tail lines of business. This expected loss ratio is determined through a review of prior accident years loss ratios and expected changes to earned pricing, loss costs, mix of business, ceded reinsurance and other factors that are expected to impact the loss ratio for the current accident year. For short-tail lines, IBNR for the current accident year is initially recorded as the product of the expected loss ratio for the period, earned premium for the period and the proportion of losses expected to be reported in future calendar periods for the current accident period. For long-tailed lines, IBNR reserves for the current accident year are initially recorded as the product of the expected loss ratio for the period and the earned premium for the period, less reported losses for the period. In addition to the expected loss ratio, the actuarial techniques or methods used primarily include paid and reported loss development and frequency / severity techniques as well as the Bornhuetter-Ferguson method (a combination of the expected loss ratio and paid development or reported development method). Within any one line of business, the methods that are given more influence vary based primarily on the maturity of the accident year, the mix of business and the particular internal and external influences impacting the claims experience or the methods. The output of the reserve reviews are reserve estimates that are referred to herein as the actuarial indication . Most of the Company property and casualty insurance product reserves are not discounted. However, the Company has discounted liabilities funded through structured settlements and has discounted certain reserves for indemnity payments due to permanently disabled claimants under workers compensation policies. For further discussion of these discounted liabilities, see Note 10 - Reserves for Future Policy Benefits and Unpaid Losses and Loss Adjustment Expenses of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. As of December 31, 2015 and 2014 , U.S. property and casualty insurance product reserves for losses and loss adjustment expenses, net of reinsurance recoverables, reported under U.S. GAAP were approximately equal to net reserves reported on a statutory basis. Under U.S. GAAP, liabilities for unpaid losses for permanently disabled workers compensation claimants are discounted at rates that are no higher than risk-free interest rates in effect at the time the claims are incurred and which can vary from the statutory discount rates set by regulators. In addition, a portion of the U.S. GAAP provision for uncollectible reinsurance is not recognized under statutory accounting, largely offsetting the difference in discounting. Provided below is a general discussion of which methods are preferred by line of business. Because the actuarial estimates are generated at a much finer level of detail than line of business (e.g., by distribution channel, coverage, accident period), this description should not be assumed to apply to each coverage and accident year within a line of business. Also, as circumstances change, the methods that are given more influence will change. 45 Property and Auto Physical Damage. These lines are fast-developing and paid and reported development techniques are used as these methods use historical data to develop paid and reported loss development patterns, which are then applied to current paid and reported losses by accident period to estimate ultimate losses. The Company relies primarily on reported development techniques although a review of frequency and severity and the initial loss expectation based on the expected loss ratio is used for the most immature accident months. The advantage of frequency / severity techniques is that frequency estimates are generally easier to predict and external information can be used to supplement internal data in making severity estimates. Personal Auto Liability. For auto liability, and bodily injury in particular, the Company performs a greater number of techniques than it does for property and auto physical damage. In addition to traditional paid and reported development methods, the Company relies on frequency/severity techniques and Berquist-Sherman techniques. Because the paid development technique is affected by changes in claim closure patterns and the reported development method is affected by changes in case reserving practices, the Company uses Berquist-Sherman techniques which adjust these patterns to reflect current settlement rates and case reserving techniques. The Company generally uses the reported development method for older accident years as a higher percentage of ultimate losses are reflected in reported losses than in cumulative paid losses and a combination of reported development, frequency/severity and Berquist-Sherman methods for more recent accident years. Recent periods can be influenced by changes in case reserve practices and changing disposal rates; the frequency/severity techniques are not affected as much by these changes and the Berquist-Sherman techniques specifically adjust for these changes. Auto Liability for Commercial Lines and Short-Tailed General Liability. The Company performs a variety of techniques, including the paid and reported development methods and frequency / severity techniques. For older, more mature accident years, the Company finds that reported development techniques are best. For more recent accident years, the Company typically prefers frequency / severity techniques that make separate assumptions about loss activity above and below a selected capping level. Long-Tailed General Liability, Bond and Large Deductible Workers Compensation . For these long-tailed lines of business, the Company generally relies on the expected loss ratio and reported development techniques. The Company generally weights these techniques together, relying more heavily on the expected loss ratio method at early ages of development and more on the reported development method as an accident year matures. Workers Compensation . Workers compensation is the Company single largest reserve line of business so a wide range of methods are reviewed in the reserve analysis. Methods performed include paid and reported development, variations on expected loss ratio methods, and an in-depth analysis on the largest states. In recent years, we have seen an acceleration of paid losses relative to historical patterns and have adjusted our expected loss development patterns accordingly. This acceleration has largely been due to two factors. First, we have seen a higher concentration of first dollar workers' compensation business and less excess of loss business over the past 10 years, resulting in fewer longer-tailed, excess workers' compensation claims in recent accident years. Second, there has been an increase in lump sum settlements across multiple accident years as management has executed on strategies to achieve mutually beneficial settlements with claimants. Adjusting for the effect of an acceleration in payments, paid loss development techniques are generally preferred for the workers' compensation line. Although paid techniques may be less predictive of the ultimate liability when a low percentage of ultimate losses are paid as in early periods of development, given changes in the frequency of workers compensation claims over time, the Company places greater reliance on paid methods with continued consideration of incurred methods, open claim approaches, state-by-state analysis and the expected loss ratio approaches. Professional Liability. Reported and paid loss developments patterns for this line tend to be volatile. Therefore, the Company typically relies on frequency and severity techniques. Assumed Reinsurance and All Other. For these lines, the Company tends to rely on the reported development techniques. In assumed reinsurance, assumptions are influenced by information gained from claim and underwriting audits. Allocated Loss Adjustment Expenses (ALAE). For some lines of business (e.g., professional liability and assumed reinsurance), ALAE and losses are analyzed together. For most lines of business, however, ALAE is analyzed separately, using paid development techniques and an analysis of the relationship between ALAE and loss payments. Unallocated Loss Adjustment Expense (ULAE). ULAE is analyzed separately from loss and ALAE. For most lines of business, incurred ULAE costs to be paid in the future are projected based on an expected cost per claim year and the anticipated claim closure pattern and the ratio of paid ULAE to paid loss. 46 The final step in the reserve review process involves a comprehensive review by senior reserving actuaries who apply their judgment and, in concert with senior management, determine the appropriate level of reserves based on the information that has been accumulated. Numerous factors are considered in this process including, but not limited to, the assessed reliability of key loss trends and assumptions that may be significantly influencing the current actuarial indications, pertinent trends observed over the recent past, the level of volatility within a particular line of business, and the improvement or deterioration of actuarial indications in the current period as compared to the prior periods. Total recorded net reserves, excluding asbestos and environmental, were 4.1% higher than the actuarial indication of the reserves as of December 31, 2015 . For a discussion of changes to reserve estimates recorded in 2015 , see Reserve Roll-forwards and Development included below in this section. Current Trends Contributing to Reserve Uncertainty The Hartford is a multi-line company in the property and casualty insurance business. The Hartford is therefore subject to reserve uncertainty stemming from a number of conditions, including but not limited to those noted above, any of which could be material at any point in time. Certain issues may become more or less important over time as conditions change. As various market conditions develop, management must assess whether those conditions constitute a long-term trend that should result in a reserving action (i.e., increasing or decreasing the reserve). Within Commercial Lines and Property & Casualty Other Operations, the Company has exposure to claims asserted for bodily injury as a result of long-term or continuous exposure to harmful products or substances. Examples include, but are not limited to, pharmaceutical products, silica and lead paint. The Company also has exposure to claims from construction defects, where property damage or bodily injury from negligent construction is alleged. In addition, the Company has exposure to claims asserted against religious institutions and other organizations relating to molestation or abuse. Such exposures may involve potentially long latency periods and may implicate coverage in multiple policy periods. These factors make reserves for such claims more uncertain than other bodily injury or property damage claims. With regard to these exposures, the Company is monitoring trends in litigation, the external environment, the similarities to other mass torts and the potential impact on the Company reserves. In Personal Lines, reserving estimates are generally less variable than for the Company other property and casualty segments because of the coverages having relatively shorter periods of loss emergence. Estimates, however, can still vary due to a number of factors, including interpretations of frequency and severity trends and their impact on recorded reserve levels. Severity trends can be impacted by changes in internal claim handling and case reserving practices in addition to changes in the external environment. These changes in claim practices increase the uncertainty in the interpretation of case reserve data, which increases the uncertainty in recorded reserve levels. In addition, the introduction of new products and class plans has led to a different mix of business by type of insured than the Company experienced in the past. Such changes in mix increase the uncertainty of the reserve projections, since historical data and reporting patterns may not be applicable to the new business. In standard commercial lines, workers compensation is the Company single biggest line of business and the line of business with the longest pattern of loss emergence. To the extent that payment patterns are impacted by increases or decreases in the frequency of settlement payments, historical patterns would be less reliable, increasing the uncertainty around reserve estimates. Medical costs make up more than 50% of workers compensation payments. As such, reserve estimates for workers compensation are particularly sensitive to changes in medical inflation, the changing use of medical care procedures and changes in state legislative and regulatory environments. In addition, a changing economic environment can affect the ability of an injured worker to return to work and the length of time a worker receives disability benefits. In specialty lines, many lines of insurance are long-tail , including large deductible workers compensation insurance; as such, reserve estimates for these lines are more difficult to determine than reserve estimates for shorter-tail lines of insurance. Estimating required reserve levels for large deductible workers compensation insurance is further complicated by the uncertainty of whether losses that are attributable to the deductible amount will be paid by the insured; if such losses are not paid by the insured due to financial difficulties, the Company would be contractually liable. Auto severity trends can be impacted by changes in internal claim handling and case reserving practices in addition to changes in the external environment. These changes in claim practices increase the uncertainty in the interpretation of case reserve data, which increases the uncertainty in recorded reserve levels. Another example of reserve variability relates to reserves for directors and officers insurance. There is potential volatility in the required level of reserves due to the continued uncertainty regarding the number and severity of class action suits. Additionally, the Company exposure to losses under directors and officers insurance policies is primarily in excess layers, making estimates of loss more complex. Impact of Changes in Key Assumptions on Reserve Volatility As stated above, the Company practice is to estimate reserves using a variety of methods, assumptions and data elements. Within its reserve estimation process for reserves other than asbestos and environmental, the Company does not consistently use statistical loss distributions or confidence levels around its reserve estimate and, as a result, does not disclose reserve ranges. 47 The reserve estimation process includes assumptions about a number of factors in the internal and external environment. Across most lines of business, the most important assumptions are future loss development factors applied to paid or reported losses to date. The trend in loss costs is also a key assumption, particularly in the most recent accident years, where loss development factors are less credible. The following discussion includes disclosure of possible variation from current estimates of loss reserves due to a change in certain key indicators of potential losses. Each of the impacts described below is estimated individually, without consideration for any correlation among key indicators or among lines of business. Therefore, it would be inappropriate to take each of the amounts described below and add them together in an attempt to estimate volatility for the Company reserves in total. For any one reserving line of business, the estimated variation in reserves due to changes in key indicators is a reasonable estimate of possible variation that may occur in the future, likely over a period of several calendar years. It is important to note that the variation discussed is not meant to be a worst-case scenario, and therefore, it is possible that future variation may be more than the amounts discussed below. Recorded reserves for auto liability, net of reinsurance, are approximately $2.1 billion across all lines, $1.4 billion of which is in Personal Lines. Personal auto liability reserves are shorter-tailed than other lines of business (such as workers compensation) and, therefore, less volatile. However, the size of the reserve base means that future changes in estimates could be material to the Company results of operations in any given period. The key indicator for Personal Lines auto liability is the annual loss cost trend, particularly the severity trend component of loss costs. A 2.5 point change in annual severity for the two most recent accident years would change the estimated net reserve need by $80 , in either direction. A 2.5 point change in annual severity is within the Company historical variation. Recorded reserves for workers compensation, net of reinsurance, are approximately $9.0 billion . Loss development patterns are a key indicator for this line of business, particularly for more mature accident years. Historically, loss development patterns have been impacted by, among other things, medical cost inflation and other changes in loss cost trends. The Company has reviewed the historical variation in paid loss development patterns. If the paid loss development patterns change by 2% , the estimated net reserve need would change by $400 , in either direction. A 2% change in paid loss development patterns is within the Company historical variation, as measured by the variation around the average development factors as reported in statutory accident year reports. Recorded reserves for general liability, net of reinsurance, are approximately $2.5 billion . Loss development patterns are a key indicator for this line of business, particularly for more mature accident years. Historically, loss development patterns have been impacted by, among other things, emergence of new types of claims (e.g., construction defect claims) or a shift in the mixture between smaller, more routine claims and larger, more complex claims. The Company has reviewed the historical variation in reported loss development patterns. If the reported loss development patterns change by 10% , the estimated net reserve need would change by $200 , in either direction. A 10% change in reported loss development patterns is within the Company historical variation, as measured by the variation around the average development factors as reported in statutory accident year reports. Reserving for Asbestos and Environmental Claims within Property & Casualty Other Operations How A&E Reserves are Set In establishing reserves for asbestos claims, the Company evaluates its insureds estimated liabilities for such claims using a ground-up approach. The Company considers a variety of factors, including the jurisdictions where underlying claims have been brought, past, pending and anticipated future claim activity, disease mix, past settlement values of similar claims, dismissal rates, allocated loss adjustment expense, and potential bankruptcy impact. Similarly, a ground-up exposure review approach is used to establish environmental reserves. The Company evaluation of its insureds estimated liabilities for environmental claims involves consideration of several factors, including historical values of similar claims, the number of sites involved, the insureds alleged activities at each site, the alleged environmental damage at each site, the respective shares of liability of potentially responsible parties at each site, the appropriateness and cost of remediation at each site, the nature of governmental enforcement activities at each site, and potential bankruptcy impact. Having evaluated its insureds probable liabilities for asbestos and/or environmental claims, the Company then evaluates its insureds insurance coverage programs for such claims. The Company considers its insureds total available insurance coverage, including the coverage issued by the Company. The Company also considers relevant judicial interpretations of policy language and applicable coverage defenses or determinations, if any. Evaluation of both the insureds estimated liabilities and the Company exposure to the insureds depends heavily on an analysis of the relevant legal issues and litigation environment. This analysis is conducted by the Company lawyers and is subject to applicable privileges. For both asbestos and environmental reserves, the Company also compares its historical direct and net loss and expense paid and reported experience year by year, to assess any emerging trends, fluctuations or characteristics suggested by the aggregate paid and reported activity. 48 Once the gross ultimate exposure for indemnity and allocated loss adjustment expense is determined for its insureds by each policy year, the Company calculates its ceded reinsurance projection based on any applicable facultative and treaty reinsurance and the Company experience with reinsurance collections. Uncertainties Regarding Adequacy of Asbestos and Environmental Reserves A number of factors affect the variability of estimates for asbestos and environmental reserves including assumptions with respect to the frequency of claims, the average severity of those claims settled with payment, the dismissal rate of claims with no payment, resolution of coverage disputes with our policyholders and the expense to indemnity ratio. The uncertainty with respect to the underlying reserve assumptions for asbestos and environmental adds a greater degree of variability to these reserve estimates than reserve estimates for more traditional exposures. While this variability is reflected in part in the size of the range of reserves developed by the Company, that range may still not be indicative of the potential variance between the ultimate outcome and the recorded reserves. The recorded net reserves as of December 31, 2015 of approximately $2.0 billion ( $1.7 billion and $0.3 billion for asbestos and environmental, respectively) are within an estimated range, unadjusted for covariance, of $1.6 billion to $2.4 billion . The process of estimating asbestos and environmental reserves remains subject to a wide variety of uncertainties, which are detailed in Note 12 - Commitments and Contingencies of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. The Company believes that its current asbestos and environmental reserves are appropriate. However, analyses of future developments could cause the Company to change its estimates and ranges of its asbestos and environmental reserves, and the effect of these changes could be material to the Company's consolidated operating results and liquidity. Consistent with the Company's long-standing reserve practices, the Company will continue to review and monitor its reserves in Property & Casualty Other Operations regularly, including its annual reviews of asbestos liabilities, reinsurance recoverables, the allowance for uncollectible reinsurance, and environmental liabilities, and where future developments indicate, make appropriate adjustments to the reserves. In 2016, the Company will complete the annual ground-up asbestos and environmental reserve studies during the second quarter. Reserve Roll-forwards and Development Based on the results of the quarterly reserve review process, the Company determines the appropriate reserve adjustments, if any, to record. Recorded reserve estimates are adjusted after consideration of numerous factors, including but not limited to, the magnitude of the difference between the actuarial indication and the recorded reserves, improvement or deterioration of actuarial indications in the period, the maturity of the accident year, trends observed over the recent past and the level of volatility within a particular line of business. In general, adjustments are made more quickly to more mature accident years and less volatile lines of business. Such adjustments of reserves are referred to as prior accident year development . Increases in previous estimates of ultimate loss costs are referred to as either an increase in prior accident year reserves or as unfavorable reserve development. Decreases in previous estimates of ultimate loss costs are referred to as either a decrease in prior accident year reserves or as favorable reserve development. Reserve development can influence the comparability of year over year underwriting results and is set forth in the paragraphs and tables that follow. Total Property and Casualty Insurance Product Reserves, Net of Reinsurance, Results In the opinion of management, based upon the known facts and current law, the reserves recorded for the Company property and casualty insurance products at December 31, 2015 represent the Company best estimate of its ultimate liability for losses and loss adjustment expenses related to losses covered by policies written by the Company. However, because of the significant uncertainties surrounding reserves, and particularly asbestos and environmental exposures, it is possible that management estimate of the ultimate liabilities for these claims may change and that the required adjustment to recorded reserves could exceed the currently recorded reserves by an amount that could be material to the Company results of operations and liquidity. 49 A roll-forward of property and casualty insurance product liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses follows: Year Ended December 31, 2015 Commercial Lines Personal Lines Property & Casualty Other Operations Total Property & Casualty Insurance Beginning liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses, gross $ 16,465 $ 1,874 $ 3,467 $ 21,806 Reinsurance and other recoverables 2,459 18 564 3,041 Beginning liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses, net 14,006 1,856 2,903 18,765 Provision for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses Current accident year before catastrophes 3,712 2,578 25 6,315 Current accident year catastrophes [3] 121 211 332 Prior accident year development 53 (21 ) 218 250 Total provision for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses 3,886 2,768 243 6,897 Less: payments 3,626 2,798 295 6,719 Ending liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses, net 14,266 1,826 2,851 18,943 Reinsurance and other recoverables 2,293 19 570 2,882 Ending liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses, gross $ 16,559 $ 1,845 $ 3,421 $ 21,825 Earned premiums $ 6,511 $ 3,873 Loss and loss expense paid ratio [1] 55.7 72.2 Loss and loss expense incurred ratio 59.7 71.5 Prior accident year development (pts) [2] 0.8 (0.5 ) [1] The loss and loss expense paid ratio represents the ratio of paid losses and loss adjustment expenses to earned premiums. [2] Prior accident year development (pts) represents the ratio of prior accident year development to earned premiums. [3] Contributing to the current accident year catastrophes losses were the following events: Year Ended December 31, 2015 Category Commercial Lines Personal Lines Total Property and Casualty Insurance Wind and hail [1] $ 43 $ 114 $ 157 Winter storms [1] $ 57 $ 27 $ 84 Tornadoes [1] 18 29 47 Other [2] 3 41 44 Total $ 121 $ 211 $ 332 [1] These amounts represent an aggregation of multiple catastrophes. [2] Consists primarily of wildfires. 50 Prior accident year development recorded in 2015 Included within prior accident year development were the following increases (decreases) to reserves: Year Ended December 31, 2015 Commercial Lines Personal Lines Property & Casualty Other Operations Total Property & Casualty Insurance Auto liability $ 62 $ (8 ) $ $ 54 Homeowners 9 9 Professional liability (36 ) (36 ) Package business 28 28 General liability 8 8 Bond (2 ) (2 ) Commercial property (6 ) (6 ) Net asbestos reserves 146 146 Net environmental reserves 55 55 Workers compensation (37 ) (37 ) Workers compensation discount accretion 29 29 Catastrophes (18 ) (18 ) Other reserve re-estimates, net 7 (4 ) 17 20 Total prior accident year development $ 53 $ (21 ) $ 218 $ 250 During 2015 , the Company re-estimates of prior accident year reserves included the following significant reserve changes: Increased reserves in commercial auto liability due to increased severity of large claims predominantly for accident years 2010 to 2013. Decreased reserves in professional liability for claims made years 2009 through 2012 primarily for large accounts. Claim costs have emerged favorably as these years have matured and management has placed more weight on the emerged experience. Increased reserves in Small Commercial package business driven by higher than expected severity on liability claims, impacting recent accident years. Decreased reserves in workers' compensation due to an improvement in claim closure rates resulting in a decrease in outstanding claims for permanently disabled claimants. In addition, accident years 2013 and 2014 continue to exhibit favorable frequency and medical severity trends; management has been placing additional weight on this favorable experience as it becomes more credible. Decreased catastrophe reserves primarily for accident year 2014 as fourth quarter 2014 catastrophes have developed favorably. Within Other reserve re-estimates, net, decreased contract surety reserves across several accident years and decreased commercial surety reserves for accident years 2012 through 2014 as a result of lower emerged losses. These reserve decreases were offset by an increase in commercial surety reserves related to accident years 2007 and prior, as the number of new claims reported has outpaced expectations. Refer to the Property & Casualty Other Operations sections for discussion of the increase in net asbestos reserves, net environmental reserves and other reserve re-estimates, net. 51 A roll-forward of property and casualty insurance product liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses follows: Year Ended December 31, 2014 Commercial Lines Personal Lines Property & Casualty Other Operations Total Property & Casualty Insurance Beginning liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses, gross $ 16,293 $ 1,864 $ 3,547 $ 21,704 Reinsurance and other recoverables 2,442 13 573 3,028 Beginning liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses, net 13,851 1,851 2,974 18,676 Provision for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses Current accident year before catastrophes 3,733 2,498 6,231 Current accident year catastrophes [3] 109 232 341 Prior accident year development 13 (46 ) 261 228 Total provision for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses 3,855 2,684 261 6,800 Less: payments 3,665 2,679 367 6,711 Ending liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses, net 14,041 1,856 2,868 18,765 Reinsurance and other recoverables 2,464 18 559 3,041 Ending liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses, gross $ 16,505 $ 1,874 $ 3,427 $ 21,806 Earned premiums $ 6,289 $ 3,806 Loss and loss expense paid ratio [1] 58.3 70.4 Loss and loss expense incurred ratio 61.3 70.5 Prior accident year development (pts) [2] 0.2 (1.2 ) [1] The loss and loss expense paid ratio represents the ratio of paid losses and loss adjustment expenses to earned premiums. [2] Prior accident year development (pts) represents the ratio of prior accident year development to earned premiums. [3] Contributing to the current accident year catastrophes losses were the following events: Year Ended December 31, 2014 Category Commercial Lines Personal Lines Total Property and Casualty Insurance Wind and hail [1] $ 45 $ 196 $ 241 Winter storms [1] 54 19 73 Other [2] 10 17 27 Total $ 109 $ 232 $ 341 [1] Amounts represent an aggregation of multiple catastrophes. [2] Includes tornadoes, earthquakes and flooding. 52 Prior accident year development recorded in 2014 Included within prior accident year development were the following increases (decreases) to reserves: Year Ended December 31, 2014 Commercial Lines Personal Lines Property & Casualty Other Operations Total Property & Casualty Insurance Auto liability $ 23 $ 2 $ $ 25 Homeowners (7 ) (7 ) Professional liability (17 ) (17 ) Package business 3 3 General liability (25 ) (25 ) Bond 8 8 Commercial property 2 2 Net asbestos reserves 212 212 Net environmental reserves 30 30 Workers compensation (7 ) (7 ) Workers compensation discount accretion 30 30 Catastrophes (14 ) (31 ) (45 ) Other reserve re-estimates, net 10 (10 ) 19 19 Total prior accident year development $ 13 $ (46 ) $ 261 $ 228 During 2014 , the Company re-estimates of prior accident year reserves included the following significant reserve changes: Increased reserves in commercial auto liability due to an increased frequency of severe claims spread across several accident years. Homeowners reserves emerged favorably for accident year 2013, primarily related to favorable development on fire and water-related claims. Decreased professional liability reserves for accident years 2013, 2012 and 2010 due to lower frequency of reported claims. Decreased general liability reserves due to lower frequency in late emerging claims. Bond reserves emerged favorably for accident years 2008 to 2013, offset by adverse emergence on reserves for accident years 2007 and prior. Decreased catastrophe reserves primarily for accident year 2013, as fourth quarter 2013 catastrophes have developed favorably. Decreased workers' compensation reserves for recent accident years due to improved frequency and lower estimated claim handling costs. Refer to the Property & Casualty Other Operations Claims section for discussion of the increase in net asbestos reserves, net environmental reserves and other reserve re-estimates, net. 53 A roll-forward of property and casualty insurance product liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses follows: Year Ended December 31, 2013 Commercial Lines Personal Lines Property & Casualty Other Operations Total Property & Casualty Insurance Beginning liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses, gross $ 16,020 $ 1,926 $ 3,770 $ 21,716 Reinsurance and other recoverables 2,365 16 646 3,027 Beginning liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses, net 13,655 1,910 3,124 18,689 Provision for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses Current accident year before catastrophes 3,897 2,412 6,309 Current accident year catastrophes [3] 105 207 312 Prior accident year development 83 (39 ) 148 192 Total provision for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses 4,085 2,580 148 6,813 Less: payments 3,889 2,639 298 6,826 Ending liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses, net 13,851 1,851 2,974 18,676 Reinsurance and other recoverables 2,442 13 573 3,028 Ending liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses, gross $ 16,293 $ 1,864 $ 3,547 $ 21,704 Earned premiums $ 6,203 $ 3,660 Loss and loss expense paid ratio [1] 62.7 72.1 Loss and loss expense incurred ratio 65.9 70.5 Prior accident year development (pts) [2] 1.3 (1.1 ) [1] The loss and loss expense paid ratio represents the ratio of paid losses and loss adjustment expenses to earned premiums. [2] Prior accident year development (pts) represents the ratio of prior accident year development to earned premiums. [3] Contributing to the current accident year catastrophes losses were the following events: Year Ended December 31, 2013 Category Commercial Lines Personal Lines Total Property and Casualty Insurance Wind and hail [1] $ 65 $ 103 $ 168 Tornadoes [1] 27 63 90 Other [2] 13 41 54 Total $ 105 $ 207 $ 312 [1] Amounts represent an aggregation of multiple catastrophes. [2] Includes wildfire, winter storms and flooding. 54 Prior accident years development recorded in 2013 Included within prior accident year development were the following increases (decreases) in reserves: Year Ended December 31, 2013 Commercial Lines Personal Lines Property & Casualty Other Operations Total Property & Casualty Insurance Auto liability $ 141 $ 3 $ $ 144 Homeowners (6 ) (6 ) Professional liability (29 ) (29 ) Package business 2 2 General liability (75 ) (75 ) Bond (8 ) (8 ) Commercial property (7 ) (7 ) Net asbestos reserves 130 130 Net environmental reserves 12 12 Uncollectible reinsurance (25 ) (25 ) Workers compensation (2 ) (2 ) Workers compensation - NY 25a Fund for Reopened Cases 80 80 Workers compensation discount accretion 30 30 Catastrophes (24 ) (39 ) (63 ) Other reserve re-estimates, net 3 6 9 Total prior accident year development $ 83 $ (39 ) $ 148 $ 192 During 2013 , the Company re-estimates of prior accident years reserves included the following significant reserve changes: Increased commercial auto liability reserves, primarily related to specialty lines claims, arising from a higher frequency of large loss bodily injury claims in accident years 2010 through 2012. Decreased professional liability reserves for accident years 2008 through 2012 due to lower than expected claim severity, primarily for large-sized accounts. Decreased general liability reserves for accident years 2006 through 2011. The emergence of claim severity as well as the frequency of late reported claims for these years was lower than expected and management has placed more weight on the emerged experience. The Company reviewed the allowance for uncollectible reinsurance in the second quarter of 2013 and decreased the allowance as a result of favorable collections compared to expectations. The decrease in workers compensation reserves is the net of decreases for accident year 2009 and prior reflecting favorable development in average severity, the result of a speed up in settlements and the result of moving to an enhanced state-level analysis of loss experience, offset by unfavorable development of workers compensation reserves for accident years 2010 through 2012 reflecting the emergence of a higher mix of more severe claims. Increased reserves related to the closing of the New York Section 25A Fund for Reopened Cases (the "Fund"). These claims were previously funded through assessments and paid by the Fund. The claims became payable by the Company effective January 1, 2014. Decreased catastrophe reserves primarily related to Storm Sandy. Other reserve re-estimates, net includes an $18 recovery related to a class action settlement with American International Group involving prior accident years involuntary workers compensation pool loss and loss adjustment expense. Refer to the Property & Casualty Other Operations Claims section for further discussion of the increase in net asbestos and net environmental reserves. 55 Property & Casualty Other Operations Claims Reserve Activity Reserves and reserve activity in Property & Casualty Other Operations are categorized and reported as asbestos, environmental, or all other . The all other category of reserves covers a wide range of insurance and assumed reinsurance coverages, including, but not limited to, potential liability for construction defects, lead paint, silica, pharmaceutical products, molestation and other long-tail liabilities. The following table presents reserve activity, inclusive of estimates for both reported and incurred but not reported claims, net of reinsurance, for Property & Casualty Other Operations, categorized by asbestos, environmental and all other claims. Property & Casualty Other Operations Losses and Loss Adjustment Expenses Asbestos Environmental All Other [1] [2] Total 2015 Beginning liability net [3] [4] $ 1,710 $ 241 $ 952 $ 2,903 Losses and loss adjustment expenses incurred 156 58 29 243 Less: Losses and loss adjustment expenses paid 154 52 89 295 Ending liability net [3] [4] $ 1,712 [5] $ 247 $ 892 $ 2,851 2014 Beginning liability net [3] [4] $ 1,714 $ 270 $ 990 $ 2,974 Losses and loss adjustment expenses incurred 212 30 19 261 Less: Losses and loss adjustment expenses paid 216 59 92 367 Ending liability net [3] [4] $ 1,710 $ 241 $ 917 $ 2,868 2013 Beginning liability net [3] [4] $ 1,776 $ 290 $ 1,058 $ 3,124 Losses and loss adjustment expenses incurred 130 12 6 148 Less: Losses and loss adjustment expenses paid 192 32 74 298 Ending liability net [3] [4] $ 1,714 $ 270 $ 990 $ 2,974 [1] Hartford Financial Products International ("HFPI") net reserves of $35 as of December 31, 2014, have been prospectively reclassified from Commercial Lines to "All Other" as HFPI does not write new business. [2] In addition to various insurance and assumed reinsurance exposures, "All Other includes unallocated loss adjustment expense reserves. All Other also includes the Company allowance for uncollectible reinsurance. When the Company commutes a ceded reinsurance contract or settles a ceded reinsurance dispute, the portion of the allowance for uncollectible reinsurance attributable to that commutation or settlement, if any, is reclassified to the appropriate cause of loss including asbestos, environmental or all other. [3] Excludes amounts reported in Commercial Lines and Personal Lines reporting segments (collectively Ongoing Operations ) for asbestos and environmental net liabilities of $14 and $9 respectively, as of December 31, 2015 , $16 and $6 , respectively, as of December 31, 2014 , and $18 and $5 , respectively, as of December 31, 2013 ; excludes total net losses and loss adjustment expenses incurred for the years ended December 31, 2015 , 2014 and 2013 of $15, $16 and $15 , respectively, related to asbestos and environmental claims; and excludes total net losses and loss adjustment expenses paid for the years ended December 31, 2015 , 2014 and 2013 of $15, $17 and $14 , respectively, related to asbestos and environmental claims. [4] Gross of reinsurance, asbestos and environmental reserves, including liabilities in Ongoing Operations, were $2,222 and $287, respectively, as of December 31, 2015 ; $2,193 and $267 , respectively, as of December 31, 2014 ; and $2,182 and $311 , respectively, as of December 31, 2013 . [5] The one year and average three year net paid amounts for asbestos claims, including Ongoing Operations, were $166 and $198, respectively, resulting in a one year net survival ratio of 10.4 and a three year net survival ratio of 8.7. Net survival ratio is the quotient of the net carried reserves divided by the average annual payment amount and is an indication of the number of years that the net carried reserve would last (i.e., survive) if the future annual claim payments were consistent with the calculated historical average. For paid and incurred losses and loss adjustment expenses reporting, the Company classifies its asbestos and environmental reserves into three categories: Direct, Assumed Reinsurance and London Market. Direct insurance includes primary and excess coverage. Assumed Reinsurance includes both treaty reinsurance (covering broad categories of claims or blocks of business) and facultative reinsurance (covering specific risks or individual policies of primary or excess insurance companies). London Market business includes the business written by one or more of the Company subsidiaries in the United Kingdom, which are no longer active in the insurance or reinsurance business. Such business includes both direct insurance and assumed reinsurance. Of the three categories of claims (Direct, Assumed Reinsurance and London Market), direct policies tend to have the greatest factual development from which to estimate the Company exposures. 56 Assumed insurance exposures are less predictable than direct insurance exposures because the Company does not generally receive notice of a reinsurance claim until the underlying direct insurance claim is mature. This causes a delay in the receipt of information at the reinsurer level and adds to the uncertainty of estimating related reserves. London Market exposures are the most uncertain of the three categories of claims. As a participant in the London Market (comprised of both Lloyd of London and London Market companies), certain subsidiaries of the Company wrote business on a subscription basis, with those subsidiaries involvement being limited to a relatively small percentage of a total contract placement. Claims are reported, via a broker, to the lead underwriter and, once agreed to, are presented to the following markets for concurrence. This reporting and claim agreement process makes estimating liabilities for this business the most uncertain of the three categories of claims. The following table sets forth paid and incurred loss activity by the three categories of claims for asbestos and environmental. Paid and Incurred Losses and Loss Adjustment Expenses ( LAE ) Development Asbestos and Environmental Asbestos [1] Environmental [1] Paid Losses & LAE Incurred Losses & LAE Paid Losses & LAE Incurred Losses & LAE 2015 Gross Direct $ 145 $ 190 $ 44 $ 67 Assumed Reinsurance 57 (1 ) 5 (4 ) London Market 17 62 16 18 Total 219 251 65 81 Ceded (65 ) (95 ) (13 ) (23 ) Net $ 154 $ 156 $ 52 $ 58 2014 Gross Direct $ 201 $ 206 $ 55 $ 23 Assumed Reinsurance 72 70 12 London Market 17 28 6 7 Total 290 304 73 30 Ceded (74 ) (92 ) (14 ) Net $ 216 $ 212 $ 59 $ 30 2013 Gross Direct $ 159 $ 72 $ 23 $ 6 Assumed Reinsurance 68 50 4 6 London Market 16 8 6 Total 243 130 33 12 Ceded (51 ) (1 ) Net $ 192 $ 130 $ 32 $ 12 [1] Excludes asbestos and environmental paid and incurred loss and LAE reported in Ongoing Operations. Total gross losses and LAE incurred in Ongoing Operations for the years ended December 31, 2015 , 2014 and 2013 includes $16, $19 and $15, respectively, related to asbestos and environmental claims. Total gross losses and LAE paid in Ongoing Operations for the years ended December 31, 2015 , 2014 and 2013 includes $16, $21 and $14, respectively, related to asbestos and environmental claims. 57 In the fourth quarters of 2015, 2014 and 2013, the Company completed evaluations of certain of its non-asbestos and non-environmental reserves in Property & Casualty Other Operations, including its assumed reinsurance liabilities. In 2015 and 2014, the Company's prior year development was impacted by unfavorable frequency of international workers' compensation claims. The Company's prior year development on these reserves was immaterial in 2013. During the second quarters of 2015, 2014 and 2013, the Company completed its annual ground-up asbestos reserve evaluations. As part of these evaluations, the Company reviewed all of its open direct domestic insurance accounts exposed to asbestos liability, as well as assumed reinsurance accounts and its London Market exposures for both direct insurance and assumed reinsurance. During 2015, the Company found a substantial majority of direct accounts have trended as expected, and the Company has seen no material changes in the underlying legal environment during the past year. However, a small percentage of the Company direct accounts have experienced greater than expected claim filings, including mesothelioma claims. This was driven by a subset of peripheral defendants with a high concentration of filings in specific, adverse jurisdictions. As a result, the aggregate indemnity and defense costs have not declined as expected. To a lesser degree, the Company also saw unfavorable development on certain assumed reinsurance accounts, driven by various account-specific factors, including filing activity experienced by the direct accounts. Based on this evaluation, the Company increased its net asbestos reserves by $146 in second quarter 2015. During 2014, the Company found estimates for certain direct accounts increased, principally due to a higher than previously estimated number of mesothelioma claim filings and an increase in costs associated with asbestos litigation. The Company also experienced unfavorable development on certain of its assumed reinsurance accounts driven by a variety of account-specific factors, including those experienced by the direct policyholders. Based on this evaluation, the Company increased its net asbestos reserves by $212 in second quarter 2014. During 2013, the Company found estimates for individual cases changed based upon the particular circumstances in such accounts. These cases were case specific and not as a result of any underlying change in current environment. The Company experienced moderate increases in claim frequency and severity as well as expense and costs associated with litigating asbestos coverage matters, particularly against certain smaller, more peripheral insureds. The Company also experienced unfavorable development on certain of its assumed reinsurance accounts driven largely by the same factors experienced by the direct policyholders. Based on this evaluation, the Company increased its net asbestos reserves by $130 in second quarter 2013. The Company currently expects to continue to perform an evaluation of its asbestos liabilities annually. During the second quarters of 2015, 2014 and 2013, the Company completed its annual ground-up environmental reserve evaluations. In each of these evaluations, the Company reviewed all of its open direct domestic insurance accounts exposed to environmental liability, as well as assumed reinsurance accounts and its London Market exposures for both direct and assumed reinsurance. During 2015, the substantial majority of the Company's environmental exposures trended as expected, however the Company found loss and expense estimates for certain individual account exposures increased based upon an increase in clean-up costs, including at a handful of Superfund sites. In addition, new claim severity has deteriorated, although frequency continues to decline as expected. During 2014 and 2013, the Company found estimates for certain individual account exposures increased based upon unfavorable litigation results and increased clean-up and expense costs. The net effect of these account-specific changes as well as quarterly actuarial evaluations of new account emergence and historical loss and expense paid experience resulted in increases of $58, $30 and $12 in net environmental reserves in 2015 , 2014 and 2013 , respectively. The Company currently expects to continue to perform an evaluation of its environmental liabilities annually. The Company divides its gross asbestos and environmental exposures into Direct, Assumed Reinsurance and London Market. Direct asbestos exposures include Major Asbestos Defendants, Non-Major Accounts, and Unallocated Direct Accounts. Major Asbestos Defendants represent the Top 70 accounts in Tillinghast's published Tiers 1 and 2 and Wellington accounts. Major Asbestos Defendants have the fewest number of asbestos accounts and include reserves related to PPG Industries, Inc. ( PPG ). In January 2009, the Company, along with approximately three dozen other insurers, entered into a modified agreement in principle with PPG to resolve the Company's coverage obligations for all its PPG asbestos liabilities. The agreement is contingent on the fulfillment of certain conditions. Major Asbestos Defendants gross asbestos reserves accounted for approximately 25% of the Company's total Direct gross asbestos reserves as of June 30, 2015. Non-Major Accounts are all other open direct asbestos accounts and largely represent smaller and more peripheral defendants. These exposures represented 1,132 accounts and contained approximately 46% of the Company's total Direct gross asbestos reserves as of June 30, 2015. Unallocated Direct Accounts includes an estimate of the reserves necessary for asbestos claims related to direct insureds that have not previously tendered asbestos claims to the Company and exposures related to liability claims that may not be subject to an aggregate limit under the applicable policies. 58 The Company provides an allowance for uncollectible reinsurance, reflecting management best estimate of reinsurance cessions that may be uncollectible in the future due to reinsurers unwillingness or inability to pay. The Company currently expects to perform its regular comprehensive review of Property & Casualty Other Operations reinsurance recoverables annually. During the second quarters of 2015, 2014 and 2013, the Company completed its annual evaluations of the collectability of the reinsurance recoverables and the adequacy of the allowance for uncollectible reinsurance associated with older, long-term casualty liabilities reported in the Property & Casualty Other Operations. In conducting this evaluation, the Company used its most recent detailed evaluations of ceded liabilities reported in the segment. The Company analyzed the overall credit quality of the Company reinsurers, recent trends in arbitration and litigation outcomes in disputes between cedants and reinsurers and recent developments in commutation activity between reinsurers and cedants. The evaluation in the second quarters of 2015, 2014, and 2013 resulted in no material adjustments to the allowance for uncollectible reinsurance. As of December 31, 2015, 2014, and 2013, the allowance for uncollectible reinsurance for Property & Casualty Other Operations totaled $ 220 , $225, and $202. Due to the inherent uncertainties as to collection and the length of time before reinsurance recoverables become due, particularly for older, long-term casualty liabilities, it is possible that future adjustments to the Company reinsurance recoverables, net of the allowance, could be required. A summary of asbestos and environmental reserves in Ongoing Operations and Other Operations is presented in the following table. Summary of A&E Reserves As of December 31, 2015 Asbestos [1] Environmental [2] Total A&E Gross Direct $ 1,681 $ 222 $ 1,903 Assumed Reinsurance 234 14 248 London Market 307 51 358 Total 2,222 287 2,509 Ceded (496 ) (31 ) (527 ) Net $ 1,726 $ 256 $ 1,982 [1] The one year gross paid amount for total asbestos claims is $231, resulting in a one year gross survival ratio of 9.6. The three year average gross paid amount for total asbestos claims is $263, resulting in a three year gross survival ratio of 8.5. [2] The one year gross paid amount for total environmental claims is $68, resulting in a one year gross survival ratio of 4.2. The three year average gross paid amount for total environmental claims is $64, resulting in a three year gross survival ratio of 4.5. 59 Impact of Re-estimates The establishment of property and casualty insurance product reserves is an estimation process, using a variety of methods, assumptions and data elements. Ultimate losses may vary materially from the current estimates. Many factors can contribute to these variations and the need to change the previous estimate of required reserve levels. Subsequent changes can generally be thought of as being the result of the emergence of additional facts that were not known or anticipated at the time of the prior reserve estimate and/or changes in interpretations of information and trends. The table below shows the range of annual reserve re-estimates experienced by The Hartford over the past ten years. The amount of prior accident year development (as shown in the reserve rollforward) for a given calendar year is expressed as a percent of the beginning calendar year reserves, net of reinsurance. The percentage relationships presented are significantly influenced by the facts and circumstances of each particular year and by the fact that only the last ten years are included in the range. Accordingly, these percentages are not intended to be a prediction of the range of possible future variability. See Impact of key assumptions on reserve volatility within this section for further discussion of the potential for variability in recorded loss reserves. Commercial Lines Personal Lines Property & Casualty Other Operations Total Property & Casualty [1] Annual range of prior accident year unfavorable (favorable) development for the ten years ended December 31, 2015 (3.1)% - 1.0% (6.9)% - (0.2)% 1.9% - 9.3% (1.2)% - 2.0% [1] Excluding the reserve increases for asbestos and environmental reserves, over the past ten years reserve re-estimates for total property and casualty insurance ranged from (2.5)% to 0.3% . The potential variability of the Company property and casualty insurance product reserves would normally be expected to vary by segment and the types of loss exposures insured by those segments. Illustrative factors influencing the potential reserve variability for each of the segments are discussed above. A table depicting the historical development of the liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses, net of reinsurance, follows: Loss Development Table Loss And Loss Adjustment Expense Liability Development Net of Reinsurance Years Ended December 31, 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 Liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses, net of reinsurance $ 16,863 $ 17,604 $ 18,231 $ 18,347 $ 18,210 $ 17,948 $ 18,517 $ 18,689 $ 18,676 $ 18,765 $ 18,943 Cumulative paid losses and loss expenses One year later 3,702 3,727 3,703 3,771 3,882 4,037 4,216 4,274 4,072 4,066 Two years later 6,122 5,980 5,980 6,273 6,401 6,664 6,897 7,019 6,801 Three years later 7,755 7,544 7,752 8,074 8,241 8,503 8,875 9,015 Four years later 8,889 8,833 9,048 9,411 9,538 9,928 10,329 Five years later 9,903 9,778 10,061 10,395 10,649 11,015 Six years later 10,674 10,564 10,845 11,303 11,534 Seven years later 11,334 11,216 11,612 12,072 Eight years later 11,895 11,883 12,270 Nine years later 12,493 12,487 Ten years later 13,044 Liabilities re-estimated One year later 17,159 17,652 18,005 18,161 18,014 18,315 18,513 18,881 18,904 19,015 Two years later 17,347 17,475 17,858 18,004 18,136 18,275 18,686 19,207 19,170 Three years later 17,318 17,441 17,700 18,139 18,093 18,299 19,013 19,515 Four years later 17,497 17,439 17,866 18,120 18,056 18,629 19,375 Five years later 17,613 17,676 17,848 18,092 18,408 18,980 Six years later 17,895 17,673 17,857 18,437 18,742 Seven years later 17,899 17,749 18,215 18,764 Eight years later 18,045 18,097 18,499 Nine years later 18,390 18,372 Ten years later 18,640 Deficiency (redundancy), net of reinsurance $ 1,777 $ 768 $ 268 $ 417 $ 532 $ 1,032 $ 858 $ 826 $ 494 $ 250 60 The previous table shows the cumulative deficiency (redundancy) of the Company reserves, net of reinsurance, as now estimated with the benefit of additional information. Those amounts are comprised of changes in estimates of gross losses and changes in estimates of related reinsurance recoveries. The following table, for the periods presented, reconciles the net reserves to the gross reserves, as initially estimated and recorded, and as currently estimated and recorded, and computes the cumulative deficiency (redundancy) of the Company reserves before reinsurance. Loss And Loss Adjustment Expense Liability Development Gross Years Ended December 31, 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 Net reserve, as initially estimated $ 17,604 $ 18,231 $ 18,347 $ 18,210 $ 17,948 $ 18,517 $ 18,689 $ 18,676 $ 18,765 $ 18,943 Reinsurance and other recoverables, as initially estimated 4,387 3,922 3,586 3,441 3,077 3,033 3,027 3,028 3,041 2,882 Gross reserve, as initially estimated $ 21,991 $ 22,153 $ 21,933 $ 21,651 $ 21,025 $ 21,550 $ 21,716 $ 21,704 $ 21,806 $ 21,825 Net re-estimated reserve $ 18,372 $ 18,499 $ 18,764 $ 18,742 $ 18,980 $ 19,375 $ 19,515 $ 19,170 $ 19,015 Re-estimated reinsurance and other recoverables 4,890 4,611 4,292 3,891 3,544 3,466 3,271 3,210 3,181 Gross re-estimated reserve $ 23,262 $ 23,110 $ 23,056 $ 22,633 $ 22,524 $ 22,841 $ 22,786 $ 22,380 $ 22,196 Gross deficiency (redundancy) $ 1,271 $ 957 $ 1,123 $ 982 $ 1,499 $ 1,291 $ 1,070 $ 676 $ 390 The following table is derived from the Loss Development table and summarizes the effect of reserve re-estimates, net of reinsurance, on calendar year operations for the ten-year period ended December 31, 2015 . The total of each column details the amount of reserve re-estimates made in the indicated calendar year and shows the accident years to which the re-estimates are applicable. The amounts in the total accident year column on the far right represent the cumulative reserve re-estimates during the ten year period ended December 31, 2015 for the indicated accident year(s). Effect of Net Reserve Re-estimates on Calendar Year Operations Calendar Year 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 Total By Accident Year 2005 & Prior $ 296 $ 188 $ (29 ) $ 179 $ 116 $ 282 $ 4 $ 145 $ 346 $ 250 $ 1,777 2006 (140 ) (148 ) (213 ) (118 ) (45 ) (7 ) (69 ) 2 25 (713 ) 2007 (49 ) (113 ) (156 ) (71 ) (15 ) (67 ) 10 9 (452 ) 2008 (39 ) 1 (31 ) (1 ) (37 ) (13 ) 43 (77 ) 2009 (39 ) (13 ) (24 ) (8 ) 7 7 (70 ) 2010 245 3 61 (22 ) 16 303 2011 36 148 (4 ) 12 192 2012 19 (55 ) (36 ) 2013 (98 ) (43 ) (141 ) 2014 (14 ) (14 ) Total increase (decrease) $ 296 $ 48 $ (226 ) $ (186 ) $ (196 ) $ 367 $ (4 ) $ 192 $ 228 $ 250 $ 769 61 Reserve changes for accident years 2005 and Prior The largest impacts of net reserve re-estimates are shown in the 2005 & Prior accident years. The net reserve re-estimates are driven, in part, by increased reserves for asbestos, environmental, assumed casualty reinsurance, workers compensation and general liability claims. Numerous actuarial assumptions on assumed casualty reinsurance turned out to be low, including loss cost trends, particularly on excess of loss business, and the impact of deteriorating terms and conditions. The net reserve re-estimates in 2006 were largely attributable to decreases in the reinsurance recoverable asset associated with older, long-term casualty liabilities, and unexpected unfavorable development on mature claims in both general liability and workers compensation. In contrast, catastrophe reserves related to the 2004 and 2005 hurricanes developed favorably in 2006. In 2007, the Company refined its processes for allocating incurred but not reported ( IBNR ) reserves by accident year, resulting in a reclassification of $347 of IBNR reserves from the 2003 to 2006 accident years to the 2002 and prior accident years. This reclassification of reserves by accident year had no effect on total recorded reserves within any segment or on total recorded reserves for any line of business within a segment. The reserve re-estimates in 2009, 2010, 2011, 2013, 2014 and 2015 were largely driven by increases in asbestos and environmental reserves, resulting from the Company annual evaluations of these liabilities. These reserve evaluations reflect deterioration in the litigation environment surrounding asbestos and environmental liabilities during this period. Reserve changes for accident years 2006 through 2009 During 2007 and 2008, the Company recognized favorable re-estimates of both loss and allocated loss adjustment expenses for the 2006 and 2007 accident years on workers compensation claims, driven, in part, by state regulatory reforms in California and Florida, underwriting actions, and expense reduction initiatives that had a greater impact in controlling costs than originally estimated. Even after considering the reclassification of IBNR reserves, accident years 2006 and 2007 show favorable reserve development in 2007 through 2011. A portion of the favorable reserve development comes from short-tail lines of business, where results emerge quickly. Unfavorable reserve re-estimates in 2015 for accident years 2006 and 2008 are primarily related to elevated workers' compensation loss emergence. Accident year 2008 was also unfavorably impacted in 2015 by an increase in general liability reserves. In 2007, the Company decreased reserves for accident year 2006 package business claims as reported losses emerged favorably to previous expectations. In 2007 through 2009, the Company decreased reserves for accident year 2006 general liability claims due to the favorable emergence of losses for high hazard and umbrella general liability claims. Reserves for professional liability claims were decreased in 2008 and 2009 related to the 2006 and 2007 accident years due to a lower estimate of claim severity on both directors and officers insurance claims and errors and omissions insurance claims. Reserves for Personal Lines auto liability claims were decreased in 2008 due largely to an improvement in emerged claim severity for the 2006 and 2007 accident years. Modest favorable reserve re-estimates in 2010 through 2013 for accident year 2009 are primarily related to liability lines of business. Reserve changes for accident years 2010 and 2011 Unfavorable reserve re-estimates in 2011 on accident year 2010 were largely driven by workers' compensation. Loss cost trends were higher than initially expected as an increase in frequency outpaced a moderation of severity trends. Unfavorable reserve re-estimates in 2013 on accident year 2010 and 2011 were primarily related to workers' compensation and commercial auto liability. Workers' compensation loss cost trends were higher than initially expected as an increase in frequency outpaced a moderation of severity trends. Unfavorable commercial auto liability reserve re-estimates were driven by higher frequency of large loss bodily injury claims. Favorable reserve re-estimates in 2014 for accident year 2010 were driven by lower frequency of professional liability reported claims, favorable bond claim emergence and lower frequency of late emerging liability claims. Modest unfavorable reserve re-estimates in 2015 for accident years 2010 and 2011 were driven by increased reserves in commercial auto liability due to increased severity of large claims. Reserve changes for accident years 2012 and 2013 Modest unfavorable reserve re-estimates during 2013 for accident year 2012 were primarily related to commercial auto liability driven by higher frequency of large loss loss bodily injury claims offset by reserve releases related to Storm Sandy. Reserves were decreased in 2015 for accident year 2012 due to favorable frequency and medical severity trends for workers' compensation, favorable professional liability claim emergence and lower frequency of late emerging general liability claims, partially offset by increased reserves in commercial auto liability due to increased severity of large claims. 62 Reserves were decreased in 2014 for accident year 2013 driven by lower estimated claim handling costs for workers' compensation and lower frequency of reported claims for professional liability. Reserves were also decreased in 2014 for accident year 2013 driven by favorable development of fourth quarter catastrophes and favorable emergence of losses for property lines of business. Reserves were decreased in 2015 for accident year 2013 driven by favorable frequency and medical severity trends for workers' compensation and favorable professional liability claim emergence, partially offset by unfavorable reserve re-estimates in commercial auto liability driven by increased severity of large claims. Reserve changes for accident year 2014 Reserves were decreased in 2015 driven by favorable frequency and medical severity trends for workers' compensation and favorable development of fourth quarter catastrophes, partially offset by increased severity of liability claims on package business. Estimated Gross Profits Used in the Valuation and Amortization of Assets and Liabilities Associated with Variable Annuity and Other Universal Life-Type Contracts Estimated gross profits ( EGPs ) are used in the amortization of the deferred policy acquisition costs ("DAC") asset and sales inducement assets ( SIA ). Portions of EGPs are also used in the valuation of reserves for death and other insurance benefit features on variable annuity and other universal life type contracts. The most significant EGP based balances are as follows: Talcott Resolution As of December 31, 2015 2014 DAC [1] $ 1,180 $ 1,200 SIA $ 56 $ 89 Death and Other Insurance Benefit Reserves, net of reinsurance [2] $ 340 $ 331 [1] For additional information on DAC, see Note 7 - Deferred Policy Acquisition Costs of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. [2] For additional information on death and other insurance benefit reserves, see Note 9 - Separate Accounts, Death Benefits and Other Insurance Benefit Features of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Unlocks The benefit (charge) to income from continuing operations, net of tax by asset and liability as a result of the Unlocks is as follows: Talcott Resolution For the years ended December 31, 2015 2014 2013 DAC $ 69 $ (136 ) $ (199 ) SIA (17 ) (35 ) (20 ) URR 42 16 Death and Other Insurance Benefit Reserves 28 34 36 Total (before tax) $ 80 $ (95 ) $ (167 ) Income tax effect 28 (33 ) (58 ) Total (after-tax) $ 52 $ (62 ) $ (109 ) The Unlock benefit, after-tax, for the year ended December 31, 2015 was primarily due to assumption changes related to benefit utilization and lower assumed lapse rates, partially offset by a lower assumed general account spread and higher assumed withdrawal rates. The Unlock charge for the year ended December 31, 2014 was primarily due to lower future estimated gross profits on the fixed annuity block driven by the continued low interest rate environment as well as higher variable annuity unit costs due to higher than expected surrenders, partially offset by actual separate account returns being above our aggregated estimated returns during the period. The Unlock charge for the year ended December 31, 2013 was primarily due to assumption changes in connection with the annual policyholder behavior assumption study, partially offset by actual separate account returns above our aggregated estimated returns during the period. 63 For most annuity contracts, the Company estimates gross profits over 20 years as EGPs emerging subsequent to that time frame are immaterial. Products sold in a particular year are aggregated into cohorts. Future gross profits for each cohort are projected over the estimated lives of the underlying contracts, based on future account value projections for variable annuity products. The projection of future account values requires the use of certain assumptions including: separate account returns; separate account fund mix; fees assessed against the contract holder account balance; surrender and lapse rates; interest margin; mortality; and the extent and duration of hedging activities and hedging costs. Changes in these assumptions and changes to other policyholder behavior assumptions such as resets, partial surrenders, reaction to price increases, and asset allocations cause EGPs to fluctuate, which impacts earnings. The Company determines EGPs from a single deterministic reversion to mean ( RTM ) separate account return projection which is an estimation technique commonly used by insurance entities to project future separate account returns. Through this estimation technique, the Company DAC model is adjusted to reflect actual account values at the end of each quarter. Through consideration of recent market returns, the Company will unlock, or adjust, projected returns over a future period so that the account value returns to the long-term expected rate of return, providing that those projected returns do not exceed certain caps. The Unlock for future separate account returns is determined each quarter. Under RTM, the expected long term weighted average rate of return is 8.3% . In the fourth quarter of 2015, the Company completed a comprehensive policyholder behavior assumption study which resulted in a non-market related after-tax benefit of $9 and incorporated the results of that study into its projection of future gross profits. Additionally, throughout the year, the Company evaluates various aspects of policyholder behavior and will revise its policyholder assumptions if credible emerging data indicates that changes are warranted. The Company will continue to evaluate its assumptions related to policyholder behavior as initiatives to reduce the size of the annuity business are implemented by management. Upon completion of an annual assumption study or evaluation of credible new information, the Company will revise its assumptions to reflect its current best estimate. These assumption revisions will change the projected account values and the related EGPs in the DAC and SIA amortization models, as well as the death and other insurance benefit reserving model. All assumption changes that affect the estimate of future EGPs including the update of current account values, the use of the RTM estimation technique and policyholder behavior assumptions are considered an Unlock in the period of revision. An Unlock adjusts DAC, SIA, and death and other insurance benefit reserve balances in the Consolidated Balance Sheets with an offsetting benefit or charge in the Consolidated Statements of Operations in the period of the revision. An Unlock that results in an after-tax benefit generally occurs as a result of actual experience or future expectations of product profitability being favorable compared to previous estimates. An Unlock that results in an after-tax charge generally occurs as a result of actual experience or future expectations of product profitability being unfavorable compared to previous estimates. EGPs are also used to determine the expected excess benefits and assessments included in the measurement of death and other insurance benefit reserves. These excess benefits and assessments are derived from a range of stochastic scenarios that have been calibrated to the Company RTM separate account returns. The determination of death and other insurance benefit reserves is also impacted by discount rates, lapses, volatilities, mortality assumptions and benefit utilization, including assumptions around annuitization rates. In addition to updating assumptions in the fourth quarter of each year, an Unlock revises EGPs, on a quarterly basis, to reflect the Company current best estimate assumptions and market updates of policyholder account value. Modifications to the Company hedging programs may impact EGPs, and correspondingly impact DAC recoverability. After each quarterly Unlock, the Company also tests the aggregate recoverability of DAC by comparing the DAC balance to the present value of future EGPs. The margin between the DAC balance and the present value of future EGPs for variable annuities was 40% as of December 31, 2015 . If the margin between the DAC asset and the present value of future EGPs is exhausted, then further reductions in EGPs would cause portions of DAC to be unrecoverable and the DAC asset would be written down to equal future EGPs. Evaluation of OTTI on Available-for-Sale Securities and Valuation Allowances on Mortgage Loans The Company has a monitoring process that is overseen by a committee of investment and accounting professionals which identifies investments that are subject to an enhanced evaluation on a quarterly basis to determine if an other-than-temporary impairment ( impairment ) is present for AFS securities or a valuation allowance is required for mortgage loans. This evaluation is a quantitative and qualitative process, which is subject to risks and uncertainties. For further discussion of the accounting policies, see the Significant Investment Accounting Policies Section in Note 1 - Basis of Presentation and Significant Accounting Policies of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. For a discussion of impairments recorded, see the Other-Than-Temporary Impairments within the Investment Portfolio Risks and Risk Management section of the MD&A. 64 Living Benefits Required to be Fair Valued (in Other Policyholder Funds and Benefits Payable ) Fair values for GMWBs classified as embedded derivatives are calculated using the income approach based upon internally developed models, because active, observable markets do not exist for those items. The fair value of these GMWBs and the related reinsurance and customized freestanding derivatives are calculated as an aggregation of the following components: Best Estimate Claim Payments; Credit Standing Adjustment; and Margins. The resulting aggregation is reconciled or calibrated, if necessary, to market information that is, or may be, available to the Company, but may not be observable by other market participants, including reinsurance discussions and transactions. The Company believes the aggregation of these components, as necessary and as reconciled or calibrated to the market information available to the Company, results in an amount that the Company would be required to transfer to or receive from market participants in an active liquid market, if one existed, for those market participants to assume the risks associated with the guaranteed minimum benefits and the related reinsurance and customized derivatives. The fair value is likely to materially diverge from the ultimate settlement of the liability as the Company believes settlement will be based on our best estimate assumptions rather than those best estimate assumptions plus risk margins. In the absence of any transfer of the guaranteed benefit liability to a third party, the release of risk margins is likely to be reflected as realized gains in future periods net income. Oversight of the Company's valuation policies and processes for product and GMWB reinsurance derivatives is performed by a multidisciplinary group comprised of finance, actuarial and risk management professionals. This multidisciplinary group reviews and approves changes and enhancements to the Company's valuation model as well as associated controls For further discussion on the impact of fair value changes from living benefits see Note 4 - Fair Value Measurements of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, and for a discussion on the sensitivities of certain living benefits due to capital market factors see Part II, Item 7, MD&A Variable Product Guarantee Risks and Risk Management. Evaluation of Goodwill for Impairment Goodwill balances are reviewed for impairment at least annually or more frequently if events occur or circumstances change that would indicate that a triggering event for a potential impairment has occurred. The goodwill impairment test follows a two-step process. In the first step, the fair value of a reporting unit is compared to its carrying value. If the carrying value of a reporting unit exceeds its fair value, the second step of the impairment test is performed for purposes of measuring the impairment. In the second step, the fair value of the reporting unit is allocated to all of the assets and liabilities of the reporting unit to determine an implied goodwill value. If the carrying amount of the reporting unit goodwill exceeds the implied goodwill value, an impairment loss is recognized in an amount equal to that excess. Management determination of the fair value of each reporting unit incorporates multiple inputs into discounted cash flow calculations including assumptions that market participants would make in valuing the reporting unit. Assumptions include levels of economic capital, future business growth, earnings projections, assets under management for Mutual Funds, and the weighted average cost of capital used for purposes of discounting. Decreases in the amount of legal entity capital held or economic capital allocated to a reporting unit, decreases in business growth, decreases in earnings projections and increases in the weighted average cost of capital will all cause a reporting unit fair value to decrease, increasing the possibility of impairment. A reporting unit is defined as an operating segment or one level below an operating segment. The Company reporting units, for which goodwill has been allocated, are equivalent to the Company operating segments of Group Benefits, Personal Lines and Mutual Funds. The carrying value of goodwill is $498 as of December 31, 2015 and is comprised of $241 for Mutual Funds, $138 for Group Benefits and $119 for Personal Lines. The annual goodwill assessment for the Mutual Funds, Group Benefits and Personal Lines reporting units was completed as of October 31, 2015, which resulted in no write-downs of goodwill for the year ended December 31, 2015. All reporting units passed the first step of the annual impairment test with a significant margin. For information regarding the 2014 and 2013 impairment tests see Note 8 - Goodwill of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 65 Valuation of Investments and Derivative Instruments Fixed Maturities, AFS; Equity Securities, AFS; Equity Securities, FVO, Fixed Maturities, FVO; Equity Securities, Trading; and Short-term Investments The fair value of fixed maturities, equity securities, and short-term investments in an active and orderly market (i.e., not distressed or forced liquidation) are determined by management after considering the following pricing sources: quoted prices for identical assets or liabilities, prices from third-party services, independent broker quotations or internal matrix pricing processes. Security pricing is applied using a waterfall approach whereby publicly available prices are first sought from third-party pricing services, any remaining unpriced securities are submitted to independent brokers for prices, or lastly, securities are priced using an internal pricing matrix. Typical inputs used by these pricing sources include, but are not limited to, benchmark yields, reported trades, broker/dealer quotes, issuer spreads, bids, offers, and/or estimated cash flows, prepayment speeds and default rates. Most fixed maturities do not trade daily. Based on the typical trading volumes and the lack of quoted market prices for fixed maturities, third-party pricing services utilize matrix pricing to derive security prices. Matrix pricing relies on securities' relationships to other benchmark quoted securities, which trade more frequently. Pricing services utilize recently reported trades of identical or similar securities making adjustments through the reporting date based on the preceding outlined available market observable information. If there are no recently reported trades, the third-party pricing services may develop a security price using expected future cash flows based upon collateral performance and discounted at an estimated market rate. Both matrix pricing and discounted cash flow techniques develop prices by factoring in the time value for cash flows and risk, including liquidity and credit. Included in the pricing of asset-backed-securities ("ABS") and residential mortgage-backed securities ("RMBS") are estimates of the rate of future prepayments of principal over the remaining life of the securities. Such estimates are derived based upon the characteristics of the underlying structure and prepayment speeds previously experienced at the interest rate levels projected for the underlying collateral. Actual prepayment experience may vary from these estimates. For further discussion, see the AFS Securities, Equity Securities, FVO Fixed Maturities, FVO, Equity Securities, Trading, and Short-Term Investments section in Note 4 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. The Company has analyzed the third-party pricing services' valuation methodologies and related inputs, and has also evaluated the various types of securities in its investment portfolio to determine an appropriate fair value hierarchy level based upon trading activity and the observability of market inputs. For further discussion of fair value measurement, see Note 4 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Derivative Instruments, including Embedded Derivatives within Investments The fair value of derivative instruments is determined using pricing valuation models for over-the-counter ("OTC") derivatives that utilize market data inputs, quoted market prices for exchanged-traded derivatives and transactions cleared through central clearing houses ("OTC-cleared"), or independent broker quotations. Excluding embedded and reinsurance related derivatives, as of December 31, 2015 and 2014 , 96% and 96% , respectively, of derivatives, based upon notional values, were priced by valuation models or quoted market prices. The remaining derivatives were priced by broker quotations. The derivatives are valued using mid-market level inputs that are predominantly observable in the market with the exception of the customized swap contracts that hedge GMWB liabilities. Inputs used to value derivatives include, but are not limited to, swap interest rates, foreign currency forward and spot rates, credit spreads and correlations, interest and equity volatility and equity index levels. For further discussion on derivative instrument valuation methodologies, see the Derivative Instruments, including embedded derivatives within the investments section in Note 4 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. For further discussion on GMWB and other guaranteed living benefits valuation methodologies, see the Living Benefits Required to be Fair Valued section in Note 4 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Limited Partnerships and Other Alternative Investments Limited partnerships and other alternative investments include hedge funds where investment company accounting has been applied to a wholly-owned fund of funds measured at fair value. These funds are fair valued using the net asset value per share or equivalent ( NAV ), as a practical expedient, calculated on a monthly basis and is the amount at which a unit or shareholder may redeem their investment, if redemption is allowed. Certain impediments to redemption include, but are not limited to the following: 1) redemption notice periods vary and may be as long as 90 days, 2) redemption may be restricted (e.g. only be allowed on a quarter-end), 3) a holding period referred to as a lock-up may be imposed whereby an investor must hold their investment for a specified period of time before they can make a notice for redemption, 4) gating provisions may limit all redemptions in a given period to a percentage of the entities' equity interests, or may only allow an investor to redeem a portion of their investment at one time and 5) early redemption penalties may be imposed that are expressed as a percentage of the amount redeemed. The Company regularly assesses impediments to redemption and current market conditions that will restrict the redemption at the end of the notice period. For further discussion of fair value measurement, see Note 4 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. In addition, certain limited partnerships and other alternative investments are accounted for under the equity method of accounting. For further discussion, see the Investments - Overview section of Note 1 of Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. 66 Valuation Allowance on Deferred Tax Assets Deferred tax assets represent the tax benefit of future deductible temporary differences and tax carryforwards. Deferred tax assets are measured using the enacted tax rates expected to be in effect when such benefits are realized if there is no change in tax law. Under U.S. GAAP, we test the value of deferred tax assets for impairment on a quarterly basis at the entity level within each tax jurisdiction, consistent with our filed tax returns. Deferred tax assets are reduced by a valuation allowance if, based on the weight of available evidence, it is more likely than not that some portion, or all, of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. The determination of the valuation allowance for our deferred tax assets requires management to make certain judgments and assumptions. In evaluating the ability to recover deferred tax assets, we have considered all available evidence as of December 31, 2015 , including past operating results, forecasted earnings, future taxable income, and prudent and feasible tax planning strategies. In the event we determine it is more likely than not that we will not be able to realize all or part of our deferred tax assets in the future, an increase to the valuation allowance would be charged to earnings in the period such determination is made. Likewise, if it is later determined that it is more likely than not that those deferred tax assets would be realized, the previously provided valuation allowance would be reversed. Our judgments and assumptions are subject to change given the inherent uncertainty in predicting future performance and specific industry and investment market conditions. As of December 31, 2015 and 2014, the Company has recorded a deferred tax asset valuation allowance of $79 and $181 , respectively, relating primarily to U.S. capital loss carryovers. The reduction in the valuation allowance stems primarily from taxable gains on the termination of derivatives during the period. In assessing the need for a valuation allowance, management considered future taxable temporary difference reversals, future taxable income exclusive of reversing temporary differences and carryovers, taxable income in open carry back years and other tax planning strategies. From time to time, tax planning strategies could include holding a portion of debt securities with market value losses until recovery, altering the level of tax exempt securities held, making investments which have specific tax characteristics, and business considerations such as asset-liability matching. Management views such tax planning strategies as prudent and feasible and would implement them, if necessary, to realize the deferred tax assets. Contingencies Relating to Corporate Litigation and Regulatory Matters Management evaluates each contingent matter separately. A loss is recorded if probable and reasonably estimable. Management establishes reserves for these contingencies at its best estimate, or, if no one number within the range of possible losses is more probable than any other, the Company records an estimated reserve at the low end of the range of losses. The Company has a quarterly monitoring process involving legal and accounting professionals. Legal personnel first identify outstanding corporate litigation and regulatory matters posing a reasonable possibility of loss. These matters are then jointly reviewed by accounting and legal personnel to evaluate the facts and changes since the last review in order to determine if a provision for loss should be recorded or adjusted, the amount that should be recorded, and the appropriate disclosure. The outcomes of certain contingencies currently being evaluated by the Company, which relate to corporate litigation and regulatory matters, are inherently difficult to predict, and the reserves that have been established for the estimated settlement amounts are subject to significant changes. Management expects that the ultimate liability, if any, with respect to such lawsuits, after consideration of provisions made for estimated losses, will not be material to the consolidated financial condition of the Company. In view of the uncertainties regarding the outcome of these matters, as well as the tax-deductibility of payments, it is possible that the ultimate cost to the Company of these matters could exceed the reserve by an amount that would have a material adverse effect on the Company consolidated results of operations and liquidity in a particular quarterly or annual period. 67 KEY PERFORMANCE MEASURES AND RATIOS The Company considers the measures and ratios in the following discussion to be key performance indicators for its businesses. Management believes that these ratios and measures are useful in understanding the underlying trends in The Hartford businesses. However, these key performance indicators should only be used in conjunction with, and not in lieu of, the results presented in the segment discussions that follow in this MD&A. These ratios and measures may not be comparable to other performance measures used by the Company competitors. Definitions of Non-GAAP and other Measures and Ratios Account Value Account value includes policyholders balances for investment contracts and reserves for future policy benefits for insurance contracts. Account value is a measure used by the Company because a significant portion of the Company fee income is based upon the level of account value. These revenues increase or decrease with a rise or fall in the amount of account value whether caused by changes in the market or through net flows. Assets Under Management Assets under management ( AUM ) include account values and mutual fund assets. AUM is a measure used by the Company because a significant portion of the Company revenues are based upon asset values. These revenues increase or decrease with a rise or fall in AUM whether caused by changes in the market or through net flows. Catastrophe Ratio The catastrophe ratio (a component of the loss and loss adjustment expense ratio) represents the ratio of catastrophe losses incurred in the current calendar year (net of reinsurance) to earned premiums and includes catastrophe losses incurred for both the current and prior accident years. A catastrophe is an event that causes $25 or more in industry insured property losses and affects a significant number of property and casualty policyholders and insurers. The catastrophe ratio includes the effect of catastrophe losses, but does not include the effect of reinstatement premiums. Combined Ratio The combined ratio is the sum of the loss and loss adjustment expense ratio, the expense ratio and the policyholder dividend ratio. This ratio is a relative measurement that describes the related cost of losses and expenses for every $100 of earned premiums. A combined ratio below 100 demonstrates underwriting profit; a combined ratio above 100 demonstrates underwriting losses. Combined Ratio before Catastrophes and Prior Accident Year Development The combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development, a non-GAAP financial measure, represents the combined ratio for the current accident year, excluding the impact of catastrophes. Combined ratio is the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP measure. A reconciliation of combined ratio to combined ratio before prior accident year development for the years ended December 31, 2015 , 2014 and 2013 is set forth in MD&A - Commercial Lines and Personal Lines. Core Earnings Core earnings, a non-GAAP measure, is an important measure of the Company operating performance. The Company believes that core earnings provides investors with a valuable measure of the performance of the Company ongoing businesses because it reveals trends in our insurance and financial services businesses that may be obscured by including the net effect of certain realized capital gains and losses, certain restructuring and other costs, pension settlements, loss on extinguishment of debt, reinsurance gains and losses from disposal of businesses, income tax benefit from reduction in deferred income tax valuation allowance, discontinued operations, and the impact of Unlocks to DAC, SIA, and death and other insurance benefit reserve balances. Some realized capital gains and losses are primarily driven by investment decisions and external economic developments, the nature and timing of which are unrelated to the insurance and underwriting aspects of our business. Accordingly, core earnings excludes the effect of all realized gains and losses (net of tax and the effects of DAC) that tend to be highly variable from period to period based on capital market conditions. The Company believes, however, that some realized capital gains and losses are integrally related to our insurance operations, so core earnings includes net realized gains and losses such as net periodic settlements on credit derivatives. These net realized gains and losses are directly related to an offsetting item included in the income statement such as net investment income. Net income (loss) is the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP measure. Core earnings should not be considered as a substitute for net income (loss) and does not reflect the overall profitability of the Company business. Therefore, the Company believes that it is useful for investors to evaluate both net income (loss) and core earnings when reviewing the Company performance. 68 A reconciliation of net income to core earnings is set forth in the following table: For the years ended December 31, 2015 2014 2013 Net income $ 1,682 $ 798 $ 176 Less: Unlock benefit (charge), after-tax 52 (62 ) (109 ) Less: Net realized capital gains (losses), after-tax and DAC, excluded from core earnings [1] (114 ) (20 ) 121 Less: Restructuring and other costs, after-tax (13 ) (49 ) (44 ) Less: Pension settlement, after-tax (83 ) Less: Loss on extinguishment of debt, after-tax (14 ) (138 ) Less: Net reinsurance gain (loss) on dispositions, after-tax 18 15 (24 ) Less: Income tax benefit from reduction in valuation allowance 94 Less: Income (loss) from discontinued operations, after-tax 9 (551 ) (1,049 ) Core earnings $ 1,650 $ 1,548 $ 1,419 [1] Excludes net realized gain on dispositions of $1.0 billion , after-tax, for the year ended December 31, 2013 relating to the sales of the Retirement Plans and Individual Life businesses which are included in net reinsurance loss on dispositions, after-tax. Core Earnings Margin Core earnings margin is a non-GAAP financial measure that the Company uses to evaluate, and believes is an important measure of, the Group Benefits segment operating performance. Core earnings margin is calculated by dividing core earnings by revenues excluding buyouts and realized gains (losses). Net income margin is the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP measure. The Company believes that core earnings margin provides investors with a valuable measure of the performance of Group Benefits because it reveals trends in the business that may be obscured by the effect of buyouts and realized gains (losses). Core earnings margin should not be considered as a substitute for net income margin and does not reflect the overall profitability of Group Benefits. Therefore, the Company believes it is important for investors to evaluate both core earnings margin and net income margin when reviewing performance. A reconciliation of net income margin to core earnings margin for the years ended December 31, 2015 , 2014 and 2013 is set forth in the Margin section within MD&A - Group Benefits. Current Accident Year Loss and Loss Adjustment Expense Ratio before Catastrophes The current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes is a measure of the cost of non-catastrophe claims incurred in the current accident year divided by earned premiums. Management believes that the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes is a performance measure that is useful to investors as it removes the impact of volatile and unpredictable catastrophe losses and prior accident year development. Expense Ratio The expense ratio for the underwriting segments of Commercial Lines and Personal Lines is the ratio of underwriting expenses to earned premiums. Underwriting expenses include the amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs and insurance operating costs and expenses, including certain centralized services and bad debt expense. Deferred policy acquisition costs include commissions, taxes, licenses and fees and other underwriting expenses and are amortized over the policy term. The expense ratio for Group Benefits is expressed as the ratio of insurance operating costs and other expenses and amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs, to premiums and other considerations, excluding buyout premiums. Fee Income Fee income is largely driven from amounts collected as a result of contractually defined percentages of assets under management. These fees are generally collected on a daily basis. Therefore, the growth in assets under management either through positive net flows or net sales, or favorable market performance will have a favorable impact on fee income. Conversely, either negative net flows or net sales, or unfavorable market performance will reduce fee income. Full Surrender Rates Full surrender rates are an internal measure of contract surrenders calculated using annualized full surrenders divided by a two-point average of annuity account values. The full surrender rate represents full contract liquidation and excludes partial withdrawals. 69 Loss and Loss Adjustment Expense Ratio The loss and loss adjustment expense ratio is a measure of the cost of claims incurred in the calendar year divided by earned premium and includes losses incurred for both the current and prior accident years, as well as the costs of mortality and morbidity and other contractholder benefits to policyholders. Among other factors, the loss and loss adjustment expense ratio needed for the Company to achieve its targeted return on equity fluctuates from year to year based on changes in the expected investment yield over the claim settlement period, the timing of expected claim settlements and the targeted returns set by management based on the competitive environment. The loss and loss adjustment expense ratio is affected by claim frequency and claim severity, particularly for shorter-tail property lines of business, where the emergence of claim frequency and severity is credible and likely indicative of ultimate losses. Claim frequency represents the percentage change in the average number of reported claims per unit of exposure in the current accident year compared to that of the previous accident year. Claim severity represents the percentage change in the estimated average cost per claim in the current accident year compared to that of the previous accident year. As one of the factors used to determine pricing, the Company practice is to first make an overall assumption about claim frequency and severity for a given line of business and then, as part of the ratemaking process, adjust the assumption as appropriate for the particular state, product or coverage. Loss Ratio, excluding Buyouts The loss ratio is utilized for the Group Benefits segment and is expressed as a ratio of benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses to premiums and other considerations, excluding buyout premiums. Since Group Benefits occasionally buys a block of claims for a stated premium amount, the Company excludes this buyout from the loss ratio used for evaluating the underwriting results of the business as buyouts may distort the loss ratio. Buyout premiums represent takeover of open claim liabilities and other non-recurring premium amounts. Mutual Fund Assets Mutual fund assets are owned by the shareholders of those funds and not by the Company and therefore are not reflected in the Company consolidated financial statements. Mutual fund assets are a measure used by the Company because a significant portion of the Company revenues are based upon asset values. These revenues increase or decrease with a rise or fall in AUM whether caused by changes in the market or through net flows. New Business Written Premium New business written premium represents the amount of premiums charged for policies issued to customers who were not insured with the Company in the previous policy term. New business written premium plus renewal policy written premium equals total written premium. Policies in Force Policies in force represent the number of policies with coverage in effect as of the end of the period. The number of policies in force is a growth measure used for Personal Lines and standard commercial lines within Commercial Lines and is affected by both new business growth and policy count retention. Policy Count Retention Policy count retention represents the ratio of the number of policies renewed during the period divided by the number of policies available to renew. The number of policies available to renew represents the number of policies, net of any cancellations, written in the previous policy term. Policy count retention is affected by a number of factors, including the percentage of renewal policy quotes accepted and decisions by the Company to non-renew policies because of specific policy underwriting concerns or because of a decision to reduce premium writings in certain classes of business or states. Policy count retention is also affected by advertising and rate actions taken by competitors. Policyholder Dividend Ratio The policyholder dividend ratio is the ratio of policyholder dividends to earned premium. Prior Accident Year Loss and Loss Adjustment Expense Ratio The prior accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio represents the increase (decrease) in the estimated cost of settling catastrophe and non-catastrophe claims incurred in prior accident years as recorded in the current calendar year divided by earned premiums. 70 Reinstatement Premiums Reinstatement premium represents additional ceded premium paid for the reinstatement of the amount of reinsurance coverage that was reduced as a result of a reinsurance loss payment. Renewal Earned Price Increase (Decrease) Written premiums are earned over the policy term, which is six months for certain Personal Lines auto business and twelve months for substantially all of the remainder of the Company Property and Casualty business. Since the Company earns premiums over the six to twelve month term of the policies, renewal earned price increases (decreases) lag renewal written price increases (decreases) by six to twelve months. Renewal Written Price Increase (Decrease) Renewal written price increase (decrease) represents the combined effect of rate changes, amount of insurance and individual risk pricing decisions per unit of exposure since the prior year. The rate component represents the change in rate filings during the period and the amount of insurance represents the change in the value of the rating base, such as model year/vehicle symbol for auto, building replacement costs for property and wage inflation for workers compensation. A number of factors affect renewal written price increases (decreases) including expected loss costs as projected by the Company pricing actuaries, rate filings approved by state regulators, risk selection decisions made by the Company underwriters and marketplace competition. Renewal written price changes reflect the property and casualty insurance market cycle. Prices tend to increase for a particular line of business when insurance carriers have incurred significant losses in that line of business in the recent past or the industry as a whole commits less of its capital to writing exposures in that line of business. Prices tend to decrease when recent loss experience has been favorable or when competition among insurance carriers increases. Renewal written price statistics are subject to change from period to period, based on a number of factors, including changes in actuarial estimates and the effect of subsequent cancellations and non-renewals on rate achieved, and modifications made to better reflect ultimate pricing achieved. Return on Assets ( ROA ), Core Earnings ROA, core earnings, is a non-GAAP financial measure that the Company uses to evaluate, and believes is an important measure of, certain of the segment operating performance. ROA is the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP measure. The Company believes that ROA, core earnings, provides investors with a valuable measure of the performance of certain of the Company on-going businesses because it reveals trends in our businesses that may be obscured by the effect of realized gains (losses). ROA, core earnings, should not be considered as a substitute for ROA and does not reflect the overall profitability of our businesses. Therefore, the Company believes it is important for investors to evaluate both ROA, core earnings, and ROA when reviewing the Company performance. ROA, core earnings is calculated by dividing core earnings by a two-point average AUM. A reconciliation of ROA to ROA, core earnings for the years ended December 31, 2015 , 2014 and 2013 , is set forth in the ROA section within MD&A - Mutual Funds. Underwriting Gain (Loss) The Company's management evaluates profitability of the P&C businesses primarily on the basis of underwriting gain (loss). Underwriting gain (loss) is a before-tax measure that represents earned premiums less incurred losses, loss adjustment expenses and underwriting expenses. Underwriting gain (loss) is influenced significantly by earned premium growth and the adequacy of the Company's pricing. Underwriting profitability over time is also greatly influenced by the Company's pricing and underwriting discipline, which seeks to manage exposure to loss through favorable risk selection and diversification, its management of claims, its use of reinsurance and its ability to manage its expense ratio, which it accomplishes through economies of scale and its management of acquisition costs and other underwriting expenses. Net income (loss) is the most directly comparable GAAP measure . The Company believes that underwriting gain (loss) provides investors with a valuable measure of before-tax profitability derived from underwriting activities, which are managed separately from the Company's investing activities. A reconciliation of underwriting gain (loss) to net income (loss) for Commercial Lines, Personal Lines and Property & Casualty Other Operations is set forth in their respective discussions herein. 71 Written and Earned Premiums Written premium is a statutory accounting financial measure which represents the amount of premiums charged for policies issued, net of reinsurance, during a fiscal period. Earned premium is a U.S. GAAP and statutory measure. Premiums are considered earned and are included in the financial results on a pro rata basis over the policy period. Management believes that written premium is a performance measure that is useful to investors as it reflects current trends in the Company sale of property and casualty insurance products. Written and earned premium are recorded net of ceded reinsurance premium. Traditional life insurance type products, such as those sold by Group Benefits, collect premiums from policyholders in exchange for financial protection for the policyholder from a specified insurable loss, such as death or disability. These premiums together with net investment income earned from the overall investment strategy are used to pay the contractual obligations under these insurance contracts. Two major factors, new sales and persistency, impact premium growth. Sales can increase or decrease in a given year based on a number of factors, including but not limited to, customer demand for the Company product offerings, pricing competition, distribution channels and the Company reputation and ratings. Persistency refers to the percentage of policies remaining in-force from year-to-year. 72 COMMERCIAL LINES Results of Operations Underwriting Summary 2015 2014 2013 Written premiums $ 6,625 $ 6,381 $ 6,208 Change in unearned premium reserve 114 92 5 Earned premiums 6,511 6,289 6,203 Losses and loss adjustment expenses Current accident year before catastrophes 3,712 3,733 3,897 Current accident year catastrophes 121 109 105 Prior accident year development 53 13 83 Total losses and loss adjustment expenses 3,886 3,855 4,085 Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs 951 919 905 Underwriting expenses 1,178 1,086 1,082 Dividends to policyholders 17 15 16 Underwriting gain 479 414 115 Net servicing income [1] 20 23 21 Net investment income 910 958 984 Net realized capital gains (losses) (6 ) (30 ) 72 Other expenses 2 (3 ) (1 ) Income from continuing operations before income taxes 1,405 1,362 1,191 Income tax expense 409 385 320 Income from continuing operations, net of tax 996 977 871 Income (loss) from discontinued operations, net of tax 7 6 (1 ) Net income $ 1,003 $ 983 $ 870 [1] Includes servicing revenues of $87 , $113 , and $112 for the years ended December 31, 2015 , December 31, 2014 , and December 31, 2013 respectively. Premium Measures [1] 2015 2014 2013 New business premium $ 1,121 $ 1,088 $ 1,035 Standard commercial lines policy count retention 84 % 84 % 81 % Standard commercial lines renewal written pricing increase 2 % 5 % 7 % Standard commercial lines renewal earned pricing increase 4 % 7 % 8 % Standard commercial lines policies in-force as of end of period (in thousands) 1,325 1,277 1,250 [1] Standard commercial lines consists of small commercial and middle market. Standard commercial premium measures exclude middle market specialty programs and livestock lines of business. Underwriting Ratios 2015 2014 2013 Loss and loss adjustment expense ratio Current accident year before catastrophes 57.0 59.4 62.8 Current accident year catastrophes 1.9 1.7 1.7 Prior accident year development 0.8 0.2 1.3 Total loss and loss adjustment expense ratio 59.7 61.3 65.9 Expense ratio 32.7 31.9 32.0 Policyholder dividend ratio 0.3 0.2 0.3 Combined ratio 92.6 93.4 98.1 Current accident year catastrophes and prior year development 2.7 1.9 3.0 Combined ratio before catastrophes and prior year development 90.0 91.5 95.1 73 2016 Outlook The Company expects economic conditions to continue to improve slowly driving a modest increase in exposures, while pricing is anticipated to further moderate. As such, the Company expects low single-digit written premiums growth in 2016 driven by small commercial and middle market where the Company continues to develop comprehensive product solutions, deeper relationships with distribution partners, differentiating customer experiences and enhanced ease of doing business processes and technologies. In specialty lines, the Company expects flat written premium growth as increases in bond and professional liability are expected to be offset by a decline in national accounts. The Company expects the Commercial Lines combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development will be between approximately 89.0 and 91.0 for 2016, compared to 90.0 in 2015, as earned pricing increases are expected to be in-line with long-term loss costs trends. Year ended December 31, 2015 compared to the year ended December 31, 2014 Overview Net income increased in 2015, as compared to the prior year period, primarily due to a higher underwriting gain and lower realized capital losses, partially offset by lower net investment income. The increase in underwriting gain was primarily driven by a lower current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes, partially offset by higher underwriting expenses and unfavorable prior accident year development. Underwriting expenses in 2014 included a reduction of $49, before tax, in the Company's estimated liability for NY State Workers' Compensation Board assessments. Revenues - Earned and Written Premiums Earned premiums increased in 2015, as compared to the prior year period, reflecting written premium growth over the preceding twelve months. Written premiums, as compared to prior year period, increased in 2015 in small commercial, middle market and specialty commercial lines. Written premium increased in all small commercial lines of business, particularly in workers compensation driven by higher new, renewal and audit premium, as well as in Spectrum package business driven by higher new and renewal premium. Written premium increased in middle market driven primarily by higher new, renewal and audit premium in construction as well as higher new and renewal premium in marine. Written premium increased in specialty commercial primarily as a result of higher retrospective premium on loss sensitive business in national accounts. Losses and Loss Adjustment Expenses Losses and loss adjustment expenses increased in 2015, as compared to the prior year period, reflecting earned premium growth, unfavorable prior accident year development and modestly higher catastrophes. The decrease in the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes in 2015, as compared to the prior year period, was primarily driven by lower loss and loss adjustment expense ratios in workers' compensation, general liability and financial products, as well as lower non-catastrophe property losses. The decrease in workers compensation was due to earned pricing increases and declining frequency, partially offset by modestly higher severity. Accordingly, the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes decreased by 2.4 points to 57.0 in 2015 from 59.4 in 2014. Current accident year catastrophe losses totaled $121 , before tax, in 2015, compared to $109 , before tax, in 2014. Catastrophe losses for both years were primarily due to winter storms and wind and hail events across various U.S. geographic regions. For additional information, see MD&A - Critical Accounting Estimates, Property and Casualty Insurance Product Reserves, Net of Reinsurance. Prior accident year reserves increased $53 , before tax, in 2015, compared to $13 , before tax, in 2014. Net reserve increases in 2015 were primarily related to commercial auto liability and package business, as well as workers' compensation discount accretion, partially offset by a decrease in reserves for workers compensation and professional liability. For additional information, see MD&A - Critical Accounting Estimates, Reserve Roll-forwards and Development. Underwriting Ratios The combined ratio, before catastrophes and prior year development, decreased 1.5 points to 90.0 in 2015 from 91.5 in 2014 reflecting improvements in all three business lines within Commercial Lines . The decrease reflected a decrease in the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes. Investment Results Investment income decreased in 2015, as compared to the prior year period. For discussion of consolidated investment results, see MD&A - Investment Results, Net Investment Income (Loss) and Net Realized Capital Gains (Losses). 74 Income Taxes The effective tax rates in 2015 and 2014 differ from the U.S. Federal statutory rate of 35% primarily due to permanent differences related to investments in tax exempt securities. For discussion of income taxes, see Note 14 - Income Taxes of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Year ended December 31, 2014 compared to the year ended December 31, 2013 Overview Net income, as compared to the prior year period, increased in 2014 primarily due to an improvement in underwriting results, driven by lower current accident year losses and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes and lower prior accident year development, partially offset by a shift to net realized capital losses in the current year from net realized capital gains in the prior year period. Underwriting expenses, compared to the prior year period, reflect a reduction of $49, before tax, in the Company's estimated liability for NY State Workers' Compensation Board assessments. Revenues - Earned and Written Premium Earned premiums increased in 2014, reflecting the impact of higher written premiums primarily in small commercial and to a lesser extent in middle market, partially offset by written premium declines in specialty lines. Written premium increased in all small commercial lines of business, driven by favorable renewal premium due to higher policy count retention and higher written pricing, as well as an increase in new business and higher audit premium on workers' compensation policies. Written premium increases in middle market were driven primarily by higher renewal written premium in property, general liability and auto, partially offset by the impact of underwriting actions that reduced written premium in the programs business. Written premium decreases in specialty lines were primarily the result of underwriting actions to improve profitability of the captives business, partially offset by growth in national accounts and bond. Losses and Loss Adjustment Expenses Losses and loss adjustment expenses reflect favorable current accident year losses before catastrophes in all lines of business and lower unfavorable prior accident year development. The reduction in the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes in 2014 was primarily driven by a lower loss and loss adjustment expense ratio in workers' compensation due to earned pricing increases and favorable frequency and severity trends. Accordingly, the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes decreased by 3.4 points to 59.4 in 2014 from 62.8 in 2013. Current accident year catastrophe losses of $109, before tax, in 2014, compared to $105, before tax, in 2013. Losses in 2014 were primarily due to multiple winter storm and wind and hail events across various U.S. geographic regions. Losses in 2013 were primarily due to multiple wind and hail and tornado events across various U.S. geographic regions. For additional information, see MD&A - Critical Accounting Estimates, Property and Casualty Insurance Product Reserves, Net of Reinsurance. Prior accident year development increases of $13, before tax, in 2014, compared to $83, before tax, in 2013. Development in 2014 was primarily due to discount accretion on workers' compensation and an increase related to commercial auto liability, partially offset by a decrease of professional and general liability reserves. Development in 2013 was primarily due to increases related to commercial auto liability and the closing of the New York Section 25A Fund for Reopened Cases, partially offset by a decrease of professional and general liability reserves. For additional information, see MD&A - Critical Accounting Estimates, Reserve Roll-forwards and Development. Underwriting Ratios The combined ratio, before catastrophes and prior year development, improved 3.6 points to 91.5 in 2014 from 95.1 in 2013. The improvement primarily reflects a decrease in the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes, as well as a decrease in the expense ratio (including a 0.8 point favorable impact on the expense ratio related to a reduction in NY State Workers' Compensation Board assessments). Investment Results Investment income decreased in 2014, as compared to the prior year period. For discussion of consolidated investment results, see MD&A - Investment Results, Net Investment Income (Loss) and Net Realized Capital Gains (Losses). Income Taxes The effective tax rate, in both periods, differs from the U.S. Federal statutory rate primarily due to permanent differences related to investments in tax exempt securities. For further discussion of income taxes, see Note 14 - Income Taxes of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 75 PERSONAL LINES Results of Operations Underwriting Summary 2015 2014 2013 Written premiums $ 3,918 $ 3,861 $ 3,719 Change in unearned premium reserve 45 55 59 Earned premiums 3,873 3,806 3,660 Losses and loss adjustment expenses Current accident year before catastrophes 2,578 2,498 2,412 Current accident year catastrophes 211 232 207 Prior accident year development (21 ) (46 ) (39 ) Total losses and loss adjustment expenses 2,768 2,684 2,580 Amortization of DAC 359 348 332 Underwriting expenses 628 604 634 Underwriting gain 118 170 114 Net servicing income [1] 4 3 34 Net investment income 128 129 145 Net realized capital gains (losses) 4 (5 ) 34 Other income [2] 15 2 2 Income before income taxes 269 299 329 Income tax expense 82 92 100 Net income $ 187 $ 207 $ 229 [1] Includes servicing revenues of $163 for year ended December 31, 2013. [2] Includes a benefit of $17, before tax, for the year ended December 31, 2015, from the resolution of litigation. Written Premiums 2015 2014 2013 Product Line Automobile $ 2,721 $ 2,659 $ 2,562 Homeowners 1,197 1,202 1,157 Total $ 3,918 $ 3,861 $ 3,719 Earned Premiums Product Line Automobile $ 2,671 $ 2,613 $ 2,522 Homeowners 1,202 1,193 1,138 Total $ 3,873 $ 3,806 $ 3,660 76 Premium Measures 2015 2014 2013 Policies in-force end of period (in thousands) Automobile 2,062 2,049 2,019 Homeowners 1,272 1,309 1,319 New business written premium Automobile $ 422 $ 415 $ 374 Homeowners $ 110 $ 130 $ 131 Policy count retention Automobile 84 % 85 % 86 % Homeowners 85 % 86 % 87 % Renewal written pricing increase Automobile 6 % 5 % 5 % Homeowners 8 % 8 % 7 % Renewal earned pricing increase Automobile 6 % 5 % 5 % Homeowners 8 % 8 % 6 % Underwriting Ratios 2015 2014 2013 Loss and loss adjustment expense ratio Current accident year before catastrophes 66.6 65.6 65.9 Current accident year catastrophes 5.4 6.1 5.7 Prior accident year development (0.5 ) (1.2 ) (1.1 ) Total loss and loss adjustment expense ratio 71.5 70.5 70.5 Expense ratio 25.5 25.0 26.4 Combined ratio 97.0 95.5 96.9 Current accident year catastrophes and prior year development 4.9 4.9 4.6 Combined ratio before catastrophes and prior year development 92.0 90.6 92.3 Product Combined Ratios 2015 2014 2013 Automobile Combined ratio 99.4 98.4 99.0 Combined ratio before catastrophes and prior year development 99.0 97.1 98.4 Homeowners Combined ratio 92.1 90.0 90.7 Combined ratio before catastrophes and prior year development 76.8 76.4 77.5 2016 Outlook The Company expects written premium growth to decrease slightly in 2016 driven by AARP Agency and Agency Other, partially offset by growth in AARP Direct. The Company expects the combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development will be between approximately 90.0 and 92.0 for 2016 compared to 92.0 in 2015 primarily due to an improvement in the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes. For auto, the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes is expected to decrease in 2016, driven by earned pricing increases and the expected benefit of underwriting and claims initiatives partially offset by moderate average claim trends, though subject to uncertainty given the increase in auto claim frequency experienced in the last half of 2015. For homeowners, the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes is expected to decrease slightly in 2016, driven by earned pricing increases partially offset by increased average claim severity. 77 Year ended December 31, 2015 compared to the year ended December 31, 2014 Overview Net income decreased in 2015, as compared to the prior year period, primarily due to a lower underwriting gain driven by deterioration in the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes and lower favorable prior accident year development, partially offset by a decrease in current accident year catastrophes. Revenues - Earned and Written Premiums Earned and written premiums increased in 2015, as compared to the prior year period, primarily due to renewal written and earned pricing increases. Policy count retention for both auto and homeowners was lower in 2015, as compared to the prior year, driven in part by renewal written pricing increases and planned underwriting initiatives. Losses and Loss Adjustment Expenses Losses and loss adjustment expenses increased in 2015, as compared to the prior year period, primarily due to higher current accident year before catastrophe losses and lower favorable prior accident year development partially offset by lower current accident year catastrophe losses. Current accident year losses and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes increased in 2015 compared to 2014 as a result of the effect of increases in earned premiums, and increases in auto liability and auto physical damage loss costs, as well as higher homeowners water and fire-related claims, which were partially offset by lower homeowners weather-related claims. The current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes of 66.6 in 2015 increased 1.0 points from from 65.6 in 2014. Current accident year catastrophe losses of $211 , before tax, decreased in 2015 compared to $232 , before tax, in 2014. Catastrophe losses in 2015 were primarily due to wildfires in California and multiple events (wind and hail primarily) across various U.S. geographic regions. Catastrophe losses in 2014 were primarily due to multiple thunderstorm and winter storm events across various U.S. geographic regions. For additional information, see MD&A - Critical Accounting Estimates, Property and Casualty Insurance Product Reserves, Net of Reinsurance. Favorable prior accident year development of $21 , before tax, decreased in 2015 compared to $46 , before tax, in 2014. Net reserve decreases for 2015 were primarily related to accident year 2014 catastrophes. Net reserve decreases for 2014 were primarily related to prior accident year catastrophes, as well as prior accident year homeowners and extra contractual liability reserves. For additional information, see MD&A - Critical Accounting Estimates, Property and Casualty Insurance Product Reserves, Net of Reinsurance. Underwriting Ratios The combined ratio, before current accident year catastrophes and prior year development, increased 1.4 points to 92.0 in 2015 from 90.6 in 2014 reflecting an increase in the current accident year before catastrophes loss and loss adjustment expense ratio due to higher automobile loss costs and increased non-weather losses in homeowners. Investment Results Investment income increased in 2015, as compared to the prior year period. For discussion of consolidated investment results, see MD&A - Investment Results, Net Investment Income (Loss) and Net Realized Capital Gains (Losses). Income Taxes The effective tax rates in 2015 and 2014 differ from the U.S. Federal statutory rate of 35% primarily due to permanent differences related to investments in tax exempt securities. For further discussion of income taxes, see Note 14 - Income Taxes of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 78 Year ended December 31, 2014 compared to the year ended December 31, 2013 Overview Net income, as compared to the prior year period, decreased in 2014 primarily due to a change to net realized capital losses and a decrease in net servicing income, partially offset by improvements in underwriting results, driven by higher earned premiums and lower underwriting expenses. Revenues - Earned and Written Premiums Earned and written premiums increased in 2014 reflecting new business written premium growth in auto, primarily from AARP Direct and AARP Agency, improved earned pricing increases in both auto and homeowners, and continued high levels of premium retention. Losses and Loss Adjustment Expenses Losses and loss adjustment expenses reflect an increase in current accident year loss and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes and higher current accident year catastrophes, partially offset by higher favorable prior accident year development. Current accident year losses and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes increased in 2014 compared to 2013 driven by growth in earned premium, partially offset by a decline in the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes to 65.6 in 2014 from 65.9 in 2013. Current accident year catastrophe losses of $232, before tax, in 2014 compared to $207, before tax, in 2013. Losses in 2014 were primarily due to multiple thunderstorm and winter storm events across various U.S. geographic regions. Losses in 2013 were primarily due to multiple thunderstorm, hail and tornado events across various U.S. geographic regions. For additional information, see MD&A - Critical Accounting Estimates, Property and Casualty Insurance Product Reserves, Net of Reinsurance. Prior accident year reserve decreases of $46, before tax, in 2014 compared to $39, before tax, in 2013. Net reserve decrease in 2014 was primarily related to prior accident year catastrophes, as well as prior accident year homeowners and extra contractual liability reserves. Net reserve decrease in 2013 was primarily related to Storm Sandy. For additional information, see MD&A - Critical Accounting Estimates, Property and Casualty Insurance Product Reserves, Net of Reinsurance. Underwriting Ratios The combined ratio, before current accident year catastrophes and prior year development, improved to 90.6 in 2014 from 92.3 in 2013. Investment Results Investment income decreased in 2014, as compared to the prior year period. For discussion of consolidated investment results, see MD&A - Investment Results, Net Investment Income (Loss) and Net Realized Capital Gains (Losses). Income Taxes The effective tax rates in 2014 and 2013 differ from the U.S. Federal statutory rate of 35% primarily due to permanent differences related to investments in tax exempt securities. For further discussion of income taxes, see Note 14 - Income Taxes of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 79 PROPERTY & CASUALTY OTHER OPERATIONS Results of Operations Underwriting Summary 2015 2014 2013 Written premiums $ 35 $ 2 $ 2 Change in unearned premium reserve 3 1 1 Earned premiums 32 1 1 Losses and loss adjustment expenses Current accident year 25 Prior accident year development 218 261 148 Total losses and loss adjustment expenses 243 261 148 Underwriting expenses 32 37 29 Underwriting loss (243 ) (297 ) (176 ) Net servicing expense (1 ) Net investment income 133 129 141 Net realized capital gains 3 3 12 Other income 7 6 2 Loss before income taxes (100 ) (159 ) (22 ) Income tax benefit (47 ) (51 ) (20 ) Net loss $ (53 ) $ (108 ) $ (2 ) Year ended December 31, 2015 compared to the year ended December 31, 2014 Net loss, as compared to the prior year period, decreased in 2015 primarily due to lower unfavorable net asbestos and environmental reserve development associated with the Company's annual ground-up reserve evaluations. Additionally, in connection with the assumption of previously reinsured business, the Company recognized written premiums of $31 partially offset by current accident year losses of $25 in 2015 upon consolidation of certain P&C run-off entities in the United Kingdom. Total losses and loss adjustment expenses in 2015 and 2014 include prior accident year development, as a result of the annual ground-up reserve evaluations, of $146 and $212 , before tax, respectively, related to asbestos reserves and $52 and $27 , respectively, related to environmental reserves. Reserve increases in 2015 were primarily related to an increase in reserves for asbestos and environmental claims due to greater than expected asbestos claim filings, including mesothelioma claims, from a small percentage of the Company's direct accounts and an increase in estimated environmental cleanup costs, including at certain Superfund sites. Year ended December 31, 2014 compared to the year ended December 31, 2013 Net loss, as compared to the prior year period, increased in 2014 primarily due to higher unfavorable net asbestos and environmental reserve development. As part of its annual ground-up asbestos and environmental reserve evaluations in 2014 , the Company increased the associated reserves by $212 and $27 , before tax, respectively. Reserve increases in 2014 were primarily due to a higher than previously estimated number of mesothelioma claim filings and an increase in costs associated with asbestos litigation. In 2013 , the Company increased its net asbestos and environmental reserves by $130 and $10, before tax, respectively. The effective tax rates in 2015 , 2014 and 2013 differ from the U.S. federal statutory rate of 35% primarily due to permanent differences related to investments in tax exempt securities. For further discussion of income taxes, see the Income Taxes section within Note 1 - Basis of Presentation and Significant Accounting Policies of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. For information on net asbestos and environmental reserves, see Property & Casualty Other Operations Claims within the Property and Casualty Insurance Product Reserves, Net of Reinsurance section in Critical Accounting Estimates. 80 GROUP BENEFITS Results of Operations Operating Summary 2015 2014 2013 Premiums and other considerations [1] $ 3,136 $ 3,095 $ 3,330 Net investment income 371 374 390 Net realized capital gains (losses) (11 ) 15 50 Total revenues 3,496 3,484 3,770 Benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses 2,427 2,362 2,518 Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs 31 32 33 Insurance operating costs and other expenses 788 836 964 Total benefits, losses and expenses 3,246 3,230 3,515 Income before income taxes 250 254 255 Income tax expense 63 63 63 Net income [1] $ 187 $ 191 $ 192 [1] Group Benefits has a block of Association - Financial Institution business that is subject to a profit sharing arrangement with third parties which was terminated on December 31,2014. The Association - Financial Institutions business represented $72 and $277 of premiums and other considerations, and $1 and $1 of net income in 2014 and 2013 , respectively. Premiums and other considerations 2015 2014 2013 Fully insured ongoing premiums $ 3,068 $ 3,014 $ 3,272 Buyout premiums 1 20 1 Fee income 67 61 57 Total premiums and other considerations 3,136 3,095 3,330 Fully insured ongoing sales, excluding buyouts $ 467 $ 326 $ 393 Ratios, excluding buyouts 2015 2014 2013 Group disability loss ratio 81.6 % 83.5 % 84.0 % Group life loss ratio 74.7 % 70.5 % 69.5 % Total loss ratio 77.4 % 76.2 % 75.6 % Expense ratio 26.1 % 28.2 % 29.9 % Selected ratios excluding Association - Financial Institutions Group life loss ratio, excluding Association - Financial Institutions 74.7 % 72.8 % 76.2 % Total loss ratio, excluding Association - Financial Institutions 77.4 % 77.4 % 79.3 % Expense ratio, excluding Association - Financial Institutions 26.1 % 27.2 % 26.8 % Margin 2015 2014 2013 Net income 5.4 % 5.5 % 5.1 % Effect of net realized gains/(losses), net of tax on after-tax margin (0.2 )% 0.3 % 0.8 % Core earnings 5.6 % 5.2 % 4.3 % 2016 Outlook The Company expects premiums to increase for 2016 due primarily to continued strong book persistency. The Company expects Group Benefits' disability and life results to improve as a result of continued pricing actions, improved disability severity, and favorable life mortality compared to 2015. In addition, the Company expects the expense ratio to improve due to the continued focus on expense management. The Company expects Group Benefits' core earnings margin will be between approximately 5.5% and 6.0% for 2016 as compared to 5.6% in 2015 . 81 Year ended December 31, 2015 compared to the year ended December 31, 2014 Net income decreased in 2015, as compared to the prior year period, primarily due to higher benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses, higher net realized capital losses and lower net investment income partially offset by higher premiums and other considerations and lower insurance operating costs and other expenses. Premiums and other considerations increased in 2015, as compared to the prior year period, due primarily to increased sales and improved persistency and pricing, partially offset by management actions related to the Association - Financial Institutions block of business. Excluding the Association - Financial Institutions block of business, fully insured ongoing premiums increased 4% in 2015. Insurance operating costs and other expenses decreased in 2015, compared to the prior year period, due primarily to lower profit sharing expense related to the Association - Financial Institutions block of business. Fully insured ongoing sales, excluding buyouts increased 43% in 2015, as compared to prior year period, primarily due to an increase in large case accounts. The total loss ratio increased by 1.2 points in 2015, as compared to the prior year period due to a higher group life loss ratio and the impact of Association - Financial Institutions business in 2014, partially offset by a lower disability loss ratio. Excluding the Association - Financial Institutions block of business, the total loss ratio was flat to prior year. Excluding the Association - Financial Institutions block of business, the life loss ratio increased 1.9 points due to favorable changes in reserve assumptions in 2014 and less favorable severity in the current year. The disability loss ratio improved 1.9 points due to changes in long term disability reserve assumptions for claim recoveries which favorably impacted the disability loss ratio by 1.2 points, as well as improved incidence and pricing partially offset by unfavorable long term disability claim severity. The expense ratio improved 2.1 points in 2015, compared to the prior year period, primarily due to lower profit sharing expense related to the Association - Financial Institutions block of business. Excluding the Association - Financial Institutions block of business, the expense ratio improved 1.1 points reflecting premium growth and lower expenses. Investment income and net realized capital gains decreased in 2015, as compared to the prior year period. For discussion of consolidated investment results, see MD&A - Investment Results, Investment Income (Loss) and Net Realized Capital Gains (Losses). The effective tax rate, in both periods, differs from the U.S. Federal statutory rate primarily due to permanent differences related to investments in tax exempt securities. For further discussion of income taxes, see Note 14 - Income Taxes of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Year ended December 31, 2014 compared to the year ended December 31, 2013 Net income slightly decreased in 2014, as compared to the prior year period, primarily due to lower premiums and other considerations, net investment income and net realized capital gains, offset by lower benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses and insurance operating costs and other expenses. Premiums and other considerations decreased in 2014, as compared to the prior year period, due primarily to management actions related to the Association - Financial Institutions block of business. Insurance operating costs and other expenses decreased in 2014, compared to the prior year period, due primarily to lower profit sharing expense related to the Association - Financial Institutions block of business. Fully insured ongoing sales, excluding buyouts declined 17% in 2014, as compared to prior year period. Excluding Association - Financial Institutions block of business, fully insured ongoing sales, excluding buyouts decreased 12% in 2014 primarily due to lower large case sales. The total loss ratio increased by 0.6 points in 2014, as compared to the prior year period. Excluding the Association - Financial Institutions block of business, the loss ratio improved 1.9 points in 2014 due to improvements in both the life and disability loss ratios. The life loss ratio improvement reflects favorable mortality experience, improved pricing, and the impact of changes in reserve assumptions. The disability loss ratio improvement reflects improved accident year incidence and pricing partially offset by higher new claim severity and less favorable development on prior accident year recoveries. The expense ratio improved 1.7 points in 2014, compared to the prior year period, primarily due to lower profit sharing expense related to the Association - Financial Institutions block of business in relation to lower premium and other considerations. Core earnings margin improved 0.9 points in 2014, compared to the prior year period. The improvement was primarily due to the improved loss ratio excluding the Association - Financial Institutions block of business. Investment income and net realized capital gains decreased in 2014, as compared to the prior year period. For discussion of consolidated investment results, see MD&A - Investment Results, Investment Income (Loss) and Net Realized Capital Gains (Losses). The effective tax rate, in both periods, differs from the U.S. Federal statutory rate primarily due to permanent differences related to investments in tax exempt securities. For further discussion of income taxes, see Note 14 - Income Taxes of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 82 MUTUAL FUNDS Results of Operations Operating Summary 2015 2014 2013 Fee income and other revenue $ 723 $ 723 $ 668 Net investment income 1 Total revenues 724 723 668 Amortization of DAC 22 28 39 Insurance operating costs and other expenses 568 559 511 Total benefits, losses and expenses 590 587 550 Income before income taxes 134 136 118 Income tax expense 48 49 42 Net income $ 86 $ 87 $ 76 Average Total Mutual Funds segment AUM $ 92,791 $ 95,177 $ 92,191 Return on Assets ("ROA") 9.3 9.1 8.2 Effect of restructuring, net of tax (0.5 ) (0.2 ) Effect of net realized gains, net of tax and DAC (0.1 ) ROA, core earnings 9.3 9.6 8.5 Mutual Funds segment AUM Mutual Fund AUM - beginning of period $ 73,035 $ 70,918 $ 61,611 Sales 17,527 15,249 15,172 Redemptions [1] (16,036 ) (16,636 ) (19,696 ) Net flows 1,491 (1,387 ) (4,524 ) Change in market value and other (113 ) 3,504 13,831 Mutual Fund AUM - end of period $ 74,413 $ 73,035 $ 70,918 Talcott AUM [2] $ 17,549 $ 20,584 $ 25,817 Total Mutual Funds segment AUM $ 91,962 $ 93,619 $ 96,735 Mutual Fund AUM by Asset Class Equity $ 47,369 $ 45,221 $ 42,426 Fixed Income 12,625 14,046 14,632 Multi-Strategy Investments [3] 14,419 13,768 13,860 Mutual Fund AUM $ 74,413 $ 73,035 $ 70,918 [1] The year ended December 31, 2014 includes a planned asset transfer of $0.7 billion to the HIMCO Variable Insurance Trust ( HVIT ) which supports legacy retirement mutual funds and runoff mutual funds (see footnote [2]). HVIT's invested assets are managed by Hartford Investment Management Company, a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company. [2] Talcott AUM consist of Company-sponsored mutual fund assets held in separate accounts supporting variable insurance and investment products. The year ended December 31, 2014 includes a planned asset transfer of $2.0 billion to HVIT. [3] Includes balanced, allocation, target date and alternative investment products. 2016 Outlook The primary objective of the Mutual Funds segment is to grow total assets under management and core earnings. Strong fund performance, market appreciation, developing and maintaining client relationships and positive net flows are all factors that can increase assets under management. Assuming average historical increases in market levels off of Mutual Funds December 31, 2015 assets under management, the Company expects moderate 2016 earnings growth, driven by improved earnings in the Mutual Funds business, offset by the run-off of the Talcott assets supporting the Company's legacy variable insurance products. A decline in market levels in 2016 would negatively impact earnings. 83 Year ended December 31, 2015 compared to the year ended December 31, 2014 Net income decreased in 2015 , compared to the prior year period which included a one time state tax benefit, primarily due to a combination of lower average AUM and higher spending on marketing initiatives. Total AUM declined reflecting market depreciation and the continued runoff of Talcott AUM. Mutual fund AUM increased by 2% reflecting higher sales and stable redemption. Year ended December 31, 2014 compared to the year ended December 31, 2013 Net income, as compared to the prior year period, increased in 2014 primarily due to higher fee revenue driven by higher Mutual Fund average AUM. AUM increased reflecting positive market performance of the Mutual Fund assets throughout the year coupled with year over year improvements in net flows offset by expected runoff of Talcott assets. Redemptions in 2014 included fund liquidations of $0.7 billion and a transfer of HVIT assets within the Hartford of $2.7 billion. 84 TALCOTT RESOLUTION Results of Operations Operating Summary 2015 2014 2013 Earned premiums [1] $ 92 $ 206 $ 94 Fee income and other [1] 1,041 1,201 1,369 Net investment income 1,470 1,542 1,577 Net realized capital (losses) gains (161 ) 26 1,719 Total revenues 2,442 2,975 4,759 Benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses 1,451 1,643 1,717 Amortization of DAC 139 402 485 Insurance operating costs and other expenses 469 567 645 Reinsurance (gain) loss on disposition in 2014 and 2013, respectively (28 ) (23 ) 1,505 Total benefits, losses and expenses 2,031 2,589 4,352 Income from continuing operations, before income taxes 411 386 407 Income tax expense (benefit) (17 ) 16 (7 ) Income from continuing operations 428 370 414 Income (loss) from discontinued operations, net of tax [2] 2 (557 ) (1,048 ) Net income (loss) $ 430 $ (187 ) $ (634 ) Assets Under Management (end of period) Variable annuity account value $ 44,245 $ 52,861 $ 81,942 Fixed market value adjusted and payout annuities 8,109 8,748 13,203 Institutional annuity account value 15,077 15,636 16,857 Other account value [4] 88,151 91,163 108,133 Total account value [3] $ 155,582 $ 168,408 $ 219,127 Variable Annuity Account Value [5] Account value, beginning of period $ 52,861 $ 61,812 $ 64,824 Net outflows (7,938 ) (11,726 ) (14,598 ) Change in market value and other (678 ) 2,775 11,586 Account value, end of period $ 44,245 $ 52,861 $ 61,812 [1] Includes earned premiums, fee income and other related to the Retirement Plans business of $38 and the Individual Life business of $2 for the year ended December 31, 2013. [2] Represents the loss from operations and sale of HLIKK in 2014 and 2013, and HLIL in 2013. For additional information, see Note 18 Discontinued Operations and Business Dispositions of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. [3] Included in the balance is approximately $(1.0) billion for the year ended December 31, 2013 related to a Talcott Resolution intra-segment funding agreement which eliminates in consolidation. [4] Other account value includes $33.2 billion , $14.6 billion , and $40.3 billion as of December 31, 2015 , and $36.5 billion , $14.9 billion , $39.8 billion as of December 31, 2014 , and $54.7 billion, $14.7 billion, and $38.7 billion as of December 31, 2013, for the Retirement Plans, Individual Life, and Private Placement Life Insurance businesses; respectively. Account values a ssociated with the Retirement Plans, and Individual Life businesses no longer generate asset-based fee income due to the sales of these businesses through reinsurance. [5] Excludes account value related to the HLIKK business sold on June 30, 2014. 85 2016 Outlook The principal goal for Talcott Resolution is to efficiently manage the runoff of the business while honoring the Company's obligations to its contractholders. As a result, the Company expects account values and consequently earnings to decline due to surrenders, policyholder initiatives or transactions with third parties, that will reduce the size of this legacy book of business. Risk-reducing transactions may also cause a reduction in statutory capital and shareholders equity. As the Company's annuity book continues to runoff, earnings are expected to decline. A key driver to the decline in earnings will be the pace at which customers surrender their contracts. In 2015, the Company experienced 9.6% variable annuity full surrender rates driven by market appreciation, continued aging of the block and in-force management initiatives. Contract counts decreased 11% for variable annuities in 2015. Looking forward, the Company expects variable annuity surrender rates to decline in 2016, as 2015 included the effect of in-force management initiatives that accelerated surrenders, likely resulting in lower surrender rates going forward. Year ended December 31, 2015 compared to the year ended December 31, 2014 Net income for the year ended December 31, 2015 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2014 increased primarily due to lower DAC amortization driven by a favorable unlock in 2015 versus an unfavorable unlock in 2014, lower insurance operating costs and other expenses, and lower benefits and losses due to the continued runoff of the variable annuity block, partially offset by lower fee income due to the continued runoff of the variable annuity block, lower net investment income due to a decrease in income from limited partnerships and alternative investments and realized capital losses related to the variable annuity hedge program. For discussion of consolidated investment results, see MD&A - Investment Results, Net Investment Income (Loss) and Net Realized Capital Gains (Losses). In addition, the year ended December 31, 2014 included a loss from discontinued operations due to the sale of HLIKK. Account values for Talcott Resolution decreased to approximately $156 billion at year ended December 31, 2015 from approximately $168 billion at year ended December 31, 2014 primarily due to a reduction in Retirement Plans' account value and net outflows and market value depreciation in variable annuity account value. For the year ended December 31, 2015 variable annuity net outflows decreased by approximately $3.8 billion as compared to the prior year period due to lower outflows from in-force management initiatives. For the year ended December 31, 2015 the annualized full surrender rate on variable annuities declined to 9.6% compared to 13.5% for the year ended December 31, 2014. This decline was primarily due to lower surrenders from in-force management initiatives as well as in-force management initiatives in prior years accelerated surrenders resulting in lower surrender rates post initiatives. Contract counts decreased 11% for variable annuities at year ended December 31, 2015 compared to year ended December 31, 2014 primarily due to in-force management initiatives and the continued aging of the block. The effective tax rates in 2015 and 2014 differ from the U.S. Federal statutory rate of 35% primarily due to permanent differences related to investments in separate account DRD. The income tax provision for the year ended December 31, 2015 includes a $36 net reduction in the provision for income taxes primarily related to the release of reserves due to the resolution of uncertain tax positions. For further discussion of income taxes, see Note 14 - Income Taxes of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Year ended December 31, 2014 compared to the year ended December 31, 2013 The net loss for the year ended December 31, 2014 decreased compared to the net loss for the year ended December 31, 2013 primarily due to the decrease in the loss from discontinued operations, net of tax, related to the sale of HLIKK. Also contributing to the decrease in net loss were lower amortization of DAC, and lower insurance operating costs and other expenses, including lower costs associated with the enhanced surrender value program, and higher income from limited partnerships and other alternative investments, partially offset by a decline in earned fee income attributable to the continued runoff of the business, and a decline in net investment income excluding that from limited partnerships and other alternative investments. Account values for Talcott Resolution decreased to approximately $168 billion at year ended December 31, 2014 from approximately $219 billion at year ended December 31, 2013 due primarily to the sale of HLIKK, and net outflows partially offset by market value appreciation in variable annuities. For the year ended December 31, 2014 variable annuity net outflows decreased by approximately $2.9 billion as compared to the prior year period due to lower outflows from in-force management initiatives. For the year ended December 31, 2014 the annualized full surrender rate on variable annuities declined to 13.5% compared to 16.7% for the year ended December 31, 2013. This decline was primarily due to lower surrenders from in-force management initiatives. Contract counts decreased 13% for variable annuities at year ended December 31, 2014 compared to year ended December 31, 2013 primarily due to market appreciation, in-force management initiatives and the continued aging of the block. The effective tax rates in 2014 and 2013 differ from the U.S. Federal statutory rate of 35% primarily due to permanent differences related to investments in separate account DRD. For further discussion of income taxes, see Note 14 - Income Taxes of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 86 CORPORATE Results of Operations Operating Summary 2015 2014 2013 Fee income [1] $ 8 $ 10 $ 12 Net investment income 17 22 27 Net realized capital gains (losses) 15 7 (89 ) Total revenues 40 39 (50 ) Insurance operating costs and other expenses [1] 53 114 78 Pension settlement 128 Loss on extinguishment of debt 21 213 Reinsurance loss on disposition 69 Interest expense 357 376 397 Total benefits, losses and expenses 431 618 757 Loss from continuing operations before income taxes (391 ) (579 ) (807 ) Income tax benefit (233 ) (204 ) (252 ) Net loss $ (158 ) $ (375 ) $ (555 ) [1] Fee income includes the income associated with the sales of non-proprietary insurance products in the Company broker-dealer subsidiaries that has an offsetting commission expense in insurance operating costs and other expenses. Year ended December 31, 2015 compared to the year ended December 31, 2014 Net loss, as compared to the prior year period, decreased in 2015 primarily due to an increase in income tax benefit of $94 from the partial reduction of the deferred tax valuation allowance on capital loss carryovers established when the HLIKK annuity business was sold. The reduction in valuation allowance stems primarily from taxable gains on sales of investments during the period. The net loss also decreased due to lower insurance operating costs and interest expense as well as the effect of a pension settlement charge in 2014, partially offset by a loss on extinguishment of debt in second quarter 2015. Insurance operating costs and other expenses decreased for 2015 largely due to a reduction in restructuring costs. In 2014, insurance operating costs and expenses includes a benefit of $10 , before tax, for recoveries for past legal expenses associated with closed litigation. Interest expense declined in 2015 due to a decrease in outstanding debt from debt maturities and the paydown of senior notes. In 2015, $456 of the Company's senior notes matured and $317 of senior notes were redeemed for cash. For additional information regarding debt, see Note 11 - Debt of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. For a reconciliation of the tax provision at the U.S. Federal statutory rate to the provision (benefit) for income taxes, see Note 14 - Income Taxes of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Year ended December 31, 2014 compared to the year ended December 31, 2013 Net loss, as compared to the prior year period, decreased in 2014 primarily due to decreases in the loss on extinguishment of debt, a change to net realized capital gains, decreases in the reinsurance loss on disposition, and a lower effective income tax rate benefit in 2013. The pension settlement charge in 2014 is related to voluntary lump-sum settlements with vested participants in the Company's defined benefit pension plan who had separated from service, but who had not yet commenced annuity benefits. For additional information regarding the pension settlement, see Note 16 - Employee Benefit Plans of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Insurance operating costs and other expenses increased in 2014 primarily due to benefits recognized in 2013 related to an insurance company recovery and the favorable resolution in 2013 of items under the Company's spin-off agreement with its former parent company. Interest expense declined in 2014 due to a decrease in outstanding debt from debt maturities and the paydown of $800 of senior notes in 2013. In 2014, $200 of the Company's senior notes matured. For additional information regarding debt, see Note 11 - Debt of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. For a reconciliation of the tax provision at the U.S. Federal statutory rate to the provision (benefit) for income taxes, see Note 14 - Income Taxes of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 87 ENTERPRISE RISK MANAGEMENT The Company has an enterprise risk management function ( ERM ) that is charged with providing analysis of the Company risks on an individual and aggregated basis and with ensuring that the Company risks remain within its risk appetite and tolerances. The Company has established the Enterprise Risk and Capital Committee ( ERCC ) that includes the Company CEO, President, Chief Financial Officer, Chief Investment Officer, Chief Risk Officer, General Counsel and others as deemed necessary by the committee chair. The ERCC is responsible for managing the Company risks and overseeing the enterprise risk management program. The Company categorizes its main risks as follows: Insurance Risk Operational Risk Financial Risk Insurance Risk Management The Company categorizes its insurance risks across both property-casualty and life products. The Company's insurance operations are vested in the ability to add value through the effective underwriting, pooling, and pricing of insurance risks. The Company has developed a disciplined approach to insurance risk management that is well integrated into the organization's underwriting, pricing, reinsurance, claims, and capital management processes. At the same time, the Company has policies and procedures to manage concentrations or correlations of insurance risk, including ERM policies governing the risks related to natural and man-made property catastrophes such as hurricanes, earthquakes, tornado/hailstorms, winter storms, pandemics, terrorism, and casualty catastrophes. The Company establishes risk limits to control potential loss and actively monitors the risk exposures as a percent of statutory surplus or total available capital resources. The Company also uses reinsurance to transfer insurance risk to well-established and financially secure reinsurers. For additional information, see MD&A - Enterprise Risk Management, Reinsurance as a Risk Management Strategy. Non-Catastrophic Insurance Risks Non-catastrophic insurance risks exist within each of the Company's divisions and include, but are not limited to, the following: Property: Risk of loss to personal or commercial property from automobile related accidents, weather, explosions, smoke, shaking, fire, theft, vandalism, inadequate installation, faulty equipment, collisions and falling objects, and/or machinery mechanical breakdown resulting in physical damage and other covered perils. Liability: Risk of loss from automobile related accidents, uninsured and underinsured drivers, lawsuits from accidents, defective products, breach of warranty, negligent acts by professional practitioners, environmental claims, latent exposures, fraud, coercion, forgery, failure to fulfill obligations per contract surety, liability from errors and omissions, derivative lawsuits, and other securities actions and covered perils. Mortality: Risk of loss from unexpected trends in insured deaths impacting timing of payouts from life insurance or annuity products, personal or commercial automobile related accidents, and death of employees or executives during the course of employment, while on disability, or while collecting workers compensation benefits. Morbidity : Risk of loss to an insured from illness incurred during the course of employment or illness from other covered perils. Disability: Risk of loss incurred from personal or commercial automobile related losses, accidents arising outside of the workplace, injuries or accidents incurred during the course of employment, or from equipment, with each loss resulting in short term or long term disability payments. Longevity: Risk of loss from increased life expectancy trends among policyholders receiving long term benefit payments or annuity payouts. The Company's processes for managing these risks include disciplined underwriting protocols, exposure controls, sophisticated risk based pricing, risk modeling, risk transfer, and capital management strategies. The Company has established underwriting guidelines for both individual risks, including individual policy limits, and risks in the aggregate, including aggregate exposure limits by geographic zone and peril. Pricing indications for each line of business are set independently by the Company's pricing actuaries and are integrated into the reserve review process to ensure consistency between pricing and reserving. Monthly reports track loss cost trends relative to pricing objectives within each state and product, and the Company's reserving actuaries provide an independent report to the Board on the Company's reserve position and loss cost trends. 88 Natural Catastrophe Risk Natural catastrophe risk is defined as the exposure arising from natural phenomena (e.g., weather, earthquakes, wildfires, etc.) that create a concentration or aggregation of loss across the Company's insurance or asset portfolios. The Company uses both internal and third-party models to estimate the potential loss resulting from various catastrophe events and the potential financial impact those events would have on the Company's financial position and results of operations across the property-casualty, group life, disability, and asset management businesses. For natural catastrophe perils, the Company's modeled loss estimates are derived by averaging 21 modeled loss events representing a 250 year return. The Company generally limits its estimated pre-tax loss as a result of natural catastrophes for property & casualty exposures from a single 250-year event to less than 30% of statutory surplus of the property and casualty insurance subsidiaries prior to reinsurance and to less than 15% of statutory surplus of the property and casualty insurance subsidiaries after reinsurance. While Enterprise Risk Management has a process to track and manage these limits, from time to time the estimated loss to natural catastrophes from a single 250-year event prior to reinsurance may fluctuate above or below these limits due to changes in modeled loss estimates, exposures or statutory surplus. For the peril of earthquake, the 21 events averaged to determine the modeled loss estimate include events occurring in California as well as the Northeastern, Southeastern, Northwestern, Midwestern, New Madrid and Great Lakes regions of the United States with associated magnitudes ranging from 7.1 to 9.2 on the Moment Magnitude scale. The estimated 250 year pre-tax probable maximum loss from earthquake events is estimated to be $810 before reinsurance and $494 net of reinsurance. For the peril of hurricane, the 21 events averaged to determine the modeled loss estimate include category 1 through 5 events in Florida, as well as Mid Atlantic, Northeastern and Texas region landfalls. The estimated 250 year pre-tax probable maximum losses from hurricane events are estimated to be $1.5 billion and $685, before and after reinsurance, respectively. The loss estimates represent total property losses for hurricane events and property and workers compensation losses for earthquake events resulting from a single event. The estimates provided are based on 250-year return period loss estimates that have a 0.4% likelihood of being exceeded in any single year. The net loss estimates provided above assume that the Company is able to recover all losses ceded to reinsurers under its reinsurance programs. There are various methodologies used in the industry to estimate the potential property and workers compensation losses that would arise from various catastrophe events and companies may use different models and assumptions in their estimates. Therefore, the Company's estimates of gross and net losses arising from a 250-year hurricane or earthquake event may not be comparable to estimates provided by other companies. Furthermore, the Company's estimates are subject to significant uncertainty and could vary materially from the actual losses that would arise from these events and the loss estimates provided by other companies. The Company also manages natural catastrophe risk for group life and group disability, which in combination with property and workers compensation loss estimates are subject to separate enterprise risk management net aggregate loss limits as a percent of enterprise surplus. Terrorism Risk The Company defines terrorism risk as the risk of losses from terrorist attacks, including losses caused by single-site and multi-site conventional attacks, as well as the potential for attacks using nuclear, biological, chemical or radiological weapons ( NBCR ). The Company monitors aggregations of terrorism risk exposure around key landmarks primarily in major metropolitan areas that span the Company's insurance portfolio. ERM limits for terrorism apply to aggregations of risk across property-casualty, group benefits and specific asset portfolios and are defined based on a deterministic, single-site conventional terrorism attack scenario. The Company manages its potential estimated loss from a conventional terrorism loss scenario up to $1.7 billion gross of reinsurance and before coverage under TRIPRA. In addition, the Company monitors exposures monthly and employs both internally developed and vendor-licensed loss modeling tools as part of its risk management discipline. While our modeled exposures to conventional terrorist attacks around landmark locations may fluctuate above and below $1.7 billion, currently, all such terrorism exposures are within ERM limits. For a discussion on risks related to terrorist attacks, see the risk factor, "The occurrence of one or more terrorist attacks in the geographic areas we serve or the threat of terrorism in general may have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, results of operations and liquidity." 89 Pandemic Risk Pandemic risk is the exposure to loss arising from widespread influenza or other pathogens or bacterial infections that create an aggregation of loss across the Company's insurance or asset portfolios. Consistent with industry practice, the Company assesses exposure to pandemics by analyzing the potential impact from a variety of pandemic scenarios based on conditions consistent with historical outbreaks of flu-like viruses such as the Severe 1918 Spanish Flu, the Asian flu of 1957, the Hong Kong flu of 1968, and the 2009 outbreak of the swine flu. For pandemic risk, the Company generally limits its estimated pre-tax loss from a single 250 year event to less than 10% of total available capital resources. In evaluating these scenarios, the Company assesses the impact on group life policies, short-term and long term disability, annuities, COLI, property & casualty claims, and losses in the investment portfolio associated with market declines in the event of a widespread pandemic. While ERM has a process to track and manage these limits, from time to time, the estimated loss for pandemics may fluctuate above or below these limits due to changes in modeled loss estimates, exposures, or statutory surplus. Currently, the Company's estimated pre-tax loss for pandemic is less than 10% of total available capital resources and is based on a single 250 year event. Reinsurance as a Risk Management Strategy The Hartford utilizes reinsurance to transfer risk to affiliated and unaffiliated insurers. Reinsurance is used to manage aggregation of risk as well as to transfer certain risk to reinsurance companies based on specific geographic or risk concentrations. All reinsurance processes are aligned under a single enterprise reinsurance risk management policy. Reinsurance purchasing is a centralized function across Commercial Lines, Personal Lines and Talcott Resolution to support a consistent strategy and to ensure that the reinsurance activities are fully integrated into the organization's risk management processes. A variety of traditional reinsurance products are used as part of the Company's risk management strategy, including excess of loss occurrence-based products that protect property and workers compensation exposures, and individual risk or quota share arrangements, that protect specific classes or lines of business. The Company has no significant finite risk contracts in place and the statutory surplus benefit from all such prior year contracts is immaterial. Facultative reinsurance is used by the Company to manage policy-specific risk exposures based on established underwriting guidelines. The Hartford also participates in governmentally administered reinsurance facilities such as the Florida Hurricane Catastrophe Fund ( FHCF ), the Terrorism Risk Insurance Program established under The Terrorism Risk Insurance Program Reauthorization Act of 2015 ( TRIPRA ) and other reinsurance programs relating to particular risks or specific lines of business. Reinsurance for Catastrophes The Company has several catastrophe reinsurance programs, including reinsurance treaties that cover property and workers compensation losses aggregating from single catastrophe events. The following table summarizes the primary catastrophe treaty reinsurance coverages that the Company has in place as of January 1, 2016: Coverage Effective for the period % of layer(s) reinsurance Per occurrence limit Retention Principal property catastrophe program covering property catastrophe losses from a single event [1] 1/1/2016 to 1/1/2017 90% $ 850 $ 350 Reinsurance with the FHCF covering Florida Personal Lines property catastrophe losses from a single event 6/1/2015 to 6/1/2016 90% $ 116 [2] $ 37 Workers compensation losses arising from a single catastrophe event [3] 7/1/2015 to 7/1/2016 80% $ 350 $ 100 [1] Certain aspects of our catastrophe treaty have terms that extend beyond the traditional one year term. [2] The per occurrence limit on the FHCF treaty is $116 for the 6/1/2015 to 6/1/2016 treaty year based on the Company's election to purchase the required coverage from FHCF. Coverage is based on the best available information from FHCF, which was updated in January 2016 [3] In addition to the limit shown, the workers compensation reinsurance includes a non-catastrophe, industrial accident layer, 80% of a $30 per event limit in excess of a $20 retention. In addition to the property catastrophe reinsurance coverage described in the above table, the Company has other catastrophe and working layer treaties and facultative reinsurance agreements that cover property catastrophe losses on an aggregate excess of loss and on a per risk basis. The principal property catastrophe reinsurance program and certain other reinsurance programs include a provision to reinstate limits in the event that a catastrophe loss exhausts limits on one or more layers under the treaties. In addition, covering the period from January 1, 2014 to December 31, 2016, the Company has an aggregate loss treaty in place which provides one limit of $200 over the three-year period of aggregate qualifying property catastrophe losses in excess of a net retention of $860 . 90 Reinsurance for Terrorism For the risk of terrorism, private sector catastrophe reinsurance capacity is generally limited and largely unavailable for terrorism losses caused by nuclear, biological, chemical or radiological weapons attacks. As such, the Company's principal reinsurance protection against large-scale terrorist attacks is the coverage currently provided through TRIPRA to the end of 2020. On January 12, 2015, the President signed TRIPRA 2015, extending TRIPRA 2007, through the end of 2020. TRIPRA 2015 provides a backstop for insurance-related losses resulting from any act of terrorism , which is certified by the Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation with the Secretary of Homeland Security and the Attorney General, for losses that exceed a threshold of industry losses of $100 in 2015, and continue to increase to $200 by 2020. Under the program, in any one calendar year, the federal government would pay losses of 85% in 2015, which then continue to decrease 1% annually, starting on January 1st, 2016, down to 80% by the year 2020, from a certified act of terrorism after an insurer's losses exceed 20% of the Company's eligible direct commercial earned premiums of the prior calendar year up to a combined annual aggregate limit for the federal government and all insurers of $100 billion. The Company's estimated deductible under the program is $1.2 billion for 2016. If an act of terrorism or acts of terrorism result in covered losses exceeding the $100 billion annual industry aggregate limit, a future Congress would be responsible for determining how additional losses in excess of $100 billion will be paid. Among other items, TRIPRA required that the President's Working Group on Financial Markets ( PWG ) continue to perform an analysis regarding the long-term availability and affordability of insurance for terrorism risk. Among the findings detailed in the PWG's initial report, released October 2, 2006, were that the high level of uncertainty associated with predicting the frequency of terrorist attacks, coupled with the unwillingness of some insurance policyholders to purchase insurance coverage, makes predicting long-term development of the terrorism risk market difficult, and that there is likely little potential for future market development for NBCR coverage. The January 2011 PWG report notes some improvements in capacity and modeling, but also noted that take-up rates for terrorism coverage remained relatively flat over the past three years and that insurers remain uncertain about the ability of models to predict the frequency and severity of terrorist attacks. The April 2014 PWG report notes that the availability and affordability of insurance for terrorism risk has not changed appreciably since 2010. Take up rates have increased since the first year of TRIA and are stable at 60% in the aggregate. The private market does not have capacity to provide reinsurance for terrorism risk to the extent provided by TRIPRA. With respect to NBCR coverage, a December 2008 study by the U.S. Government Accountability Office ( GAO ) found that property and casualty insurers still generally seek to exclude NBCR coverage from their commercial policies when permitted. However, while nuclear, pollution and contamination exclusions are contained in many property and liability insurance policies, the GAO report concluded that such exclusions may be subject to challenges in court because they were not specifically drafted to address terrorist attacks. Furthermore, workers compensation policies generally have no exclusion or limitations. The GAO found that commercial property and casualty policyholders, including companies that own high-value properties in large cities, generally reported that they could not obtain NBCR coverage. Commercial property and casualty insurers generally remain unwilling to offer NBCR coverage because of uncertainties about the risk and the potential for catastrophic losses. Reinsurance Recoverables Reinsurance Security To manage reinsurer credit risk, a reinsurance security review committee evaluates the credit standing, financial performance, management and operational quality of each potential reinsurer. Through this process, the Company maintains a centralized list of reinsurers approved for participation in reinsurance transactions. Only reinsurers approved through this process are eligible to participate in new reinsurance transactions. The Company's approval designations reflect the differing credit exposure associated with various classes of business. Participation eligibility is categorized based upon the nature of the risk reinsured, including the expected liability payout duration. In addition to defining participation eligibility, the Company regularly monitors credit risk exposure to each reinsurance counterparty and has established limits tiered by counterparty credit rating. For further discussion on how the Company manages and mitigates third party credit risk, see MD&A - Enterprise Risk Management, Credit Risk. 91 Property and Casualty Insurance Product Reinsurance Recoverables Property and casualty insurance product reinsurance recoverables represent loss and loss adjustment expense recoverables from a number of entities, including reinsurers and pools. The components of the gross and net reinsurance recoverables are summarized as follows: As of December 31, Reinsurance Recoverables 2015 2014 Paid loss and loss adjustment expenses $ 119 $ 133 Unpaid loss and loss adjustment expenses 2,662 2,868 Gross reinsurance recoverables 2,781 3,001 Less: Allowance for uncollectible reinsurance (266 ) (271 ) Net reinsurance recoverables $ 2,515 $ 2,730 Distribution of Gross Reinsurance Recoverables As shown in the following table, a portion of the total gross reinsurance recoverables relates to the Company mandatory participation in various involuntary assigned risk pools and the value of annuity contracts held under structured settlement agreements. Reinsurance recoverables due from mandatory pools are backed by the financial strength of the property and casualty insurance industry. Annuities purchased from third-party life insurers under structured settlements are recognized as reinsurance recoverables in cases where the Company has not obtained a release from the claimant. Of the remaining gross reinsurance recoverables, the portion of recoverables due from companies rated by A.M. Best is as follows: As of December 31, Distribution of Gross Reinsurance Recoverables 2015 2014 Gross reinsurance recoverables $ 2,781 $ 3,001 Less: mandatory (assigned risk) pools and structured settlements (551 ) (567 ) Gross reinsurance recoverables excluding mandatory pools and structured settlements $ 2,230 $ 2,434 % of Total % of Total Rated A- (Excellent) or better by A.M. Best [1] $ 1,474 66.1 % $ 1,561 64.1 % Other rated by A.M. Best 4 0.2 % 4 0.2 % Total rated companies 1,478 66.3 % 1,565 64.3 % Voluntary pools 82 3.7 % 92 3.8 % Captives 387 17.3 % 488 20.0 % Other not rated companies 283 12.7 % 289 11.9 % Total $ 2,230 100.0 % $ 2,434 100.0 % [1] Based on A.M. Best ratings as of December 31, 2015 and 2014 , respectively. Where its contracts permit, the Company secures future claim obligations with various forms of collateral, including irrevocable letters of credit, secured trusts, funds held accounts and group wide offsets. As part of its reinsurance recoverable review, the Company analyzes recent developments in commutation activity between reinsurers and cedants, recent trends in arbitration and litigation outcomes in disputes between cedants and reinsurers and the overall credit quality of the Company reinsurers. As indicated in the above table, 66.1% of the gross reinsurance recoverables due from reinsurers rated by A.M. Best were rated A- (excellent) or better as of December 31, 2015 . Due to the inherent uncertainties as to collection and the length of time before such amounts will be due, it is possible that future adjustments to the Company reinsurance recoverables, net of the allowance, could be required, which could have a material adverse effect on the Company consolidated results of operations or cash flows in a particular quarterly or annual period. Annually, the Company completes evaluations of the reinsurance recoverable asset associated with older, long-term casualty liabilities reported in the Property & Casualty Other Operations reporting segment, and the allowance for uncollectible reinsurance reported in the Commercial Lines reporting segment. For a discussion regarding the results of these evaluations, see MD&A - Critical Accounting Estimates, Property and Casualty Insurance Product Reserves, Net of Reinsurance. 92 Life Insurance Product Reinsurance Recoverables Life insurance product reinsurance recoverables represent future policy benefits and unpaid loss and loss adjustment expenses and other policyholder funds and benefits payable that are recoverable from a number of reinsurers. The components of the gross and net reinsurance recoverables are as follows: As of December 31, Reinsurance Recoverables 2015 2014 Future policy benefits and unpaid loss and loss adjustment expenses and other policyholder funds and benefits payable 20,674 20,190 Gross reinsurance recoverables $ 20,674 $ 20,190 Less: Allowance for uncollectible reinsurance [1] Net reinsurance recoverables $ 20,674 $ 20,190 [1] No allowance for uncollectible reinsurance is required as of December 31, 2015 and December 31, 2014 As of December 31, 2015 , the Company has reinsurance recoverables from MassMutual and Prudential of $8.6 billion and $10.8 billion , respectively. As of December 31, 2014 the Company had reinsurance recoverables from MassMutual and Prudential of $8.6 billion and $10.4 billion , respectively. The Company's obligations to its direct policyholders that have been reinsured to Mass Mutual and Prudential are secured by invested assets held in trust. Net of invested assets held in trust, as of December 31, 2015, the Company has no reinsurance-related concentrations of credit risk greater than 10% of the Company consolidated stockholders equity. Guaranty Funds and Other Insurance-related Assessments As part of its risk management strategy, the Company regularly monitors the financial wherewithal of other insurers and, in particular, activity by insurance regulators and various state guaranty associations relating to troubled insurers. In all states, insurers licensed to transact certain classes of insurance are required to become members of a guaranty fund. In most states, in the event of the insolvency of an insurer writing any such class of insurance in the state, members of the funds are assessed to pay certain claims of the insolvent insurer. A particular state's fund assesses its members based on their respective written premiums in the state for the classes of insurance in which the insolvent insurer was engaged. Assessments are generally limited for any year to one or two percent of the premiums written per year depending on the state. The amount and timing of assessments related to past insolvencies is unpredictable. Citizens Property Insurance Corporation in Florida ( Citizens ), a non-affiliate insurer, provides property insurance to Florida homeowners and businesses that are unable to obtain insurance from other carriers, including for properties deemed to be high risk. Citizens maintains a Personal Lines account, a Commercial Lines account and a High Risk account. If Citizens incurs a deficit in any of these accounts, Citizens may impose a regular assessment on other insurance carriers in the state, such as the Company, to fund the deficits, subject to certain restrictions and subject to approval by the Florida Office of Insurance Regulation. Carriers are then permitted to surcharge policyholders to recover the assessments over the next few years. Citizens may also opt to finance a portion of the deficits through issuing bonds and may impose emergency assessments on other insurance carriers to fund the bond repayments. Unlike with regular assessments, however, insurance carriers only serve as a collection agent for emergency assessments and are not required to remit surcharges for emergency assessments to Citizens until they collect surcharges from policyholders. Under U.S. GAAP, the Company is required to accrue for regular assessments in the period the assessments become probable and estimable and the obligating event has occurred. Surcharges to recover the amount of regular assessments may not be recorded as an asset until the related premium is written. Emergency assessments that may be levied by Citizens are not recorded in the income statement. Operational Risk Management The Hartford has an Operational Risk Management ( ORM ) function whose responsibility is to provide a comprehensive and enterprise-wide view of the Company's operational risk on an aggregate basis. The Company defines operational risk as the risk of loss resulting from inadequate or failed internal processes, people and systems, or from external events. Operational risk is inherent in our business and functional areas. It includes legal risk and considers reputational risk as an impact. ORM is responsible for establishing, maintaining and communicating the framework, principles and guidelines of The Hartford's operational risk management program. In addition, ORM also manages business continuity, model risk management, the ORM system, and risk assessments. Responsibility for day-to-day management of operational risk lies within each business unit and functional area. 93 ORM works closely with the Operational Risk Committee ( ORC ), an enterprise wide governance group comprised of senior leaders from functional areas such as ORM, Operations and Technology, Claims, Legal, Compliance, Finance and Internal Audit. The ORC meets regularly and provides a forum for ensuring the effective identification, assessment, control, ownership, management and reporting of operational risks across the enterprise. Members of the ORC provide periodic risk updates to the ERCC and Audit Committee. Individual committees, such as the Enterprise Privacy and Security Committee, Enterprise Health, Environment and Safety Committee, and the Model Oversight Committees focus on specific operational risk issues. ORM has various tools and processes for identifying, monitoring, measuring, prioritizing, and reporting operational risks. ORM facilitates the business risk assessment process which is used to identify the top risks in the business and functional areas, evaluate controls to mitigate those risks, and monitor control improvements. ORM also facilitates loss event collection and analysis, scenario analysis, and aggregated reporting of risks. ORM uses a centralized Governance, Risk, and Compliance (GRC) system to support effective and efficient management of operational risk across the Company. Financial Risk Management The Company identifies the following categories of financial risk: Liquidity Risk Interest Rate Risk Equity Risk Foreign Currency Exchange Risk Credit Risk Financial risks include direct and indirect risks to the Company's financial objectives coming from events that impact market conditions or prices. Financial risk also includes exposure to events that may cause correlated movement in multiple risk factors. The primary sources of financial risks are the Company's general account assets and the liabilities and the guarantees which the company has written over various liability products, particularly its portfolio of variable annuities. The Company assesses its financial risk on a U.S. GAAP, statutory and economic basis. The Hartford has developed a disciplined approach to financial risk management that is well integrated into the Company's underwriting, pricing, hedging, claims, asset and liability management, new product, and capital management processes. Consistent with its risk appetite, the Company establishes financial risk limits to control potential loss. Exposures are actively monitored, and mitigated where appropriate. The Company uses various risk management strategies, including reinsurance and over-the-counter and exchange traded derivatives with counterparties meeting the appropriate regulatory and due diligence requirements. Derivatives are utilized to achieve one of four Company-approved objectives: to hedge risk arising from interest rate, equity market, commodity market, credit spread and issuer default, price or currency exchange rate risk or volatility; to manage liquidity; to control transaction costs; or to enter into synthetic replication transactions. Liquidity Risk Liquidity risk is the risk to current or prospective earnings or capital arising from the Company's inability or perceived inability to meet its contractual cash obligations at the legal entity level when they come due over given time horizons without incurring unacceptable costs and without relying on uncommitted funding sources. Liquidity risk includes the inability to manage unplanned increases or accelerations in cash outflows, decreases or changes in funding sources, and changes in market conditions that affect the ability to liquidate assets quickly to meet obligations with minimal loss in value. Components of liquidity risk include funding risk, company specific liquidity risk and market liquidity risk. Funding risk is the gap between sources and uses of cash under normal and stressed conditions taking into consideration structural, regulatory and legal entity constraints. Company specific liquidity risk represents changes in institution-specific conditions that affect the Company's ability to sell assets or otherwise transact business without incurring a significant loss in value. Market liquidity risk represents changes in general market conditions that affect the institution's ability to sell assets or otherwise transact business without incurring a significant loss in value is market liquidity risk. The Company has defined ongoing monitoring and reporting requirements to assess liquidity across the enterprise under both current and stressed market conditions. The Company measures and manages liquidity risk exposures and funding needs within prescribed limits and across legal entities taking into account legal, regulatory and operational limitations to the transferability of liquidity. The Company also monitors internal and external conditions, and identifies material risk changes and emerging risks that may impact liquidity. The Company's CFO has primary responsibility for liquidity risk. For further discussion on liquidity see the section on Capital Resources and Liquidity. 94 Interest Rate Risk Interest rate risk is the risk of financial loss due to adverse changes in the value of assets and liabilities arising from movements in interest rates. Interest rate risk encompasses exposures with respect to changes in the level of interest rates, the shape of the term structure of rates and the volatility of interest rates. Interest rate risk does not include exposure to changes in credit spreads. The Company has exposure to interest rates arising from its fixed maturity securities, interest sensitive liabilities and discount rate assumptions associated with the Company pension and other post retirement benefit obligations. An increase in interest rates from current levels is generally a favorable development for the Company. Interest rate increases are expected to provide additional net investment income, reduce the cost of the variable annuity hedging program, and limit the potential risk of margin erosion due to minimum guaranteed crediting rates in certain Talcott Resolution products. However, if long-term interest rates rise dramatically within a six to twelve month time period, certain Talcott Resolution businesses may be exposed to disintermediation risk. Disintermediation risk refers to the risk that policyholders will surrender their contracts in a rising interest rate environment requiring the Company to liquidate assets in an unrealized loss position. In conjunction with the interest rate risk measurement and management techniques, certain of Talcott Resolution's fixed income product offerings have market value adjustment provisions at contract surrender. An increase in interest rates may also impact the Company tax planning strategies and in particular its ability to utilize tax benefits of previously recognized realized capital losses. A decline in interest rates results in certain mortgage-backed and municipal securities being more susceptible to paydowns and prepayments or calls. During such periods, the Company generally will not be able to reinvest the proceeds at comparable yields. Lower interest rates will also likely result in lower net investment income, increased hedging costs associated with variable annuities and, if declines are sustained for a long period of time, it may subject the Company to reinvestment risk and possibly reduced profit margins associated with guaranteed crediting rates on certain Talcott Resolution products. Conversely, the fair value of the investment portfolio will increase when interest rates decline and the Company interest expense will be lower on its variable rate debt obligations. The Company manages its exposure to interest rate risk by constructing investment portfolios that maintain asset allocation limits and asset/liability duration matching targets which may include the use of derivatives. The Company analyzes interest rate risk using various models including parametric models and cash flow simulation under various market scenarios of the liabilities and their supporting investment portfolios. Key metrics that the Company uses to quantify its exposure to interest rate risk inherent in its invested assets and interest rate sensitive liabilities include duration, convexity and key rate duration. Duration is the price sensitivity of a financial instrument or series of cash flows to a parallel change in the underlying yield curve used to value the financial instrument or series of cash flows. For example, a duration of 5 means the price of the security will change by approximately 5% for a 100 basis point change in interest rates. Convexity is used to approximate how the duration of a security changes as interest rates change in a parallel manner. Key rate duration analysis measures the price sensitivity of a security or series of cash flows to each point along the yield curve and enables the Company to estimate the price change of a security assuming non-parallel interest rate movements. To calculate duration, convexity, and key rate durations, projections of asset and liability cash flows are discounted to a present value using interest rate assumptions. These cash flows are then revalued at alternative interest rate levels to determine the percentage change in fair value due to an incremental change in the entire yield curve for duration and convexity, or a particular point on the yield curve for key rate duration. Cash flows from corporate obligations are assumed to be consistent with the contractual payment streams on a yield to worst basis. Yield to worst is a basis that represents the lowest potential yield that can be received without the issuer actually defaulting. The primary assumptions used in calculating cash flow projections include expected asset payment streams taking into account prepayment speeds, issuer call options and contract holder behavior. Mortgage-backed and asset-backed securities are modeled based on estimates of the rate of future prepayments of principal over the remaining life of the securities. These estimates are developed by incorporating collateral surveillance and anticipated future market dynamics. Actual prepayment experience may vary from these estimates. The Company is also exposed to interest rate risk based upon the sensitivity of the present value of the Company pension and other postretirement benefit obligations to changes in liability discount rates. The discount rate assumption is based upon an interest rate yield curve that reflects high-quality fixed income investments consistent with the maturity profile of the expected liability cash flows. For further discussion of discounting pension and other postretirement benefit obligations, refer to Note 16 - Employee Benefit Plans of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. In addition, management evaluates performance of certain Talcott Resolution products based on net investment spread which is, in part, influenced by changes in interest rates. The investments and liabilities primarily associated with interest rate risk are included in the following discussion. Certain product liabilities, including those containing GMWB or GMDB, expose the Company to interest rate risk but also have significant equity risk. These liabilities are discussed as part of the Variable Product Guarantee Risks and Risk Management section. 95 Fixed Maturity Investments The Company investment portfolios primarily consist of investment grade fixed maturity securities. The fair value of fixed maturity investments was $59.7 billion and $59.9 billion at December 31, 2015 and 2014 , respectively. The fair value of these and other invested assets fluctuate depending on the interest rate environment and other general economic conditions. The weighted average duration of the portfolio, including fixed maturities, commercial mortgage loans, certain derivatives, and cash equivalents, was approximately 5.5 years and 5.3 years as of December 31, 2015 and 2014 , respectively. Liabilities The Company issued investment contracts and certain insurance product liabilities, other than non-guaranteed separate accounts, include asset accumulation vehicles such as fixed annuities, guaranteed investment contracts, other investment and universal life-type contracts and certain insurance products such as long-term disability. Asset accumulation vehicles primarily require a fixed rate payment, often for a specified period of time, such as fixed rate annuities with a market value adjustment feature. The term to maturity of these contracts generally range from less than one year to ten years. A fixed interest rate is specified in the contract based upon the term selected. These contracts contain surrender values that are based upon a market value adjustment formula if held for shorter periods. The formula typically is based on current interest crediting rates being offered for new market value annuity purchases at the time of contract issuance with terms equal to the remaining term to maturity. The market value adjustment may be positive or negative, depending upon market interest rates at surrender. In addition, certain products such as corporate owned life insurance contracts and the general account portion of Talcott Resolution's variable annuity products credit interest to policyholders subject to market conditions and minimum interest rate guarantees. The term to maturity of the asset portfolio supporting these products may range from short to intermediate. While interest rate risk associated with many of these products has been reduced through the use of market value adjustment features and surrender charges, the primary risk associated with these products is that the spread between investment return and credited rate may not be sufficient to earn targeted returns. The Company also manages the risk of certain insurance liabilities similarly to investment type products due to the relative predictability of the aggregate cash flow payment streams. Products in this category may contain significant reliance upon actuarial pricing assumptions (including mortality and morbidity) and do have some element of cash flow uncertainty. Product examples include structured settlement contracts, on-benefit annuities (i.e., the annuitant is currently receiving benefits thereon) and short-term and long-term disability contracts. The cash outflows associated with these policy liabilities are not interest rate sensitive but do vary based on the timing and amount of benefit payments. The primary risks associated with these products are that the benefits will exceed expected actuarial pricing and/or that the actual timing of the cash flows will differ from those anticipated, or interest rate levels earned on the investment portfolio may deviate from those assumed in product pricing, ultimately resulting in an investment return lower than that assumed in pricing. The average duration of the liability cash flow payments can range from less than one year to in excess of fifteen years. Derivatives The Company utilizes a variety of derivative instruments to mitigate interest rate risk associated with its investment portfolio or hedge liabilities. Interest rate swaps are primarily used to convert interest receipts or payments to a fixed or variable rate. The use of such swaps enable the Company to customize contract terms and conditions to desired objectives and manage the duration profile within established tolerances. Interest rate swaps are also used to hedge the variability in the cash flow of a forecasted purchase or sale of fixed rate securities due to changes in interest rates. Interest rate caps, floors, swaps, swaptions, and futures may be used to manage portfolio duration. As of December 31, 2015 and 2014 , notional amounts pertaining to derivatives utilized to manage interest rate risk, including offsetting positions, totaled $ 17.8 billion and $ 19.3 billion , respectively ($ 17.7 billion and $ 19.2 billion , respectively, related to investments and $ 0.1 billion and $ 0.1 billion , respectively, related to Talcott Resolution liabilities). The fair value of these derivatives was $ (796) and $ (468) as of December 31, 2015 and 2014 , respectively. These amounts do not include derivatives associated with the Variable Annuity Hedging Program. 96 Interest Rate Sensitivity Invested Assets Supporting Fixed Liabilities Included in the following table is the before-tax change in the net economic value of investment contracts (e.g., fixed annuity contracts) issued by the Company Talcott Resolution segment, as well as certain insurance product liabilities (e.g., disability contracts) issued by the Company Group Benefits segment, for which the payment rates are fixed at contract issuance and/or the investment experience is substantially absorbed by the Company operations, along with the corresponding invested assets. Also included in this analysis are the interest rate sensitive derivatives used by the Company to hedge its exposure to interest rate risk in the investment portfolios supporting these contracts. This analysis does not include the assets and corresponding liabilities of certain insurance products such as auto, property, term life insurance, and certain life contingent annuities. Certain financial instruments, such as limited partnerships and other alternative investments, have been omitted from the analysis due to the fact that these investments generally lack sensitivity to interest rate changes. Insulated separate account assets and liabilities are excluded from the analysis because gains and losses in separate accounts accrue to policyholders. The calculation of the estimated hypothetical change in net economic value below assumes a 100 basis point upward and downward parallel shift in the yield curve. Interest Rate Sensitivity of Fixed Liabilities and Invested Assets Supporting Them Change in Net Economic Value as of December 31, 2015 2014 Basis point shift -100 +100 -100 +100 Increase (decrease) in economic value, before tax $ (420 ) $ 261 $ (452 ) $ 304 The carrying value of fixed maturities, commercial mortgage loans and short-term investments related to the businesses included in the table above was $25.3 billion and $27.2 billion , as of December 31, 2015 and 2014 , respectively. The assets supporting the fixed liabilities are monitored and managed within set duration guidelines, and are evaluated on a daily basis, as well as annually using scenario simulation techniques in compliance with regulatory requirements. Invested Assets not Supporting Fixed Liabilities The following table provides an analysis showing the estimated before-tax change in the fair value of the Company investments and related derivatives, excluding assets supporting fixed liabilities which are included in the table above, assuming 100 basis point upward and downward parallel shifts in the yield curve as of December 31, 2015 and 2014 . Certain financial instruments, such as limited partnerships and other alternative investments, have been omitted from the analysis due to the fact that these investments generally lack sensitivity to interest rate changes. Interest Rate Sensitivity of Invested Assets not Supporting Fixed Liabilities Change in Fair Value as of December 31, 2015 2014 Basis point shift -100 +100 -100 +100 Increase (decrease) in fair value, before tax $ 2,186 $ (2,063 ) $ 2,182 $ (2,083 ) The carrying value of fixed maturities, commercial mortgage loans and short-term investments related to the businesses included in the table above was $41.9 billion and $43.1 billion , as of December 31, 2015 and 2014 , respectively. The selection of the 100 basis point parallel shift in the yield curve was made only as an illustration of the potential hypothetical impact of such an event and should not be construed as a prediction of future market events. Actual results could differ materially from those illustrated above due to the nature of the estimates and assumptions used in the above analysis. The Company sensitivity analysis calculation assumes that the composition of invested assets and liabilities remain materially consistent throughout the year and that the current relationship between short-term and long-term interest rates will remain constant over time. As a result, these calculations may not fully capture the impact of portfolio re-allocations, significant product sales or non-parallel changes in interest rates. Equity Risk Equity risk is defined as the risk of financial loss due to changes in the value of global equities or equity indices. The Company has exposure to equity risk from assets under management, embedded derivatives within the Company variable annuities and assets that support the Company pension and other post retirement benefit plans. Equity Risk on the Company Variable Annuity products is mitigated through various hedging programs. (See the Variable Annuity Hedge Program Section) 97 The Company's exposure to equity risk includes the potential for lower earnings associated with certain businesses such as mutual funds and variable annuities where fee income is earned based upon the value of the assets under management. For further discussion of equity risk, see the Variable Product Guarantee Risks and Risk Management section below. In addition, Talcott Resolution includes certain guaranteed benefits, primarily associated with variable annuity products, which increase the Company's potential benefit exposure in the periods that equity markets decline. The Company is also subject to equity risk based upon the assets that support its pension and other post retirement benefit plans. The asset allocation mix is reviewed on a periodic basis. In order to minimize risk, the pension plans maintain a listing of permissible and prohibited investments. In addition, the pension plans have certain concentration limits and investment quality requirements imposed on permissible investment options. For further discussion of equity risk associated with the pension plans, see the Critical Accounting Estimates section of the MD&A under Pension and Other Postretirement Benefit Obligations and Note 16 Employee Benefit Plans of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Variable Product Guarantee Risks and Risk Management The Company variable products are significantly influenced by the U.S. and other equity markets. Increases or declines in equity markets impact certain assets and liabilities related to the Company variable products and the Company earnings derived from those products. The Company variable products include variable annuity contracts and mutual funds. Generally, declines in equity markets will: reduce the value of assets under management and the amount of fee income generated from those assets; increase the liability for GMWB benefits resulting in realized capital losses; increase the value of derivative assets used to hedge product guarantees resulting in realized capital gains; increase the costs of the hedging instruments we use in our hedging program; increase the Company net amount at risk ("NAR") for GMDB and GMWB benefits; increase the amount of required assets to be held backing variable annuity guarantees to maintain required regulatory reserve levels and targeted risk based capital ratios; and decrease the Company estimated future gross profits, resulting in a DAC unlock charge. See Estimated Gross Profits Used in the Valuation and Amortization of Assets and Liabilities Associated with Variable Annuity Contracts within the Critical Accounting Estimates section of the MD&A for further information. Generally, increases in equity markets will have the inverse impact of those listed in the preceding discussion. For additional information, see Risk Hedging - Variable Annuity Hedging Program section. Variable Annuity Guaranteed Benefits The Company variable annuities include GMDB and certain contracts with GMDB also include GMWB features. Declines in the equity markets will increase the Company liability for these benefits. Many contracts with a GMDB include a maximum anniversary value ("MAV"), which in rising markets resets the guarantee on anniversary to be 'at the money'. As the MAV increases, it can increase the NAR for subsequent declines in account value. Generally, a GMWB contract is in the money if the contractholder guaranteed remaining balance ("GRB") becomes greater than the account value. The NAR is generally defined as the guaranteed minimum benefit amount in excess of the contractholder current account value. Variable annuity account values with guarantee features were $44.2 billion and $52.9 billion as of December 31, 2015 and December 31, 2014 , respectively. 98 The following tables summarize the account values of the Company variable annuities with guarantee features and the NAR split between various guarantee features (retained net amount at risk does not take into consideration the effects of the variable annuity hedge programs in place as of each balance sheet date): Total Variable Annuity Guarantees As of December 31, 2015 ($ in billions) Account Value Gross Net Amount at Risk Retained Net Amount at Risk % of Contracts In the Money[2] % In the Money [2] [3] U.S. Variable Annuity [1] GMDB $ 44.2 $ 4.2 $ 1.1 55 % 9 % GMWB 20.2 0.2 0.2 11 % 9 % Total Variable Annuity Guarantees As of December 31, 2014 ($ in billions) Account Value Gross Net Amount at Risk Retained Net Amount at Risk % of Contracts In the Money [2] % In the Money [2] [3] U.S. Variable Annuity [1] GMDB $ 52.9 $ 3.8 $ 0.8 23 % 14 % GMWB 24.8 0.2 0.1 6 % 11 % [1] Policies with a guaranteed living benefit also have a guaranteed death benefit. The NAR for each benefit is shown; however these benefits are not additive. When a policy terminates due to death, any NAR related to GMWB is released. Similarly, when a policy goes into benefit status on a GMWB, the GMDB NAR is reduced to zero. [2] Excludes contracts that are fully reinsured. [3] For all contracts that are in the money , this represents the percentage by which the average contract was in the money. Many policyholders with a GMDB also have a GMWB. Policyholders that have a product that offers both guarantees can only receive the GMDB or GMWB. The GMDB NAR disclosed in the preceding tables is a point in time measurement and assumes that all participants utilize the GMDB benefit on that measurement date. For additional information on the Company's GMDB liability, see Note 9 - Separate Accounts, Death Benefits and Other Insurance Benefit Features of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. The Company expects to incur GMDB payments in the future only if the policyholder has an in the money GMDB at their death. For policies with a GMWB rider, the company expects to incur GMWB payments in the future only if the account value is reduced over time to a specified level through a combination of market performance and periodic withdrawals, at which point the contract holder will receive an annuity equal to the GRB which is generally equal to premiums less withdrawals. For the Company life-time GMWB products, this annuity can exceed the GRB. As the account value fluctuates with equity market returns on a daily basis and the life-time GMWB payments may exceed the GRB, the ultimate amount to be paid by the Company, if any, is uncertain and could be significantly more or less than the Company current carried liability. For additional information on the Company GMWB liability, see Note 4 - Fair Value Measurements of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 99 Variable Annuity Market Risk Exposures The following table summarizes the broad Variable Annuity Guarantees offered by the Company and the market risks to which the guarantee is most exposed from a U.S. GAAP accounting perspective: Variable Annuity Guarantees [1] U.S. GAAP Treatment [1] Primary Market Risk Exposures [1] GMDB and life-contingent component of the GMWB Accumulation of the portion of fees required to cover expected claims, less accumulation of actual claims paid Equity Market Levels GMWB (excluding life-contingent portions) Fair Value Equity Market Levels / Implied Volatility / Interest Rates [1] Each of these guarantees and the related U.S. GAAP accounting volatility will also be influenced by actual and estimated policyholder behavior. Risk Hedging Variable Annuity Hedging Program The Company variable annuity hedging is primarily focused, through the use of reinsurance and capital market derivative instruments, on reducing the economic exposure to market risks associated with guaranteed benefits that are embedded in our variable annuity contracts. The variable annuity hedging also considers the potential impacts on statutory accounting results. Reinsurance The Company uses reinsurance for a portion of contracts with GMWB riders issued prior to the third quarter of 2003 and GMWB risks associated with a block of business sold between the third quarter of 2003 and the second quarter of 2006. The Company also uses reinsurance for a majority of the GMDB issued. Capital Market Derivatives GMWB Hedge Program The Company enters into derivative contracts to hedge market risk exposures associated with the GMWB liabilities that are not reinsured. These derivative contracts include customized swaps, interest rate swaps and futures, and equity swaps, options, and futures, on certain indices including the S&P 500 index, EAFE index, and NASDAQ index. Additionally, the Company holds customized derivative contracts to provide protection from certain capital market risks for the remaining term of specified blocks of non-reinsured GMWB riders. These customized derivative contracts are based on policyholder behavior assumptions specified at the inception of the derivative contracts. The Company retains the risk for differences between assumed and actual policyholder behavior and between the performance of the actively managed funds underlying the separate accounts and their respective indices. While the Company actively manages this dynamic hedging program, increased U.S. GAAP earnings volatility may result from factors including, but not limited to: policyholder behavior, capital markets, divergence between the performance of the underlying funds and the hedging indices, changes in hedging positions and the relative emphasis placed on various risk management objectives. Macro Hedge Program The Company macro hedging program uses derivative instruments, such as options and futures on equities and interest rates, to provide protection against the statutory tail scenario risk arising from GMWB and GMDB liabilities on the Company statutory surplus. These macro hedges cover some of the residual risks not otherwise covered by the dynamic hedging program. Management assesses this residual risk under various scenarios in designing and executing the macro hedge program. The macro hedge program will result in additional U.S. GAAP earnings volatility as changes in the value of the macro hedge derivatives, which are designed to reduce statutory reserve and capital volatility, may not be closely aligned to changes in GAAP liabilities. Variable Annuity Hedging Program Sensitivities The underlying guaranteed living benefit liabilities and the related hedge assets within the GMWB (excluding life contingent GMWB payments) and Macro hedge programs are carried at fair value, with the exception of liabilities within the Macro hedge program. 100 The following table presents our estimates of the potential instantaneous impacts from sudden market stresses related to equity market prices, interest rates, and implied market volatilities. The following sensitivities represent: (1) the net estimated difference between the change in the fair value of GMWB liabilities and the underlying hedge instruments and (2) the estimated change in fair value of the hedge instruments for the macro program, before the impacts of amortization of DAC, and taxes. As noted in the preceding discussion, certain hedge assets are used to hedge liabilities that are not carried at fair value and will not have a liability offset in the U.S. GAAP sensitivity analysis. All sensitivities are measured as of year end and are related to the fair value of liabilities and hedge instruments in place at that date for the Company variable annuity hedge programs. The impacts presented in the table that follows are estimated individually and measured without consideration of any correlation among market risk factors. GAAP Sensitivity Analysis As of December 31, 2015 (before tax and DAC) [1] GMWB Macro Equity Market Return -20 % -10 % 10 % -20 % -10 % 10 % Potential Net Fair Value Impact $ (19 ) $ (6 ) $ $ 168 $ 70 $ (43 ) Interest Rates -50bps -25bps +25bps -50bps -25bps +25bps Potential Net Fair Value Impact $ 2 $ 1 $ (3 ) $ 12 $ 6 $ (6 ) Implied Volatilities 10 % 2 % -10 % 10 % 2 % -10 % Potential Net Fair Value Impact $ (50 ) $ (10 ) $ 48 $ 93 $ 19 $ (89 ) [1] These sensitivities are based on the following key market levels as of December 31, 2015: 1) S&P of 2044 ; 2) 10yr US swap rate of 2.25 %; and 3) S&P 10yr volatility of 27.16 % The preceding sensitivity analysis is an estimate and should not be used to predict the future financial performance of the Company's variable annuity hedge programs. The actual net changes in the fair value liability and the hedging assets illustrated in the preceding table may vary materially depending on a variety of factors which include but are not limited to: The sensitivity analysis is only valid as of the measurement date and assumes instantaneous changes in the capital market factors and no ability to rebalance hedge positions prior to the market changes; Changes to the underlying hedging program, policyholder behavior, and variation in underlying fund performance relative to the hedged index, which could materially impact the liability; and The impact of elapsed time on liabilities or hedge assets, any non-parallel shifts in capital market factors, or correlated moves across the sensitivities. Foreign Currency Exchange Risk Foreign currency exchange risk is defined as the risk of financial loss due to changes in the relative value between currencies. The Company foreign currency exchange risk is related to non-U.S. dollar denominated investments, which primarily consist of fixed maturity and equity investments, a yen denominated fixed payout annuity and changes in equity of a P&C runoff entity in the United Kingdom. In addition, the Company Talcott Resolution operations formerly issued non-U.S. dollar denominated funding agreement liability contracts. A significant portion of the Company foreign currency exposure is mitigated through the use of derivatives. Fixed Maturity and Equity Investments The risk associated with the non-U.S. dollar denominated fixed maturities and equities relates to potential decreases in value and income resulting from unfavorable changes in foreign exchange rates. The fair values of the non-U.S. dollar denominated fixed maturities and equities at December 31, 2015 and 2014 were approximately $ 921 and $ 549 , respectively. Included in these amounts are $ 530 and $ 398 at December 31, 2015 and 2014 , respectively, related to non-U.S. dollar denominated fixed maturity and equity securities that directly support liabilities denominated in the same currencies. At December 31, 2015 and 2014 , the derivatives used to hedge currency exchange risk related to the remaining non-U.S. dollar denominated fixed maturities and equities had a total notional amount of $ 444 and $ 137 , respectively, and total fair value of $ 18 and $ 2 , respectively. Based on the fair values of the Company non-U.S. dollar denominated securities and derivative instruments as of December 31, 2015 and 2014 , management estimates that a 10% unfavorable change in exchange rates would decrease the fair values by a before-tax total of approximately $48 and $38 , respectively. The estimated impact was based upon a 10% change in December 31 spot rates. The selection of the 10% unfavorable change was made only for illustration of the potential hypothetical impact of such an event and should not be construed as a prediction of future market events. Actual results could differ materially from those illustrated above due to the nature of the estimates and assumptions used in the analysis. 101 Liabilities The Company has foreign currency exchange risk associated with yen denominated fixed payout annuities under a reinsurance contract. The Company has entered into pay U.S. dollar, receive yen swap contracts to hedge the currency exposure between the U.S. dollar denominated assets and the yen denominated fixed liability reinsurance payments. In addition, during 2015, the Company entered into certain foreign currency forwards to hedge the currency impacts on changes in equity of a P&C runoff entity in the United Kingdom . At December 31, 2015 the derivatives used to hedge the currency impacts had a total notional amount of $191 and a total fair value of $6 . Talcott Resolution previously issued non-U.S. dollar denominated funding agreement liability contracts. The Company hedged the foreign currency risk associated with these liability contracts with currency rate swaps. At December 31, 2015 and 2014 , the derivatives used to hedge foreign currency exchange risk related to foreign denominated liability contracts had a total notional amount of $ 94 , and a total fair value of $ (26) and $(20) , respectively. Financial Risk on Statutory Capital Statutory surplus amounts and risk-based capital ( RBC ) ratios may increase or decrease in any period depending upon a variety of factors and may be compounded in extreme scenarios or if multiple factors occur at the same time. At times the impact of changes in certain market factors or a combination of multiple factors on RBC ratios can be counterintuitive. Factors include: In general, as equity market levels and interest rates decline, the amount and volatility of both our actual potential obligation, as well as the related statutory surplus and capital margin for death and living benefit guarantees associated with variable annuity contracts can be materially negatively affected, sometimes at a greater than linear rate. Other market factors that can impact statutory surplus, reserve levels and capital margin include differences in performance of variable subaccounts relative to indices and/or realized equity and interest rate volatilities. In addition, as equity market levels increase, generally surplus levels will increase. RBC ratios will also tend to increase when equity markets increase. However, as a result of a number of factors and market conditions, including the level of hedging costs and other risk transfer activities, reserve requirements for death and living benefit guarantees and RBC requirements could increase with rising equity markets, resulting in lower RBC ratios. Non-market factors, which can also impact the amount and volatility of both our actual potential obligation, as well as the related statutory surplus and capital margin, include actual and estimated policyholder behavior experience as it pertains to lapsation, partial withdrawals, and mortality. As the value of certain fixed-income and equity securities in our investment portfolio decreases, due in part to credit spread widening, statutory surplus and RBC ratios may decrease. As the value of certain derivative instruments that do not get hedge accounting decreases, statutory surplus and RBC ratios may decrease. Our statutory surplus is also impacted by widening credit spreads as a result of the accounting for the assets and liabilities in our fixed MVA annuities. Statutory separate account assets supporting the fixed MVA annuities are recorded at fair value. In determining the statutory reserve for the fixed MVA annuities, we are required to use current crediting rates. In many capital market scenarios, current crediting rates are highly correlated with market rates implicit in the fair value of statutory separate account assets. As a result, the change in statutory reserve from period to period will likely substantially offset the change in the fair value of the statutory separate account assets. However, in periods of volatile credit markets, actual credit spreads on investment assets may increase sharply for certain sub-sectors of the overall credit market, resulting in statutory separate account asset market value losses. As actual credit spreads are not fully reflected in the current crediting rates the calculation of statutory reserves will not substantially offset the change in fair value of the statutory separate account assets resulting in reductions in statutory surplus. This has resulted and may continue to result in the need to devote significant additional capital to support the product. With respect to our fixed annuity business, sustained low interest rates may result in a reduction in statutory surplus and an increase in NAIC required capital. Most of these factors are outside of the Company control. The Company financial strength and credit ratings are significantly influenced by the statutory surplus amounts and RBC ratios of our insurance company subsidiaries. In addition, rating agencies may implement changes to their internal models that have the effect of increasing or decreasing the amount of statutory capital we must hold in order to maintain our current ratings. The Company has reinsured approximately 33% of its risk associated with GMWB and 74% of its risk associated with the aggregate GMDB exposure. These reinsurance agreements serve to reduce the Company exposure to changes in the statutory reserves and the related capital and RBC ratios associated with changes in the capital markets. The Company also continues to explore other solutions for mitigating the capital market risk effect on surplus, such as internal and external reinsurance solutions, modifications to our hedging program, changes in product design and expense management. 102 Credit Risk Credit risk is defined as the risk to earnings or capital due to uncertainty of an obligor or counterparty ability or willingness to meet its obligations in accordance with contractually agreed upon terms. The majority of the Company credit risk is concentrated in its investment holdings but is also present in reinsurance and insurance portfolios. Credit risk is comprised of three major factors: the risk of change in credit quality, or credit migration risk; the risk of default; and the risk of a change in value due to changes in credit spread. A decline in creditworthiness is typically associated with an increase in an investment credit spread, potentially resulting in an increase in other-than-temporary impairments and an increased probability of a realized loss upon sale. The objective of the Company enterprise credit risk management strategy is to identify, quantify, and manage credit risk on an aggregate portfolio basis and to limit potential losses in accordance with an established credit risk management policy. The Company manages to its credit risk appetite by primarily holding a diversified mix of investment grade issuers and counterparties across its investment, reinsurance, and insurance portfolios. Potential losses are also limited within portfolios by diversifying across geographic regions, asset types, and sectors. The Company manages credit risk exposure from its inception to its maturity or sale. Both the investment and reinsurance areas have formulated procedures for counterparty approvals and authorizations. Although approval processes may vary by area and type of credit risk, approval processes establish minimum levels of creditworthiness and financial stability. Credits considered for investment are subjected to underwriting reviews. Within the investment portfolio, private securities are subject to committee review for approval. Credit risks are managed on an on-going basis through the use of various processes and analyses. At the investment, reinsurance, and insurance product levels, fundamental credit analyses are performed at the issuer/counterparty level on a regular basis. To provide a holistic review within the investment portfolio, fundamental analyses are supported by credit ratings, assigned by nationally recognized rating agencies or internally assigned, and by quantitative credit analyses. The Company utilizes various risk tools, such as credit value at risk ("VaR") to measure spread, migration, and default risk on a monthly basis. Issuer and security level risk measures are also utilized. In the event of deterioration in credit quality, the Company maintains watch lists of problem counterparties within the investment and reinsurance portfolios. The watch lists are updated based on regular credit examinations and management reviews. The Company also performs quarterly assessments of probable expected losses in the investment portfolio. The process is conducted on a sector basis and is intended to promptly assess and identify potential problems in the portfolio and to recognize necessary impairments. Credit risk policies at the enterprise and operation level ensure comprehensive and consistent approaches to quantifying, evaluating, and managing credit risk under expected and stressed conditions. These policies define the scope of the risk, authorities, accountabilities, terms, and limits, and are regularly reviewed and approved by senior management. Aggregate counterparty credit quality and exposure is monitored on a daily basis utilizing an enterprise-wide credit exposure information system that contains data on issuers, ratings, exposures, and credit limits. Exposures are tracked on a current and potential basis. Credit exposures are reported regularly to the Company's Asset Liability Committee ("ALCO") and the ERCC. Exposures are aggregated by ultimate parent across investments, reinsurance receivables, insurance products with credit risk, and derivative counterparties. The Company exercises various methods to mitigate its credit risk exposure within its investment and reinsurance portfolios. Some of the reasons for mitigating credit risk include financial instability or poor credit, avoidance of arbitration or litigation, future uncertainty of the counterparty, and exposure in excess of risk tolerances. Credit risk within the investment portfolio is most commonly mitigated through asset sales or the use of derivative instruments. Counterparty credit risk is mitigated through the practice of entering into contracts only with strong creditworthy institutions and through the practice of holding and posting of collateral. In addition, transactions cleared through a central clearing house reduce risk due to their ability to require daily variation margin, monitor the Company's ability to request additional collateral in the event of a counterparty downgrade, and be an independent valuation source. Systemic credit risk is mitigated through the construction of high-quality, diverse portfolios that are subject to regular underwriting of credit risks. For further discussion of the Company investment and derivative instruments, see MD&A - Enterprise Risk Management, Portfolio Risks and Risk Management and Note 6 - Investments and Derivative Instruments of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. For further discussion on managing and mitigating credit risk from the use of reinsurance via an enterprise security review process, see MD&A - Enterprise Risk Management, Insurance Risk Management, Reinsurance as a Risk Management Strategy. As of December 31, 2015 , the Company had no investment exposure to any credit concentration risk of a single issuer or counterparty greater than 10% of the Company's stockholders' equity, other than the U.S. government and certain U.S. government securities. For further discussion of concentration of credit risk in the investment portfolio, see the Concentration of Credit Risk section in Note 6 - Investments and Derivative Instruments of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 103 Derivative Instruments The Company utilizes a variety of OTC, OTC-cleared and exchange-traded derivative instruments as a part of its overall risk management strategy, as well as to enter into replication transactions. Derivative instruments are used to manage risk associated with interest rate, equity market, commodity market, credit spread, issuer default, price, and currency exchange rate risk or volatility. Replication transactions are used as an economical means to synthetically replicate the characteristics and performance of assets that are permissible investments under the Company investment policies. For further information on the Company use of derivatives, see Note 6 Investments and Derivative Instruments of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Derivative activities are monitored and evaluated by the Company compliance and risk management teams and reviewed by senior management. In addition, the Company monitors counterparty credit exposure on a monthly basis to ensure compliance with Company policies and statutory limitations. The notional amounts of derivative contracts represent the basis upon which pay or receive amounts are calculated and are not reflective of credit risk. Downgrades to the credit ratings of The Hartford insurance operating companies may have adverse implications for its use of derivatives including those used to hedge benefit guarantees of variable annuities. In some cases, downgrades may give derivative counterparties for OTC derivatives and clearing brokers for OTC-cleared derivatives the right to cancel and settle outstanding derivative trades or require additional collateral to be posted. In addition, downgrades may result in counterparties and clearing brokers becoming unwilling to engage in or clear additional derivatives or may require collateralization before entering into any new trades. This would restrict the supply of derivative instruments commonly used to hedge variable annuity guarantees, particularly long-dated equity derivatives and interest rate swaps. The Company uses various derivative counterparties in executing its derivative transactions. The use of counterparties creates credit risk that the counterparty may not perform in accordance with the terms of the derivative transaction. The Company has derivative counterparty exposure policies which limit the Company exposure to credit risk. The Company policies with respect to derivative counterparty exposure establishes market-based credit limits, favors long-term financial stability and creditworthiness of the counterparty and typically requires credit enhancement/credit risk reducing agreements. The Company minimizes the credit risk of derivative instruments by entering into transactions with high quality counterparties primarily rated A or better, which are monitored and evaluated by the Company risk management team and reviewed by senior management. The Company also generally requires that OTC derivative contracts be governed by an International Swaps and Derivatives Association ("ISDA") Master Agreement, which is structured by legal entity and by counterparty and permits right of offset. The Company has developed credit exposure thresholds which are based upon counterparty ratings. Credit exposures are measured using the market value of the derivatives, resulting in amounts owed to the Company by its counterparties or potential payment obligations from the Company to its counterparties. The Company enters into credit support annexes in conjunction with the ISDA agreements, which require daily collateral settlement based upon agreed upon thresholds. For purposes of daily derivative collateral maintenance, credit exposures are generally quantified based on the prior business day market value and collateral is pledged to and held by, or on behalf of, the Company to the extent the current value of the derivatives exceed the contractual thresholds. In accordance with industry standard and the contractual agreements, collateral is typically settled on the next business day. The Company has exposure to credit risk for amounts below the exposure thresholds which are uncollateralized, as well as for market fluctuations that may occur between contractual settlement periods of collateral movements. For the company derivative programs, the maximum uncollateralized threshold for a derivative counterparty for a single legal entity is $ 10 . The Company currently transacts OTC derivatives in five legal entities that have a threshold greater than zero; therefore, the maximum combined threshold for a single counterparty across all legal entities that use derivatives is $ 50 . In addition, the Company may have exposure to multiple counterparties in a single corporate family due to a common credit support provider. As of December 31, 2015 , the maximum combined threshold for all counterparties under a single credit support provider across all legal entities that use derivatives was $ 100 . Based on the contractual terms of the collateral agreements, these thresholds may be immediately reduced due to a downgrade in either party credit rating. For further discussion, see the Derivative Commitments section of Note 12 Commitments and Contingencies of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. For the year ended December 31, 2015 , the Company incurred no losses on derivative instruments due to counterparty default. In addition to counterparty credit risk, the Company may also introduce credit risk through the use of credit default swaps that are entered into to manage credit exposure. Credit default swaps involve a transfer of credit risk of one or many referenced entities from one party to another in exchange for periodic payments. The party that purchases credit protection will make periodic payments based on an agreed upon rate and notional amount, and for certain transactions there will also be an upfront premium payment. The second party, who assumes credit risk, will typically only make a payment if there is a credit event as defined in the contract and such payment will typically be equal to the notional value of the swap contract less the value of the referenced security issuer debt obligation. A credit event is generally defined as default on contractually obligated interest or principal payments or bankruptcy of the referenced entity. 104 The Company uses credit derivatives to purchase credit protection and to assume credit risk with respect to a single entity, referenced index, or asset pool. The Company purchases credit protection through credit default swaps to economically hedge and manage credit risk of certain fixed maturity investments across multiple sectors of the investment portfolio. The Company also enters into credit default swaps that assume credit risk as part of replication transactions. Replication transactions are used as an economical means to synthetically replicate the characteristics and performance of assets that are permissible investments under the Company investment policies. These swaps reference investment grade single corporate issuers and baskets, which include customized diversified portfolios of corporate issuers, which are established within sector concentration limits and may be divided into tranches which possess different credit ratings. As of December 31, 2015 and 2014 , the notional amount related to credit derivatives that purchase credit protection was $ 0.4 billion and $ 0.6 billion , respectively, while the fair value was $ 18 and $ (6) , respectively. As of December 31, 2015 and 2014 , the notional amount related to credit derivatives that assume credit risk was $ 2.5 billion and $ 1.5 billion , respectively, while the fair value was $ (13) and $ 3 , respectively. For further information on credit derivatives, see Note 6 Investments and Derivative Instruments of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Investment Portfolio Risks and Risk Management Investment Portfolio Composition The following table presents the Company fixed maturities, AFS, by credit quality. The following average credit ratings referenced throughout this section are based on availability, and are the midpoint of the applicable ratings among Moody s, S&P, Fitch and Morningstar. If no rating is available from a rating agency, then an internally developed rating is used. Fixed Maturities by Credit Quality December 31, 2015 December 31, 2014 Amortized Cost Fair Value Percent of Total Fair Value Amortized Cost Fair Value Percent of Total Fair Value United States Government/Government agencies $ 7,911 $ 8,179 13.8 % $ 7,135 $ 7,596 12.8 % AAA 6,980 7,195 12.2 % 6,963 7,251 12.2 % AA 9,943 10,584 17.9 % 9,258 10,056 16.9 % A 14,297 15,128 25.5 % 15,250 16,717 28.2 % BBB 14,598 14,918 25.2 % 13,464 14,397 24.2 % BB & below 3,236 3,192 5.4 % 3,292 3,367 5.7 % Total fixed maturities, AFS $ 56,965 $ 59,196 100 % $ 55,362 $ 59,384 100 % The value of securities in the "United States Government/ Government agencies" category increased, as compared to December 31, 2014 , primarily due to purchases of U.S. treasuries as a result of portfolio management between sectors to manage credit, duration and liquidity needs, as well as holding additional securities related to our repurchase agreement program. The decline in the "A" category and the increase in the "BBB" category is primarily due to downgrades of corporate securities and bonds of municipalities and political subdivisions ("municipal bonds") from "A" to "BBB", as well as net purchases. Fixed maturities, FVO, are not included in the preceding table. For further discussion on FVO securities, see Note 4 - Fair Value Measurements of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 105 The following table presents the Company AFS securities by type, as well as fixed maturities and equity, FVO. Securities by Type December 31, 2015 December 31, 2014 Cost or Amortized Cost Gross Unrealized Gains Gross Unrealized Losses Fair Value Percent of Total Fair Value Cost or Amortized Cost Gross Unrealized Gains Gross Unrealized Losses Fair Value Percent of Total Fair Value ABS Consumer loans $ 2,183 $ 6 $ (40 ) $ 2,149 3.6 % $ 2,052 $ 14 $ (28 ) $ 2,038 3.4 % Small business 123 12 (4 ) 131 0.2 % 166 14 (8 ) 172 0.3 % Other 214 6 (1 ) 219 0.4 % 252 11 (1 ) 262 0.4 % Collateralized debt obligations ("CDOs") Collateralized loan obligations ("CLOs") 2,514 4 (21 ) 2,497 4.2 % 2,279 4 (17 ) 2,266 3.8 % Commercial real estate ("CREs") 91 42 (1 ) 132 0.2 % 114 88 (9 ) 193 0.3 % Other [1] 384 29 (1 ) 409 0.7 % 383 6 (10 ) 382 0.6 % Commercial mortgage-backed securities ("CMBS") Agency backed [2] 1,224 34 (8 ) 1,250 2.1 % 1,136 45 (1 ) 1,180 2.0 % Bonds 2,725 58 (29 ) 2,754 4.7 % 2,594 126 (4 ) 2,716 4.6 % Interest only ( IOs ) 719 13 (19 ) 713 1.2 % 505 25 (11 ) 519 0.9 % Corporate Basic industry 1,161 55 (45 ) 1,171 2.0 % 1,673 105 (22 ) 1,756 3.0 % Capital goods 1,781 110 (15 ) 1,876 3.2 % 1,880 192 (4 ) 2,068 3.5 % Consumer cyclical 1,848 68 (24 ) 1,892 3.2 % 1,647 128 (8 ) 1,767 3.0 % Consumer non-cyclical 3,735 196 (24 ) 3,907 6.6 % 3,473 335 (5 ) 3,803 6.4 % Energy 2,276 84 (111 ) 2,249 3.8 % 3,092 252 (49 ) 3,295 5.5 % Financial services 6,083 246 (63 ) 6,266 10.6 % 4,942 405 (94 ) 5,253 8.8 % Tech./comm. 3,553 229 (62 ) 3,720 6.3 % 3,150 370 (12 ) 3,508 5.9 % Transportation 869 43 (10 ) 902 1.5 % 891 82 (4 ) 969 1.6 % Utilities 4,395 299 (60 ) 4,634 7.8 % 4,278 496 (13 ) 4,761 8.0 % Other 175 12 (2 ) 185 0.3 % 162 17 179 0.3 % Foreign govt./govt. agencies 1,321 34 (47 ) 1,308 2.2 % 1,592 73 (29 ) 1,636 2.8 % Municipal bonds Taxable 1,315 92 (9 ) 1,398 2.4 % 1,135 135 (2 ) 1,268 2.1 % Tax-exempt 9,809 916 (2 ) 10,723 18.1 % 10,600 1,006 (3 ) 11,603 19.5 % RMBS Agency 2,206 64 (6 ) 2,264 3.8 % 2,448 98 (2 ) 2,544 4.3 % Non-agency 89 2 91 0.2 % 81 3 84 0.1 % Alt-A 68 1 69 0.1 % 55 1 56 0.1 % Sub-prime 1,623 15 (16 ) 1,622 2.7 % 1,231 20 (17 ) 1,234 2.1 % U.S. Treasuries 4,481 222 (38 ) 4,665 7.9 % 3,551 326 (5 ) 3,872 6.5 % Fixed maturities, AFS 56,965 2,892 (658 ) 59,196 100 % 55,362 4,377 (358 ) 59,384 100 % Equity securities Financial services 159 1 (2 ) 158 18.8 % 149 13 162 23.2 % Other 683 37 (39 ) 681 81.2 % 527 37 (27 ) 537 76.8 % Equity securities, AFS 842 38 (41 ) 839 100 % 676 50 (27 ) 699 100 % Total AFS securities $ 57,807 $ 2,930 $ (699 ) $ 60,035 $ 56,038 $ 4,427 $ (385 ) $ 60,083 Fixed maturities, FVO $ 503 $ 488 Equity, FVO [3] $ 282 $ 348 [1] Gross unrealized gains (losses) exclude the fair value of bifurcated embedded derivatives within certain securities. Changes in value are recorded in net realized capital gains (losses). [2] Includes securities with pools of loans issued by the Small Business Administration which are backed by the full faith and credit of the U.S. government. [3] Included in equity securities, AFS on the Consolidated Balance Sheets. 106 The fair value of AFS securities was relatively consistent with December 31, 2014 , as the impact of widening credit spreads and an increase in interest rates was partially offset by the reinvestment of short-term assets into fixed maturities, as well as the purchase of U.S. Treasuries with the proceeds received from repurchase agreements. The Company has reduced its allocation to tax-exempt municipal bonds in favor of other investments that provide greater after-tax economic return potential given current market conditions and the Company tax position. During 2015 , the Company increased its investment in the financial services sector through purchases of primarily investment grade corporate securities while reducing it's exposure to the energy sector as a result of the continued volatility in oil prices. These changes are discussed further below. Energy Exposure Market values of securities in the energy sector continued to experience volatility throughout 2015. The continued price volatility has caused credit spreads to widen for corporate and sovereign issuers that generate a large portion of their revenues from energy. The impact is more pronounced on issuers with below investment grade credit. Ultimately, the impact on these issuers will be determined by the severity and duration of the decline in prices and the ability of the issuers to hedge price declines, adjust their cost structure or find other sources of revenue . The Company's direct exposure within its investment portfolio to the energy sector totals approximately 3% of total invested assets as of December 31, 2015 and is primarily comprised of corporate debt. As a result of continued volatility in prices, the Company reduced its exposure to the energy sector during 2015 by an amortized cost of approximately $1 billion . The Company's energy sector investments as of December 31, 2015 are primarily comprised of investment grade securities and the exposure is diversified by issuer, as well as in different sub-sectors of the energy market. The following table summarizes the Company's exposure to the energy sector by security type and credit quality. December 31, 2015 December 31, 2014 Cost or Amortized Cost Fair Value Cost or Amortized Cost Fair Value Corporate and equity securities, AFS Investment grade corporate $ 2,058 $ 2,068 $ 2,818 $ 3,043 Below investment grade corporate 218 181 274 252 Equity, AFS 16 13 23 21 Total corporate and equity securities, AFS 2,292 2,262 3,115 3,316 Foreign govt./govt. agencies, AFS Investment grade 248 251 322 334 Below investment grade 6 6 36 32 Total foreign govt./govt. agencies, AFS [1] 254 257 358 366 Fixed maturities, FVO Investment grade 2 2 10 10 Below investment grade 4 4 14 14 Total fixed maturities, FVO 6 6 24 24 Short-term investments 10 10 41 41 Total energy exposure [2] $ 2,562 $ 2,535 $ 3,538 $ 3,747 [1] Includes sovereigns for which oil exports are greater than 4% of gross domestic product. [2] Excludes equity securities, FVO with cost and fair value of $45 and $45 , respectively, as of December 31, 2014, that are hedged with total return swaps. The Company did not hold any equity securities, FVO within the energy sector as of December 31, 2015. The Company manages the credit risk associated with the energy sector within the investment portfolio on an on-going basis using macroeconomic analysis and issuer credit analysis. The Company considers alternate scenarios including oil prices remaining at low levels for an extended period and/or declining significantly below current levels. For additional details regarding the Company management of credit risks, see the Credit Risk Section of this MD&A. The Company has evaluated all available-for-sale securities for potential other-than-temporary impairments as of December 31, 2015 and 2014, and concluded that for the securities in an unrealized loss position, it is more likely than not that we will recover our entire amortized cost basis in the securities. In addition, the Company does not currently have the intent-to-sell, nor will we be required to sell, the securities discussed above. For additional details regarding the Company impairment process, see the Other-Than-Temporary Impairments Section of this MD&A. 107 Emerging Market Exposure Emerging market securities have been negatively impacted by growing concerns surrounding the growth of the Chinese economy, volatile prices for energy and other commodities, political tension in eastern Europe, softer-than-expected global economic growth, as well as trade and budget deficits, raising the potential for destabilizing capital outflows and rapid currency depreciation. As a result of these factors, credit spreads for certain emerging market securities have been volatile and we expect continued sensitivity to geopolitical events, the ongoing evolution of Fed policy and other economic factors, including contagion risk. The Company has limited direct exposure within its investment portfolio to emerging market issuers, totaling $1.2 billion and $1.1 billion in amortized cost and fair value, respectively, or approximately 2% of total invested assets as of December 31, 2015 , and is primarily comprised of sovereign and corporate debt issued in U.S. dollars. The Company identifies exposures with the issuers ultimate parent country of domicile, which may not be the country of the security issuer. The following table presents the Company exposure to securities within certain emerging markets currently under the greatest stress, defined as countries that had a sovereign S&P credit rating of B- or below, or countries that have had a current account deficit and have an average inflation level greater than 5% for the past six months, as of either December 31, 2015 or 2014 . December 31, 2015 December 31, 2014 Amortized Cost Fair Value Amortized Cost Fair Value Argentina $ $ $ 2 $ 2 Brazil 33 29 123 120 India 21 21 37 37 Indonesia 92 85 82 80 Kazakhstan 55 53 79 73 Lebanon 29 29 South Africa 34 31 54 53 Turkey 76 73 65 67 Ukraine 3 3 Uruguay 32 30 16 17 Venezuela 4 2 Other 73 69 97 96 Total [1] $ 416 $ 391 $ 591 $ 579 [1] Includes an amortized cost and fair value of $176 and $160 , respectively, as of December 31, 2015 and an amortized cost and fair value of $137 and $131 , respectively, as of December 31, 2014 included in the exposure to the energy sector table above. The Company manages the credit risk associated with emerging market securities within the investment portfolio on an on-going basis using macroeconomic analysis and issuer credit analysis subject to diversification and individual credit risk management limits. For additional details regarding the Company management of credit risk, see the Credit Risk section of this MD&A. Due to the continued decline in oil prices during 2015 , the Company significantly reduced its exposure to countries that rely on the energy sector as a main source of their Gross Domestic Product ("GDP"), such as Brazil. European Exposure In recent years, certain economies in the European region have experienced adverse economic conditions, specifically in Europe peripheral region (Greece, Ireland, Italy, Portugal and Spain), that were precipitated in part by elevated unemployment rates weighing on inflation rates, government debt levels and the slowing growth of the region. However, austerity measures aimed at reducing sovereign debt levels and greater support from the European Central Bank have reduced the risk of default on the sovereign debt of the countries within the region. As a result, economic conditions in the region have shown signs of improvement through stabilized credit ratings in Ireland, Italy, Portugal and Spain. Though economic conditions in the region have improved, continued slow GDP growth and elevated unemployment levels may continue to put pressure on sovereign debt. 108 The Company manages the credit risk associated with the European securities within the investment portfolio on an on-going basis using several processes which are supported by macroeconomic analysis and issuer credit analysis. For additional details regarding the Company management of credit risk, see the Credit Risk section of this MD&A. The Company periodically considers alternate scenarios, including a base-case and both positive and negative tail scenarios that includes a partial or full break-up of the Eurozone. The outlook for key factors is evaluated, including the economic prospects for key countries, the potential for the spread of sovereign debt contagion, and the likelihood that policymakers and politicians pursue sufficient fiscal discipline and introduce appropriate backstops. Given the inherent uncertainty in the outcome of developments in the Eurozone, however, the Company controls both absolute levels of exposure and the composition of that exposure for investments and derivatives. The Company has direct European exposure, totaling approximately 6% of total invested assets as of December 31, 2015 . The following tables present the Company European securities included in the Securities by Type table above. The Company identifies exposures with the issuers ultimate parent country of domicile, which may not be the country of the security issuer. The following tables present the Company European securities included in the Securities by Type table above. December 31, 2015 Corporate & Equity, AFS Non-Finan. [1] Corporate & Equity, AFS Financials Foreign Govt./ Govt. Agencies Total Amortized Cost Fair Value Amortized Cost Fair Value Amortized Cost Fair Value Amortized Cost Fair Value Spain 1 1 1 1 Peripheral region 1 1 1 1 Europe excluding peripheral region [4] 2,622 2,749 1,191 1,229 350 352 4,163 4,330 Total Europe $ 2,623 $ 2,750 $ 1,191 $ 1,229 $ 350 $ 352 $ 4,164 $ 4,331 Europe exposure net of credit default swap protection [2] $ 4,161 $ 4,331 December 31, 2014 Corporate & Equity, AFS Non-Finan. [1] Corporate & Equity, AFS Financials Foreign Govt./ Govt. Agencies Total Amortized Cost Fair Value Amortized Cost Fair Value Amortized Cost Fair Value Amortized Cost Fair Value Italy $ 1 $ 1 $ $ $ $ $ 1 $ 1 Spain [3] 21 23 1 1 22 24 Ireland 31 35 31 35 Peripheral region 53 59 1 1 54 60 Europe excluding peripheral region [4] 2,832 3,068 971 1,052 373 396 4,176 4,516 Total Europe $ 2,885 $ 3,127 $ 972 $ 1,053 $ 373 $ 396 $ 4,230 $ 4,576 Europe exposure net of credit default swap protection [2] $ 4,186 $ 4,576 [1] Includes amortized cost and fair value of $ 1 and $ 4 as of December 31, 2015 and 2014 , respectively, related to limited partnerships and other alternative investments. [2] Includes a notional amount and fair value of $ 3 and $ 0 , respectively, as of December 31, 2015 and $ 44 and $ 0 , respectively, as of December 31, 2014 related to credit default swap protection. This includes a notional amount of $ 3 and $ 3 as of December 31, 2015 and December 31, 2014 , respectively, related to single name corporate issuers in the financial services sector. [3] As of December 31, 2014, the Company had credit default swap protection with a notional amount of $3 related to Corporate and Equity, AFS, respectively. [4] Includes an amortized cost and fair value of $308 and $317 , respectively, as of December 31, 2015 and an amortized cost and fair value of $389 and $407 , respectively, as of December 31 2014 included in the exposure to the energy sector table above. The Company European investment exposure largely relates to corporate entities which are domiciled in or generated a significant portion of its revenue within the United Kingdom, the Netherlands, Germany and Switzerland. Entities domiciled in the United Kingdom comprise the Company's largest exposure; as of December 31, 2015 and 2014 , the U.K. exposure totals less than 3% of total invested assets. The majority of the European investments are U.S. dollar-denominated, and those securities that are Sterling and euro-denominated are hedged to U.S. dollars or support foreign-denominated liabilities. For a discussion of foreign currency risks, see the Foreign Currency Exchange Risk section of this MD&A. The Company does not hold any sovereign exposure to the peripheral region and does not hold any exposure to issuers in Greece. As of both December 31, 2015 and 2014 , the Company unfunded commitments associated with its investment portfolio was immaterial, and the weighted average credit quality of European investments was A-. 109 As of December 31, 2015 and 2014 , the Company credit default swaps that provide credit protection on European issuers had a notional amount of $ 3 and $ 44 , respectively, and a fair value of $ 0 and $ 0 , respectively. As of December 31, 2015 and 2014 credit default swaps related to the peripheral region that reference single name corporate and financial European issuers had a notional value of $ 0 and $ 3 , respectively. The maturity dates of credit default swaps are primarily consistent with the hedged bonds. For further information on the use of the Company credit derivatives and counterparty credit quality, see Derivative Instruments within the Credit Risk section of this MD&A. In addition to the credit risk associated with the investment portfolio, as of December 31, 2015 , the Company has $216 of reinsurance recoverables due from legal entity counterparties domiciled within Europe. For a more detailed discussion of the Company's reinsurance arrangements, see Note 5 - Reinsurance of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Financial Services The Company investment in the financial services sector is predominantly through investment grade banking and insurance institutions. The following table presents the Company fixed maturities and equity, AFS securities in the financial services sector that are included in the preceding Securities by Type table. December 31, 2015 December 31, 2014 Amortized Cost Fair Value Net Unrealized Gain/(Loss) Amortized Cost Fair Value Net Unrealized Gain/(Loss) AAA $ 40 $ 42 $ 2 $ 31 $ 34 $ 3 AA 747 763 16 401 436 35 A 2,922 3,025 103 2,610 2,804 194 BBB 2,133 2,188 55 1,681 1,734 53 BB & below 400 406 6 368 407 39 Total [1] $ 6,242 $ 6,424 $ 182 $ 5,091 $ 5,415 $ 324 [1] Includes equity, AFS securities with an amortized cost and fair value of $159 and $158 , respectively as of December 31, 2015 and an amortized cost and fair value of $149 and $162 , respectively, as of December 31, 2014 included in the AFS by type table above. The Company's investment in the financial services sector increased, as compared to December 31, 2014, due to purchases of primarily investment grade corporate securities, partially offset by a decrease in valuations as a result of an increase in interest rates and wider credit spreads. Commercial Real Estate Through December 31, 2015 , commercial real estate market conditions, including property prices, occupancies, financial conditions, transaction volume, and delinquencies, continued to improve. In addition, the availability of credit has increased and there is now less concern about the ability of borrowers to refinance as loans come due. 110 The following table presents the Company exposure to CMBS bonds by current credit quality and vintage year included in the preceding Securities by Type table. Credit protection represents the current weighted average percentage of the outstanding capital structure subordinated to the Company investment holding that is available to absorb losses before the security incurs the first dollar loss of principal and excludes any equity interest or property value in excess of outstanding debt. CMBS - Bonds [1] December 31, 2015 AAA AA A BBB BB and Below Total Amortized Cost Fair Value Amortized Cost Fair Value Amortized Cost Fair Value Amortized Cost Fair Value Amortized Cost Fair Value Amortized Cost Fair Value 2004 & Prior $ 12 $ 12 $ 50 $ 55 $ $ $ $ $ 2 $ 2 $ 64 $ 69 2005 98 107 27 28 5 5 5 5 135 145 2006 149 151 102 104 140 141 61 62 22 22 474 480 2007 202 206 170 178 81 83 20 20 51 52 524 539 2008 37 38 37 38 2009 11 11 11 11 2010 18 19 8 8 26 27 2011 55 59 23 23 78 82 2012 40 40 6 6 26 26 33 32 105 104 2013 16 16 95 97 79 80 9 10 1 1 200 204 2014 329 335 58 58 69 68 6 6 2 2 464 469 2015 201 197 163 158 172 165 71 66 607 586 Total $ 1,168 $ 1,191 $ 679 $ 692 $ 572 $ 568 $ 228 $ 224 $ 78 $ 79 $ 2,725 $ 2,754 Credit protection 32.9% 25.8% 18.4% 16.6% 18.7% 26.3% December 31, 2014 AAA AA A BBB BB and Below Total Amortized Cost Fair Value Amortized Cost Fair Value Amortized Cost Fair Value Amortized Cost Fair Value Amortized Cost Fair Value Amortized Cost Fair Value 2004 & Prior $ 13 $ 13 $ 58 $ 64 $ 7 $ 7 $ $ $ 15 $ 20 $ 93 $ 104 2005 175 188 78 80 99 101 83 84 46 46 481 499 2006 287 300 108 115 121 127 63 66 22 23 601 631 2007 211 221 169 182 78 82 31 31 72 73 561 589 2008 40 43 40 43 2009 11 11 11 11 2010 18 20 18 20 2011 56 62 6 6 62 68 2012 40 41 14 14 12 12 66 67 2013 16 16 95 99 71 76 12 13 194 204 2014 350 360 64 66 53 54 467 480 Total $ 1,217 $ 1,275 $ 572 $ 606 $ 443 $ 461 $ 207 $ 212 $ 155 $ 162 $ 2,594 $ 2,716 Credit protection 33.0% 25.7% 20.2% 19.5% 18.0% 27.2% [1] The vintage year represents the year the pool of loans was originated. The Company also has exposure to CRE CDOs with an amortized cost and fair value of $ 91 and $ 132 , respectively, as of December 31, 2015 , and $ 114 and $ 193 , respectively, as of December 31, 2014 . These securities are comprised of pools of commercial mortgage loans or equity positions of other CMBS securitizations. We continue to monitor these investments as economic and market uncertainties regarding future performance impact market liquidity and security premiums. 111 In addition to CMBS bonds and CRE CDOs, the Company has exposure to commercial mortgage loans as presented in the following table. These loans are collateralized by a variety of commercial properties and are diversified both geographically throughout the United States and by property type. These loans are primarily in the form of whole loans, where the Company is the sole lender, but may include participations. Loan participations are loans where the Company has purchased or retained a portion of an outstanding loan or package of loans and participates on a pro-rata basis in collecting interest and principal pursuant to the terms of the participation agreement. In general, A-Note participations have senior payment priority, followed by B-Note participations and then mezzanine loan participations. As of December 31, 2015 , loans within the Company mortgage loan portfolio that have had extensions or restructurings, other than what is allowable under the original terms of the contract, are immaterial . Commercial Mortgage Loans December 31, 2015 December 31, 2014 Amortized Cost [1] Valuation Allowance Carrying Value Amortized Cost [1] Valuation Allowance Carrying Value Agricultural $ 33 $ (7 ) $ 26 $ 51 $ (5 ) $ 46 Whole loans 5,458 (16 ) 5,442 5,333 (13 ) 5,320 A-Note participations 139 139 154 154 B-Note participations 17 17 17 17 Mezzanine loans 19 19 Total $ 5,647 $ (23 ) $ 5,624 $ 5,574 $ (18 ) $ 5,556 [1] Amortized cost represents carrying value prior to valuation allowances, if any. During 2015 , the Company funded $744 of commercial whole loans with a weighted average loan-to-value ( LTV ) ratio of 63% and a weighted average yield of 3.7% . The Company continues to originate commercial whole loans within primary markets, such as office, industrial and multi-family, focusing on loans with strong LTV ratios and high quality property collateral. There were no mortgage loans held for sale as of December 31, 2015 or December 31, 2014. Valuation Allowances on Mortgage Loans Year ended December 31, 2015 For the year ended December 31, 2015 , the change in valuation allowances on mortgage loan additions of $5 was largely driven by individual property performance. Continued improvement in commercial real estate property valuations will positively impact future loss development, with future impairments driven by idiosyncratic loan-specific performance rather than overall deteriorating market fundamentals. Year ended December 31, 2014 For the year ended December 31, 2014 , the change in valuation allowances on mortgage loan additions of $4 was largely driven by individual property performance. Year ended December 31, 2013 For the year ended December 31, 2013 , the change in valuation allowances on mortgage loan additions of $2 was largely driven by individual property performance. 112 Municipal Bonds The following table summarizes the amortized cost, fair value, and weighted average credit quality of the Company's available-for-sale investments in municipal bonds. December 31, 2015 December 31, 2014 Amortized Cost Fair Value Weighted Average Credit Quality Amortized Cost Fair Value Weighted Average Credit Quality General Obligation $ 2,069 $ 2,243 AA $ 2,259 $ 2,480 AA Pre-Refunded [1] 850 903 AAA 716 748 AAA Revenue Transportation 1,566 1,744 A+ 1,599 1,781 A+ Health Care 1,371 1,499 AA- 1,412 1,560 AA- Water & Sewer 1,228 1,324 AA 1,204 1,308 AA Education 1,109 1,205 AA 1,115 1,232 AA Sales Tax 692 779 AA- 916 1,020 AA- Leasing [2] 728 803 AA- 772 858 AA- Power 658 709 A+ 739 814 A+ Housing 91 94 AA 148 153 AA Other 762 818 AA- 855 917 AA- Total Revenue 8,205 8,975 AA- 8,760 9,643 AA- Total Municipal $ 11,124 $ 12,121 AA- $ 11,735 $ 12,871 AA- [1] Pre-Refunded bonds are bonds for which an irrevocable trust containing sufficient U.S. treasury, agency, or other securities has been established to fund the remaining payments of principal and interest. [2] Leasing revenue bonds are generally the obligations of a financing authority established by the municipality that leases facilities back to a municipality. The notes are typically secured by lease payments made by the municipality that is leasing the facilities financed by the issue. Lease payments may be subject to annual appropriation by the municipality or the municipality may be obligated to appropriate general tax revenues to make lease payments. As of December 31, 2015 , the largest issuer concentrations were the state of California, the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, and the New York Dormitory Authority, which each comprised less than 3% of the municipal bond portfolio and were comprised of general obligation and revenue bonds. As of December 31, 2014 , the largest issuer concentrations were the states of Illinois and California, as well as the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, which each comprised less than 3% of the municipal bond portfolio, and were primarily comprised of general obligation and taxable bonds. Limited Partnerships and Other Alternative Investments The following table presents the Company investments in limited partnerships and other alternative investments which include hedge funds, real estate funds, and private equity and other funds. Hedge funds are comprised of approximately half credit and equity-related funds and approximately half global macro and market neutral focus funds. Real estate funds consist of investments primarily in real estate equity funds, including some funds with public market exposure, and real estate joint ventures. Private equity and other funds primarily consist of investments in funds whose assets typically consist of a diversified pool of investments in small to mid-sized non-public businesses with high growth potential as well as limited exposure to public markets. December 31, 2015 December 31, 2014 Amount Percent Amount Percent Hedge funds $ 1,034 36.0 % $ 1,187 40.3 % Real estate funds 576 20.0 % 561 19.1 % Private equity and other funds 1,264 44.0 % 1,194 40.6 % Total $ 2,874 100 % $ 2,942 100 % 113 Available-for-Sale Securities Unrealized Loss Aging The total gross unrealized losses were $699 as of December 31, 2015 , and have increased $314 , or 82% , from December 31, 2014 , due to wider credit spreads and higher interest rates. As of December 31, 2015 , $582 of the gross unrealized losses were associated with securities depressed less than 20% of cost or amortized cost. The remaining $117 of gross unrealized losses were associated with securities depressed greater than 20%. The securities depressed more than 20% are primarily corporate securities that decreased in value due to widening of the sector credit spreads and an increase in interest rates. As part of the Company ongoing security monitoring process, the Company has reviewed its AFS securities in an unrealized loss position and concluded that these securities are temporarily depressed and are expected to recover in value as the securities approach maturity or as market spreads tighten. For these securities in an unrealized loss position where a credit impairment has not been recorded, the Company best estimate of expected future cash flows are sufficient to recover the amortized cost basis of the security. Furthermore, the Company neither has an intention to sell nor does it expect to be required to sell these securities. For further information regarding the Company impairment analysis, see Other-Than-Temporary Impairments in the Investment Portfolio Risks and Risk Management section of this MD&A. The following tables present the Company unrealized loss aging for AFS securities by length of time the security was in a continuous unrealized loss position: December 31, 2015 December 31, 2014 Consecutive Months Items Cost or Amortized Cost Fair Value Unrealized Loss [1] Items Cost or Amortized Cost Fair Value Unrealized Loss [1] Three months or less 2,094 $ 10,535 $ 10,398 $ (137 ) 1,412 $ 4,014 $ 3,963 $ (51 ) Greater than three to six months 819 2,837 2,735 (102 ) 643 1,739 1,665 (74 ) Greater than six to nine months 933 4,421 4,194 (227 ) 220 417 404 (13 ) Greater than nine to eleven months 329 1,302 1,242 (60 ) 102 148 142 (6 ) Twelve months or more 675 3,072 2,896 (173 ) 688 4,667 4,429 (241 ) Total 4,850 $ 22,167 $ 21,465 $ (699 ) 3,065 $ 10,985 $ 10,603 $ (385 ) [1] Unrealized losses exclude the fair value of bifurcated embedded derivative features of certain securities as changes in value are recorded in net realized capital gains (losses). The following table presents the Company unrealized loss aging for AFS securities continuously depressed over 20% by length of time (included in the preceding table): December 31, 2015 December 31, 2014 Consecutive Months Items Cost or Amortized Cost Fair Value Unrealized Loss [1] Items Cost or Amortized Cost Fair Value Unrealized Loss [1] Three months or less 240 $ 288 $ 212 $ (76 ) 137 $ 152 $ 113 $ (39 ) Greater than three to six months 130 77 51 (26 ) 39 17 11 (6 ) Greater than six to nine months 5 3 2 (1 ) 11 4 1 (3 ) Greater than nine to eleven months 6 12 8 (4 ) 9 1 (1 ) Twelve months or more 50 28 18 (10 ) 49 31 19 (12 ) Total 431 $ 408 $ 291 $ (117 ) 245 $ 205 $ 144 $ (61 ) [1] Unrealized losses exclude the fair value of bifurcated embedded derivatives features of certain securities as changes in value are recorded in net realized capital gains (losses). 114 Other-Than-Temporary Impairments The following table presents the Company impairments recognized in earnings by security type. For the years ended December 31, 2015 2014 2013 ABS $ $ $ 9 CRE CDOs 1 2 CMBS Agency 1 Bonds 2 17 IOs 2 1 4 Corporate 71 35 20 Equity 16 11 15 Municipal 2 3 RMBS Agency 3 Sub-prime 1 1 6 Foreign government 5 Other 3 3 Total $ 102 $ 59 $ 73 Year ended December 31, 2015 For the year ended December 31, 2015 , impairments recognized in earnings were comprised of securities that the Company intends to sell ("intent-to-sell impairments") of $54 , credit impairments of $ 29 , impairments on equity securities of $16 , and other impairments of $3 . For the year ended December 31, 2015 , impairments were primarily in the corporate sector and resulted from $45 and $26 of intent-to-sell and credit impairments, respectively. The Company incorporates its best estimate of future performance using internal assumptions and judgments that are informed by economic and industry specific trends, as well as our expectations with respect to security specific developments. Non-credit impairments recognized in other comprehensive income were $6 for the year ended December 31, 2015 . These non-credit impairments represent the difference between fair value and the Company best estimate of expected future cash flows discounted at the security effective yield prior to impairment, rather than at current market implied credit spreads. Future impairments may develop as the result of changes in intent to sell specific securities or if actual results underperform current modeling assumptions, which may be the result of, but are not limited to, macroeconomic factors and security-specific performance below current expectations. Ultimate loss formation will be a function of macroeconomic factors and idiosyncratic security-specific performance. Year ended December 31, 2014 For the year ended December 31, 2014 , impairments recognized in earnings were comprised of credit impairments of $37, primarily concentrated in corporate securities. Also, included were impairments on debt securities for which the Company had the intent-to-sell of $17, primarily related to equity, AFS securities. In addition, impairments recognized in earnings included impairments on equity securities of $2 that were in an unrealized loss position and the Company no longer believed the securities would recover in the foreseeable future. Year ended December 31, 2013 For the year ended December 31, 2013 , impairments recognized in earnings were comprised of credit impairments of $32, primarily concentrated in corporate and fixed rate CMBS bonds. Also, included were impairments on debt securities for which the Company had the intent-to-sell of $26, primarily related to structured securities with exposure to commercial and residential real estate and corporate securities. In addition, impairments recognized in earnings included impairments on equity securities of $15 that were in an unrealized loss position and the Company no longer believed the securities would recover in the foreseeable future. 115 CAPITAL RESOURCES AND LIQUIDITY The following section discusses the overall financial strength of The Hartford and its insurance operations including their ability to generate cash flows from each of their business segments, borrow funds at competitive rates and raise new capital to meet operating and growth needs over the next twelve months. Liquidity Requirements and Sources of Capital The Hartford Financial Services Group, Inc. (Holding Company) The liquidity requirements of the holding company of The Hartford Financial Services Group, Inc. ( HFSG Holding Company ) have been and will continue to be met by HFSG Holding Company fixed maturities, short-term investments and cash, and dividends from its subsidiaries, principally its insurance operations, as well as the issuance of common stock, debt or other capital securities and borrowings from its credit facilities, as needed. As of December 31, 2015 , HFSG Holding Company held fixed maturities, short-term investments and cash of $1.7 billion . Expected liquidity requirements of the HFSG Holding Company for the next twelve months include payment of 5.5% senior notes of $275 at maturity in October 2016, interest payments on debt of approximately $330 and common stockholder dividends, subject to discretion of the Board of Directors, of approximately $335 . The Hartford has an intercompany liquidity agreement that allows for short-term advances of funds among the HFSG Holding Company and certain affiliates of up to $2.0 billion for liquidity and other general corporate purposes. The Connecticut Insurance Department ("CTDOI") granted approval for certain affiliated insurance companies that are parties to the agreement to treat receivables from a parent, including the HFSG Holding Company, as admitted assets for statutory accounting purposes. As of December 31, 2015 , there were no amounts outstanding from the HFSG holding company. Equity In July 2015, the Board of Directors approved a $1.6 billion increase in and extension of the Company's authorized equity repurchase program, bringing the total authorization for equity repurchases to $4.375 billion for the period January 1, 2014 through December 31, 2016 , with $1.3 billion remaining as of December 31, 2015 . Any repurchase of shares under the equity repurchase program is dependent on market conditions and other factors. During the year ended December 31, 2015 , the Company repurchased 28.4 million common shares for $1,250 . During the period January 1, 2016 through February 24, 2016 , the Company repurchased 5.3 million common shares for $211 . Debt On March 30, 2015, the Company repaid its $289 , 4.0% senior notes at maturity. On May 27, 2015, the Company redeemed for cash the entire $296 aggregate principal amount outstanding of 4.0% senior notes due October 15, 2017 for $317 including a make-whole premium. On November 2, 2015, the Company repaid its $167 , 7.3% senior notes at maturity. The Company funded the maturities of the 4.0% and 7.3% senior notes along with the redemption of the 4.0% senior notes with cash on hand. In addition, the Company plans to repay $275 of 5.5% senior notes due October 2016 upon maturity. In July 2015, the Board of Directors authorized the extension of the existing debt capital management program, bringing the total authorization for debt management to $1.431 billion for the period January 1, 2014 through December 31, 2016. In addition to the payment of the maturing debt of $275, under the program the Company expects to use the remaining authorization of approximately $180 for other debt capital management actions during 2016. Any debt capital management actions are dependent on market conditions and other factors. For further information regarding debt, see Note 11 - Debt of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Intercompany Liquidity Agreements On January 29, 2015 Hartford Insurance Company of the Midwest, an indirect wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company, issued a Revolving Note (the "Note") in the principal amount of $58 to Hartford Fire Insurance Company, a subsidiary of the Company, under the intercompany liquidity agreement. The Note matured on March 31, 2015. Dividends On February 25, 2016 , The Hartford Board of Directors declared a quarterly dividend of $0.21 per common share payable on April 1, 2016 to common shareholders of record as of March 7, 2016 . There are no current restrictions on the HFSG Holding Company's ability to pay dividends to its shareholders. For a discussion of restrictions on dividends to the HFSG Holding Company from its insurance subsidiaries, see "Dividends from Insurance Subsidiaries" below. For a discussion of potential restrictions on the HFSG Holding Company's ability to pay dividends, see Part I, Item 1A, Risk Factors for the risk factor "Our ability to declare and pay dividends is subject to limitations" . 116 Pension Plans and Other Postretirement Benefits While the Company has significant discretion in making voluntary contributions to the U. S. qualified defined benefit pension plan, minimum contributions are mandated in certain circumstances pursuant to the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, as amended by the Pension Protection Act of 2006, the Worker, Retiree, and Employer Recovery Act of 2008, the Preservation of Access to Care for Medicare Beneficiaries and Pension Relief Act of 2010, the Moving Ahead for Progress in the 21st Century Act of 2012 (MAP-21) and Internal Revenue Code regulations. The Company made contributions to the U. S. qualified defined benefit pension plan of $100, $100 and $100 in 2015, 2014 and 2013, respectively. No contributions were made to the other postretirement plans in 2015, 2014 and 2013. The Company 2015, 2014 and 2013 required minimum funding contributions were immaterial. The Company does not have a 2016 required minimum funding contribution for the U.S. qualified defined benefit pension plan and the funding requirements for all pension plans are expected to be immaterial. The Company has not determined whether, and to what extent, contributions may be made to the U. S. qualified defined benefit pension plan in 2016. The Company will monitor the funded status of the U.S. qualified defined benefit pension plan during 2016 to make this determination. Dividends from Insurance Subsidiaries Dividends to the HFSG Holding Company from its insurance subsidiaries are restricted by insurance regulation. The payment of dividends by Connecticut-domiciled insurers is limited under the insurance holding company laws of Connecticut. These laws require notice to and approval by the state insurance commissioner for the declaration or payment of any dividend, which, together with other dividends or distributions made within the preceding twelve months, exceeds the greater of (i) 10% of the insurer policyholder surplus as of December 31 of the preceding year or (ii) net income (or net gain from operations, if such company is a life insurance company) for the twelve-month period ending on the thirty-first day of December last preceding, in each case determined under statutory insurance accounting principles. In addition, if any dividend of a Connecticut-domiciled insurer exceeds the insurer earned surplus, it requires the prior approval of the Connecticut Insurance Commissioner. The insurance holding company laws of the other jurisdictions in which The Hartford insurance subsidiaries are incorporated (or deemed commercially domiciled) generally contain similar (although in certain instances somewhat more restrictive) limitations on the payment of dividends. Dividends paid to HFSG Holding Company by its life insurance subsidiaries are further dependent on cash requirements of Hartford Life, Inc. ("HLI") and other factors. In addition to statutory limitations on paying dividends, the Company also takes other items into consideration when determining dividends from subsidiaries. These considerations include, but are not limited to, expected earnings and capitalization of the subsidiary, regulatory capital requirements and liquidity requirements of the individual operating company. During 2015, HFSG Holding Company received approximately $900 of dividends from its property and casualty insurance subsidiaries including approximately $200 which was subsequently contributed to a U.K. subsidiary to effect the consolidation of certain property and casualty runoff entities in the U.K. In addition to the property and casualty insurance subsidiaries dividends, HFSG Holding Company received approximately $1.1 billion through a series of transactions with HLI life insurance subsidiaries. In 2016, The Company property and casualty insurance subsidiaries are permitted to pay up to a maximum of approximately $1.6 billion in dividends to HFSG Holding Company without prior approval from the applicable insurance commissioner. In 2016, HFSG Holding Company anticipates receiving net dividends of approximately $800 from its property and casualty insurance subsidiaries. In 2016, Hartford Life and Accident Insurance Company ("HLA") is permitted to pay up to a maximum of $165 in dividends without prior approval from the insurance commissioner. In 2016, HFSG Holding Company anticipates receiving dividends of approximately $240 from HLA, subject to regulatory approval. On January 29, 2016, Hartford Life Insurance Company ("HLIC") paid an extraordinary dividend of $500, based on approval received from the insurance commissioner. As a result of this dividend, HLIC has no ordinary dividend capacity for the remainder of 2016. HFSG Holding Company anticipates receiving an additional $250 of extraordinary dividends from HLIC during 2016, subject to regulatory approval. Other Sources of Capital for the HFSG Holding Company The Hartford endeavors to maintain a capital structure that provides financial and operational flexibility to its insurance subsidiaries, ratings that support its competitive position in the financial services marketplace (see the Ratings section below for further discussion), and shareholder returns. As a result, the Company may from time to time raise capital from the issuance of equity, equity-related debt or other capital securities and is continuously evaluating strategic opportunities. The issuance of debt, common equity, equity-related debt or other capital securities could result in the dilution of shareholder interests or reduced net income due to additional interest expense. 117 Shelf Registrations On August 9, 2013, The Hartford filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission (the SEC ) an automatic shelf registration statement (Registration No. 333-190506) for the potential offering and sale of debt and equity securities. The registration statement allows for the following types of securities to be offered: debt securities, junior subordinated debt securities, preferred stock, common stock, depositary shares, warrants, stock purchase contracts, and stock purchase units. In that The Hartford is a well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in Rule 405 under the Securities Act of 1933, the registration statement went effective immediately upon filing and The Hartford may offer and sell an unlimited amount of securities under the registration statement during the three-year life of the registration statement. Contingent Capital Facility The Hartford is party to a put option agreement that provides The Hartford with the right to require the Glen Meadow ABC Trust, a Delaware statutory trust, at any time and from time to time, to purchase The Hartford junior subordinated notes in a maximum aggregate principal amount not to exceed $500 . Under the Put Option Agreement, The Hartford pays the Glen Meadow ABC Trust premiums on a periodic basis, calculated with respect to the aggregate principal amount of notes that The Hartford had the right to put to the Glen Meadow ABC Trust for such period. The Hartford has agreed to reimburse the Glen Meadow ABC Trust for certain fees and ordinary expenses. The Company holds a variable interest in the Glen Meadow ABC Trust where the Company is not the primary beneficiary. As a result, the Company did not consolidate the Glen Meadow ABC Trust. As of December 31, 2015 , The Hartford has not exercised its right to require Glen Meadow ABC Trust to purchase the Notes. As a result, the notes remain a source of capital for the HFSG Holding Company. Commercial Paper and Revolving Credit Facility Commercial Paper The Hartford maximum borrowings available under its commercial paper program are $1.0 billion . The Company is dependent upon market conditions to access short-term financing through the issuance of commercial paper to investors. As of December 31, 2015 there was no commercial paper outstanding. Revolving Credit Facilities The Company has a senior unsecured five-year revolving credit facility (the Credit Facility ) that provides for borrowing capacity up to $1.0 billion of unsecured credit through October 31, 2019 available in U.S. dollars, Euro, Sterling, Canadian dollars and Japanese Yen. As of December 31, 2015 , no borrowings were outstanding under the Credit Facility. As of December 31, 2015 , the Company was in compliance with all financial covenants within the Credit Facility. Derivative Commitments Certain of the Company derivative agreements contain provisions that are tied to the financial strength ratings, as set by nationally recognized statistical rating agencies, of the individual legal entity that entered into the derivative agreement. If the legal entity financial strength were to fall below certain ratings, the counterparties to the derivative agreements could demand immediate and ongoing full collateralization and in certain instances demand immediate settlement of all outstanding derivative positions traded under each impacted bilateral agreement. The settlement amount is determined by netting the derivative positions transacted under each agreement. If the termination rights were to be exercised by the counterparties, it could impact the legal entity ability to conduct hedging activities by increasing the associated costs and decreasing the willingness of counterparties to transact with the legal entity. The aggregate fair value of all derivative instruments with credit-risk-related contingent features that are in a net liability position as of December 31, 2015 was $1.3 billion . Of this $1.3 billion the legal entities have posted collateral of $1.5 billion in the normal course of business. In addition, the Company has posted collateral of $34 associated with a customized GMWB derivative. Based on derivative market values as of December 31, 2015 , a downgrade of one or two levels below the current financial strength ratings by either Moody or S&P would not require additional assets to be posted as collateral. These collateral amounts could change as derivative market values change, as a result of changes in our hedging activities or to the extent changes in contractual terms are negotiated. The nature of the collateral that we would post, if required, would be primarily in the form of U.S. Treasury bills, U.S. Treasury notes and government agency securities. As of December 31, 2015 , the aggregate notional amount and fair value of derivative relationships that could be subject to immediate termination in the event of rating agency downgrades to either BBB+ or Baa1 was $ 149 and $ (10) , respectively. 118 Insurance Operations Current and expected patterns of claim frequency and severity or surrenders may change from period to period but continue to be within historical norms and, therefore, the Company insurance operations current liquidity position is considered to be sufficient to meet anticipated demands over the next twelve months, including any obligations related to the Company restructuring activities. For a discussion and tabular presentation of the Company current contractual obligations by period, refer to Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements and Aggregate Contractual Obligations within the Capital Resources and Liquidity section of the MD&A. The principal sources of operating funds are premiums, fees earned from assets under management and investment income, while investing cash flows originate from maturities and sales of invested assets. The primary uses of funds are to pay claims, claim adjustment expenses, commissions and other underwriting expenses, taxes, to purchase new investments and to make dividend payments to the HFSG Holding Company. The Company insurance operations consist of property and casualty insurance products (collectively referred to as Property & Casualty Operations ) and life insurance and legacy annuity products (collectively referred to as Life Operations ). Property & Casualty Operations Property & Casualty Operations holds fixed maturity securities including a significant short-term investment position (securities with maturities of one year or less at the time of purchase) to meet liquidity needs. As of December 31, 2015 , Property & Casualty Operations fixed maturities, short-term investments, and cash are summarized as follows: Fixed maturities $ 25,904 Short-term investments 581 Cash 128 Less: Derivative collateral 182 Total $ 26,431 Liquidity requirements that are unable to be funded by Property & Casualty Operation short-term investments would be satisfied with current operating funds, including premiums received or through the sale of invested assets. A sale of invested assets could result in significant realized losses. Life Operations Life Operations total general account contractholder obligations are supported by $ 41 billion of cash and total general account invested assets, which includes a significant short-term investment position to meet liquidity needs. As of December 31, 2015 , Life Operations fixed maturities, short-term investments, and cash are summarized as follows: Fixed maturities $ 32,424 Short-term investments 902 Cash 320 Less: Derivative collateral 1,296 Total $ 32,350 Capital resources available to fund liquidity upon contractholder surrender or termination are a function of the legal entity in which the liquidity requirement resides. Generally, obligations of Group Benefits will be funded by Hartford Life and Accident Insurance Company. Obligations of Talcott Resolution will generally be funded by Hartford Life Insurance Company and Hartford Life and Annuity Insurance Company. HLIC, an indirect wholly-owned subsidiary, is a member of the Federal Home Loan Bank of Boston ( FHLBB ). Membership allows HLIC access to collateralized advances, which may be used to support various spread-based businesses and enhance liquidity management. FHLBB membership requires the company to own member stock and advances require the purchase of activity stock. The amount of advances that can be taken are dependent on the asset types pledged to secure the advances. The CTDOI will permit HLIC to pledge up to $1.2 billion in qualifying assets to secure FHLBB advances for 2016. The pledge limit is recalculated annually based on statutory admitted assets and capital and surplus. HLIC would need to seek the prior approval of the CTDOI in order to exceed these limits. As of December 31, 2015, HLIC had no advances outstanding under the FHLBB facility. 119 As of Contractholder Obligations December 31, 2015 Total Life contractholder obligations $ 171,578 Less: Separate account assets [1] 120,123 General account contractholder obligations $ 51,455 Composition of General Account Contractholder Obligations Contracts without a surrender provision and/or fixed payout dates [2] $ 24,767 U.S. Fixed MVA annuities [3] 5,574 Other [4] 21,114 General account contractholder obligations $ 51,455 [1] In the event customers elect to surrender separate account assets, Life Operations will use the proceeds from the sale of the assets to fund the surrender, and Life Operations liquidity position will not be impacted. In many instances Life Operations will receive a percentage of the surrender amount as compensation for early surrender (surrender charge), increasing Life Operations liquidity position. In addition, a surrender of variable annuity separate account or general account assets (see the following) will decrease Life Operations obligation for payments on guaranteed living and death benefits. [2] Relates to contracts such as payout annuities or institutional notes or surrenders of term life, group benefit contracts or death and living benefit reserves for which surrenders will have no current effect on Life Operations liquidity requirements. [3] Relates to annuities that are recorded in the general account under U.S. GAAP as the contractholders are subject to the Company's credit risk, although these annuities are held in a statutory separate account. In the statutory separate account, Life Operations is required to maintain invested assets with a fair value greater than or equal to the MVA surrender value of the Fixed MVA contract. In the event assets decline in value at a greater rate than the MVA surrender value of the Fixed MVA contract, Life Operations is required to contribute additional capital to the statutory separate account. Life Operations will fund these required contributions with operating cash flows or short-term investments. In the event that operating cash flows or short-term investments are not sufficient to fund required contributions, the Company may have to sell other invested assets at a loss, potentially resulting in a decrease in statutory surplus. As the fair value of invested assets in the statutory separate account are at least equal to the MVA surrender value of the Fixed MVA contract, surrender of Fixed MVA annuities will have an insignificant impact on the liquidity requirements of Life Operations. [4] Surrenders of, or policy loans taken from, as applicable, these general account liabilities, which include the general account option for Life Operations' individual variable annuities and the variable life contracts of the former Individual Life business, the general account option for annuities of the former Retirement Plans business and universal life contracts sold by the former Individual Life business, may be funded through operating cash flows of Life Operations, available short-term investments, or Life Operations may be required to sell fixed maturity investments to fund the surrender payment. Sales of fixed maturity investments could result in the recognition of realized losses and insufficient proceeds to fully fund the surrender amount. In this circumstance, Life Operations may need to take other actions, including enforcing certain contract provisions which could restrict surrenders and/or slow or defer payouts. The Company has ceded reinsurance in connection with the sales of its Retirement Plans and Individual Life businesses in 2013 to MassMutual and Prudential, respectively. These reinsurance transactions do not extinguish the Company's primary liability on the insurance policies issued under these businesses. For further information regarding the sale of Retirement Plans and Individual Life, see Note 18 - Discontinued Operations and Business Dispositions of Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. 120 Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements and Aggregate Contractual Obligations The Company does not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that are reasonably likely to have a material effect on the financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, or capital resources of the Company, except for the contingent capital facility described above, as well as unfunded commitments to purchase investments in limited partnerships and other alternative investments, private placements, and mortgage loans as disclosed in Note 12 - Commitments and Contingencies of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. The following table summarizes the Company aggregate contractual obligations as of December 31, 2015 : Payments due by period Total Less than 1 year 1-3 years 3-5 years More than 5 years Property and casualty obligations [1] $ 22,348 $ 5,228 $ 5,192 $ 2,539 $ 9,389 Life, annuity and disability obligations [2] 256,576 17,829 31,881 26,006 180,860 Operating lease obligations [3] 143 39 60 31 13 Long-term debt obligations [4] 11,016 612 1,328 891 8,185 Purchase obligations [5] 2,271 1,482 507 254 28 Other liabilities reflected on the balance sheet [6] 1,664 1,075 405 184 Total $ 294,018 $ 26,265 $ 39,373 $ 29,905 $ 198,475 [1] The following points are significant to understanding the cash flows estimated for obligations under property and casualty contracts: Reserves for Property & Casualty unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses include IBNR and case reserves. While payments due on claim reserves are considered contractual obligations because they relate to insurance policies issued by the Company, the ultimate amount to be paid to settle both case reserves and IBNR is an estimate, subject to significant uncertainty. The actual amount to be paid is not finally determined until the Company reaches a settlement with the claimant. Final claim settlements may vary significantly from the present estimates, particularly since many claims will not be settled until well into the future. In estimating the timing of future payments by year, the Company has assumed that its historical payment patterns will continue. However, the actual timing of future payments could vary materially from these estimates due to, among other things, changes in claim reporting and payment patterns and large unanticipated settlements. In particular, there is significant uncertainty over the claim payment patterns of asbestos and environmental claims. In addition, the table does not include future cash flows related to the receipt of premiums that may be used, in part, to fund loss payments. Under U.S. GAAP, the Company is only permitted to discount reserves for losses and loss adjustment expenses in cases where the payment pattern and ultimate loss costs are fixed and determinable on an individual claim basis. For the Company, these include claim settlements with permanently disabled claimants. As of December 31, 2015 , the total property and casualty reserves in the above table are gross of a reserve discount of $523 . [2] Estimated life, annuity and disability obligations include death and disability claims, policy surrenders, policyholder dividends and trail commissions offset by expected future deposits and premiums on in-force contracts. Estimated life, annuity and disability obligations are based on mortality, morbidity and lapse assumptions comparable with the Company historical experience, modified for recent observed trends. The Company has also assumed market growth and interest crediting consistent with other assumptions. In contrast to this table, the majority of the Company obligations are recorded on the balance sheet at the current account values and do not incorporate an expectation of future market growth, interest crediting, or future deposits. Therefore, the estimated obligations presented in this table significantly exceed the liabilities recorded in reserve for future policy benefits and unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses, other policyholder funds and benefits payable, and separate account liabilities. Due to the significance of the assumptions used, the amounts presented could materially differ from actual results. See Note 18 - Discontinued Operations and Business Dispositions of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further information as to Retirement Plans and Individual Life reinsurance transactions. [3] Includes future minimum lease payments on operating lease agreements. See Note 12 - Commitments and Contingencies of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional discussion on lease commitments. [4] Includes contractual principal and interest payments. See Note 11 - Debt of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional discussion of long-term debt obligations. [5] Includes $1 billion in commitments to purchase investments including approximately $748 of limited partnership and other alternative investments, $236 of private placements, and $31 of mortgage loans. Outstanding commitments under these limited partnerships and mortgage loans are included in payments due in less than 1 year since the timing of funding these commitments cannot be reliably estimated. The remaining commitments to purchase investments primarily represent payables for securities purchased which are reflected on the Company Consolidated Balance Sheets. Also included in purchase obligations is $919 relating to contractual commitments to purchase various goods and services such as maintenance, human resources, and information technology in the normal course of business. Purchase obligations exclude contracts that are cancelable without penalty or contracts that do not specify minimum levels of goods or services to be purchased. [6] Includes cash collateral of $369 which the Company has accepted in connection with the Company derivative instruments. Since the timing of the return of the collateral is uncertain, the return of the collateral has been included in the payments due in less than 1 year. Also included in other long-term liabilities are net unrecognized tax benefits of $12 , retained yen denominated fixed payout annuity liabilities of $703 , and consumer notes of $40 . Consumer notes include principal payments and contractual interest for fixed rate notes and interest based on current rates for floating rate notes. 121 Capitalization The capital structure of The Hartford as of December 31, 2015 and 2014 consisted of debt and stockholders equity, summarized as follows: December 31, 2015 December 31, 2014 Change Short-term debt (includes current maturities of long-term debt) $ 275 $ 456 (40 )% Long-term debt 5,084 5,653 (10 )% Total debt [1] 5,359 6,109 (12 )% Stockholders equity excluding accumulated other comprehensive income (loss), net of tax ( AOCI ) 17,971 17,792 1 % AOCI, net of tax (329 ) 928 NM Total stockholders equity $ 17,642 $ 18,720 (6 )% Total capitalization including AOCI $ 23,001 $ 24,829 (7 )% Debt to stockholders equity 30 % 33 % Debt to capitalization 23 % 25 % [1] Total debt of the Company excludes $38 and $71 of consumer notes as of December 31, 2015 and December 31, 2014 , respectively . Total stockholders' equity decreased in 2015 primarily due to a decrease in net unrealized capital gains from securities within AOCI. Total capitalization decreased $1,828 , or 7% , as of December 31, 2015 compared with December 31, 2014 primarily due to decreases in total debt and the decrease in AOCI. For additional information regarding AOCI, net of tax, see Note 15 - Changes In and Reclassifications From Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Cash Flow 2015 2014 2013 Net cash provided by operating activities $ 2,756 $ 1,886 $ 1,237 Net provided by for investing activities $ 485 $ 1,696 $ 3,745 Net cash used for financing activities $ (3,144 ) $ (4,476 ) $ (5,820 ) Cash end of year $ 448 $ 399 $ 1,428 Year ended December 31, 2015 compared to the year ended December 31, 2014 Cash provided by operating activities increased in 2015 as compared to the prior year period primarily due to an increase in premiums collected and reinsurance claim recoveries, as well as decreases in claims and operating expenses paid. Cash provided by investing activities in 2015 primarily relates to net proceeds from short-term investments of $3.1 billion, partially offset by net payments for available-for-sale securities of $1.9 billion and additions to property and equipment of $307. Cash provided by investing activities in 2014 primarily relates to net proceeds from available-for-sale securities of $2.8 billion, and proceeds from the business sold of $963, partially offset by net payments for short-term investments of $1.9 billion. Cash used for financing activities in 2015 consists primarily of net payments for deposits, transfers and withdrawals for investments and universal life products of $1.3 billion, acquisition of treasury stock of $1.3 billion and repayment of debt of $773, partially offset by $507 in proceeds from securities sold under repurchase agreements. Cash used for financing activities in 2014 consists primarily of $2.2 billion related to net activity for investment and universal life-type contracts, and acquisition of treasury stock of $1.8 billion. Year ended December 31, 2014 compared to the year ended December 31, 2013 Cash provided by operating activities in 2014 reflects an increase in premiums collected and a decrease in loss and loss adjustment expenses paid, partially offset by an increase in payments for payables and accruals. Operating cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2014, and 2013 were adequate to meet liquidity requirements. On June 30, 2014, the Company completed the sale of HLIKK. The operations of HLIKK are reported as discontinued operations and are included primarily in net cash provided by operating activities. For further information regarding this transaction, see Note 18 - Discontinued Operations and Business Dispositions of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 122 Cash provided by investing activities in 2014 primarily relates to net proceeds from available-for-sale securities of $2.8 billion, and proceeds from the business sold of $963, partially offset by net payments for short-term investments of $1.8 billion. Cash provided by investing activities in 2013 primarily relates to net proceeds from the sale of available-for-sale securities of $4.9 billion, and proceeds from the business sold of $815, partially offset by net payments on derivatives of $2.2 billion. Cash used for financing activities in 2014 primarily relates to $2.2 billion related to net payments for deposits, transfers and withdrawals for investment and universal life products and treasury stock acquired of $1.8 billion. Cash used for financing activities in 2013 primarily consists of net payments for deposits, transfers and withdrawals for investment and universal life products of $2.1 billion, a decrease in securities loaned or sold under agreements to repurchase of $1.9 billion, repayment of long term debt of $1.3 billion and treasury stock acquired of $600. Equity Markets For a discussion of the potential impact of the equity markets on capital and liquidity, see the Financial Risk on Statutory Capital and Liquidity Risk section in this MD&A. Ratings Ratings are an important factor in establishing a competitive position in the insurance marketplace and impact the Company's ability to access financing and its cost of borrowing. There can be no assurance that the Company ratings will continue for any given period of time, or that they will not be changed. In the event the Company ratings are downgraded, the Company competitive position, ability to access financing, and its cost of borrowing, may be adversely impacted. The following table summarizes The Hartford significant member companies financial ratings from the major independent rating organizations as of February 24, 2016 : Insurance Financial Strength Ratings: A.M. Best Standard & Poor's Moody's Hartford Fire Insurance Company A+ A+ A1 Hartford Life and Accident Insurance Company A A A2 Hartford Life Insurance Company A- BBB+ Baa2 Hartford Life and Annuity Insurance Company A- BBB+ Baa2 Other Ratings: The Hartford Financial Services Group, Inc.: Senior debt a- BBB + Baa2 Commercial paper AMB-1 A-2 P-2 These ratings are not a recommendation to buy or hold any of The Hartford securities and they may be revised or revoked at any time at the sole discretion of the rating organization. The agencies consider many factors in determining the final rating of an insurance company. One consideration is the relative level of statutory capital and surplus (referred to collectively as "statutory capital") necessary to support the business written and is reported in accordance with accounting practices prescribed by the applicable state insurance department. See Part I, Item 1A. Risk Factors Downgrades in our financial strength or credit ratings, which may make our products less attractive, could increase our cost of capital and inhibit our ability to refinance our debt, which would have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, results of operations and liquidity. 123 Statutory Capital The table below sets forth statutory capital for the Company insurance subsidiaries. December 31, 2015 December 31, 2014 Life insurance subsidiaries $ 6,591 $ 7,157 Property and casualty insurance subsidiaries 8,563 8,069 Total $ 15,154 $ 15,226 Statutory capital for the life insurance subsidiaries decreased by $566 , primarily due to dividends and returns of capital of $1.1 billion, partially offset by variable annuity impacts of $440 and net income from non-variable annuity business of $320. Statutory capital for the property and casualty insurance subsidiaries increased by $494 , primarily due to statutory net income of $1.5 billion, partially offset by dividends to the HFSG Holding Company of $900 and unrealized loss on investments of $202. Significant differences between U.S. GAAP stockholders equity and aggregate statutory capital prepared in accordance with U.S. STAT include the following: U.S. STAT excludes equity of non-insurance and foreign insurance subsidiaries not held by U.S. insurance subsidiaries. Costs incurred by the Company to acquire insurance policies are deferred under U.S. GAAP while those costs are expensed immediately under U.S. STAT. Temporary differences between the book and tax basis of an asset or liability which are recorded as deferred tax assets are evaluated for recoverability under U.S. GAAP while those amounts deferred are subject to limitations under U.S. STAT. The assumptions used in the determination of Life benefit reserves are prescribed under U.S. STAT, while the assumptions used under U.S. GAAP are generally the Company best estimates. The methodologies for determining life insurance reserve amounts are also different. For example, reserving for living benefit reserves under U.S. STAT is generally addressed by the Commissioners Annuity Reserving Valuation Methodology and the related Actuarial Guidelines, while under U.S. GAAP, those same living benefits are either embedded derivatives recorded at fair value or are recorded as SOP 03-1 reserves. The sensitivity of these life insurance reserves to changes in equity markets, as applicable, will be different between U.S. GAAP and U.S. STAT. The difference between the amortized cost and fair value of fixed maturity and other investments, net of tax, is recorded as an increase or decrease to the carrying value of the related asset and to equity under U.S. GAAP, while U.S. STAT only records certain securities at fair value, such as equity securities and certain lower rated bonds required by the NAIC to be recorded at the lower of amortized cost or fair value. U.S. STAT for life insurance companies establishes a formula reserve for realized and unrealized losses due to default and equity risks associated with certain invested assets (the Asset Valuation Reserve), while U.S. GAAP does not. Also, for those realized gains and losses caused by changes in interest rates, U.S. STAT for life insurance companies defers and amortizes the gains and losses, caused by changes in interest rates, into income over the original life to maturity of the asset sold (the Interest Maintenance Reserve) while U.S. GAAP does not. Goodwill arising from the acquisition of a business is tested for recoverability on an annual basis (or more frequently, as necessary) for U.S. GAAP, while under U.S. STAT goodwill is amortized over a period not to exceed 10 years and the amount of goodwill admitted as an asset is limited. In addition, certain assets, including a portion of premiums receivable and fixed assets, are non-admitted (recorded at zero value and charged against surplus) under U.S. STAT. U.S. GAAP generally evaluates assets based on their recoverability. 124 Risk-Based Capital The Company's U.S. insurance companies' states of domicile impose risk-based capital ( RBC ) requirements. The requirements provide a means of measuring the minimum amount of statutory capital appropriate for an insurance company to support its overall business operations, based on its size and risk profile. Regulatory compliance is determined by a ratio of a company's total adjusted capital ( TAC ) to its authorized control level RBC ( ACL RBC ). Companies below specific trigger points or ratios are classified within certain levels, each of which requires specified corrective action. The minimum level of TAC before corrective action commences ( Company Action Level ) is two times the ACL RBC. The adequacy of a company's capital is determined by the ratio of a company's TAC to its Company Action Level, known as the "RBC ratio". All of the Company's operating insurance subsidiaries had RBC ratios in excess of the minimum levels required by the applicable insurance regulations. On an aggregate basis, The Company's U.S. property and casualty insurance companies' RBC ratio was in excess of 200% of its Company Action Level as of December 31, 2015 and 2014. The RBC ratios for the Company's principal life insurance operating subsidiaries were all in excess of 400% of their respective Company Action Levels as of December 31, 2015 and 2014. The reporting of RBC ratios is not intended for the purpose of ranking any insurance company, or for use in connection with any marketing, advertising or promotional activities. Similar to the RBC ratios that are employed by U.S. insurance regulators, regulatory authorities in the international jurisdictions in which The Company operates generally establish minimum solvency requirements for insurance companies. All of The Hartford's international insurance subsidiaries have solvency margins in excess of the minimum levels required by the applicable regulatory authorities. Sensitivity In any particular year, statutory capital amounts and RBC ratios may increase or decrease depending upon a variety of factors. The amount of change in the statutory capital or RBC ratios can vary based on individual factors and may be compounded in extreme scenarios or if multiple factors occur at the same time. At times the impact of changes in certain market factors or a combination of multiple factors on RBC ratios can be counterintuitive. For further discussion on these factors and the potential impacts to the life insurance subsidiaries, see MD&A - Enterprise Risk Management, Financial Risk on Statutory Capital. Statutory capital at the property and casualty subsidiaries has historically been maintained at or above the capital level required to meet AA level ratings from rating agencies. Statutory capital generated by the property and casualty subsidiaries in excess of the capital level required to meet AA level ratings is available for use by the enterprise or for corporate purposes. The amount of statutory capital can increase or decrease depending on a number of factors affecting property and casualty results including, among other factors, the level of catastrophe claims incurred, the amount of reserve development, the effect of changes in interest rates on investment income and the discounting of loss reserves, and the effect of realized gains and losses on investments. In addition, the Company can access the $500 Glen Meadow trust contingent capital facility and maintains the ability to access $1.0 billion of capacity under its revolving credit facility. Contingencies Legal Proceedings For a discussion regarding contingencies related to The Hartford legal proceedings, please see the information contained under Litigation and Asbestos and Environmental Claims, in Note 12 - Commitments and Contingencies of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements and Part II, Item 1 Legal Proceedings, which are incorporated herein by reference. For a discussion of terrorism reinsurance legislation and how it affects The Hartford, see MD&A - Enterprise Risk Management, Insurance Risk Management, Terrorism Risk. Tax proposals and regulatory initiatives which have been or are being considered by Congress and/or the United States Treasury Department could have a material effect on the insurance business. These proposals and initiatives include, or could include, new taxes or assessments on large financial institutions, changes pertaining to the income tax treatment of insurance companies and life insurance products and annuities, repeal or reform of the estate tax and comprehensive federal tax reform, and changes to the regulatory structure for financial institutions. The nature and timing of any Congressional or regulatory action with respect to any such efforts is unclear. Legislative and Regulatory Developments Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act of 2010 (the Dodd-Frank Act ) Since it was enacted in 2010, the Dodd-Frank act has resulted in significant changes to the regulation of the financial services industry, including changes to the rules governing derivatives, restrictions on proprietary trading by certain entities, the creation of a Federal Insurance Office within the U.S. Treasury, and enhancements to corporate governance rules, among other things. The Dodd-Frank Act requires significant rulemaking across numerous agencies within the federal government. Rulemaking and implementation of newly-adopted rules is ongoing and may affect our operations and governance in ways that could adversely affect our financial condition and results of operations. 125 Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2010 (the "Affordable Care Act") On March 23, 2010, the President signed the Affordable Care Act. While many of the key provisions of the Affordable Care Act have become effective, there remains uncertainty with its implementation. Federal agencies continue rulemaking for certain provisions, along with the law being subject to legal and legislative challenges. In addition, certain provisions of the Affordable Care Act have been amended or delayed, such as the employer mandate which will continue to be phased in during 2016. The impact of the Affordable Care Act to The Hartford as an employer is consistent with other large employers. The Hartford core business does not involve the issuance of health insurance and we do not issue any products that insure customers under the Affordable Care Act individual mandate. To date, there have been certain limited impacts to The Hartford's group benefits businesses including additional opportunities to market our group benefits products and services through private exchanges. While we have not observed any material impacts on the Company workers compensation business or group benefits business, we continue to monitor the impact of the Affordable Care Act on consumer, broker and medical provider behavior for leading indicators of changes in medical costs or loss payments primarily on the Company's workers' compensation and disability liabilities. Social Security Disability Insurance ("SSDI") On November 2, 2015, the President signed the Bipartisan Budget Act of 2015 (the "Budget Act"), which, among other things, ensures solvency of the SSDI program through 2022. Prior to the Budget Act's enactment, the SSDI program was projected to become insolvent in 2016, which would have had an impact on the group disability and workers' compensation markets, including reserve impacts and increases in the cost of benefits. Budget of the United States Government On February 9, 2016, the Obama Administration released its Fiscal Year 2017, Budget of the U.S. Government (the Budget ). The Budget includes proposals that if enacted, would affect the taxation of life insurance companies and certain life insurance products. In particular, the proposals would change the method used to determine the amount of dividend income received by a life insurance company on assets held in separate accounts used to support products, including variable life insurance and variable annuity contracts, which are eligible for the dividends received deduction ( DRD ). The DRD reduces the amount of dividend income subject to tax and is a significant component of the difference between the Company's actual tax expense and expected amount determined using the federal statutory tax rate of 35%. If this proposal were enacted, the Company's actual tax expense could increase, reducing earnings. United States Department of Labor Proposed Rule In April, 2015, the U.S. Department of Labor (DOL) issued a proposed regulation that would, if finalized in its current form, expand the range of activities that would be considered to be fiduciary investment advice under the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 ( ERISA ) and the Internal Revenue Code. On January 28, 2016, the DOL submitted its final version of the proposed fiduciary rule to the Office of Management and Budget for review. In its proposed form, the rule could have an adverse impact on our current offerings of certain insurance products and investment products, along with contracts in our run-off lines of business. If enacted in its current form, the proposed rule could impact the way we provide investment-related information and support to financial advisors, plan sponsors, plan participants, plan beneficiaries and Individual Retirement Account (IRA) owners. Because we cannot predict the exact nature and extent of changes that may be made to the proposed rule when finalized, the potential effect on our businesses is undeterminable at this time. Guaranty Fund and Other Insurance-related Assessments For a discussion regarding Guaranty Fund and Other Insurance-related Assessments, see Note 12 Commitments and Contingencies of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. IMPACT OF NEW ACCOUNTING STANDARDS For a discussion of accounting standards, see Note 1 Basis of Presentation and Significant Accounting Policies of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 
