CIK: 874766
Company Name: HARTFORD FINANCIAL SERVICES GROUP INC DE
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2006-02-24


Item 7. MANAGEMENT S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS (Dollar amounts in millions, except for per share data, unless otherwise stated) Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations ( MD&A ) addresses the financial condition of The Hartford Financial Services Group, Inc. and its subsidiaries (collectively, The Hartford or the Company ) as of December 31, 2005, compared with December 31, 2004, and its results of operations for each of the three years in the period ended December 31, 2005. This discussion should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and related Notes beginning on page F-1. Certain reclassifications have been made to prior year financial information to conform to the current year presentation. Certain of the statements contained herein are forward-looking statements. These forward-looking statements are made pursuant to the safe harbor provisions of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 and include estimates and assumptions related to economic, competitive and legislative developments. These forward-looking statements are subject to change and uncertainty which are, in many instances, beyond the Company control and have been made based upon management expectations and beliefs concerning future developments and their potential effect upon the Company. There can be no assurance that future developments will be in accordance with management expectations or that the effect of future developments on The Hartford will be those anticipated by management. Actual results could differ materially from those expected by the Company, depending on the outcome of various factors, including, but not limited to, those set forth in Item 1A, Risk Factors. These factors include: the difficulty in predicting the Company potential exposure for asbestos and environmental claims; the possible occurrence of terrorist attacks; the response of reinsurance companies under reinsurance contracts and the availability, pricing and adequacy of reinsurance to protect the Company against losses; changes in the stock markets, interest rates or other financial markets, including the potential effect on the Company statutory capital levels; the inability to effectively mitigate the impact of equity market volatility on the Company financial position and results of operations arising from obligations under annuity product guarantees; the Company potential exposure arising out of regulatory proceedings or private claims relating to incentive compensation or payments made to brokers or other producers and alleged anti-competitive conduct; the uncertain effect on the Company of regulatory and market-driven changes in practices relating to the payment of incentive compensation to brokers and other producers, including changes that have been announced and those which may occur in the future; the possibility of unfavorable loss development; the incidence and severity of catastrophes, both natural and man-made; stronger than anticipated competitive activity; unfavorable judicial or legislative developments; the potential effect of domestic and foreign regulatory developments, including those which could increase the Company business costs and required capital levels; the possibility of general economic and business conditions that are less favorable than anticipated; the Company ability to distribute its products through distribution channels, both current and future; the uncertain effects of emerging claim and coverage issues; a downgrade in the Company financial strength or credit ratings; the ability of the Company subsidiaries to pay dividends to the Company; and other factors described in such forward-looking statements. INDEX Overview 28 Critical Accounting Estimates 31 Consolidated Results of Operations 40 Life 43 Retail 49 Retirement Plans 51 Institutional 52 Individual Life 54 Group Benefits 55 International 56 Other 58 Property & Casualty 58 Total Property & Casualty 63 Ongoing Operations 72 Business Insurance 75 Personal Lines 78 Specialty Commercial 81 Other Operations (Including Asbestos and Environmental Claims) 83 Investments 88 Investment Credit Risk 96 Capital Markets Risk Management 101 Capital Resources and Liquidity 108 Impact of New Accounting Standards 116 OVERVIEW The Hartford is a diversified insurance and financial services company with operations dating back to 1810. The Company is headquartered in Connecticut and is organized into two major operations: Life and Property & Casualty, each containing reporting segments. In the quarter ended December 31, 2005, and as more fully described below, the Company changed its reporting segments to reflect the current manner by which its chief operating decision maker views and manages the business. All segment data for prior reporting periods have been adjusted to reflect the current segment reporting. Within the Life and Property & Casualty operations, The Hartford conducts business principally in ten operating segments. Additionally, Corporate primarily includes all of the Company debt financing and related interest expense, as well as certain capital raising activities and purchase accounting adjustments. Life has realigned its reportable operating segments during 2005 to include six reportable operating segments: Retail Products Group ( Retail ), Retirement Plans, Institutional Solutions Group ( Institutional ), Individual Life, Group Benefits and International. Through Life the Company provides investment and retirement products such as variable and fixed annuities, mutual funds and retirement plan services; other institutional investment products; structured settlements; private placement life insurance; individual life insurance 28 Table of Contents products including variable universal life, universal life, interest sensitive whole life and term life; and group benefit products, such as group life and group disability insurance. Property & Casualty is organized into four reportable operating segments: the underwriting segments of Business Insurance, Personal Lines and Specialty Commercial (collectively Ongoing Operations ), and the Other Operations segment. Through Property & Casualty the Company provides a number of coverages, as well as insurance-related services, to businesses throughout the United States, including workers compensation, property, automobile, liability, umbrella, specialty casualty, marine, livestock, bond, professional liability and director and officer liability coverages. Property & Casualty also provides automobile, homeowners, and home-based business coverage to individuals throughout the United States, as well as insurance-related services to businesses. Many of the principal factors that drive the profitability of The Hartford Life and Property & Casualty operations are separate and distinct. Management considers this diversification to be a strength of The Hartford that distinguishes the Company from many of its peers. To present its operations in a more meaningful and organized way, management has included separate overviews within the Life and Property & Casualty sections of MD&A. For further overview of Life profitability and analysis, see page 43. For further overview of Property & Casualty profitability and analysis, see page 58. Regulatory Developments In June 2004, the Company received a subpoena from the New York Attorney General Office in connection with its inquiry into compensation arrangements between brokers and carriers. In mid-September 2004 and subsequently, the Company has received additional subpoenas from the New York Attorney General Office, which relate more specifically to possible anti-competitive activity among brokers and insurers. Since the beginning of October 2004, the Company has received subpoenas or other information requests from Attorneys General and regulatory agencies in more than a dozen jurisdictions regarding broker compensation and possible anti-competitive activity. The Company may receive additional subpoenas and other information requests from Attorneys General or other regulatory agencies regarding similar issues. In addition, the Company has received a request for information from the New York Attorney General Office concerning the Company compensation arrangements in connection with the administration of workers compensation plans. The Company intends to continue cooperating fully with these investigations, and is conducting an internal review, with the assistance of outside counsel, regarding broker compensation issues in its Property & Casualty and Group Benefits operations. On October 14, 2004, the New York Attorney General Office filed a civil complaint against Marsh & McLennan Companies, Inc., and Marsh, Inc. (collectively, Marsh ). The complaint alleges, among other things, that certain insurance companies, including the Company, participated with Marsh in arrangements to submit inflated bids for business insurance and paid contingent commissions to ensure that Marsh would direct business to them. The Company was not joined as a defendant in the action, which has since settled. Although no regulatory action has been initiated against the Company in connection with the allegations described in the civil complaint, it is possible that the New York Attorney General Office or one or more other regulatory agencies may pursue action against the Company or one or more of its employees in the future. The potential timing of any such action is difficult to predict. If such an action is brought, it could have a material adverse effect on the Company. On October 29, 2004, the New York Attorney General Office informed the Company that the Attorney General is conducting an investigation with respect to the timing of the previously disclosed sale by Thomas Marra, a director and executive officer of the Company, of 217,074 shares of the Company common stock on September 21, 2004. The sale occurred shortly after the issuance of two additional subpoenas dated September 17, 2004 by the New York Attorney General Office. The Company has engaged outside counsel to review the circumstances related to the transaction and is fully cooperating with the New York Attorney General Office. On the basis of the review, the Company has determined that Mr. Marra complied with the Company applicable internal trading procedures and has found no indication that Mr. Marra was aware of the additional subpoenas at the time of the sale. There continues to be significant federal and state regulatory activity relating to financial services companies, particularly mutual funds companies. These regulatory inquiries have focused on a number of mutual fund issues, including market timing and late trading, revenue sharing and directed brokerage, fees, transfer agents and other fund service providers, and other mutual-fund related issues. The Company has received requests for information and subpoenas from the SEC, subpoenas from the New York Attorney General Office, a subpoena from the Connecticut Attorney General Office, requests for information from the Connecticut Securities and Investments Division of the Department of Banking, and requests for information from the New York Department of Insurance, in each case requesting documentation and other information regarding various mutual fund regulatory issues. The Company continues to cooperate fully with these regulators in these matters. The SEC Division of Enforcement and the New York Attorney General Office are investigating aspects of the Company variable annuity and mutual fund operations related to market timing. The Company continues to cooperate fully with the SEC and the New York Attorney General Office in these matters. The Company mutual funds are available for purchase by the separate accounts of different variable universal life insurance policies, variable annuity products, and funding agreements, and they are offered directly to certain qualified retirement plans. Although existing products contain transfer restrictions between subaccounts, some products, particularly older variable annuity products, do not contain restrictions on the frequency of transfers. In addition, as a result of the settlement of litigation against the Company with respect to certain owners of older variable annuity contracts, the Company ability to restrict transfers by these owners has, until recently, been limited. The Company has executed an agreement with the parties to the previously settled litigation which, together with separate agreements between these contract owners and their broker, has resulted in the exchange or surrender of substantially all of the variable annuity contracts that were the subject of the previously settled litigation. Pursuant to an agreement in principle reached in February 2005 with the Board of Directors of the mutual funds, the Company has 29 Table of Contents indemnified the affected mutual funds for material harm deemed to have been caused to the funds by frequent trading by these owners for the period from January 2, 2004 through December 31, 2005. The Company does not expect to incur additional costs pursuant to this agreement in principle in light of the exchange or surrender of these variable annuity contracts. The SEC Division of Enforcement also is investigating aspects of the Company variable annuity and mutual fund operations related to directed brokerage and revenue sharing. The Company discontinued the use of directed brokerage in recognition of mutual fund sales in late 2003. The Company continues to cooperate fully with the SEC in these matters. The Company has received subpoenas from the New York Attorney General Office and the Connecticut Attorney General Office requesting information relating to the Company group annuity products, including single premium group annuities used in maturity or terminal funding programs. These subpoenas seek information about how various group annuity products are sold, how the Company selects mutual funds offered as investment options in certain group annuity products, and how brokers selling the Company group annuity products are compensated. The Company continues to cooperate fully with these regulators in these matters. To date, none of the SEC and New York Attorney General market timing investigation, the SEC directed brokerage investigation, or the New York Attorney General and Connecticut Attorney General single premium group annuity investigation has resulted in the initiation of any formal action against the Company by these regulators. However, the Company believes that the SEC, the New York Attorney General Office, and the Connecticut Attorney General Office are likely to take some action against the Company at the conclusion of the respective investigations. The Company is engaged in active discussions with the SEC, the New York Attorney General Office and the Connecticut Attorney General Office. The potential timing of any resolution of any of these matters or the initiation of any formal action by any of these regulators is difficult to predict. The Company recorded a charge of $66, after-tax, to establish a reserve for the market timing and directed brokerage matters in the first quarter of 2005. Based on recent developments, the Company recorded an additional charge of $36, after-tax, in the fourth quarter of 2005 to increase the reserve for the market timing, directed brokerage and single premium group annuity matters. This reserve is an estimate; in view of the uncertainties regarding the outcome of these regulatory investigations, as well as the tax-deductibility of payments, it is possible that the ultimate cost to the Company of these matters could exceed the reserve by an amount that would have a material adverse effect on the Company consolidated results of operations or cash flows in a particular quarterly or annual period. On May 24, 2005, the Company received a subpoena from the Connecticut Attorney General Office seeking information about the Company participation in finite reinsurance transactions in which there was no substantial transfer of risk between the parties. The Company is cooperating fully with the Connecticut Attorney General Office in this matter. On June 23, 2005, the Company received a subpoena from the New York Attorney General Office requesting information relating to purchases of the Company variable annuity products, or exchanges of other products for the Company variable annuity products, by New York residents who were 65 or older at the time of the purchase or exchange. On August 25, 2005, the Company received an additional subpoena from the New York Attorney General Office requesting information relating to purchases of or exchanges into the Company variable annuity products by New York residents during the past five years where the purchase or exchange was funded using funds from a tax-qualified plan or where the variable annuity purchased or exchanged for was a sub-account of a tax-qualified plan or was subsequently put into a tax-qualified plan. The Company is cooperating fully with the New York Attorney General Office in these matters. On July 14, 2005, the Company received an additional subpoena from the Connecticut Attorney General Office concerning the Company structured settlement business. This subpoena requests information about the Company sale of annuity products for structured settlements, and about the ways in which brokers are compensated in connection with the sale of these products. The Company is cooperating fully with the New York Attorney General Office and the Connecticut Attorney General Office in these matters. The Company has received a request for information from the New York Attorney General Office about issues relating to the reporting of workers compensation premium. The Company is cooperating fully with the New York Attorney General Office in this matter. Broker Compensation As the Company has disclosed previously, the Company pays brokers and independent agents commissions and other forms of incentive compensation in connection with the sale of many of the Company insurance products. Since the New York Attorney General Office filed a civil complaint against Marsh on October 14, 2004, several of the largest national insurance brokers, including Marsh, Aon Corporation and Willis Group Holdings Limited, have announced that they have discontinued the use of contingent compensation arrangements. Other industry participants may make similar, or different, determinations in the future. In addition, legal, legislative, regulatory, business or other developments may require changes to industry practices relating to incentive compensation. At this time, it is not possible to predict the effect of these announced or potential changes on the Company business or distribution strategies. 30 Table of Contents CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES The preparation of financial statements, in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America ( GAAP ), requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates. The Company has identified the following estimates as critical in that they involve a higher degree of judgment and are subject to a significant degree of variability: property and casualty reserves for unpaid claims and claim adjustment expenses, net of reinsurance; Life deferred policy acquisition costs and present value of future profits associated with variable annuity and other universal life-type contracts; the evaluation of other-than-temporary impairments on investments in available-for-sale securities; the valuation of guaranteed minimum withdrawal benefit derivatives; pension and other postretirement benefit obligations; and contingencies relating to corporate litigation and regulatory matters. In developing these estimates management makes subjective and complex judgments that are inherently uncertain and subject to material change as facts and circumstances develop. Although variability is inherent in these estimates, management believes the amounts provided are appropriate based upon the facts available upon compilation of the financial statements. Property & Casualty Reserves, Net of Reinsurance The Hartford establishes property and casualty reserves to provide for the estimated costs of paying claims under insurance policies written by the Company. These reserves include estimates for both claims that have been reported and those that have been incurred but not reported, and include estimates of all expenses associated with processing and settling these claims. Estimating the ultimate cost of future claims and claim adjustment expenses is an uncertain and complex process. This estimation process is based largely on the assumption that past developments are an appropriate predictor of future events and involves a variety of actuarial techniques that analyze experience, trends and other relevant factors. Reserve estimates can change over time because of unexpected changes in the external environment. Potential external factors include (1) changes in the inflation rate for goods and services related to covered damages such as medical care, hospital care, auto parts, wages and home repair, (2) changes in the general economic environment that could cause unanticipated changes in the claim frequency per unit insured, (3) changes in the litigation environment as evidenced by changes in claimant attorney representation in the claims negotiation and settlement process, (4) changes in the judicial environment regarding the interpretation of policy provisions relating to the determination of coverage and/or the amount of damages awarded for certain types of damages, (5) changes in the social environment regarding the general attitude of juries in the determination of liability and damages, (6) changes in the legislative environment regarding the definition of damages and (7) new types of injuries caused by new types of injurious exposure: past examples include breast implants, lead paint and construction defects. Reserve estimates can also change over time because of changes in internal company operations. Potential internal factors include (1) periodic changes in claims handling procedures, (2) growth in new lines of business where exposure and loss development patterns are not well established or (3) changes in the quality of risk selection in the underwriting process. In the case of assumed reinsurance, all of the above risks apply. In addition, changes in ceding company case reserving and reporting patterns can create additional factors that need to be considered in estimating the reserves. Due to the inherent complexity of the assumptions used, final claim settlements may vary significantly from the present estimates, particularly when those settlements may not occur until well into the future. Through both facultative and treaty reinsurance agreements, the Company cedes a share of the risks it has underwritten to other insurance companies. The Company net reserves for loss and loss adjustment expenses include anticipated recovery from reinsurers on unpaid claims. The estimated amount of the anticipated recovery, or reinsurance recoverable, is net of an allowance for uncollectible reinsurance. Reinsurance recoverables include an estimate of the amount of gross loss and loss adjustment expense reserves that may be ceded under the terms of the reinsurance agreements, including incurred but not reported unpaid losses. The Company calculates its ceded reinsurance projection based on the terms of any applicable facultative and treaty reinsurance, including an estimate of how incurred but not reported losses will ultimately be ceded by reinsurance agreement. Accordingly, the Company estimate of reinsurance recoverables is subject to similar risks and uncertainties as the estimate of the gross reserve for unpaid claim and claim adjustment expenses. The Company provides an allowance for uncollectible reinsurance, reflecting management current estimate of reinsurance cessions that may be uncollectible in the future due to reinsurers unwillingness or inability to pay and contemplates recoveries under ceded reinsurance contracts and settlements of disputes that could be different than the ceded liabilities. The Company analyzes recent developments in commutation activity between reinsurers and cedants, recent trends in arbitration and litigation outcomes in disputes between reinsurers and cedants and the overall credit quality of the Company reinsurers. Where its contracts permit, the Company secures future claim obligations with various forms of collateral, including irrevocable letters of credit, secured trusts, funds held accounts and group-wide offsets. The allowance for uncollectible reinsurance was $413 as of December 31, 2005, including $335 related to Other Operations and $78 related to Ongoing Operations. Due to the inherent uncertainties as to collection and the length of time before reinsurance recoverables become due, it is possible that future adjustments to the Company reinsurance recoverables, net of the allowance, could be required, which could have a material adverse effect on the Company consolidated results of operations or cash flows in a particular quarter or annual period. The Hartford, like other insurance companies, categorizes and tracks its insurance reserves for its segments by line of business , such as property, auto physical damage, auto liability, commercial multi-peril package business, workers compensation, general liability 31 Table of Contents professional liability and bond. Furthermore, The Hartford regularly reviews the appropriateness of reserve levels at the line of business level, taking into consideration the variety of trends that impact the ultimate settlement of claims for the subsets of claims in each particular line of business. In addition, within the Other Operations segment, the Company has reserves for asbestos and environmental (A&E) claims. Adjustments to previously established reserves, which may be material, are reflected in the operating results of the period in which the adjustment is determined to be necessary. In the judgment of management, information currently available has been properly considered in the reserves established for claims and claim adjustment expenses. Incurred but not reported (IBNR) reserves represent the difference between the estimated ultimate cost of all claims and the actual reported loss and loss adjustment expenses ( reported losses ). Reported losses represent cumulative loss and loss adjustment expenses paid plus case reserves for outstanding reported claims. Company actuaries evaluate the total reserves (IBNR and case reserves) on an accident year basis. An accident year is the calendar year in which a loss is incurred, or, in the case of claims-made policies, the calendar year in which a loss is reported. The following table shows loss and loss adjustment expense reserves by line of business and by operating segment as of December 31, 2005, net of reinsurance: Business Personal Specialty Other Total Insurance Lines Commercial Operations P&C Reserve Line of Business Property $ 58 $ 152 $ 274 $ $ 484 Auto physical damage 15 26 (2 ) 39 Auto liability 608 1,550 73 2,231 Package business 1,680 1,680 Workers compensation 3,312 5 1,685 5,002 General liability 674 32 1,203 1,909 Professional liability 471 471 Bond 140 140 Assumed Reinsurance [1] 1,098 1,098 All other non-A&E 1,142 1,142 A&E 10 2 4 2,651 2,667 Total reserves-net 6,357 1,767 3,848 4,891 16,863 Reinsurance and other recoverables 709 385 2,354 1,955 5,403 Total reserves-gross $ 7,066 $ 2,152 $ 6,202 $ 6,846 $ 22,266 [1] These net loss and loss adjustment expense reserves relate to assumed reinsurance underwritten by Reinsurance operations that were moved into Other Operations (formerly known as HartRe ). Reserving for non-A&E reserves within Ongoing and Other Operations How non-A&E reserves are set Reserves are set by line of business within the various operating segments. As indicated in the above table, a single line of business may be written in one or more of the segments. Case reserves are established by a claims handler on each individual claim and are adjusted as new information becomes known during the course of handling the claim. Lines of business for which loss data (e.g. paid losses and case reserves) emerge (i.e. is reported) over a long period of time are referred to as long-tail lines of business. Lines of business for which loss data emerge more quickly are referred to as short-tail lines of business. Within the Company Ongoing Operations the shortest-tail lines of business are property and auto physical damage. The longest tail lines of business within Ongoing Operations include workers compensation, general liability, and professional liability. Assumed reinsurance, which is within Other Operations, is also long-tail business. Company reserving actuaries, who are independent of the business units, regularly review reserves for both current and prior accident years using the most current claim data. These quarterly reserve reviews incorporate a variety of actuarial methods and judgments and involve rigorous analysis. For most lines of business, a variety of actuarial methods are reviewed and the actuaries select methods and specific assumptions appropriate for each line of business based on the current circumstances affecting that line of business. These selections incorporate input, as judged by the reserving actuaries to be appropriate, from claims personnel, pricing actuaries and operating management on reported loss cost trends and other factors that could affect the reserve estimates. The output of the quarterly reserve reviews are reserve estimates that are referred to herein as the actuarial indication. For short-tail lines of business, emergence of paid loss and case reserves is credible and likely indicative of ultimate losses. The method used to set reserves for these lines incorporates two key assumptions. The first key assumption is an expected loss ratio for the current accident year. This loss ratio is determined through a review of prior accident years loss ratios and expected changes to earned pricing, loss costs, mix of business, ceded reinsurance and other factors that are expected to impact the loss ratio for the current accident year. The second key assumption is a development pattern for reported losses (also referred to as the loss emergence pattern). IBNR reserves for the current year are set as the product of the expected loss ratio for the period, earned premium for the period and the proportion of losses expected to be reported in future calendar periods for the current accident period. IBNR reserves for prior accident years are similarly determined, again relying on an expected development pattern for reported losses. For long-tail lines of business, emergence of paid losses and case reserves is less credible in the early periods and, accordingly may not be indicative of ultimate losses. For these lines, methods which rely on actual paid losses and case reserves and incorporate a development pattern assumption are given less weight in calculating IBNR reserves for the early stages of loss emergence because such 32 Table of Contents a low percentage of ultimate losses are reported in that time frame. Accordingly, for any given accident year, the rate at which losses emerge in the early periods is generally not as reliable an indication of the ultimate loss costs as it would be for shorter-tail lines of business. The estimation of reserves for these lines of business in the early stages of loss emergence is therefore largely influenced by prior accident years loss ratios and expected changes to earned pricing, loss costs, mix of business, ceded reinsurance and other factors that are expected to affect the loss ratio. For later periods of loss emergence, methods which incorporate actual paid losses and case reserves and a development pattern assumption are given more weight in estimating ultimate losses. The final step in the quarterly reserve review involves a comprehensive review by senior reserving actuaries who apply their judgment and, in concert with senior management, determine the appropriate level of reserves to record. Numerous factors are considered in this determination process including, but not limited to, the assessed reliability of key loss trends and assumptions that may be significantly influencing the current actuarial indications, the maturity of the accident year, pertinent trends observed over the recent past, the level of volatility within a particular line of business, and the improvement or deterioration of actuarial indications in the current period as compared to the prior periods. In general, changes are made more quickly to more mature accident years and less volatile lines of business. At year-end 2005, total recorded net reserves excluding asbestos and environmental and excluding the allowance for uncollectible reinsurance are 0.6% higher than the actuarial indication of the reserves. Annually, as part of the statutory reporting requirements, IBNR is allocated to accident year by statutory line of business. This work forms the basis for the loss development table and reserve re-estimates table shown in the Business section. During 2005, there were numerous changes to reserve estimates. Among other loss developments in 2005, these changes included strengthening of workers compensation reserves for claim payments expected to emerge after 20 years of development, a release of 2003 and 2004 accident year workers compensation reserves, strengthening of assumed casualty reinsurance reserves and a release of reserves for allocated loss adjustment expenses, predominately in Personal Lines. See Reserves within the Property and Casualty MD&A for further discussion of reserve developments. Current trends contributing to reserve uncertainty The Hartford is a multi-line company in the property and casualty business. The Hartford is therefore subject to reserve uncertainty stemming from a number of conditions, including but not limited to those noted above, any of which could be material at any point in time for any segment. Certain issues may become more or less important over time as conditions change. As various market conditions develop, management must assess whether those conditions constitute a long-term trend that should result in a reserving action (i.e. increasing or decreasing the reserve). Below is a discussion of certain market conditions that Company management has observed during 2005. Within the commercial segments and the Other Operations segment, the Company has exposure to claims asserted for bodily injury as a result of long-term or continuous exposure to harmful products or substances. Examples include, but are not limited to, pharmaceutical products, latex gloves, silica and lead paint. The Company also has exposure to claims from construction defects, where property damage or bodily injury from negligent construction is alleged. The Company also has exposure to claims asserted against religious institutions and other organizations relating to molestation or abuse. Such exposures may involve potentially long latency periods and may implicate coverage in multiple policy periods. These factors make reserves for such claims more uncertain than other bodily injury or property damage claims. With regard to these exposures, the Company is monitoring trends in litigation, the external environment, the similarities to other mass torts and the potential impact on the Company reserves. In Personal Lines, reserving estimates are generally less variable than for the Company other property and casualty segments. This is largely due to the coverages having relatively shorter periods of loss emergence. Estimates, however, can still vary due to a number of factors, including interpretations of frequency and severity trends and their impact on recorded reserve levels. Severity trends can be impacted by changes in internal claim handling and case reserving practices in addition to changes in the external environment. These changes in claim practices increase the uncertainty in the interpretation of case reserve data, which increases the uncertainty in recorded reserve levels. In addition, the success of the Company new Dimensions class plan for automobile first introduced in 2004 has lead to a different mix of business by type of insured than the Company experienced in the past. In general, the Company now has a lower proportion of preferred risks than in the past. Such a change in mix increases the uncertainty of the reserve projections, since historical data and reporting patterns may not be applicable to the new business. In Business Insurance, workers compensation is the Company single biggest line of business and the line of business with the longest pattern of loss emergence. Reserve estimates for workers compensation are particularly sensitive to assumptions about medical inflation, which has been increasing steadily over the past few years. In addition, changes in state legislative and regulatory environments impact the Company estimates. These changes increase the uncertainty in the application of development patterns. In the Specialty Commercial segment, many lines of insurance, such as excess insurance and large deductible workers compensation insurance are long-tail lines of insurance. For long-tail lines, the period of time between the incidence of the insured loss and either the reporting of the claim to the insurer, the settlement of the claim, or the payment of the claim can be substantial, and in some cases, several years. As a result of this extended period of time for losses to emerge, reserve estimates for these lines are more uncertain (i.e. more variable) than reserve estimates for shorter-tail lines of insurance. Estimating required reserve levels for large deductible workers compensation insurance is further complicated by the uncertainty of whether losses that are attributable to the deductible amount can be paid by the insured; if such losses are not paid by the insured due to financial difficulties, the Company would be contractually liable. Another example of reserve variability relates to reserves for directors and officers insurance. There is uncertainty in the required level of reserves due to the impact of recent allegations within the financial services industry, including those in the mutual fund, investment banking and insurance industries. 33 Table of Contents Within Ongoing Operations, the Company has reserves for natural catastrophes that have occurred. The Company estimates of loss and loss expenses arising from catastrophe losses are based on information from reported claims, information from catastrophe loss models and estimates of reinsurance recoverables on ceded losses. For catastrophe losses that occur shortly before the end of the reporting period, the loss and loss expense reserves rely heavily on estimates derived from catastrophe loss models and previous experience and, therefore, are subject to significant uncertainty. For large catastrophes, such as with hurricane Katrina in 2005, there may be a long time lag between the date the catastrophe occurs and the date that residents and business owners are able to return to their properties to report a claim. In addition, it is sometimes difficult for claim adjusters to access the most significantly impacted areas. Estimating reserves for catastrophes is further complicated by the need to estimate the effect of anticipated demand surge which is the tendency for the cost of building materials and contractors to rise based on an increase in demand in the affected areas. Impact of changes in key assumptions on reserve volatility As stated above, the Company practice is to estimate reserves using a variety of methods, assumptions and data elements. Within its reserve estimation process for reserves other than asbestos and environmental, the Company does not derive statistical loss distributions or confidence levels around its reserve estimate and, as a result, does not have reserve range estimates to disclose. The reserve estimation process includes explicit assumptions about a number of factors in the internal and external environment. Across most lines of business, the most important assumptions are future loss development factors applied to paid or reported losses to date. For most lines, the reported loss development factor is most important. In workers compensation, paid loss development factors are also important. The trend in loss costs is also a key assumption, particularly in the most recent accident years, where loss development factors are less credible. The following discussion includes disclosure of possible variation from current estimates of loss reserves due to a change in certain key assumptions. Each of the impacts described below is estimated individually, without consideration for any correlation among key assumptions or among lines of business. Therefore, it would be inappropriate to take each of the amounts described below and add them together in an attempt to estimate volatility for the Company reserves in total. The estimated variation in reserves due to changes in key assumptions is a reasonable estimate of possible variation that may occur in the future, likely over a period of several calendar years. It is important to note that the variation discussed is not meant to be a worst-case scenario, and therefore, it is possible that future variation may be more than amounts discussed below. Recorded reserves for workers compensation, net of reinsurance, are $5.0 billion, across Business Insurance and Specialty Commercial. The two most important assumptions for workers compensation reserves are loss development factors and loss cost trends, particularly medical cost inflation. Loss development patterns are dependent on medical cost inflation. Approximately half of the workers compensation net reserves are related to future medical costs. A review of National Council on Compensation Insurance ( NCCI ) data suggests that the annual growth in industry medical claim costs has varied from -2% to +12% since 1991. Across the entire reserve base, a 1 point change in calendar year medical inflation would change the estimated net reserve by $600, in either direction. Recorded reserves for auto liability, net of reinsurance, are $2.2 billion across all lines, $1.5 billion of which is in Personal Lines. Personal auto liability reserves are shorter-tailed than other lines of business (such as workers compensation) and, therefore, less volatile. However, the size of the reserve base means that future changes in estimate could be material to the Company results of operations in any given period. The key assumption for Personal Lines auto liability is the annual loss cost trend, particularly the severity trend component of loss costs. A review of Insurance Services Office ( ISO ) data suggests that annual growth in industry severity since 1999 has varied from +1% to +6%. A 2.5 point change in assumed annual severity is within historical variation for the industry and for the Company. A 2.5 point change in assumed annual severity for the two most recent accident years would change the estimated net reserve need by $70, in either direction. Assumed annual severity for accident years prior to the two most recent accident years is likely to have minimal variability. Recorded reserves for general liability, net of reinsurance, are $1.9 billion across Business Insurance and Specialty Commercial. Reported loss development patterns are a key assumption for this line of business, particularly for more mature accident years. Historically, assumptions on reported loss development patterns have been impacted by, among other things, emergence of new types of claims (e.g. construction defect claims) or a shift in the mixture between smaller, more routine claims and larger, more complex claims. The Company has reviewed the historical variation in reported loss development patterns. If the reported loss development patterns change by 10%, a change that is within historical variation, the estimated net reserve need would change by $300, in either direction. Similar to general liability, assumed casualty reinsurance is affected by reported loss development pattern assumptions. In addition to the items identified above that would affect both direct and reinsurance liability claim development patterns, there is also an impact to assumed reporting patterns for any changes in claim notification from ceding companies to the reinsurer. Recorded net reserves for assumed reinsurance business, excluding asbestos and environmental liabilities, within Other Operations were $1.1 billion as of December 31, 2005. If the development patterns underlying the Company net reserves for HartRe assumed casualty reinsurance are incorrect by 10 points, the estimated net reserve need would change by $287, in either direction. 34 Table of Contents Reserving for Asbestos and Environmental Claims within Other Operations How A&E reserves are set The Company continues to receive asbestos and environmental claims. Asbestos claims relate primarily to bodily injuries asserted by people who came in contact with asbestos or products containing asbestos. Environmental claims relate primarily to pollution and related clean-up costs. The Company wrote several different categories of insurance contracts that may cover asbestos and environmental claims. First, the Company wrote primary policies providing the first layer of coverage in an insured liability program. Second, the Company wrote excess policies providing higher layers of coverage for losses that exhaust the limits of underlying coverage. Third, the Company acted as a reinsurer assuming a portion of those risks assumed by other insurers writing primary, excess and reinsurance coverages. Fourth, subsidiaries of the Company participated in the London Market, writing both direct insurance and assumed reinsurance business. In establishing reserves for asbestos claims, the Company evaluates its insureds estimated liabilities for such claims using a ground-up approach. The Company considers a variety of factors, including the jurisdictions where underlying claims have been brought, past, pending and anticipated future claim activity, disease mix, past settlement values of similar claims, dismissal rates, allocated claim adjustment expense, and potential bankruptcy impact. Similarly, a ground-up exposure review approach is used to establish environmental reserves. The Company evaluation of its insureds estimated liabilities for environmental claims involves consideration of several factors, including historical values of similar claims, the number of sites involved, the insureds alleged activities at each site, the alleged environmental damage at each site, the respective shares of liability of potentially responsible parties at each site, the appropriateness and cost of remediation at each site, the nature of governmental enforcement activities at each site, and potential bankruptcy impact. Having evaluated its insureds probable liabilities for asbestos and/or environmental claims, the Company then evaluates its insureds insurance coverage programs for such claims. The Company considers its insureds total available insurance coverage, including the coverage issued by the Company. The Company also considers relevant judicial interpretations of policy language and applicable coverage defenses or determinations, if any. Evaluation of both the insureds estimated liabilities and the Company exposure to the insureds depends heavily on an analysis of the relevant legal issues and litigation environment. This analysis is conducted by the Company lawyers and is subject to applicable privileges. For both asbestos and environmental reserves, the Company also compares its historical direct net loss and expense paid and incurred experience, and net loss and expense paid and incurred experience year by year, to assess any emerging trends, fluctuations or characteristics suggested by the aggregate paid and incurred activity. Once the gross ultimate exposure for indemnity and allocated claim adjustment expense is determined for its insureds by each policy year, the Company calculates its ceded reinsurance projection based on any applicable facultative and treaty reinsurance and the Company experience with reinsurance collections. Uncertainties Regarding Adequacy of Asbestos and Environmental Reserves With regard to both environmental and particularly asbestos claims, significant uncertainty limits the ability of insurers and reinsurers to estimate the ultimate reserves necessary for unpaid losses and related expenses. Traditional actuarial reserving techniques cannot reasonably estimate the ultimate cost of these claims, particularly during periods where theories of law are in flux. The degree of variability of reserve estimates for these exposures is significantly greater than for other more traditional exposures. In particular, the Company believes there is a high degree of uncertainty inherent in the estimation of asbestos loss reserves. In the case of the reserves for asbestos exposures, factors contributing to the high degree of uncertainty include inadequate loss development patterns, plaintiffs expanding theories of liability, the risks inherent in major litigation, and inconsistent emerging legal doctrines. Furthermore, over time, insurers, including the Company, have experienced significant changes in the rate at which asbestos claims are brought, the claims experience of particular insureds, and the value of claims, making predictions of future exposure from past experience uncertain. For example, in the past few years, insurers in general, including the Company, have experienced an increase in the number of asbestos-related claims due to, among other things, plaintiffs increased focus on new and previously peripheral defendants and an increase in the number of insureds seeking bankruptcy protection as a result of asbestos-related liabilities. Plaintiffs and insureds have sought to use bankruptcy proceedings, including pre-packaged bankruptcies, to accelerate and increase loss payments by insurers. In addition, some policyholders have asserted new classes of claims for coverages to which an aggregate limit of liability may not apply. Further uncertainties include insolvencies of other carriers and unanticipated developments pertaining to the Company ability to recover reinsurance for asbestos and environmental claims. Management believes these issues are not likely to be resolved in the near future. In the case of the reserves for environmental exposures, factors contributing to the high degree of uncertainty include expanding theories of liability and damages; the risks inherent in major litigation; inconsistent decisions concerning the existence and scope of coverage for environmental claims; and uncertainty as to the monetary amount being sought by the claimant from the insured. 35 Table of Contents It is also not possible to predict changes in the legal and legislative environment and their effect on the future development of asbestos and environmental claims. It is unknown whether potential Federal asbestos-related legislation will be enacted or what its effect would be on the Company aggregate asbestos liabilities. The reporting pattern for assumed reinsurance claims, including those related to asbestos and environmental claims is much longer than for direct claims. In many instances, it takes months or years to determine that the policyholder own obligations have been met and how the reinsurance in question may apply to such claims. The delay in reporting reinsurance claims and exposures adds to the uncertainty of estimating the related reserves. Given the factors and emerging trends described above, the Company believes the actuarial tools and other techniques it employs to estimate the ultimate cost of claims for more traditional kinds of insurance exposure are less precise in estimating reserves for its asbestos and environmental exposures. For this reason, the Company relies on exposure-based analysis to estimate the ultimate costs of these claims and regularly evaluates new information in assessing its potential asbestos and environmental exposures. A number of factors affect the variability of estimates for asbestos and environmental reserves including assumptions with respect to the frequency of claims, the average severity of those claims settled with payment, the dismissal rate of claims with no payment and the expense to indemnity ratio. The uncertainty with respect to the underlying reserve assumptions for asbestos and environmental adds a greater degree of variability to these reserve estimates than reserve estimates for more traditional exposures. While this variability is reflected in part in the size of the range of reserves developed by the Company, that range may still not be indicative of the potential variance between the ultimate outcome and the recorded reserves. The recorded net reserves as of December 31, 2005 of $2.7 billion ($2.3 billion and $360 for asbestos and environmental, respectively) is within an estimated range, unadjusted for covariance, of $2.0 billion to $3.1 billion. The process of estimating asbestos and environmental reserves remains subject to a wide variety of uncertainties, which are detailed in Note 12 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Due to these uncertainties, further developments could cause the Company to change its estimates and ranges of its asbestos and environmental reserves, and the effect of these changes could be material to the Company consolidated operating results, financial condition and liquidity. In the opinion of management, based upon the known facts and current law, the reserves recorded for the Company property and casualty businesses at December 31, 2005 represent the Company best estimate of its ultimate liability for claims and claim adjustment expenses related to losses covered by policies written by the Company. However, because of the significant uncertainties surrounding environmental, and particularly asbestos exposures, it is possible that management estimate of the ultimate liabilities for these claims may change and that the required adjustment to recorded reserves could exceed the currently recorded reserves by an amount that could be material to the Company results of operations, financial condition and liquidity. Life Deferred Policy Acquisition Costs and Present Value of Future Profits Associated with Variable Annuity and Other Universal Life-Type Contracts Accounting Policy and Assumptions Life policy acquisition costs include commissions and certain other expenses that vary with and are primarily associated with acquiring business. Present value of future profits is an intangible asset recorded upon applying purchase accounting in an acquisition of a life insurance company. Deferred policy acquisition costs and the present value of future profits intangible asset are amortized in the same way. Both are amortized over the estimated life of the contracts acquired, generally 20 years. Within the following discussion, deferred policy acquisition costs and the present value of future profits intangible asset will be referred to as DAC . At December 31, 2005 and 2004, the carrying value of the Company Life DAC asset was $8.6 billion and $7.4 billion, respectively. Of those amounts, $4.5 billion and $4.4 billion related to individual variable annuities sold in the U.S., $1.2 billion and $0.8 billion related to individual variable annuities sold in Japan and $2.0 billion and $1.8 billion related to universal life-type contracts sold by Individual Life. The Company amortizes DAC related to traditional policies (term, whole life and group insurance) over the premium-paying period in proportion to the present value of annual expected premium income. The Company amortizes DAC related to investment contracts and universal life-type contracts (including individual variable annuities) using the retrospective deposit method. Under the retrospective deposit method, acquisition costs are amortized in proportion to the present value of estimated gross profits ( EGPs ). The Company uses other measures for amortizing DAC, such as gross costs, as a replacement for EGPs when EGPs are expected to be negative for multiple years of the contract life. The Company also adjusts the DAC balance, through other comprehensive income, by an amount that represents the amortization of DAC that would have been required as a charge or credit to operations had unrealized gains and losses on investments been realized. Actual gross profits, in a given reporting period, that vary from management initial estimates result in increases or decreases in the rate of amortization, commonly referred to as a true-up , which are recorded in the current period. The true-up recorded for the years ended December 31, 2005, 2004 and 2003, was an increase to amortization of $18, $16 and $38, respectively. Each year, the Company develops future EGPs for the products sold during that year. The EGPs for products sold in a particular year are aggregated into cohorts. Future gross profits are projected for the estimated lives of the contracts, generally 20 years and are, to a large extent, a function of future account value projections for individual variable annuity products and to a lesser extent for variable universal life products. The projection of future account values requires the use of certain assumptions. The assumptions considered to be important in the projection of future account value, and hence the EGPs, include separate account fund performance, which is impacted by separate account fund mix, less fees assessed against the contract holder account balance, surrender and lapse rates, interest margin, and mortality. The assumptions are developed as part of an annual process and are dependent upon the Company current best estimates of future events which are likely to be different for each year cohort. For example, upon completion of a study 36 Table of Contents during the fourth quarter of 2005, the Company, in developing projected account values and the related EGP for the 2005 cohorts, used a separate account return assumption of 7.6% (after fund fees, but before mortality and expense charges) for U.S. products and 4.3% (after fund fees, but before mortality and expense charges) for Japanese products. (Although the Company used a separate account return assumption of 4.3% for the 2005 cohort, based on the relative fund mix of all variable products sold in Japan, the weighted average rate on the entire Japan block is 5.0%.) For prior year cohorts, the Company separate account return assumption, at the time those cohorts account values and related EGPs were projected, was 9.0% for U.S. products and 5.4% for Japanese products. Unlock and Sensitivity Analysis EGPs that are used as the basis for determining amortization of DAC are evaluated regularly to determine if actual experience or other evidence suggests that earlier estimates should be revised. Assumptions used to project account values and the related EGPs, are not revised unless the EGPs in the DAC amortization model fall outside of a reasonable range. In the event that the Company was to revise assumptions used for prior year cohorts, thereby changing its estimate of projected account value, and the related EGPs, in the DAC amortization model, the cumulative DAC amortization would be adjusted to reflect such changes, in the period the revision was determined to be necessary, a process known as unlocking . To determine the reasonableness of the prior assumptions used and their impact on previously projected account values and the related EGPs, the Company evaluates, on a quarterly basis, its previously projected EGPs. The Company process to assess the reasonableness of its EGPs involves the use of internally developed models, which run a large number of stochastically determined scenarios of separate account fund performance. Incorporated in each scenario are the Company current best estimate assumptions with respect to separate account returns, lapse rates, mortality, and expenses. These scenarios are run for individual variable annuity business in the U.S. and independently for individual variable annuity business in Japan and are used to calculate statistically significant ranges of reasonable EGPs. The statistical ranges produced from the stochastic scenarios are compared to the present value of EGPs used in the respective DAC amortization models. If EGPs used in the DAC amortization model fall outside of the statistical ranges of reasonable EGPs, a revision to the assumptions in prior year cohorts used to project account value and the related EGPs, in the DAC amortization model would be necessary. A similar approach is used for variable universal life business. As of December 31, 2005, the present value of the EGPs used in the DAC amortization models, for variable annuities and variable universal life business, fell within the statistical range of reasonable EGPs. Therefore, the Company did not revise the separate account return assumption, the account values or any other assumptions, in those DAC amortization models, for 2004 and prior cohorts. The Company performs analyses with respect to the potential impact of an unlock. To illustrate the effects of an unlock, assume the Company had concluded that a revision to previously projected account values and the related EGPs was required as of December 31, 2005. If the Company assumed a separate account return assumption of 7.6% for all U.S. product cohorts and 5.0% for all Japanese product cohorts and used its current best estimate assumptions for mortality and lapses, for all products, to project account values forward from the current account value to reproject future EGPs, the estimated decrease to amortization (an increase to net income) for all business would be approximately $10-$15, after-tax. If, instead, the Company assumed a separate account return assumption of 8.6% in the U.S. (6.0% in Japan) or 6.6% in the U.S. (4.0% in Japan), the estimated after-tax change in amortization for all business would have been a decrease of $55-$60 and an increase (a decrease to net income) of $30-$35, respectively. The Company has estimated that the present value of the EGPs is likely to remain within the statistical range for its U.S. individual variable annuity business if account values were to decline (due to declining separate account return performance, increased lapses or increased mortality) by 17% or less over the next twelve months or increase (due to increasing separate account return performance, decreasing lapses or decreased mortality) by 20% or less over the next twelve months. However, significant favorable experience in the funds underlying the Japan variable annuities resulted in actual account values exceeding the account value in the DAC amortization model. Therefore, EGPs in the DAC amortization models for Japanese individual variable annuity business, based on previously projected account values that are lower than actual account values, were just inside the statistical range of reasonable EGPs as of December 31, 2005. Continued favorable experience on key assumptions for Japan variable annuities, which could include increasing fund return performance, decreasing lapses or decreasing mortality, could result in the DAC amortization model EGPs being outside of the statistical range of reasonableness and result in an unlock which would result in a decrease to DAC amortization and an increase to the DAC asset. If the Company assumed a separate account return assumption of 5.0% for all Japanese product cohorts and used its current best estimate assumptions for mortality and lapses to project account values forward from the current account values to reproject future EGPs, the estimated decrease to amortization for Japan variable annuities would be approximately $25-$30, after-tax. If, instead, the Company assumed a separate account return assumption of 6.0% in Japan or 4.0% in Japan, the estimated after-tax decrease in amortization for Japan variable annuities would be $30-$35 and $20-$25, respectively. Aside from absolute levels and timing of market performance, additional factors that will influence this unlock determination include the degree of volatility in separate account fund performance and shifts in asset allocation within the separate account made by policyholders. The overall return generated by the separate account is dependent on several factors, including the relative mix of the underlying sub-accounts among bond funds and equity funds as well as equity sector weightings. The Company overall U.S. separate account fund performance has been reasonably correlated to the overall performance of the S&P 500 Index (which closed at 1,248 on December 31, 2005), although no assurance can be provided that this correlation will continue in the future. The overall recoverability of the DAC asset is dependent on the future profitability of the business. The Company tests the aggregate recoverability of the DAC asset by comparing the amounts deferred to the present value of total EGPs. In addition, the Company routinely stress tests its DAC asset for recoverability against severe declines in its separate account assets, which could occur if the equity markets experienced another significant sell-off, as the majority of policyholders funds in the separate accounts is invested in the 37 Table of Contents equity market. As of December 31, 2005, the Company believed U.S. individual and Japan individual variable annuity separate account assets could fall, through a combination of negative market returns, lapses and mortality, by at least 39% and 60%, respectively, before portions of its DAC asset would be unrecoverable. Valuation of Guaranteed Minimum Withdrawal Benefit Derivatives The Company offers certain variable annuity products with a guaranteed minimum withdrawal benefit ( GMWB ) rider. The fair value of the GMWB obligation is calculated based on actuarial and capital market assumptions related to the projected cash flows, including benefits and related contract charges, over the lives of the contracts, incorporating expectations concerning policyholder behavior. Because of the dynamic and complex nature of these cash flows, stochastic techniques under a variety of market return scenarios and other best estimate assumptions are used. Estimating these cash flows involves numerous estimates and subjective judgments including those regarding expected market rates of return, market volatility, correlations of market returns and discount rates. At each valuation date, the Company assumes expected returns based on risk-free rates as represented by the current LIBOR forward curve rates; market volatility assumptions for each underlying index based on a blend of observed market implied volatility data and annualized standard deviations of monthly returns using the most recent 20 years of observed market performance; correlations of market returns across underlying indices based on actual observed market returns and relationships over the ten years preceding the valuation date; and current risk-free spot rates as represented by the current LIBOR spot curve to determine the present value of expected future cash flows produced in the stochastic projection process. Changes in capital market assumptions can significantly change the value of the GMWB obligation. For example, independent decreases in equity market returns, decreases in interest rates and increases in equity index volatility will all have the effect of decreasing the GMWB asset resulting in a realized loss in net income. Furthermore, changes in policyholder behavior can also significantly change the value of the GMWB obligation. For example, independent increases in fund mix towards equity based funds vs. bond funds, increases in withdrawals, increasing mortality, increasing usage of the step-up feature and decreases in lapses will all have the effect of decreasing the GMWB asset resulting in a realized loss in net income. Independent changes in any one of these assumptions moving in the opposite direction will have the effect of increasing the GMWB asset resulting in a realized gain in net income. During the fourth quarter of 2005, the Company reflected a newly reliable market input for volatility on Standard and Poor ( S&P ) 500 index options. The impact of reflecting the newly reliable market input for the S&P 500 index volatility resulted in a decrease to the GMWB asset of $83. The impact to net income including other changes in assumptions, after DAC amortization and taxes was a loss of $18. Evaluation of Other-Than-Temporary Impairments on Available-for-Sale Securities The Hartford investments in fixed maturities, which include bonds, redeemable preferred stock and commercial paper; and certain equity securities, which include common and non-redeemable preferred stocks, are classified as available-for-sale and accordingly are carried at fair value with the after-tax difference from cost or amortized cost, as adjusted for the effect of deducting the life and pension policyholders share of the immediate participation guaranteed contracts; and certain life and annuity deferred policy acquisition costs and reserve adjustments, reflected in stockholders equity as a component of accumulated other comprehensive income ( AOCI ). One of the significant estimates related to available-for-sale securities is the evaluation of investments for other-than-temporary impairments. If a decline in the fair value of an available-for-sale security is judged to be other-than-temporary, a charge is recorded in net realized capital losses equal to the difference between the fair value and cost or amortized cost basis of the security. In addition, for securities expected to be sold, an other-than-temporary impairment charge is recognized if the Company does not expect the fair value of a security to recover to cost or amortized cost prior to the expected date of sale. The fair value of the other-than-temporarily impaired investment becomes its new cost basis. The evaluation of impairments is a quantitative and qualitative process, which is subject to risks and uncertainties and is intended to determine whether declines in the fair value of investments should be recognized in current period earnings. The risks and uncertainties include changes in general economic conditions, the issuer financial condition or near term recovery prospects and the effects of changes in interest rates. The Company has a security monitoring process overseen by a committee of investment and accounting professionals ( the committee ) that identifies securities that, due to certain characteristics, as described below, are subjected to an enhanced analysis on a quarterly basis. Securities not subject to Emerging Issues Task Force ( EITF ) Issue No. 99-20, Recognition of Interest Income and Impairment on Purchased and Retained Beneficial Interests in Securitized Financial Assets ( non-EITF Issue No. 99-20 securities ) that are in an unrealized loss position, are reviewed at least quarterly to determine if an other-than-temporary impairment is present based on certain quantitative and qualitative factors. The primary factors considered in evaluating whether a decline in value for non-EITF Issue No. 99-20 securities is other-than-temporary include: (a) the length of time and the extent to which the fair value has been less than cost or amortized cost, (b) the financial condition, credit rating and near-term prospects of the issuer, (c) whether the debtor is current on contractually obligated interest and principal payments and (d) the intent and ability of the Company to retain the investment for a period of time sufficient to allow for recovery. Non-EITF Issue No. 99-20 securities depressed by twenty percent or more for six months are presumed to be other-than-temporarily impaired unless significant objective verifiable evidence supports that the security price is temporarily depressed and is expected to recover within a reasonable period of time. The evaluation of non-EITF Issue No. 99-20 securities depressed more than ten percent is documented and discussed quarterly by the committee. For certain securitized financial assets with contractual cash flows including asset-backed securities, ( ABS ), EITF Issue No. 99-20 requires the Company to periodically update its best estimate of cash flows over the life of the security. If the fair value of a securitized financial asset is less than its cost or amortized cost and there has been a decrease in the present value of the estimated cash flows since the last revised estimate, considering both timing and amount, an other-than-temporary impairment charge is recognized. Estimating 38 Table of Contents future cash flows is a quantitative and qualitative process that incorporates information received from third party sources along with certain internal assumptions and judgments regarding the future performance of the underlying collateral. As a result, actual results may differ from current estimates. In addition, projections of expected future cash flows may change based upon new information regarding the performance of the underlying collateral. Pension and Other Postretirement Benefit Obligations The Company maintains a U.S. qualified defined benefit pension plan (the Plan ) that covers substantially all employees, as well as unfunded excess plans to provide benefits in excess of amounts permitted to be paid to participants of the Plan under the provisions of the Internal Revenue Code. The Company has also entered into individual retirement agreements with certain retired directors providing for unfunded supplemental pension benefits. In addition, the Company provides certain health care and life insurance benefits for eligible retired employees. The Company maintains international plans which represent an immaterial percentage of total pension assets, liabilities and expense and, for reporting purposes, are combined with domestic plans. Pursuant to accounting principles related to the Company pension and other postretirement obligations to employees under its various benefit plans, the Company is required to make a significant number of assumptions in order to calculate the related liabilities and expenses each period. The two economic assumptions that have the most impact on pension and other postretirement expense are the discount rate and the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets. In determining the discount rate assumption, the Company utilizes a discounted cash flow analysis of the Company pension and other postretirement obligations, currently available market and industry data and consultation with its plan actuaries. The yield curve utilized in the cash flow analysis is comprised of bonds rated Aa or higher with maturities primarily between zero and thirty years. Based on all available information, it was determined that 5.50% was the appropriate discount rate as of December 31, 2005 to calculate the Company benefit liability. Accordingly, the 5.50% discount rate will also be used to determine the Company 2006 pension and other postretirement expense. At December 31, 2004, the discount rate was 5.75%. The Company determines the expected long-term rate of return assumption based on an analysis of the Plan portfolio historical compound rates of return since 1979 (the earliest date for which comparable portfolio data is available) and over rolling 5 year, 10 year and 20 year periods, balanced along with future long-term return expectations that generally anticipate an investment mix of 60% equity securities and 40% fixed income securities. The Company selected these periods, as well as shorter durations, to assess the portfolio volatility, duration and total returns as they relate to pension obligation characteristics, which are influenced by the Company workforce demographics. While the historical return of the Plan portfolio has been 11.03% since 1979, based upon management outlook with respect to market returns, as well as the planned asset mix, management lowered its long-term rate of return assumption to 8.00% as of December 31, 2005 from 8.50% as of December 31, 2004. To illustrate the impact of these assumptions on annual pension and other postretirement expense for 2006 and going forward, a 25 basis point change in the discount rate will increase/decrease pension and other postretirement expense by approximately $15 and a 25 basis point change in the long-term asset return assumption will increase/decrease pension and other postretirement expense by approximately $8. Contingencies Relating to Corporate Litigation and Regulatory Matters Management follows the requirements of SFAS No. 5 Accounting for Contingencies . This statement requires management to evaluate each contingent matter separately. A loss is recorded if probable and reasonably estimable. Management establishes reserves for these contingencies at its best estimate , or, if no one number within the range of possible losses is more probable than any other, the Company records an estimated reserve at the low end of the range of losses. The Company has a quarterly monitoring process involving legal and accounting professionals. Legal personnel first identify outstanding corporate litigation and regulatory matters posing a reasonable possibility of loss. These matters are then jointly reviewed by accounting and legal personnel to evaluate the facts and changes since the last review in order to determine if a provision for loss should be recorded or adjusted, the amount that should be recorded, and the appropriate disclosure. The outcomes of certain contingencies currently being evaluated by the Company, which relate to corporate litigation and regulatory matters, are inherently difficult to predict, and the reserves that have been established for the estimated settlement amounts are subject to significant changes. In view of the uncertainties regarding the outcome of these matters, as well as the tax-deductibility of payments, it is possible that the ultimate cost to the Company of these matters could exceed the reserve by an amount that would have a material adverse effect on the Company consolidated results of operations or cash flows in a particular quarterly or annual period. 39 Table of Contents CONSOLIDATED RESULTS OF OPERATIONS For the Years Ended December 31, 2005 2004 2003 Operating Summary Earned premiums $ 14,359 $ 13,566 $ 11,891 Fee income 4,012 3,471 2,760 Net investment income Securities available-for-sale and other 4,384 4,144 3,233 Equity securities held for trading [1] [2] 3,847 799 Total net investment income 8,231 4,943 3,233 Other revenues 464 437 556 Net realized capital gains 17 291 279 Total revenues 27,083 22,708 18,719 Benefits, claims and claim adjustment expenses [1] 16,776 13,640 13,548 Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs and present value of future profits 3,169 2,843 2,397 Insurance operating costs and expenses 3,227 2,776 2,314 Interest expense 252 251 271 Other expenses 674 675 739 Total benefits, claims and expenses 24,098 20,185 19,269 Income (loss) before income taxes and cumulative effect of 2,985 2,523 (550 ) accounting change Income tax expense (benefit) 711 385 (459 ) Income (loss) before cumulative effect of accounting change 2,274 2,138 (91 ) Cumulative effect of accounting change, net of tax [3] (23 ) Net income (loss) $ 2,274 $ 2,115 $ (91 ) [1] Includes dividend income and mark-to-market effects of trading securities supporting the international variable annuity business, which are classified in net investment income with corresponding amounts credited to policyholders within benefits, claims and claim adjustment expenses. [2] Amounts reported in 2003 are prior to the adoption of Statement of Position 03-1, Accounting and Reporting by Insurance Enterprises for Certain Nontraditional Long-Duration Contracts and for Separate Accounts ( SOP 03-1 ), [3] For the year ended December 31, 2004, represents the cumulative impact of the Company adoption of SOP 03-1. 2005 2004 2003 Net Income (Loss) by Operation and Life Segment Life Retail $ 622 $ 503 $ 412 Retirement Plans 75 66 42 Institutional 88 68 32 Individual Life 166 155 145 Group Benefits 272 229 148 International 96 39 13 Other [1] (115 ) 322 53 Total Life 1,204 1,382 845 Property & Casualty Ongoing Operations [1] 1,165 955 783 Other Operations 71 (45 ) (1,528 ) Total Property & Casualty 1,236 910 (745 ) Corporate (166 ) (177 ) (191 ) Net income (loss) $ 2,274 $ 2,115 $ (91 ) [1] For the year ended December 31, 2004, Life includes a $190 tax benefit recorded in its Other category and Property & Casualty Ongoing Operations includes a $26 tax benefit, which relate to agreement with the IRS on the resolution of matters pertaining to tax years prior to 2004. For further discussion of this benefit, see Note 12 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 2005 2004 2003 Underwriting Results by Property & Casualty Segment Business Insurance $ 396 $ 360 $ 158 Personal Lines 460 138 130 Specialty Commercial (165 ) (53 ) 10 Other Operations [1] (226 ) (448 ) (2,840 ) [1] Includes $2,604 of before-tax net asbestos reserve strengthening in 2003. Operating Results 2005 Compared to 2004 Net income increased $159 for the year ended December 31, 2005 compared with the prior year. The increase was primarily due to the following: An increase in Property & Casualty net income of $326, driven primarily by improved underwriting results in the Personal Lines and Other Operations segments, increased net investment income, and a reduction in other expenses; partially offset by a decrease in net realized capital gains. The improved underwriting results in Personal Lines was driven primarily by a reduction in current year catastrophe losses, a reduction in net unfavorable prior accident year loss reserve development and earned premium growth. The improvement in underwriting results for Other Operations was primarily due to a reduction in net unfavorable prior accident year loss reserve development. The increase in net investment income was primarily due to higher assets under management resulting from increased cash flows from underwriting, higher investment yields on fixed maturity investments and an increase in income from limited partnership investments. 40 Table of Contents An increase in net income for Retail of $119, principally driven by higher fee income from growth in the variable annuity and mutual fund businesses as a result of higher assets under management as compared to the prior year periods. An increase in net income for International of $57, principally driven by higher fee income and investment spread in Japan derived from a 78% increase in the assets under management. An increase in net income for the Group Benefits segment of $43, driven primarily by higher earned premiums and net investment income as well as a favorable loss ratio. Partially offsetting these increases were: A $216 tax benefit recorded in 2004 to reflect the effect of the IRS audit settlement on tax years prior to 2004. A charge of $102, after-tax, recorded in 2005 in Life to reserve for investigations related to market timing by the SEC and New York Attorney General Office, directed brokerage by the SEC and single premium group annuities by the New York Attorney General Office and the Connecticut Attorney General Office. An after-tax expense of $46 recorded in Life during 2005, related to the termination of a provision of an agreement with a mutual fund distribution partner of the Company retail mutual funds. Total revenues increased $4.4 billion for the year ended December 31, 2005 compared with the prior year. The increase was primarily due to the following: An increase of $3.3 billion in net investment income, driven primarily by a $3.0 billion increase in net investment income on the Company trading securities portfolio. Also contributing to the increase was a higher average invested asset base. An increase of $793 in earned premiums. Earned premium growth of $486 in Business Insurance was primarily driven by new business premium growth outpacing non-renewals in the prior 12 months. Earned premium growth of $165 in Personal Lines was primarily driven by new business growth outpacing non-renewals in auto and the effect of earned pricing increases in homeowners. Earned premiums increased $158 in Group Benefits primarily due to increased sales, particularly in group disability, and continued strong persistency. An increase of $541 in fee income primarily driven by increased individual annuity assets under management in the United States and Japan. Partially offsetting these increases was: A decrease of $274 in net realized capital gains primarily due to lower net gains on the sale of fixed maturity securities, losses associated with GMWB derivatives, Japanese fixed annuity contract hedges and periodic net coupon settlements. These losses were offset in part by changes in the value of non-qualifying foreign currency swaps. 2004 Compared to 2003 Net income increased $2.2 billion for the year ended December 31, 2004 compared with the prior year. The increase was primarily due to the following: An increase in Property & Casualty net income of $1.7 billion driven primarily by a $1.7 billion after-tax charge to strengthen net asbestos reserves based on a ground up study in 2003. A $216 tax benefit in 2004, of which $190 was recorded in Life and $26 was recorded in Property & Casualty, primarily consisting of the benefit related to the separate account dividends-received deduction ( DRD ) and interest. For further discussion, see Note 12 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Growth in all of Life segments and improved underwriting results, particularly in the Business Insurance segment. Partially offsetting the increase was: Increased Property & Casualty catastrophe losses, primarily related to hurricanes Charley, Frances, Ivan and Jeanne. Total revenues increased $4.0 billion for the year ended December 31, 2004 compared with the prior year. The increase was primarily due to the following: Increased earned premiums for Group Benefits driven primarily by the acquisition of the group benefits business of CNA, sales growth and favorable persistency. Increased earned premiums in the Business Insurance, Personal Lines and Specialty Commercial segments primarily due to earned pricing increases and growth in new business premiums out pacing non-renewals for Personal Lines and Business Insurance. Increased fee income for Retail resulted from an increase in variable annuity average account values. Net investment income increased due primarily to the adoption of SOP 03-1, which resulted in $1.6 billion of net investment income. Net Realized Capital Gains and Losses See Investment Results in the Investments section. 41 Table of Contents Income Taxes The effective tax rate for 2005, 2004 and 2003 was 24%, 15% and 83%, respectively. The principal causes of the difference between the effective rate and the U.S. statutory rate of 35% for 2005 were tax-exempt interest earned on invested assets and the separate account dividends received deduction ( DRD ). For 2004, the principal causes were tax exempt interest earned on invested assets, the separate account DRD and the tax benefit associated with the settlement of the 1998-2001 IRS audit. Income taxes paid (received) in 2005, 2004 and 2003 were $447, $32 and ($107), respectively. For additional information, see Note 13 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. The separate account DRD is estimated for the current year using information from the most recent year-end, adjusted for projected equity market performance. The estimated DRD is generally updated in the third quarter for the provision-to-filed-return adjustments, and in the fourth quarter based on known actual mutual fund distributions and fee income from The Hartford variable insurance products. The actual current year DRD can vary from the estimates based on, but not limited to, changes in eligible dividends received by the mutual funds, amounts of distributions from these mutual funds, appropriate levels of taxable income as well as the utilization of capital loss carry forwards at the mutual fund level. Earnings (Loss) Per Common Share The following table represents earnings per common share data for the past three years: 2005 2004 2003 Basic earnings (loss) per share $ 7.63 $ 7.24 $ (0.33 ) Diluted earnings (loss) per share [1] $ 7.44 $ 7.12 $ (0.33 ) Weighted average common shares outstanding (basic) 298.0 292.3 272.4 Weighted average common shares outstanding and dilutive potential common shares (diluted) [1] 305.6 297.0 272.4 [1] As a result of the net loss for the year ended December 31, 2003, SFAS No. 128, Earnings Per Share , requires the Company to use basic weighted average common shares outstanding in the calculation of the year ended December 31, 2003 diluted earnings (loss) per share, since the inclusion of options of 1.8 would have been antidilutive to the earnings per share calculation. In the absence of the net loss, weighted average common shares outstanding and dilutive potential common shares would have totaled 274.2. Outlook Life In the Retail segment management believes the market for retirement products continues to expand as individuals increasingly save and plan for retirement. However, competition has increased substantially in the retail market with most major variable annuity writers now offering living benefits such as GMWB riders. As a result, sales may be lower than the level of sales attained in 2005 when considering the competitive environment, the risk of disruption on new sales from product offering changes, customer acceptance of new products and the effect on the distribution related to product offering changes. The success of the Company new living income benefit and any new products will ultimately be based on customer acceptance. With the increased competition in the variable annuity market causing lower sales levels from the level in 2004, combined with surrender activity on the aging block of business, net outflows are currently forecasted to be above levels experienced in 2005. This will be largely dependent on the Company ability to attract new customers and to retain contract holder account values in existing or new product offerings as they reach the end of the surrender charge period of their contract. The future profitability of the Retirement Plans segment will depend on the Company ability to increase assets under management across all businesses and maintain its investment spread earnings on the products sold largely in the Government business. 401(k) sales are expected to remain strong throughout 2006 primarily due to the continuing growth in the market for retirement products. The Government market is highly competitive from a pricing perspective, and a small number of cases often account for a significant portion of sales, therefore the Company may not be able to sustain the level of sales growth attained in 2005. The future net income of the Institutional segment will depend on the Company ability to increase assets under management across all businesses and maintain its investment spread earnings on the products sold largely in the Institutional Investment Products ( IIP ) business. The IIP markets are highly competitive from a pricing perspective, and a small number of cases often account for a significant portion of sales, therefore the Company may not be able to sustain the level of assets under management growth attained in 2005. IIP will launch new products in 2006 to provide solutions that deal specifically with longevity risk. Longevity risk is defined as the likelihood of an individual outliving their assets. IIP is also designing innovative solutions to corporation defined benefit liabilities. The focus of the PPLI business is variable PPLI products to fund non-qualified benefits or other post employment benefit liabilities. The market served by PPLI is subject to extensive legal and regulatory review that could have an adverse effect on its business. In Individual Life variable universal life sales and account values remain sensitive to equity market levels and returns. The Company continues to pursue new and enhanced products, as well as broader and deeper distribution opportunities to increase sales. Individual Life continues to face uncertainty surrounding estate tax legislation, aggressive competition from other life insurance providers, reduced availability and higher price of reinsurance, and the current regulatory environment regarding reserving practices for universal life products with no-lapse guarantees which may negatively affect Individual Life future earnings. In Group Benefits, management anticipates the increased scale of the group life and disability operations and the expanded distribution network for its products and services will generate strong sales growth. Sales, however, may be negatively affected by the competitive 42 Table of Contents pricing environment in the marketplace. Management is committed to selling competitively priced products that meet the Company internal rate of return guidelines. In the International segment management is optimistic about the growth potential of the retirement savings market in Japan. Several trends such as an aging population, longer life expectancies, declining birth rate leading to a smaller number of younger workers to support each retiree, and under funded pension systems have resulted in greater need for an individual to plan and adequately fund retirement savings. However, competition has increased substantially in the Japanese market with most major competitors offering guaranteed benefit riders and, as a result, the Company may not be able to sustain the level of sales attained in 2005. Continued growth depends on increasing the Company penetration in the Japanese market by securing new distribution outlets for our products and accessing more customers within existing distributors. In addition, the Company will be looking for ways to leverage our variable annuity capability into other investment product opportunities. Property & Casualty In 2006, management expects continued growth in written and earned premiums in Business Insurance and Personal Lines, partially offset by an expected decline in written and earned premium in Specialty Commercial. Within Business Insurance, in both small commercial and middle market, the Company plans to continue to broaden its relationships with key agencies to increase new business, maintain renewal retention and expand market share in targeted states. Management expects double-digit written premium growth in small commercial in 2006. The Personal Lines segment is expected to deliver written premium growth in the mid-single digits in 2006, including growth from both AARP and Agency. The Company expects new business growth in Agency business as well as strong renewal retention in AARP. Within Specialty Commercial, management expects written and earned premium to decline in 2006 given the non-renewal of a captive insurance program which represented $240 of written premium in 2005. Partially offsetting this decline is an expectation of growth in property written premium driven by new business growth and written pricing increases. Also, a decrease in the percentage of risks ceded to reinsurers will likely contribute to growth in professional liability written premium. Management expects written pricing trends in 2006 to be affected by increased competition in Business Insurance and Personal Lines. Price competition is most significant for Select Xpand and middle market business within Business Insurance. Competition is also intensifying in Personal Lines, especially in auto. Rather than competing on rate, many companies are advertising heavily to drive new business and retain profitable customers. In 2006, management believes that pricing declines in Business Insurance will lessen somewhat as higher reinsurance costs are reflected in the market. Within Personal Lines, the Company expects written pricing to be flat to slightly negative for auto and written pricing increases in the mid-single digits for homeowners. In the wake of the third and fourth quarter hurricanes of 2005, specialty property written pricing has been increasing in catastrophe prone areas and management expects rates to continue to increase in 2006. Within Business Insurance and Personal Lines, loss costs are expected to increase in 2006 as increasing claim severity is expected to outpace favorable claim frequency. As a result of the anticipated written pricing decreases in some lines and less favorable written pricing increases in other lines, management expects the current accident year loss and loss expense ratio in Business Insurance and Personal Lines to increase moderately in 2006. Within Specialty Commercial, management expects that the written pricing increases in property will yield a lower current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio, provided that catastrophe property claim experience returns to expected levels. The Other Operations segment will continue to manage the discontinued operations of The Hartford as well as claims (and associated reserves) related to asbestos, environmental and other exposures. The Hartford will continue to review various components of all of its reserves on a regular basis. LIFE Executive Overview Life provides investment and retirement products such as variable and fixed annuities, mutual funds and retirement plan services and other institutional products; individual and PPLI; and, group benefit products, such as group life and group disability insurance. Life derives its revenues principally from: (a) fee income, including asset management fees, on separate account and mutual fund assets and mortality and expense fees, as well as cost of insurance charges; (b) net investment income on general account assets; (c) fully insured premiums; and (d) certain other fees. Asset management fees and mortality and expense fees are primarily generated from separate account assets, which are deposited with Life through the sale of variable annuity and variable universal life products and from mutual funds. Cost of insurance charges are assessed on the net amount at risk for investment-oriented life insurance products. Premium revenues are derived primarily from the sale of group life, and group disability and individual term insurance products. Life expenses essentially consist of interest credited to policyholders on general account liabilities, insurance benefits provided, amortization of the deferred policy acquisition costs, expenses related to the selling and servicing the various products offered by the Company, dividends to policyholders, and other general business expenses. Life profitability in its variable annuity, mutual fund and, to a lesser extent, variable universal life businesses, depends largely on the amount of the contract holder account value or assets under management on which it earns fees and the level of fees charged. Changes in account value or assets under management are driven by two main factors: net flows, which measure the success of the Company 43 Table of Contents asset gathering and retention efforts, and the market return of the funds, which is heavily influenced by the return realized in the equity markets. Net flows are comprised of new sales and other deposits less surrenders, death benefits, policy charges and annuitizations of investment type contracts, such as: variable annuity contracts. In the mutual fund business, net flows are known as net sales. Net sales are comprised of new sales less redemptions by mutual fund customers. Life uses the average daily value of the S&P 500 Index as an indicator for evaluating market returns of the underlying account portfolios in the United States. Relative profitability of variable products is highly correlated to the growth in account values or assets under management since these products generally earn fee income on a daily basis. Thus, a prolonged downturn in the financial markets could reduce revenues and potentially raise the possibility of a charge against deferred policy acquisition costs. The profitability of Life fixed annuities and other spread-based products depends largely on its ability to earn target spreads between earned investment rates on its general account assets and interest credited to policyholders. Profitability is also influenced by operating expense management including the benefits of economies of scale in the administration of its United States variable annuity businesses in particular. In addition, the size and persistency of gross profits from these businesses is an important driver of earnings as it affects the rate of amortization of the deferred policy acquisition costs. Life profitability in its individual life insurance and group benefits businesses depends largely on the size of its in force block, the adequacy of product pricing and underwriting discipline, actual mortality and morbidity experience, and the efficiency of its claims and expense management. Performance Measures Fee Income Fee income is largely driven from amounts collected as a result of contractually defined percentages of assets under management on investment type contracts. These fees are generally collected on a daily basis from the contract holder account. For individual life insurance products, fees are contractually defined percentages based on levels of insurance, age, premiums and deposits collected and contractholder account value. Life insurance fees are generally collected on a monthly basis. Therefore, the growth in assets under management either through positive net flows or net sales and favorable equity market performance will have a favorable impact on fee income. Conversely, negative net flows or net sales and unfavorable equity market performance will reduce fee income generated from investment type contracts. As of and for the years ended December 31, 2005 2004 2003 Product/Key Indicator Information United States Individual Variable Annuities Account value, beginning of period $ 99,617 $ 86,501 $ 64,343 Net flows (881 ) 5,471 7,709 Change in market value and other 6,578 7,645 14,449 Account value, end of period $ 105,314 $ 99,617 $ 86,501 Retail Mutual Funds Assets under management, beginning of period $ 25,240 $ 20,301 $ 14,079 Net sales 1,335 2,505 2,155 Change in market value and other 2,488 2,434 4,067 Assets under management, end of period $ 29,063 $ 25,240 $ 20,301 Retirement Plans Account value, beginning of period $ 16,493 $ 13,571 $ 10,183 Net flows 1,618 1,636 1,560 Change in market value and other 1,206 1,286 1,828 Account value, end of period $ 19,317 $ 16,493 $ 13,571 Individual Life Insurance Variable universal life account value, end of period $ 5,902 $ 5,356 $ 4,725 Total life insurance inforce 150,801 139,889 130,798 S&P 500 Index Year end closing value 1,248 1,212 1,112 Daily average value 1,208 1,131 965 Japan Annuities Account value, beginning of period $ 14,631 $ 6,220 $ 1,722 Net flows 10,857 7,249 3,490 Change in market value and other 616 1,162 1,008 Account value, end of period $ 26,104 $ 14,631 $ 6,220 The 2005 increase in U.S. variable annuity account values can be attributed to market growth over the past four quarters. Net flows and net sales for the U.S. variable annuity and retail mutual fund businesses, respectively, have decreased from prior year levels. In particular, variable annuity net flows and mutual fund net sales were negatively affected due to lower sales levels and higher surrenders due to increased competition. Changes in market value are based on market conditions and investment management performance. Japan annuity account values and net flows continue to grow as a result of strong sales and significant market growth in 2005. 44 Table of Contents Net Investment Income and Interest Credited Certain investment type contracts such as fixed annuities and other spread-based contracts generate deposits that the Company collects and invests to earn investment income. These investment type contracts use this investment income to credit the contract holder an amount of interest specified in the respective contract; therefore, management evaluates performance of these products based on the spread between net investment income and interest credited. Net investment income and interest credited can be volatile period over period, which can have a significant positive or negative effect on the operating results of each segment. The volatile nature of net investment income is driven primarily by prepayments on securities and earnings on partnership investments. In addition, insurance type contracts such as those sold by Group Benefits (discussed below) collect and invest premiums for protection from losses specified in the particular insurance contract and those sold by Institutional, collect and invest premiums for certain life contingent benefits. For the years ended December 31, 2005 2004 2003 [1] Net Investment Income Retail $ 933 $ 1,011 $ 432 Retirement Plans 311 306 281 Institutional 802 664 581 Individual Life 305 303 263 Group Benefits 398 373 262 International 75 11 2 Other 4,021 1,007 220 Total net investment income $ 6,845 $ 3,675 $ 2,041 Interest Credited on General Account Assets Retail $ 717 $ 841 $ 284 Retirement Plans 197 186 184 Institutional 383 300 253 Individual Life 225 216 192 International 14 (1 ) Other 4,135 939 170 Total interest credited on general account assets $ 5,671 $ 2,481 $ 1,083 [1] Amounts reported in 2003 are prior to the adoption of SOP 03-1. Net investment income and interest credited in Other increased for the year ended December 31, 2005 due to $3,847 increase in the mark-to-market effects of trading account securities supporting the Japanese variable annuity business. Net investment income and interest credited on general account assets in Retail declined for the year ended December 31, 2005 due to lower assets under management from surrenders on market value adjusted ( MVA ) fixed annuity products at the end of their guarantee period. The increase for the year ended December 31, 2004 was largely due to the adoption of SOP 03-1. Net investment income and interest credited on general account assets in Institutional increased as a result of the Company funding agreement backed Investor Notes program, partially offset by surrenders in the PPLI business. In addition to interest credited on general account assets, Institutional also had other contract benefits for limited payment contracts of $292, $279 and $231 for the years ended December 31, 2005, 2004 and 2003, respectively. These amounts need to be deducted from net investment income to understand the net interest spread on these businesses because these contracts are accounted for as traditional insurance products. Premiums As discussed above, traditional insurance type products, such as those sold by Group Benefits, collect premiums from policyholders in exchange for financial protection of the policy holder from a specified insurable loss, such as death or disability. These premiums together with net investment income earned from the overall investment strategy are used to pay the contractual obligations under these insurance contracts. Two major factors, new sales and persistency, impact premium growth. Sales can increase or decrease in a given year based on a number of factors, including but not limited to, customer demand for the Company product offerings, pricing competition, distribution channels and the Company reputation and ratings. A majority of sales correspond with the open enrollment periods of employers benefits, typically January 1 or July 1. Persistency is the percentage of insurance policies remaining in force from year to year as measured by premiums. For the years ended December 31, 2005 2004 2003 Group Benefits Total premiums and other considerations $ 3,810 $ 3,652 $ 2,362 Fully insured ongoing sales (excluding buyouts) 779 632 507 Persistency [1] 87 % 85 % 81 % [1] The persistency rate represents the employer market group life and disability business, which accounts for, on average, 75% of inforce premiums. Earned premiums and other considerations include $27, $4 and $40 in buyout premiums for the years ended December 31, 2005, 2004 and 2003, respectively. The increase in premiums and other considerations for Group Benefits in 2005 compared to 2004 was driven by sales and favorable persistency. Expenses 45 Table of Contents There are three major categories for expenses. The first major category of expenses is benefits and claims. These include the costs of mortality and morbidity, particularly in the group benefits business, and mortality in the individual life businesses, as well as other contractholder benefits to policyholders. In addition, traditional insurance type products generally use a loss ratio which is expressed as the amount of benefits incurred during a particular period divided by total premiums and other considerations, as a key indicator of underwriting performance. Since Group Benefits occasionally buys a block of claims for a stated premium amount, the Company excludes this buyout from the loss ratio used for evaluating the underwriting results of the business as buyouts may distort the loss ratio. The second major category is insurance operating costs and expenses, which is commonly expressed in a ratio of a revenue measure depending on the type of business. The third category is the amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs and the present value of future profits, which is typically expressed as a percentage of pre-tax income before the cost of this amortization. The individual annuity business within Retail accounts for the majority of the amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs and present value of future profits for Life. For the years ended December 31, 2005 2004 2003 Retail General insurance expense ratio (individual annuity) 17.9 bps 18.3 bps 22.0 bps DAC amortization ratio (individual annuity) 49.6 % 50.9 % 50.1 % Insurance expenses, net of deferrals $ 869 $ 687 $ 560 Individual Life Death benefits $ 241 $ 245 $ 224 Insurance expenses, net of deferrals $ 167 $ 164 $ 161 Group Benefits Total benefits and claims $ 2,794 $ 2,703 $ 1,862 Loss ratio (excluding buyout premiums) 73.1 % 74.0 % 78.5 % Insurance expenses, net of deferrals $ 1,022 $ 989 $ 553 Expense ratio (excluding buyout premiums) 27.8 % 27.7 % 24.6 % Individual annuity expense ratio for the year ended December 31, 2005 continued to benefit from the Company disciplined expense management and economies of scale in the variable annuity business. Additionally, individual annuity expense ratio continues to be one of the lowest ratios of general insurance expenses as a percent of assets under management in the industry, holding near 18 bps of average account value for the year ended December 31, 2005. The Company expects this ratio to stay between 18-20 bps. The ratio of individual annuity DAC amortization over income before taxes and DAC amortization declined for the year ended December 31, 2005 as a result of higher gross profits and a lower amount of additional deposits received on existing business. Individual Life death benefits decreased for the year ended December 31, 2005 due to favorable mortality experience. The Group Benefits loss ratio, excluding buyouts, for the year ended December 31, 2005 decreased due to favorable morbidity and mortality experience. The Group Benefits expense ratio, excluding buyouts, increased slightly for the year ended December 31, 2005 primarily due to higher operating expenses related to business growth. Profitability Management evaluates the rates of return various businesses can provide as a way of determining where additional capital should be invested to increase net income and shareholder returns. Specifically, because of the importance of its individual annuity products, the Company uses the return on assets for the individual annuity business for evaluating profitability. In Group Benefits, after tax margin is a key indicator of overall profitability. 2005 2004 2003 Ratios Retail Individual annuity return on assets ( ROA ) 54.6 bps 44.8 bps 45.4 bps Group Benefits After-tax margin(excluding buyouts) 7.2 % 6.3 % 6.4 % Individual annuity ROA increased for the year ended December 31, 2005, compared to the prior year. In particular, variable annuity fees and fixed annuity general account spreads each increased for the year ended December 31, 2005 compared to the prior year. The increase in the ROA can be attributed to the increase in account values and resulting increased fees including GMWB rider fees without a corresponding increase in expenses, while the increase in fixed annuity general account spread resulted from fixed annuity contracts that were repriced upon the contract reaching maturity. Also, contributing to a higher ROA in 2005 is an increase in the separate account dividends received deduction ( DRD ) tax benefit compared to 2004. The improvement in the Group Benefits after-tax margin for the year ended December 31, 2005 was primarily due to favorable loss ratios and higher net investment income as compared to 2004. 46 Table of Contents 2005 2004 2003 Life Operating Summary Earned premiums $ 4,203 $ 4,072 $ 3,086 Fee income 4,000 3,464 2,760 Net investment income Securities available-for-sale and other 2,998 2,876 2,041 Equity securities held for trading [1] [2] 3,847 799 Total net investment income 6,845 3,675 2,041 Other revenues 131 Net realized capital gains (losses) (25 ) 164 26 Total revenues 15,023 11,375 8,044 Benefits, claims and claim adjustment expenses [1] 9,809 6,630 4,616 Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs and present value of future profits 1,172 993 755 Insurance operating costs and other expenses 2,522 2,145 1,607 Total benefits, claims and expenses 13,503 9,768 6,978 Income before income taxes and cumulative effect of accounting change 1,520 1,607 1,066 Income tax expense 316 202 221 Income before cumulative effect of accounting change 1,204 1,405 845 Cumulative effect of accounting change, net of tax [3] (23 ) Net income $ 1,204 $ 1,382 $ 845 [1] Includes dividend income and mark-to-market effects of trading securities supporting the international variable annuity business, which are classified in net investment income with corresponding amounts credited to policyholders within benefits, claims and claim adjustment expenses. [2] Amounts in 2003 are prior to the adoption of SOP 03-1. [3] For the year ended December 31, 2004, represents the cumulative impact of the Company adoption of SOP 03-1. Life realigned its reportable operating segments in 2005 from Retail, Institutional, Individual Life and Group Benefits to Retail, Retirement Plans, Institutional, Individual Life, Group Benefits and International. Retail offers individual variable and fixed market value adjusted ( MVA ) annuities, retail mutual funds, 529 college savings plans, Canadian and offshore investment products. Retirement Plans offers retirement plan products and services to corporations and municipalities under Section 401(k), 403(b) and 457 plans. Institutional offers institutional liability products, including stable value products, structured settlements and institutional annuities (primarily terminal funding cases), as well as variable PPLI owned by corporations and high net worth individuals. Individual Life sells a variety of life insurance products, including variable universal life, universal life, interest sensitive whole life and term life. Group Benefits provides employers, associations, affinity groups and financial institutions with group life, accident and disability coverage, along with other products and services, including voluntary benefits, group retiree health, and medical stop loss. International, which primarily has operations located in Japan, Brazil, Ireland and the United Kingdom, provides investments, retirement savings and other insurance and savings products to individuals and groups outside the United States and Canada. Life includes in an Other category its leveraged PPLI product line of business; corporate items not directly allocated to any of its reportable operating segments; net realized capital gains and losses on fixed maturity sales generated from movements in interest rates, less amortization of those gains or losses back to the reportable segments; net realized capital gains and losses generated from credit related events, less a credit risk fee charged to the reportable segments; net realized capital gains and losses from non-qualifying derivative strategies (including embedded derivatives) other than the net periodic coupon settlements on credit derivatives and the net periodic coupon settlements on the cross currency swap used to economically hedge currency and interest rate risk generated from sales of the Company yen based fixed annuity, which are allocated to the reportable segments; the mark-to-market adjustment for the equity securities held for trading reported in net investment income and the related change in interest credited reported as a component of benefits, claims and claim adjustment expenses since these items are not considered by the Company chief operating decision maker in evaluating the International results of operations; and intersegment eliminations. 2005 Compared to 2004 Life net income for the year ended December 31, 2005 decreased compared to the prior year due to higher income tax expense. Income tax expense increased for the year ended December 31, 2005 due to the absence of a tax benefit of $190 recorded in 2004 to reflect the impact of the Internal Revenue Service ( IRS ) audit settlement on tax years prior to 2004. Partially offsetting the increase in income tax expense compared to the prior year was an increase in the DRD benefit related to the 2005 tax year of $50. Additional contributing factors to the decrease in net income can be found below: For the year ended December 31, 2005, Life experienced realized capital losses of $25 as compared to realized capital gains of $164 for the year ended December 31, 2004. See the Investments section for further discussion of investment results and related realized capital gains and losses. Life recorded an after-tax charge of $102 for the year ended December 31, 2005 to establish reserves for regulatory matters for investigations related to market timing by the SEC and New York Attorney General Office, directed brokerage by the SEC, 47 Table of Contents and single premium group annuities by the New York Attorney General Office and the Connecticut Attorney General Office. Life recorded an after-tax expense of $46 for the year ended December 31, 2005, which related to the termination of a provision of an agreement with a mutual fund distribution partner. Partially offsetting the decreases to earnings discussed above was: Net income in Retail increased during 2005, principally driven by higher fee income from growth in the variable annuity and mutual fund businesses as a result of higher assets under management as compared to the prior year. Institutional contributed higher earnings during 2005, driven by higher assets under management. Individual Life net income increased during 2005, primarily driven by business growth which resulted in increases in both higher life insurance inforce and account values. Net income in Group Benefits increased during 2005, primarily due to a non-recurring tax benefit of $9 related to the acquisition of the group life and accident, and short-term and long-term disability business of CNA Financial Corporation ( the CNA Acquisition ) and higher earned premiums and net investment income as well as a favorable loss ratio as compared to the prior year period. Net income in International increased during 2005, primarily driven by the increased fees from an increase in assets under management of the Japan annuity business. Japan assets under management have grown to $26.1 billion at December 31, 2005 from $14.6 billion at December 31, 2004. Net investment income increased for all Life segments during 2005, driven by a higher asset base and increased partnership income, as compared to the prior year. The effective tax rate was 21% for Life operations for the current year as compared to an effective tax rate of 13% for Life operations for the respective prior year period. The 2005 higher effective tax rate was attributed to the absence of the 2004 tax benefit of $190 (as mentioned above) offset by an increase in the DRD tax benefit of $50. 2004 Compared to 2003 Life net income increased in 2004 due primarily to business growth in virtually all segments as discussed below, a lower effective income tax rate, and higher net realized capital gains. (See the Investments section for further discussion of investment results and related realized capital gains). Life recorded in the third quarter of 2004 a tax benefit of $190, consisting primarily of a change in estimate of the dividends-received deduction ( DRD ) tax benefit reported during 2003 and prior years and interest, and changed the estimate of the after-tax benefit for the DRD benefit related to the 2004 tax year. Additional contributing factors to the increase in net income can be found below: Net income in Retail increased, principally driven by growth in the variable annuity and mutual fund businesses as a result of increased assets under management. Net income in Retirement Plans increased primarily due to higher fee income related to the 401(k) business compared to the prior year. Net income in Group Benefits increased due primarily to increased earned premiums and net investment income growth, primarily resulting from the CNA Acquisition. In addition, Group Benefits was impacted by favorable persistency in most businesses and a lower loss ratio. Net income in Institutional was higher as a result of a decrease in other expenses related to private placement life insurance business compared to the respective prior year. The decrease in other expenses for the current year is attributed to a $40 after-tax charge, recorded in the third quarter ended September 30, 2003, associated with the settlement of the Bancorp Services, LLC ( Bancorp ) litigation. Individual Life earnings increase was primarily driven by improved net investment spread income including the effects of prepayments and growth in account values and life insurance in force. Net income in International increased over the prior year primarily driven by the increase in assets under management of the Japan annuity business. Japan assets under management have grown to $14.6 billion at December 31, 2004 from $6.2 billion at December 31, 2003. Also during 2004, Life introduced market value adjusted fixed annuity products to provide a diversified product portfolio to customers in Japan. The effective tax rate was 13% for Life operations in 2004 as compared to an effective tax rate of 21% for Life operations for the respective prior year period. The lower effective tax rate was attributed to tax related items, as discussed above, of $190 and a 2004 tax year DRD benefit of $132, as compared to tax related items of $30 and a 2003 tax year DRD benefit of $87 reported for the years ended December 31, 2004 and 2003, respectively. Partially offsetting the increases to earnings discussed above was: Retail recorded lower spread income on market value adjusted ( MVA ) fixed annuities due to the adoption of SOP 03-1 in 2004. Slightly offsetting the positive earnings drivers for the year ended December 31, 2004 was the cumulative effect of accounting change from the Company adoption of SOP 03-1. (For further discussion of the impact of the Company adoption of SOP 03-1, see Note 1 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements). 48 Table of Contents Income Taxes The effective tax rate for 2005, 2004 and 2003 was 21%, 13% and 21%, respectively. The principal causes of the difference between the effective rates and the U.S. statutory rate of 35% for 2005 were tax-exempt interest earned on invested assets and the separate account dividends received deduction ( DRD ). For 2004, the principal causes were tax exempt interest earned on invested assets, the separate account dividends received deduction and the tax benefit associated with the settlement of the 1998-2001 IRS audit. For additional information, see Note 13 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. The separate account DRD is estimated for the current year using information from the most recent year-end, adjusted for projected equity market performance. The estimated DRD is generally updated in the third quarter for the provision-to-filed-return adjustments, and in the fourth quarter based on known actual mutual fund distributions and fee income from The Hartford variable insurance products. The actual current year DRD can vary from the estimates based on, but not limited to, changes in eligible dividends received by the mutual funds, amounts of distributions from these mutual funds, appropriate levels of taxable income as well as the utilization of capital loss carry forwards at the mutual fund level. A description of each segment as well as an analysis of the operating results summarized above is included on the following pages. RETAIL 2005 2004 2003 Operating Summary Fee income and other $ 2,325 $ 2,019 $ 1,654 Earned premiums (52 ) 5 (34 ) Net investment income 933 1,011 432 Net realized capital gains 9 8 Total revenues 3,215 3,035 2,060 Benefits, claims and claim adjustment expenses 895 1,074 519 Insurance operating costs and other expenses 869 687 560 Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs and present value of future profits 744 647 498 Total benefits, claims and expenses 2,508 2,408 1,577 Income before income taxes and cumulative effect of accounting change 707 627 483 Income tax expense 85 105 71 Income before cumulative effect of accounting change 622 522 412 Cumulative effect of accounting change, net of tax [1] (19 ) Net income $ 622 $ 503 $ 412 2005 2004 2003 Assets Under Management Individual variable annuity account values $ 105,314 $ 99,617 $ 86,501 Individual fixed annuity and other account values 10,222 11,384 11,215 Other retail products account values 336 182 48 Total account values [2] 115,872 111,183 97,764 Retail mutual fund assets under management 29,063 25,240 20,301 Other mutual fund assets under management 1,004 641 369 Total mutual fund assets under management 30,067 25,881 20,670 Total assets under management $ 145,939 $ 137,064 $ 118,434 [1] Represents the cumulative impact of the Company adoption of SOP 03-1. [2] Includes policyholders balances for investment contracts and reserve for future policy benefits for insurance contracts. Retail focuses on the savings and retirement needs of the growing number of individuals who are preparing for retirement, or have already retired, through the sale of individual variable and fixed annuities, mutual funds and other investment products. Life is both a leading writer of individual variable annuities and a top seller of individual variable annuities through banks in the United States. 2005 Compared to 2004 Net income in Retail increased for the year ended December 31, 2005 primarily due to improved fee income driven by higher assets under management. Assets under management increased primarily as a result of market growth. A more expanded discussion of earnings growth can be found below: The increase in fee income in the variable annuity business for the year ended December 31, 2005 was mainly a result of growth in average account values. The year-over-year increase in average account values of 10% can be attributed to market appreciation of $6.3 billion during 2005. Variable annuities had net outflows of $881 for the year ended December 31, 2005 compared to net inflows of $5.5 billion for the year ended December 31, 2004. The net outflows in 2005 were due to increased surrender activity and increased sales competition, particularly as it relates to guaranteed living benefits riders were offered with variable annuity products. Mutual fund fee income increased for the year ended December 31, 2005 due to increased assets under management driven by market appreciation of $2.6 billion and net sales of $1.3 billion. Despite the increase in assets under management, the amount of net sales has declined for the year ended December 31, 2005 compared to the prior year. This decrease is attributed to market competition and higher redemption amounts due to a higher lapse rate. The fixed annuity business contributed $66 of higher investment spread income in 2005 compared to 2004, excluding the cumulative effects of accounting change, due to improved investment spreads from the MVA products. 49 Table of Contents Benefits and claims and claim adjustment expenses have decreased for the year ended December 31, 2005 due to an increase in reserves in the third quarter of 2004 related to the acquisition of a block of acquired business from London Pacific Life and Annuity Company in liquidation. The increase in reserves of $62 was offset by an equivalent increase in earned premium. Also contributing to the decrease in benefits expense is a decrease in interest credited as older fixed annuity MVA business with higher credited rates matures and either lapse or renews at lower credited rates. The effective tax rate decreased for the year ended December 31, 2005 compared to the prior year end due to an increase in the DRD benefit as a percentage of pre-tax income. Partially offsetting these positive earnings drivers were the following items: Throughout Retail, insurance operating costs and other expenses increased for the year ended December 31, 2005 compared to the prior year. General insurance expenses increased due to increased costs related to technology services as well as sales and marketing. In addition, the Company recorded an after-tax expense of $46, for the termination of a provision of an agreement with a mutual fund distribution partner. There was higher amortization of DAC, which resulted from higher gross profits due to the positive earnings drivers as discussed above. 2004 Compared to 2003 Net income increased for the year ended December 31, 2004, principally driven by higher fee income from double digit growth in the assets under management in virtually all businesses of the segment and strong expense management: Fee income generated by the variable annuity operation increased, as average account values were higher in 2004 as compared to the prior year. The increase in average account values can be attributed to market appreciation of $7.6 billion and net flows of $5.5 billion during 2004. Retail mutual fund fee income increased as a result of an increase in assets under management of 24% year over year principally due to net sales and market appreciation of $2.5 billion each during 2004. Partially offsetting the positive earnings drivers were the following items: There was higher amortization of DAC, due to higher gross profits and increased subsequent deposit activity, primarily in individual annuity. Lower income from the fixed annuity business, due to lower investment spread from the market value adjusted ( MVA ) product caused by the cumulative effect of accounting change from the Company adoption of SOP 03-1. With the adoption of SOP 03-1, the Company includes the investment return from the fixed annuity product in net investment income and includes interest credited to contract holders in the benefits, claims and claim adjustment expenses. In prior years, the market value spread was reported as guaranteed separate account income in fee income and other. The effective tax rate increased for the year ended December 31, 2004 due to the absence of a prior year tax benefit recorded in 2003. Outlook Management believes the market for retirement products continues to expand as individuals increasingly save and plan for retirement. Demographic trends suggest that as the baby boom generation matures, a significant portion of the United States population will allocate a greater percentage of their disposable incomes to saving for their retirement years due to uncertainty surrounding the Social Security system and increases in average life expectancy. Competition has increased substantially in the variable annuities market with most major variable annuity writers now offering living benefits such as GMWB riders. The Company strategy in 2006 revolves around introducing new products and continually evaluating the portfolio of products currently offered. As a result, sales may be lower than the level of sales attained in 2005 when considering the competitive environment, the risk of disruption on new sales from product offering changes, customer acceptance of new products and the effect on the distribution related to product offering changes. Individual annuity sales of $11.5 billion in 2005 decreased 27% compared to prior year levels of $15.7 billion. Significantly contributing to the Company variable annuity sales during 2005 and 2004 was Principal First, a GMWB rider. In an effort to meet diverse customer needs, in the fourth quarter of 2005, Life introduced a new living withdrawal benefit, which guarantees a steady income stream for the life of the policyholder. The success of this and any new product will ultimately be based on customer acceptance. With the increased competition in the variable annuity market causing lower sales levels from the level in 2004, combined with surrender activity on the aging block of business, net outflows are currently forecasted to be above levels experienced in 2005. This will be largely dependent on the Company ability to attract new customers and to retain contract holder account values in existing or new product offerings as they reach the end of the surrender charge period of their contract. The growth and profitability of the individual annuity and mutual fund businesses is dependent to a large degree on the performance of the equity markets. In periods of favorable equity market performance, Life may experience stronger sales and higher net flows, which will increase assets under management and thus increase fee income earned on those assets. In addition, higher equity market levels will generally reduce certain costs to Life of individual annuities, such as guaranteed minimum death benefit ( GMDB ) and GMWB benefits. Conversely, weak equity markets may dampen sales activity and increase surrender activity causing declines in assets under management and lower fee income. Such declines in the equity markets will also increase the cost to Life of GMDB and GMWB benefits associated with individual annuities. Life attempts to mitigate some of the volatility associated with the GMDB and GMWB benefits using reinsurance or other risk management strategies, such as hedging. Future net income for Life will be affected by the 50 Table of Contents effectiveness of the risk management strategies Life has implemented to mitigate the net income volatility associated with the GMDB and GMWB benefits of variable annuity contracts. For spread-based products sold in the Retail segment, the future growth will depend on the ability to earn targeted returns on new business given competition, retention of account values in the fixed annuity business when the contract holder rate guarantee expires and the future interest rate environment. RETIREMENT PLANS 2005 2004 2003 Operating Summary Fee income and other $ 152 $ 121 $ 83 Earned premiums 10 10 15 Net investment income 311 306 281 Net realized capital gains (losses) (3 ) (3 ) 1 Total revenues 470 434 380 Benefits, claims and claim adjustment expenses 231 220 226 Insurance operating costs and other expenses 115 96 79 Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs 26 29 17 Total benefits, claims and expenses 372 345 322 Income before income taxes and cumulative effect of account change 98 89 58 Income tax expense 23 22 16 Income before cumulative effect of accounting change 75 67 42 Cumulative effect of accounting change, net of tax [1] (1 ) Net income $ 75 $ 66 $ 42 2005 2004 2003 Assets Under Management Governmental account values $ 10,475 $ 9,962 $ 8,965 401(k) account values 8,842 6,531 4,606 Total account values 19,317 16,493 13,571 Government mutual fund assets under management 163 756 770 401(k) mutual fund assets under management 947 755 585 Total mutual fund assets under management 1,110 1,511 1,355 Total assets under management $ 20,427 $ 18,004 $ 14,926 [1] Represents the cumulative impact of the Company adoption of SOP 03-1. Retirement Plans primarily offers customized wealth creation and financial protection for corporate and government employers through its two business units, Government and 401(k). 2005 Compared to 2004 Net income in Retirement Plans increased for the year ended December 31, 2005 compared to the prior year primarily due to higher earnings in the 401(k) business. Net income for the Government business was relatively stable as positive market appreciation was largely offset by negative net flows, resulting in modest growth in assets under management: 401(k) fee income increased 39% or $30 for the year ended December 31, 2005 compared to the prior year. This increase is a result of positive net flows from the 401(k) business of $1.8 billion over the prior year driven by strong sales and increasing ongoing deposits contributing to the growth in 401(k) assets under management of 34% to $9.8 billion. Total 401(k) deposits and net flows increased substantially by 32% and 26%, respectively, over the prior year primarily due to the full year impact of 2004 expansion of wholesaling capabilities and new product offerings. The DAC amortization rate decreased in 2005 compared to 2004 as a result of higher profits. Partially offsetting these positive earnings drivers were the following items: General account spread decreased for both 401(k) and Governmental businesses for the year ended December 31, 2005 compared to prior year. The decrease is attributable to a decrease in the net investment income earned rate for both businesses. Average general account assets for the Retirement Plans segment increased approximately 7% in 2005 compared to 2004, while net investment income increased 2% compared to the prior year. Benefits and claims expense, which mainly consists of interest credited, increased 5% for the year ended December 31, 2005 compared to prior year, which was driven by a 7% increase in Governmental general account business. An increase in insurance operating costs and other expenses of $19 during 2005 was principally driven by the 401(k) business. The additional costs can be attributed to greater sales and assets under management, resulting in a 20% increase in asset-based commissions to third parties, technology expenditures, and marketing and servicing costs supporting the segment business. However, the increase in 401(k) sales has driven down the overall general insurance expense per case by over 4% compared to the prior year. 2004 Compared to 2003 Net income for the year ended December 31, 2004 increased primarily due to higher fee income related to the 401(k) business compared to the prior year. A more expanded discussion of earnings growth can be found below. 401(k) fee income increased 57% or $28 for year ended December 31, 2004 compared to the prior year. This increase is a result of positive net flows from the 401(k) business of $1.4 billion over the past four quarters driven by strong sales contributing to the 51 Table of Contents increase in 401(k) assets under management of 42% to $6.5 billion. Total deposits and net flows increased substantially by 45% and 42%, respectively, over the prior year primarily due to the expansion of wholesaling capabilities and new product offerings. The Governmental business contributed significantly higher income in 2004. The 11% increase in net investment income in 2004 compared to 2003 as well as $9 of additional fee income was attributed to the growth in the average account values as a result of positive net flows of $230 and market appreciation of $767. The effective tax rate decreased for the year ended December 31, 2004 due to an increase in the DRD benefit as a percentage of pre-tax income. Partially offsetting these positive earnings drivers was the following item: Insurance operating costs and other expenses for 401(k) increased for the year ended December 31, 2004 compared to the prior year mainly driven by greater sales and assets under management, resulting in a 50% increase in commissions over prior year, in addition to growth in investment technology services and sales and marketing costs. Outlook The future profitability of this segment will depend on Life ability to increase assets under management across all businesses and maintain its investment spread earnings on the general account products sold largely in the Government business. 401(k) sales are expected to remain strong throughout 2006 primarily due to the continuing growth in the market for retirement products. As the baby boom generation approaches retirement, management believes these individuals will contribute more of their income to retirement plans due to the uncertainty of the Social Security system and the increase in average life expectancy. Assets under management are also expected to increase in 2006 due to both strong sales and the effects of increasing company wholesaling activities in 2005. Disciplined expense management will continue to be a focus; however, as Life looks to expand its reach in this market, additional investments in service and technology will occur. The Government market is highly competitive from a pricing perspective, and a small number of cases often account for a significant portion of sales, therefore the Company may not be able to sustain the level of sales growth attained in 2005. INSTITUTIONAL 2005 2004 2003 Operating Summary Fee income and other $ 119 $ 161 $ 154 Earned premiums 504 463 783 Net investment income 802 664 581 Net realized capital gains (losses) (5 ) 3 4 Total revenues 1,420 1,291 1,522 Benefits, claims and claim adjustment expenses 1,212 1,116 1,344 Insurance operating costs and expenses 56 55 109 Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs and present value of future profits 32 26 28 Total benefits, claims and expenses 1,300 1,197 1,481 Income before income taxes and cumulative effect of accounting change 120 94 41 Income tax expense 32 26 9 Net income $ 88 $ 68 $ 32 2005 2004 2003 Assets Under Management Institutional account values $ 17,917 $ 14,599 $ 12,660 Private Placement Life Insurance account values [1] 23,836 22,498 20,992 Mutual fund assets under management 1,528 676 438 Total assets under management $ 43,281 $ 37,773 $ 34,090 [1] Includes policyholder balances for investment contracts and reserves for future policy benefits for insurance contracts. Institutional primarily offers customized wealth creation and financial protection for institutions, corporate and high net worth individuals through its two business units: Institutional Investment Products ( IIP ) and PPLI. 2005 Compared to 2004 Net income in Institutional increased for the year ended December 31, 2005 compared to the prior year driven by higher earnings in both the Institutional and PPLI businesses: Total revenues increased in Institutional driven by positive net flows of $2.4 billion during the past four quarters, which resulted in higher assets under management. Net flows for Institutional increased for the year ended December 31, 2005 compared to the prior year, primarily as a result of the Company funding agreement backed Investor Notes program, which was launched in the third quarter of 2004. Investor Note sales for the years ended December 31, 2005 and 2004 were $2.0 billion and $643, respectively. General account spread is one of the main drivers of net income for the Institutional line of business. An increase in spread income in 2005 was driven by higher assets under management noted above, combined with improved partnership income and mortality gains related to terminal funding and structured settlement contracts that include life contingencies. For the year ended December 31, 2005 and 2004, gains related to mortality, investments or other activity were $10 and $3 after-tax, respectively. During 2005, 52 Table of Contents the Company invested in more variable rate assets to back the increasing block of variable rate liabilities sold under the stable value product line. This asset/liability matching strategy has decreased portfolio yields, as variable rate assets have lower initial coupon yields then fixed rate assets. At the same time the stable value variable rate liabilities have lower crediting rates in the current period than stable value fixed rate liabilities, which has allowed the Company to maintain-to-slightly-increase its general account spread on a yield basis. PPLI net income increased $3 or 17% compared to prior year primarily due to asset growth in the variable business combined with favorable mortality experience. Partially offsetting these positive earnings drivers was the following item: PPLI cost of insurance charges has decreased due to reductions in the face amount of certain cases. These face reductions have also resulted in lower death benefits. This impact combined with favorable mortality, which increases the provision for future experience rate credits has led to the year over year decrease in fee income and other. 2004 Compared to 2003 Net income for the year ended December 31, 2004 increased primarily due to PPLI businesses compared to the prior year: The decrease in other expenses was primarily attributed to a PPLI $40 after-tax charge, recorded in the third quarter ended September 30, 2003, associated with the settlement of a certain litigation matter. Partially offsetting these positive earnings drivers were the following items: Lower income from the IIP and PPLI businesses, excluding the aforementioned settlement of a certain litigation matter. The decrease in net income in IIP was due primarily to lower spread income and slightly higher insurance operating costs for the year ended December 31, 2004 as compared to 2003. In addition, IIP reported lower earnings for 2004 compared to the prior year due to favorable mortality experience in 2003. Additionally, income tax expense was higher for 2004 due primarily to decreases in other expenses related to the PPLI business, as discussed above. The effective tax rate increased over the previous year-end because the percentage increase in tax preferred items (DRD, tax-exempt interest) was not as great as the percentage increase in pre-tax income from 2003 to 2004. Earned Premiums decreased for the year ended December 31, 2004 compared to 2003 due to lower sales on limited payment contracts for the Structured Settlement and Terminal Funding products, consistent with a corresponding decrease in Benefits, Claims and Claim Adjustment Expenses. Outlook The future net income of this segment will depend on Life ability to increase assets under management across all businesses and maintain its investment spread earnings on the products sold largely in the IIP business. The IIP markets are highly competitive from a pricing perspective, and a small number of cases often account for a significant portion of sales, therefore the Company may not be able to sustain the level of assets under management growth attained in 2005. In 2004, IIP introduced the Hartford Income Notes, a new funding agreement backed product that provides the Company with opportunity for future growth. This product provides access to both a multi-billion dollar retail market, and a nearly trillion dollar institutional market. These markets are very competitive and the Company success depends in part on the level of credited interest rates and the Company credit rating. As the baby boom generation approaches retirement, management believes these individuals will seek investment and insurance vehicles that will give them steady streams of income throughout retirement. IIP will launch new products in 2006 to provide solutions that deal specifically with longevity risk. Longevity risk is defined as the likelihood of an individual outliving their assets. IIP is also designing innovative solutions to corporation defined benefit liabilities. The focus of the PPLI business is variable PPLI products to fund non-qualified benefits or other post employment benefit liabilities. The market served by PPLI is subject to extensive legal and regulatory review that could have an adverse effect on its business. 53 Table of Contents INDIVIDUAL LIFE 2005 2004 2003 Operating Summary Fee income and other $ 802 $ 767 $ 747 Earned premiums (33 ) (21 ) (20 ) Net investment income 305 303 263 Net realized capital gains (losses) 5 7 (7 ) Total revenues 1,079 1,056 983 Benefits, claims and claim adjustment expenses 469 480 436 Insurance operating costs and other expenses 167 164 161 Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs and present value of future profits 205 185 177 Total benefits, claims and expenses 841 829 774 Income before income taxes and cumulative effect of accounting change 238 227 209 Income tax expense 72 71 64 Income before cumulative effect of accounting change 166 156 145 Cumulative effect of accounting change, net of tax [1] (1 ) Net income $ 166 $ 155 $ 145 2005 2004 2003 Account Values Variable universal life insurance $ 5,902 $ 5,356 $ 4,725 Universal life/interest sensitive whole life 3,696 3,402 3,259 Modified guaranteed life and other 716 729 742 Total account values $ 10,314 $ 9,487 $ 8,726 Life Insurance Inforce Variable universal life insurance $ 71,365 $ 69,089 $ 67,031 Universal life/interest sensitive whole life 41,714 39,109 38,320 Modified guaranteed life and other 37,722 31,691 25,447 Total life insurance inforce $ 150,801 $ 139,889 $ 130,798 [1] Represents the cumulative impact of the Company adoption of SOP 03-1. Individual Life provides life insurance solutions to a wide array of partners to solve the wealth protection, accumulation and transfer needs of their affluent, emerging affluent and business insurance clients. 2005 Compared to 2004 Net income increased $11 or 7% for the year ended December 31, 2005 as compared to the prior year, primarily due to increases in both life insurance inforce and account values. The following factors contributed to the earnings increase: Fee income increased $35 for the year ended December 31, 2005 as compared to the prior year. Cost of insurance charges, a component of total fee income, increased $22 in 2005, driven by business growth and aging of the prior year block of variable universal, universal, and interest-sensitive whole life insurance inforce. Other fee income, another component of total fee income, increased $7 in 2005 primarily due to growth and improved product performance primarily in interest-sensitive whole life and variable universal life insurance products. Variable fee income grew $6 in 2005, as equity market performance and premiums in excess of withdrawals added to the variable universal life account value. Net investment income increased a moderate $2 for the year ended December 31, 2005 as compared to the prior year due to increased general account assets from business growth, partially offset by lower interest rates on new investments and reduced prepayments on bonds in 2005. Benefits, claims and claim adjustment expenses decreased for the year ended December 31, 2005 as compared to the prior year. Income tax expense and the resulting tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2005 was aided by a DRD tax benefit of $7, whereas income tax expense for the year ended December 31, 2004 includes a DRD tax benefit of $5. Partially offsetting these positive earnings drivers were the following factors: Amortization of DAC increased for the year ended December 31, 2005 compared to the prior year primarily as a result of product mix and higher gross margins within variable universal and interest-sensitive whole life insurance products. Insurance operating costs and other expenses increased $3 for the year ended December 31, 2005 compared to the prior year as a result of business growth. 2004 Compared to 2003 Net income increased $10 or 7% for the year ended December 31, 2004 as compared to the prior year, primarily driven by increases in both life insurance inforce and account values, resulting from business growth and improved investment spreads. The following factors contributed to the earnings increase: Fee income increased for the year ended December 31, 2004 as compared to the prior year primarily due to increased cost of insurance charges as life insurance inforce grew and aged and variable universal life account values increased driven by favorable equity markets and new sales. Account values and life insurance inforce grew 9% and 7% from 2003 to 2004, respectively. Net investment income increased for the year ended December 31, 2004 as compared to the prior year primarily due to the adoption of SOP 03-1, growth in general account values and prepayments on bonds. The adoption of SOP 03-1 also resulted in 54 Table of Contents increases in benefits, claims and claim adjustment expenses and a decrease to fee income and other for the year ended December 31, 2004 as compared to the prior year period for the segment Modified Guarantee Life Insurance product, which was formerly classified as a separate account product. Partially offsetting these positive earnings drivers were the following factors: Benefits, claims and claim adjustment expenses increased for the year ended December 31, 2004 as compared to the prior year primarily due to the absence in 2004 of the unusually favorable mortality experienced in 2003, along with continued growth and aging of life insurance inforce. Insurance operating costs and other expenses increased for the year ended December 31, 2004 as compared to the prior year as a result of business growth. Additionally, income tax expense was higher for the year ended December 31, 2004 as compared to the prior year due primarily to earnings growth, as discussed above. Income tax expense includes a DRD tax benefit of $5 related to the 2004 tax year, whereas, income tax expense for 2003 includes a total DRD tax benefit of $6. Outlook Individual Life sales grew to $250 in 2005 from $233 in 2004 and $196 in 2003 with the successful introduction of new universal life and variable universal life products. Variable universal life sales and account values remain sensitive to equity market levels and returns. The Company continues to pursue new and enhanced products, as well as broader and deeper distribution opportunities to increase sales. Individual Life continues to face uncertainty surrounding estate tax legislation, aggressive competition from other life insurance providers, reduced availability and higher price of reinsurance, and the current regulatory environment regarding reserving practices for universal life products with no-lapse guarantees which may negatively affect Individual Life future earnings. GROUP BENEFITS 2005 2004 2003 Operating Summary Earned premiums and other $ 3,810 $ 3,652 $ 2,362 Net investment income 398 373 262 Net realized capital gains 1 2 Total revenues 4,209 4,027 2,624 Benefits, claims and claim adjustment expenses 2,794 2,703 1,862 Insurance operating costs and other expenses 1,022 989 553 Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs 31 23 18 Total benefits, claims and expenses 3,847 3,715 2,433 Income before income taxes 362 312 191 Income tax expense 90 83 43 Net income $ 272 $ 229 $ 148 Earned Premiums and Other Fully insured ongoing premiums $ 3,747 $ 3,611 $ 2,302 Buyout premiums 27 4 40 Other 36 37 20 Total earned premiums and other $ 3,810 $ 3,652 $ 2,362 The Group Benefits segment provides employers, associations, affinity groups and financial institutions with group life, accident and disability coverage, along with other products and services, including voluntary benefits, group retiree health, and medical stop loss. The Company also offers disability underwriting, administration, claims processing services and reinsurance to other insurers and self-funded employer plans. Group Benefits has a block of financial institution business that is experience rated. This business comprised approximately 9% of the segment 2005 and 2004 premiums and other considerations (excluding buyouts) and, on average, 5% of the segment 2005 and 2004 net income. In 2003, this business comprised 2% of both the segment premiums and other considerations (excluding buyouts) and net income. Under the terms of this business, the loss experience will inversely affect the commission expenses incurred. 2005 Compared to 2004 Net income of $272 included a non-recurring tax benefit of $9 related to the CNA Acquisition. Excluding this tax benefit, net income increased 15% to $263 for the year ended December 31, 2005 as compared to $229 for the prior year due primarily to higher earned premiums and net investment income as well as a favorable loss ratio. The following factors contributed to the earnings increase: Earned premiums, excluding buyouts, increased 4% driven by sales growth of 23%, particularly in disability, for the year ended December 31, 2005 and continued strong persistency during 2005. Net investment income increased due to higher average asset balances as well as slightly higher average investment yields. The segment loss ratio (defined as benefits, claims and claim adjustment expenses as a percentage of premiums and other considerations excluding buyouts) was 73.1% for the year ended December 31, 2005, down from 74.0% in the prior year due to improved morbidity experience as well as favorable mortality experience. Excluding financial institutions, the loss ratio was 77.3%, down from 78.7% in the prior year. 55 Table of Contents Partially offsetting the positive earnings drivers noted above was the following item: Operating costs were higher for the year ended December 31, 2005 as compared to the prior year primarily due to higher operating expenses related to business growth. 2004 Compared to 2003 Net income increased for the year ended December 31, 2004 as compared to the prior year due to earned premium growth and net investment income growth as the result of the CNA Acquisition as well as a favorable loss ratio. The following factors contributed to the earnings increase: Earned premiums excluding buyouts, increased 57% for the year ended December 31, 2004 as compared to the prior year driven by premium growth resulting from the CNA Acquisition, sales growth of 25%, and favorable persistency. The segment loss ratio was 74.0% for the year ended December 31, 2004 as compared to 78.5% for the prior year, which contributed favorably to net income. The improvement in loss ratio in 2004 was the result of improved mortality and morbidity experience. Excluding financial institutions, the loss ratio was 78.7%, down from 79.5% in the prior year. Partially offsetting these favorable items were the following factors: Higher commissions due to higher sales and premiums previously discussed. Operating costs increased due to business growth and the CNA Acquisition. The segment ratio of insurance operating costs and other expenses to premiums and other considerations (excluding buyouts) increased to 27.7% for the year ended December 31, 2004, from 24.6% for prior year. The increase in expense ratio was primarily attributed to lower losses, which resulted in increased commissions, on a larger block of experience rated financial institution business. Excluding the financial institution business, the 2004 expense ratio was 23.6% for the year ended December 31, 2004, down from 23.8% for the prior year. Outlook The Company anticipates the increased scale of the group life and disability operations and the expanded distribution network for its products and services will generate strong sales growth in 2006. Sales, however, may be negatively affected by the competitive pricing environment in the marketplace. Management is committed to selling competitively priced products that meet the Company internal rate of return guidelines. Despite the current market conditions, including low interest rates, rising medical costs, the changing regulatory environment and cost containment pressure on employers, the Group Benefits segment continues to leverage its strength in claim practices risk management, service and distribution, enabling the Company to capitalize on market opportunities. Additionally, employees continue to look to the workplace for a broader and ever expanding array of insurance products. As employers design benefit strategies to attract and retain employees, while attempting to control their benefit costs, management believes that the need for the Group Benefits segment products will continue to expand. This, combined with the significant number of employees who currently do not have coverage or adequate levels of coverage, creates unique opportunities for our products and services. INTERNATIONAL 2005 2004 2003 Operating Summary Fee income and other $ 483 $ 240 $ 90 Net investment income 75 11 2 Net realized capital losses (34 ) (1 ) (2 ) Total revenues 524 250 90 Benefits, claims and claim adjustment expenses 42 20 1 Insurance operating costs and other expenses 188 98 42 Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs and present value of future profits 133 77 32 Total benefits, claims and expenses 363 195 75 Income before income taxes and cumulative effect of 161 55 15 accounting change Income tax expense 65 12 2 Income before cumulative effect of accounting change 96 43 13 Cumulative effect of accounting change, net of tax [1] (4 ) Net income $ 96 $ 39 $ 13 2005 2004 2003 Assets Under Management Japan variable annuity assets under management $ 24,641 $ 14,129 $ 6,220 Japan MVA fixed annuity assets under management 1,463 502 Total assets under management $ 26,104 $ 14,631 $ 6,220 [1] Represents the cumulative impact of the Company adoption of SOP 03-1. International, with operations in Japan, Brazil, Ireland and the United Kingdom, focuses on the savings and retirement needs of the growing number of individuals outside the United States who are preparing for retirement, or have already retired, through the sale of variable annuities, fixed annuities and other insurance and savings products. The Company Japan operation, which began selling 56 Table of Contents variable annuities at the end of 2000, has grown significantly to become the largest distributor of variable annuities in Japan and the largest component of International. 2005 Compared to 2004 Net income increased significantly for the year ending December 31, 2005, principally driven by higher fee income and investment spread in Japan, derived from a 78% increase in the assets under management. A more expanded discussion of earnings growth can be found below: The increase in fee income in 2005 was mainly a result of growth in Japan variable annuity assets under management. As of December 31, 2005, Japan variable annuity assets under management were $24.6 billion, a 74% increase from the prior year. The increase in assets under management was driven by positive net flow of $9.8 billion and favorable market appreciation of $3.4 billion, partially offset by a ($2.6) billion impact of foreign currency exchange. Higher fees in 2005 were also the result of increased surrender activity, as customers surrendered policies in order to take advantage of significant appreciation in their account balances. The Japan MVA fixed annuity business contributed $13 of higher investment spread income, including net periodic coupon settlements included in realized losses, in 2005 compared to 2004. This increase in investment spread was driven by higher assets under management. As of December 31, 2005, Japan MVA assets under management increased to $1.5 billion compared to $502 in the prior year. The increase in fixed annuity assets under management can be attributed to sales of $1.2 billion for the year ending December 31, 2005 as compared to $521 for the prior year. Partially offsetting the positive earnings drivers discussed above were the following items: The increase in operating costs in 2005 was primarily due to the significant growth in the Japan operation and the investment in our Ireland operation. DAC amortization was higher in the current year as compared to the prior year due to higher EGP consistent with the growth in the Japan operation. Tax rates increased in 2005 primarily due to a deferred tax valuation allowance established for losses on the United Kingdom operation. 2004 Compared to 2003 Net income improved in 2004 compared to 2003 primarily as a result of an increase in fee income from significant growth in the Japan variable annuity business. A more expanded discussion of earnings growth can be found below: The increase in fee income was primarily attributed to higher variable annuity assets under management in our Japan operations. As of December 31, 2004, Japan variable annuity assets under management were $14.1 billion, a 127% increase from the previous year. At the end of the third quarter of 2004, the MVA fixed annuity product was introduced to provided a diversified product portfolio to customers in Japan. Japan fixed annuity sales and assets under management for the year ending December 31, 2004 were $521 and $502, respectively. Outlook Management is optimistic about growth potential of the retirement savings market in Japan. Several trends such as an aging population, longer life expectancies, declining birth rate leading to a smaller number of younger workers to support each retiree, and under funded pension systems have resulted in greater need for an individual to plan and adequately fund retirement savings. As of September 30, 2005, the Japan variable annuity industry assets surpassed $71 billion since its inception in 1999. As of September 2005, International, with $21.9 billion in assets, had a 31% market share of the industry assets compared to $11.1 billion, a 29% market share as of September 30, 2004. As of December 31, 2005, International had $24.6 billion in variable annuity assets. Total annuity sales were $11.9 billion in 2005, a 53% increase over the previous year. Sales included $1.2 billion in fixed annuity sales. Hartford Japan now has over 360,000 customers. Competition has increased substantially in the Japanese market with most major competitors offering guaranteed benefit riders and, as a result, the Company may not be able to sustain the level of sales attained in 2005. Continued growth depends on increasing the Company penetration in the Japanese market by securing new distribution outlets for our products and accessing more customers within existing distributors. In addition, we will be looking for ways to leverage our variable annuity capability into other investment product opportunities. In an effort to meet diverse customer needs, in November 2005, the Company introduced a new variable annuity offering which adds greater liquidity and asset allocations with a greater equity component. The success of this new product will ultimately be based on customer acceptance. Profitability depends on the account values of our customers which are affected by equity, bond and currency markets. Periods of favorable market performance will increase assets under management and thus increase fee income earned on those assets. In addition, higher account values levels will generally reduce certain costs to the Company of individual annuities, such as guaranteed minimum death benefits ( GMDB ) and GMIB benefits. Expanse management is also an important component of product profitability. 57 Table of Contents OTHER 2005 2004 2003 Operating Summary Fee income and other $ 83 $ 119 $ 143 Net investment income 4,021 1,007 220 Net realized capital gains 2 156 22 Total revenues 4,106 1,282 385 Benefits, claims and claim adjustment expenses 4,166 1,017 228 Insurance operating costs and other expenses 105 56 103 Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs and present value of future profits 1 6 (15 ) Total benefits, claims and expenses 4,272 1,079 316 Income before income taxes and cumulative effect of accounting change (166 ) 203 69 Income tax expense (benefit) (51 ) (117 ) 16 Income (loss) before cumulative effect of accounting change (115 ) 320 53 Cumulative effect of accounting change, net of tax [1] 2 Net income (loss) $ (115 ) $ 322 $ 53 [1] Represents the cumulative impact of the Company adoption of SOP 03-1. Net investment income includes the mark-to-market adjustment for equity securities held for trading which increased primarily due to increased assets and market performance in International. This increase net investment income is offset by an increase in benefit, claims and claim adjustment expenses which reflects the interest credited on the Japan account balance liability. 2005 Compared to 2004 Net income decreased for the year ended December 31, 2005. The following factors contributed to the change in earnings: Net realized capital gains decreased for the year ended December 31, 2005 due to increasing interest rates and the realized loss associated with the GMWB derivatives. Income tax benefit decreased for the year ended December 31, 2005 due to the absence of a $190 tax benefit recorded during 2004. Other than the impact of Japan interest credited, benefits, claims, and claim adjustment expenses increased for the year ended December 31, 2005 primarily due to the establishment of a $102 after-tax reserve for investigations related to market timing by the SEC and the New York Attorney General Office, directed brokerage by the SEC and single premium group annuities by the New York Attorney General Office and the Connecticut Attorney General Office. 2004 Compared to 2003 Net income increased for the year ended December 31, 2004. The following factors contributed to the earnings increase: Net realized capital gains increased for the year ended December 31, 2004 due to net gains on bond sales and lower impairments. Income tax benefit for the year ended December 31, 2004 included a $190 tax benefit. PROPERTY & CASUALTY Executive Overview Property & Casualty is organized into four reportable operating segments: the underwriting segments of Business Insurance, Personal Lines and Specialty Commercial (collectively Ongoing Operations ); and the Other Operations segment. Property & Casualty provides a number of coverages, as well as insurance related services, to businesses throughout the United States, including workers compensation, property, automobile, liability, umbrella, specialty casualty, marine, livestock, bond, professional liability and directors and officers liability coverages. Property & Casualty also provides automobile, homeowners and home-based business coverage to individuals throughout the United States as well as insurance-related services to businesses. Property & Casualty derives its revenues principally from premiums earned for insurance coverages provided to insureds, investment income, and, to a lesser extent, from fees earned for services provided to third parties and net realized capital gains and losses. Premiums charged for insurance coverages are earned principally on a pro rata basis over the terms of the related policies in force. Service fees principally include revenues from third party claims administration services provided by Specialty Risk Services and revenues from member contact center services provided through AARP Health Care Options program. Net income is the measure of profit or loss used in evaluating the performance of Ongoing Operations and the Other Operations segment. Within Ongoing Operations, the underwriting segments of Business Insurance, Personal Lines and Specialty Commercial are evaluated by The Hartford management primarily based upon underwriting results. Underwriting results is a before-tax measure that represents earned premiums less incurred claims, claim adjustment expenses and underwriting expenses. Underwriting results within Ongoing Operations are influenced significantly by earned premium growth and the adequacy of the Company pricing. Underwriting profitability over time is also greatly influenced by the Company underwriting discipline, which seeks to manage exposure to loss through favorable risk selection and diversification, its management of claims, its use of reinsurance and its ability to manage its expense ratio which it accomplishes through economies of scale and its management of acquisition costs and other underwriting expenses. The Hartford believes that underwriting results provides investors with a valuable measure of before-tax profitability derived from underwriting activities, which are managed separately from the Company investing activities. Underwriting results is also 58 Table of Contents presented for Ongoing Operations and Other Operations. A reconciliation of underwriting results to net income for Ongoing Operations and Other Operations is set forth in their respective discussions herein. Pricing adequacy depends on a number of factors, including the ability to obtain regulatory approval for rate changes, proper evaluation of underwriting risks, the ability to project future loss cost frequency and severity based on historical loss experience adjusted for known trends, the Company response to rate actions taken by competitors, and expectations about regulatory and legal developments and expense levels. Property & Casualty seeks to price its insurance policies such that insurance premiums and future net investment income earned on premiums received will cover underwriting expenses and the ultimate cost of paying claims reported on the policies and provide for a profit margin. For many of its insurance products, Property & Casualty is required to obtain approval for its premium rates from state insurance departments. In setting its pricing, Property & Casualty assumes an expected level of losses from natural or man-made catastrophes that will cover the Company exposure to catastrophes over the long-term. In most years, however, Property & Casualty actual losses from catastrophes will be more or less than that assumed in its pricing due to the significant volatility of catastrophe losses. ISO defines a catastrophe loss as an event that causes $25 or more in industry insured property losses and affects a significant number of property and casualty policyholders and insurers. Given the lag in the period from when claims are incurred to when they are reported and paid, final claim settlements may vary from current estimates of incurred losses and loss expenses, particularly when those payments may not occur until well into the future. Reserves for lines of business with a longer lag (or tail ) in reporting are more difficult to estimate. Reserve estimates for longer tail lines are initially set based on loss and loss expense ratio assumptions estimated when the business was priced and are adjusted as the paid and reported claims develop, indicating that the ultimate loss and loss expense ratio will differ from the initial assumptions. Adjustments to previously established loss and loss expense reserves, if any, are reflected in underwriting results in the period in which the adjustment is determined to be necessary. Through its Other Operations segment, Property & Casualty is responsible for managing operations of The Hartford that have discontinued writing new or renewal business as well as managing the claims related to asbestos and environmental exposures. Key Performance Ratios and Measures The Company considers several measures and ratios to be the key performance indicators for the property and casualty underwriting businesses. The following tables and the segment discussions for the years ended December 31, 2005, 2004 and 2003 include various premium measures and underwriting ratios. Management believes that these measures and ratios are useful in understanding the underlying trends in The Hartford property and casualty insurance underwriting business. However, these key performance indicators should only be used in conjunction with, and not in lieu of, underwriting income for the individual Property & Casualty segments and net income for the Property & Casualty business as a whole and may not be comparable to other performance measures used by the Company competitors. The Company aims to achieve both growth and profitability in the Business Insurance and Personal Lines businesses and, therefore, key performance indicators for these two segments include both growth and profitability measures. Specialty Commercial, however, is comprised of transactional businesses where premium writings may fluctuate based on perceived market opportunity. As such, the key performance indicators do not include a growth objective for Specialty Commercial. The number of policies in force is a growth measure used for Personal Lines only. 2005 2004 2003 Growth Ratios and Measures Polices in Force as of year-end Personal Lines Automobile 2,222,688 2,166,922 2,058,825 Personal Lines Homeowners 1,384,364 1,348,573 1,319,629 Written Pricing Increase (Decrease) Business Insurance (2 %) 2 % 9 % Personal Lines Automobile 3 % 10 % Personal Lines Homeowners 6 % 9 % 14 % Premium Renewal Retention Business Insurance 84 % 85 % 87 % Personal Lines Automobile 87 % 89 % 91 % Personal Lines Homeowners 94 % 100 % 101 % New Business % to Net Written Premium Business Insurance 24 % 25 % 26 % Personal Lines Automobile 15 % 18 % 15 % Personal Lines Homeowners 14 % 13 % 10 % Policies in force as of year end : Policies in force represent the number of policies with coverage in effect as of the end of the period. In both automobile and homeowners, the policy in force count in 2005 has increased as a result of the new Dimensions class plan rolled out in 2004 and 2005. The increase is also attributable to continued growth in AARP business, reflecting an increase in the penetration of the AARP 59 Table of Contents target market and direct marketing programs to increase premium writings. The policy in force count is primarily a reflection of new business growth. Written pricing increase (decrease): Written pricing increase (decrease) over the comparable period of the prior year includes the impact of rate filings, the impact of changes in the value of the rating bases and individual risk pricing decisions. A number of factors impact written pricing increases (decreases) including expected loss costs as projected by the Company pricing actuaries, rate filings approved by state regulators, risk selection decisions made by the Company underwriters and marketplace competition. Written pricing changes reflect the property and casualty insurance market cycle. Prices tend to increase for a particular line of business when insurance carriers have incurred significant losses in that line of business in the recent past or the industry as a whole commits less of its capital to writing exposures in that line of business. Prices tend to decrease when recent loss experience has been favorable or when competition among insurance carriers increases. In 2005, written pricing in Personal Lines homeowners and small commercial continued to increase, but at a slower rate than in 2004. Written pricing for middle market continued to decrease in 2005 and written pricing for Personal Lines auto was flat. As one of the factors used to determine pricing, the Company practice is to first make an overall assumption about claim frequency and severity for a given line of business and then, as part of the ratemaking process, adjust the assumption as appropriate for the particular state, product or coverage. Claim frequency represents the percentage change in the average number of reported claims per unit of exposure in the current accident year compared to that of the previous accident year. Claim severity represents the percentage change in the estimated average cost per claim in the current accident year compared to that of the previous accident year. Premium renewal retention: Premium renewal retention represents the ratio of net written premium in the current period that is not derived from new business divided by total net written premium of the prior period. Accordingly, premium renewal retention includes the effect of written pricing changes on renewed business. In addition, the renewal retention rate is affected by a number of other factors, including the percentage of renewal policy quotes accepted and decisions by the Company to non-renew policies because of specific policy underwriting concerns or because of a decision to reduce premium writings in certain lines of business or states. Premium renewal retention has decreased from 2004 to 2005 due to the effect of written pricing decreases in Business Insurance and lower written pricing increases in Personal Lines. Before the effect of written pricing changes, premium renewal retention in 2005 increased in Personal Lines auto and Business Insurance and decreased in Personal Lines homeowners. While Personal Lines premium retention continues to be strong, increased advertising and modest rate reductions by competitors contributed to the decrease in retention. Before the impacts of written pricing changes,premium renewal retention in Business Insurance increased for both small commercial and middle market accounts. New business premium as a percentage of written premium: From 2004 to 2005, new business as a percentage of written premium has remained relatively flat for Business Insurance and Personal Lines homeowners and has decreased for Personal Lines auto. The decrease in Personal Lines auto new business premium as a percentage of written premium has been driven by companies in the industry, including The Hartford, concentrating on securing renewals and reducing rate shopping by customers. 2005 2004 2003 Profitability Ratios and Measures Ongoing Operations ratios and measures: Earned Pricing Increase Business Insurance 5 % 12 % Personal Lines Automobile 1 % 5 % 9 % Personal Lines Homeowners 7 % 11 % 14 % Loss and loss adjustment expense ratio Current year 66.1 69.2 68.8 Prior years [1] 0.4 0.1 0.5 Total loss and loss adjustment expense ratio 66.5 69.3 69.2 Expense ratio 26.5 25.9 26.8 Policyholder dividend ratio 0.1 0.1 0.4 Combined ratio 93.2 95.3 96.5 Catastrophe ratio [1] 3.6 2.2 3.1 Combined ratio before catastrophes and prior year development 89.4 89.7 92.8 Other Operations net income (loss) $ 71 ($45 ) ($1,528 ) [1] Included in both the prior year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio and the catastrophe ratio is prior accident year development on catastrophe losses, including, in 2004, the net reserve release of (3.1) points related to September 11. Earned pricing increase (decrease): Because the Company earns premiums over the 6 to 12 month term of the policies, earned pricing increases (decreases) lag written pricing increases (decreases) by 6 to 12 months. Written premiums are earned over the policy term, which is six months for certain Personal Lines auto business and 12 months for substantially all of the remainder of the Company business. In 2005, earned 60 Table of Contents pricing increases have moderated in Personal Lines as written pricing increases over the prior 6 to 12 months have declined. Earned pricing in Business Insurance was flat in 2005 as written pricing turned slightly negative during 2005 after having been favorable in 2004. Loss and loss adjustment expense ratio: The current year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio is a measure of the cost of claims incurred in the current accident year divided by earned premiums. The prior year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio represents the increase (decrease) in the estimated cost of settling claims incurred in prior accident years as recorded in the current calendar year divided by earned premiums. Among other factors, the loss and loss adjustment expense ratio needed for the Company to achieve its targeted return on equity fluctuates from year to year based on changes in the expected investment yield over the claim settlement period, the timing of expected claim settlements and the targeted returns set by management based on the competitive environment. The current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio decreased by 3.1 points from 2004 to 2005 due largely to a 2.0 point decrease in current accident year catastrophe losses. Also contributing to the improvement in the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio is improved current accident year performance for auto bodily injury and workers compensation claims, partially offset by the effect of an increase in non-catastrophe loss costs for property coverages. In the latter half of 2005, claim frequency for property coverages became less favorable than it had been in 2003, 2004 and the first half of 2005. As a result, beginning in the latter half of 2005, increases in claim severity outpaced favorable claim frequency. Management expects the trend of increasing loss costs to continue in 2006, resulting in a higher current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio, given that earned pricing is expected to decrease slightly in Business Insurance and become less positive in Personal Lines. Claim severity is expected to increase as a result of inflation in claim settlement costs, driven principally by medical cost inflation, property value increases and other indemnity cost increases. Reserve estimates, including reserves for catastrophe claims, are inherently uncertain. While the Company believes its recorded reserves are established at a level to meet the ultimate cost of unpaid claims, reserve estimates may change in the future based on information or trends that are not currently known. See Reserves below for a detailed discussion of prior accident year loss development and Critical Accounting Estimates for a discussion of current trends contributing to reserve uncertainty and the impact of changes in key assumptions on reserve volatility. Expense ratio: The expense ratio is the ratio of underwriting expenses, excluding bad debt expense, to earned premiums. Underwriting expenses include the amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs and insurance operating costs and expenses. Deferred policy acquisition costs include commissions, taxes, licenses and fees and other underwriting expenses and are amortized over the policy term. While changes in the expense ratio vary by segment, the overall expense ratio for Ongoing Operations segments has increased from 2004 to 2005, primarily due to $64 of hurricane related assessments incurred in 2005 related to the 2004 and 2005 hurricanes. Policyholder dividend ratio: The policyholder dividend ratio is the ratio of policyholder dividends to earned premium. Combined ratio: The combined ratio is the sum of the loss and loss adjustment expense ratio, the expense ratio and the policyholder dividend ratio. This ratio is a relative measurement that describes the related cost of losses and expense for every $100 of earned premiums. A combined ratio below 100.0 demonstrates underwriting profit; a combined ratio above 100.0 demonstrates underwriting losses. The combined ratio has decreased from 2004 to 2005, primarily because of a 2.0 point reduction in current accident year catastrophe losses. Catastrophe ratio: The catastrophe ratio (a component of the loss and loss adjustment expense ratio) represents the ratio of catastrophe losses (net of reinsurance) to earned premiums. A catastrophe is an event that causes $25 or more in industry insured property losses and affects a significant number of property and casualty policyholders and insurers. By their nature, catastrophe losses vary dramatically from year to year. Based on the mix and geographic dispersion of premium written and estimates derived from various catastrophe loss models, the Company expected catastrophe ratio over the long-term is 3.0 points. Reinstatement premium represents additional ceded premium paid for the reinstatement of the amount of reinsurance coverage that was reduced as a result of a reinsurance loss payment. See Risk Management Strategy below for a discussion of the Company property catastrophe risk management program that serves to mitigate the Company net exposure to catastrophe losses. The catastrophe ratio includes the effect of catastrophe losses, but does not include the effect of reinstatement premiums. Current accident year catastrophe loss and loss adjustment expenses and reinstatement premiums were as follows in each period: 2005 2004 2003 Current accident year catastrophe loss and loss adjustment expenses $ 351 $ 523 $ 272 Third and fourth quarter property catastrophe treaty reinstatement premium $ 73 $ 17 $ Current accident year catastrophe loss and loss adjustment expenses in 2005 included $264 for Hurricanes Katrina, Rita and Wilma. 61 Table of Contents Current accident year catastrophe loss and loss adjustment expenses in 2004 included $394 for Hurricanes Charley, Frances, Ivan and Jeanne. Combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development : The combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development represents the combined ratio for the current accident year, excluding the impact of catastrophes. The Company believes this ratio is an important measure of the trend in profitability since it removes the impact of volatile and unpredictable catastrophe losses and prior accident year reserve development. Before considering catastrophes, the combined ratio related to current accident year business has improved from 2004 to 2005 principally due to improved current accident year performance for auto bodily injury and workers compensation claims, partially offset by the effect of an increase in non-catastrophe loss costs for property coverages and an increase in the expense ratio, which was largely due to the hurricane-related assessments of $64 in 2005. Other Operations net income (loss): The Other Operations segment is responsible for managing operations of The Hartford that have discontinued writing new or renewal business as well as managing the claims related to asbestos and environmental exposures. As such, neither earned premiums nor underwriting ratios are meaningful financial measures. Instead, management believes that net income (loss) is a more meaningful measure. Whether Other Operations reports net income or a net loss is largely a function of the amount of prior accident year development and the amount of investment income earned on assets held to meet claim liabilities. In 2005, Other Operations reported net income of $71 as net investment income earned exceeded unfavorable prior accident year loss development. In 2003 and 2004, the segment reported net losses as unfavorable prior accident year loss development exceeded net investment income. Unfavorable prior accident year development decreased from $409 in 2004 to $212 in 2005. The net loss in 2003 includes net asbestos reserve strengthening of $1.7 billion after-tax. Reserve estimates within Other Operations, including estimates for asbestos and environmental claims, are inherently uncertain. Refer to the Other Operations segment MD&A for further discussion of Other Operations prior accident year development and operating results. Total Property & Casualty Investment Earnings 2005 2004 2003 Investment yield, after-tax 4.1 % 4.1 % 4.2 % Net realized capital gains, after-tax $ 29 $ 87 $ 165 The investment return, or yield, on Property & Casualty invested assets is an important element of the Company earnings since insurance products are priced with the assumption that premiums received can be invested for a period of time before loss and loss adjustment expenses are paid. For longer tail lines, such as workers compensation and general liability, claims are paid over several years and, therefore, the premiums received for these lines of business can generate significant investment income. Due to the emphasis on preservation of capital and the need to maintain sufficient liquidity to satisfy claim obligations, the vast majority of Property & Casualty invested assets have been held in fixed maturities, including, among other asset classes, corporate bonds, municipal bonds, government debt, short-term debt, mortgage-backed securities and asset-backed securities. Based upon the fair value of Property & Casualty investments as of December 31, 2005 and 2004, approximately 94% and 96%, respectively, of invested assets were held in fixed maturities. When fixed maturity or equity investments are sold, any gain or loss is reported in net realized capital gains (losses). Individual securities may be sold for a variety of reasons, including a decision to change the Company asset allocation in response to market conditions and the need to liquidate funds to meet large claim settlements Accordingly, net realized capital gains (losses) for any particular period are not predictable and can vary significantly. Refer to the Investment section of MD&A for further discussion of net investment income and net realized capital gains (losses). Allocation of Invested Assets and Investment Income to Ongoing Operations and Other Operations Property & Casualty insurance business has been written by a number of writing companies that, under a pooling arrangement, participate in the Hartford Fire Insurance Pool, the lead company of which is the Hartford Fire Insurance Company ( Hartford Fire ). Property & Casualty maintains one portfolio of invested assets for all business written by the Hartford Fire Insurance Pool companies, including business reported in both the Ongoing Operations and Other Operations segments. Separate investment portfolios are maintained within Other Operations for the runoff of international assumed reinsurance claims and for the runoff business of Heritage Holdings, Inc., including its subsidiaries, Excess Insurance Company Ltd., First State Insurance Company and Heritage Reinsurance Company, Ltd. Within the Hartford Fire Insurance Pool, invested assets are attributed to Ongoing Operations and Other Operations pursuant to the Company capital attribution process. The Hartford attributes capital to each line of business or segment using an internally-developed, risk-based capital attribution methodology that incorporates management assessment of the relative risks within each line of business or segment, as well as the capital requirements of external parties, such as regulators and rating agencies. Net investment income earned on the Hartford Fire invested asset portfolio is allocated between Ongoing Operations and Other Operations based on the allocation of invested assets to each segment and the expected investment yields earned by each segment. Net investment income earned on the separate portfolios within Other Operations is recorded entirely within Other Operations. Based on 62 Table of Contents the Company method of allocating net investment income for the Hartford Fire Insurance Pool and the net investment income earned by Other Operations on its separate investment portfolios, in 2005, the before-tax investment yield for Ongoing Operations was 5.5% and the before-tax investment yield for Other Operations was 5.7%. TOTAL PROPERTY & CASUALTY Unless otherwise specified, the following discusses changes for the year ended December 31, 2005 compared to the year ended December 31, 2004 and the year ended December 31, 2004 compared to the year ended December 31, 2003. 2005 2004 2003 Operating Summary Earned premiums [1] $ 10,156 $ 9,494 $ 8,805 Net investment income 1,365 1,248 1,172 Other revenues [2] 463 436 428 Net realized capital gains 44 133 253 Total revenues 12,028 11,311 10,658 Benefits, claims and claim adjustment expenses [3],[4] Current year 6,715 6,590 6,102 Prior year [5] 248 414 2,824 Total benefits, claims and claim adjustment expenses 6,963 7,004 8,926 Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs 1,997 1,850 1,642 Insurance operating costs and expenses 731 643 779 Other expenses [6] 617 629 634 Total benefits, claims and expenses 10,308 10,126 11,981 Income (loss) before income taxes 1,720 1,185 (1,323 ) Income tax expense (benefit) [7] 484 275 (578 ) Net income (loss) [8] $ 1,236 $ 910 $ (745 ) 2005 2004 2003 Net Income (loss) Ongoing Operations $ 1,165 $ 955 $ 783 Other Operations 71 (45 ) (1,528 ) Total Property & Casualty net income (loss) $ 1,236 $ 910 $ (745 ) [1] Includes reinstatement premiums related to hurricanes of $73 recorded in the third and fourth quarter of 2005 and reinstatement premiums related to hurricanes of $17 recorded in the third quarter of 2004. [2] Primarily servicing revenue. [3] Includes the impact of 2003 asbestos reserve addition of $2,604. [4] Includes 2005 catastrophes of $365 and 2004 catastrophes of $507, before the net reserve release of $395 related to September 11. [5] Net prior year incurred losses in 2005 includes an increase in reserves for assumed reinsurance of $85 and net reserve strengthening for workers compensation reserves of $45, partially offset by a net reserve release of $95, predominantly related to allocated loss adjustment expenses on auto liability claims. [6] Includes severance charges of $41 for 2003. [7] Includes a $26 tax benefit related to tax years prior to 2004. [8] Includes net realized capital gains (losses), after tax, of $ 29, $87, and $165 for the years ended December 31, 2005, 2004 and 2003, respectively. 2005 Compared to 2004 - Net income increased $326, or 36%, as a result of a $535, or 45%, increase in income before income taxes. The increase in income before income taxes was driven primarily by the following: A $172 reduction in current accident year catastrophe losses. Current accident year catastrophe losses of $351 in 2005 included losses from hurricanes Katrina, Rita and Wilma. Current accident year catastrophe losses of $523 in 2004 included losses from hurricanes Charley, Frances, Ivan and Jeanne. A $166 reduction in net unfavorable prior accident year development. A $90 reduction in earned premium on retrospectively-rated policies recorded within Specialty Commercial in 2004. An increase in underwriting profit derived from a $572 increase in earned premium, before considering the $90 retrospective earned premium adjustment in 2004. The earned premium growth was generated in Business Insurance and Personal Lines. A $117 increase in net investment income, primarily as a result of a larger investment base due to increased cash flows from underwriting, higher investment yields on fixed maturity investments and an increase in income from limited partnership investments, An improvement in current accident year non-catastrophe loss and loss adjustment expenses for auto liability and workers compensation claims. Partially offsetting these improvements were the following: An $89 decrease in net realized capital gains due to lower net realized gains on the sale of fixed maturity investments and net losses on non-qualifying derivatives during 2005 compared to net gains during 2004. An $88 increase in insurance operating costs, principally related to hurricane-related assessments. Hurricane-related assessments in 2005 were $64, primarily for assessments payable to the Florida Citizens Property Insurance Corporation (Citizens) as a result of losses incurred by Citizens from the 2004 and 2005 Florida hurricanes. An increase in property non-catastrophe current accident year loss and loss adjustment expenses as a percentage of earned premium. 63 Table of Contents 2004 Compared to 2003 - Net income increased $1.7 billion, from a net loss of ($745) in 2003, as a result of a $2,508 increase in income before income taxes. The increase in income before income taxes was driven primarily by the following: A $2.6 billion increase in asbestos and environmental reserves recorded in 2003, An increase in underwriting profit derived from a $779 increase in earned premium, before considering the $90 reduction in earned premium on retrospectively-rated policies in 2004. The $779 increase in earned premium reflected growth in Business Insurance, Personal Lines and Specialty Commercial, partially offset by a $346 decline in Other Operations earned premium as a result of exiting the assumed reinsurance business. A $76 increase in net investment income, primarily driven by an increase in underwriting cash flow, partially offset by a decrease in the investment yield, and An improvement in non-catastrophe current accident year loss and loss adjustment expenses as a percentage of earned premium in all segments of Ongoing Operations. The improvement was principally driven by strong earned pricing and favorable property claim frequency in 2004. Partially offsetting these improvements were the following: A $246 increase in current accident year catastrophe losses. Current accident year catastrophe losses of $523 in 2004 included losses from Hurricanes Charley, Frances, Ivan and Jeanne. A $194 increase in net unfavorable prior accident year development, before considering the $2.6 billion of net asbestos and environmental reserve strengthening in 2003. Refer to the Ongoing Operations and Other Operations sections herein. A $120 decrease in net realized capital gains due to lower net realized gains on the sale of fixed maturity investments. A $90 reduction in earned premium on retrospectively-rated policies recorded within Specialty Commercial in 2004. Reserves Reserving for property and casualty losses is an estimation process. As additional experience and other relevant claim data become available, reserve levels are adjusted accordingly. Such adjustments of reserves related to claims incurred in prior years are a natural occurrence in the loss reserving process and are referred to as reserve development. Reserve development that increases previous estimates of ultimate loss costs is called reserve strengthening. Reserve development that decreases previous estimates of ultimate loss costs is called reserve releases. Reserve development can influence the comparability of year over year underwriting results and is set forth in the paragraphs and tables that follow. The prior accident year development in the following table represents the ratio of reserve development to earned premiums. For a detailed discussion of the Company reserve policies, see Notes 1, 11 and 12 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements and the discussion in Critical Accounting Estimates. A rollforward of liabilities for unpaid claims and claim adjustment expenses by segment for Property & Casualty follows: For the year ended December 31, 2005 Business Personal Specialty Ongoing Other Total Insurance Lines Commercial Operations Operations P&C Beginning liabilities for unpaid claims and claim adjustment expenses-gross $ 6,057 $ 2,000 $ 5,519 $ 13,576 $ 7,753 $ 21,329 Reinsurance and other recoverables 474 190 2,091 2,755 2,383 5,138 Beginning liabilities for unpaid claims and claim adjustment expenses-net 5,583 1,810 3,428 10,821 5,370 16,191 Provision for unpaid claims and claim adjustment expenses Current year 2,949 2,389 1,377 6,715 6,715 Prior years 22 (95 ) 109 36 212 248 Total provision for unpaid claims and claim adjustment expenses 2,971 2,294 1,486 6,751 212 6,963 Less: Payments [1] (2,197 ) (2,337 ) (1,066 ) (5,600 ) (691 ) (6,291 ) Ending liabilities for unpaid claims and claim adjustment expenses-net 6,357 1,767 3,848 11,972 4,891 16,863 Reinsurance and other recoverables 709 385 2,354 3,448 1,955 5,403 Ending liabilities for unpaid claims and claim adjustment expenses-gross $ 7,066 $ 2,152 $ 6,202 $ 15,420 $ 6,846 $ 22,266 Earned premiums $ 4,785 $ 3,610 $ 1,757 $ 10,152 $ 4 $ 10,156 Loss and loss expense paid ratio [1] 45.9 64.8 60.6 55.1 Loss and loss expense incurred ratio 62.1 63.6 84.6 66.5 Prior accident year development (pts.) [2] 0.5 (2.6 ) 6.2 0.4 [1] The loss and loss expense paid ratio represents the ratio of paid claims and claim adjustment expenses to earned premiums. [2] Prior accident year development (pts) represents the ratio of prior accident year development to earned premiums 64 Table of Contents Ongoing Operations Current accident year catastrophe loss and loss adjustment expenses In 2005, the current accident year provision for claim and claim adjustment expenses of $6.7 billion included net catastrophe loss and loss adjustment expenses of $351, of which $264 related to Hurricanes Katrina, Rita and Wilma. The following table shows current accident year catastrophe impacts in 2005, including reinstatement premium owed to reinsurers: Year Ended December 31, 2005 Business Personal Specialty Ongoing Other Total Insurance Lines Commercial Operations Operations P&C Gross incurred claim and claim adjustment expenses for current accident year catastrophes $ 337 $ 394 $ 594 $ 1,325 $ $ 1,325 Ceded claim and claim adjustment expenses for current accident year catastrophes 248 296 430 974 974 Net incurred claim and claim adjustment expenses for current accident year catastrophes $ 89 $ 98 $ 164 $ 351 $ $ 351 Reinstatement premium ceded to reinsurers $ 16 $ 31 $ 26 $ 73 $ $ 73 A significant portion of the gross incurred loss and loss adjustment expenses are recoverable from reinsurers under the Company principal catastrophe reinsurance program in addition to other reinsurance programs. Reinsurance recoveries under the Company principal catastrophe reinsurance program, which covers multiple lines of business, are allocated to the segments in accordance with a pre-established methodology that is consistent with the method used to allocate the ceded premium to each segment. In addition to its retention, the Company has a co-participation in the losses ceded under the principal catastrophe reinsurance program, which varies by layer, and is recorded in Specialty Commercial. In the third and fourth quarters of 2005, the Company reinstated the limits under its reinsurance programs that were exhausted by Hurricane Katrina and Wilma, resulting in additional ceded premium of $73, which is reflected as a reduction in earned premium. The Company estimates of net loss and loss expenses arising from Hurricanes Katrina, Rita and Wilma are based on information from reported claims and estimates of reinsurance recoverables on ceded losses. Estimating ultimate net losses for the 2005 hurricanes is challenging. Given the long time lag between Hurricane Katrina landfall and when many residents and business owners were able to return to their properties, the Company expects reported losses to emerge more slowly for Hurricane Katrina than for past hurricanes. Also, the extent of the damage caused by the hurricanes in the Gulf coast region potentially will increase loss costs due to increased demand for building materials and contractors needed to complete repair work. Given the inherent uncertainty in how reported claims will ultimately develop, ultimate loss and loss expenses paid after December 31, 2005 for Hurricanes Katrina, Rita and Wilma could vary significantly from the reserves recorded as of December 31, 2005. The Company estimate of loss and loss adjustment expenses under Hurricanes Katrina, Rita and Wilma is based on covered losses under the terms of the policies. The Company does not provide residential flood insurance on its Personal Lines homeowners policies so the Company estimate of hurricane losses on Personal Lines homeowners business does not include any provision for damages arising from flood waters. The Company acts as an administrator for the Write Your Own flood program on behalf of the National Flood Insurance Program under FEMA, for which it earns a fee for collecting premiums and processing claims. Under the program, the Company services both personal lines and commercial lines flood insurance policies and does not assume any underwriting risk. As a result, catastrophe losses in the above table do not include any losses related to the Write Your Own flood program. Prior accident year development Included within prior accident year development for the year ended December 31, 2005 are the following reserve strengthenings (releases). Year Ended December 31, 2005 Business Personal Specialty Ongoing Other Total Insurance Lines Commercial Operations Operations P&C Strengthening of workers compensation reserves for claim payments expected to emerge after 20 years of development $ 50 $ $ 70 $ 120 $ $ 120 Release of 2003 and 2004 accident year workers compensation reserves (75 ) (75 ) (75 ) Release of reserves for allocated loss adjustment expenses (25 ) (95 ) (120 ) (120 ) Strengthening of reserves for 2004 hurricanes 20 9 4 33 33 Strengthening of general liability reserves in Business Insurance 40 40 40 Strengthening of environmental reserves 37 37 Strengthening of assumed casualty reinsurance reserves 85 85 Other reserve reestimates, net 12 (9 ) 35 38 90 128 Total prior accident year development for the year ended December 31, 2005 $ 22 $ (95 ) $ 109 $ 36 $ 212 $ 248 65 Table of Contents During the year ended December 31, 2005, the Company reestimates of prior accident year reserves included the following significant reserve changes. Ongoing Operations Strengthened workers compensation reserves for claim payments expected to emerge after 20 years of development by $120. For workers compensation claims involving permanent disability, it is particularly difficult to estimate how such claims will develop more than 20 years after the year the claims were incurred. The revision was based on modeling using new techniques and extensive data gathering. The $120 of reserve strengthening represented 3% of the Company net reserves for workers compensation claims as of December 31, 2004. Released reserves for workers compensation losses in Business Insurance on accident years 2003 and 2004 by $75. The latest evaluations of workers compensation claims indicate that underwriting actions of recent years and reform in California have had a greater impact in controlling loss costs than was originally estimated. The $75 reserve release represented 2% of the Company net reserves for workers compensation claims as of December 31, 2004. Released prior accident year reserves for allocated loss adjustment expenses by $120, largely as the result of cost reduction initiatives implemented by the Company to reduce allocated loss adjustment expenses for both legal and non-legal expenses as well as improved actuarial techniques. The improved actuarial techniques included an analysis of claims involving legal expenses separate from claims that do not involve legal expenses. This analysis included a review of the trends in the number of claims involving legal expenses, the average expenses incurred and trends in legal expenses. The release of $95 in Personal Lines represented 5% of Personal Lines net reserves as of December 31, 2004. Strengthened general liability reserves within Business Insurance by $40 for accident years 2000-2003 due to higher than anticipated loss payments beyond four years of development. The $40 reserve release represented 2% of the Company net reserves for general liability claims as of December 31, 2004. Strengthened reserves for loss and loss adjustment expenses related to the third quarter 2004 hurricanes by a total of $33. The main drivers of the increase were late-reported claims for condominium assessments and increases in the costs of building materials and contracting services. Within the Specialty Commercial segment, there were other offsetting positive and negative adjustments to prior accident year reserves. The principal offsetting adjustments were a release of reserves for directors and officers insurance related to accident years 2003 and 2004 and strengthening of prior accident year reserves for contracts that provide auto financing gap coverage and auto lease residual value coverage; the release and offsetting strengthening were each approximately $80. Other Operations Strengthened assumed reinsurance reserves by $85, principally for accident years 1997 through 2001. In recent years, the Company has seen an increase in reported losses above previous expectations and this increase in reported losses contributed to the reserve re-estimates. Assumed reinsurance exposures are inherently less predictable than direct insurance exposures because the Company may not receive notice of a reinsurance claim until the underlying direct insurance claim is mature. The reserve strengthening of $85 represents 6% of the $1.3 billion of net Reinsurance reserves within Other Operations as of December 31, 2004. The all other category of reserves covers a wide range of insurance and assumed reinsurance coverages, including, but not limited to, potential liability for construction defects, lead paint, molestation, silica, pharmaceutical products and other long-tail liabilities. Strengthened environmental reserves by $37 as a result of an environmental reserve evaluation completed during the third quarter of 2005. While the review found no apparent underlying cause or change in the claim environment, loss estimates for individual cases changed based upon the particular circumstances of each account. The $37 of reserve strengthening represented 1% of the Company net reserves for asbestos and environmental claims as of December 31, 2004. 66 Table of Contents For the year ended December 31, 2004 Business Personal Specialty Ongoing Other Total Insurance Lines Commercial Operations Operations [1] P&C Beginning liabilities for unpaid claims and claim adjustment expenses-gross $ 5,296 $ 1,733 $ 5,148 $ 12,177 $ 9,538 $ 21,715 Reinsurance and other recoverables 395 43 2,096 2,534 2,963 5,497 Beginning liabilities for unpaid claims and claim adjustment expenses-net 4,901 1,690 3,052 9,643 6,575 16,218 Provision for unpaid claims and claim adjustment expenses Current year 2,700 2,509 1,345 6,554 36 6,590 Prior years (67 ) 3 69 5 409 414 Total provision for unpaid claims and claim adjustment expenses 2,633 2,512 1,414 6,559 445 7,004 Less: Payments [1] (1,951 ) (2,392 ) (1,038 ) (5,381 ) (1,650 ) (7,031 ) Ending liabilities for unpaid claims and claim adjustment expenses-net 5,583 1,810 3,428 10,821 5,370 16,191 Reinsurance and other recoverables 474 190 2,091 2,755 2,383 5,138 Ending liabilities for unpaid claims and claim adjustment expenses-gross $ 6,057 $ 2,000 $ 5,519 $ 13,576 $ 7,753 $ 21,329 Earned premiums $ 4,299 $ 3,445 $ 1,726 $ 9,470 $ 24 $ 9,494 Loss and loss expense paid ratio [2] 45.4 69.4 59.9 56.8 Loss and loss expense incurred ratio 61.2 72.9 81.9 69.3 Prior accident year development (pts.) [3] (1.6 ) 0.1 4.0 0.1 [1] Other Operations included payments pursuant to the MacArthur settlement. [2] The loss and loss expense paid ratio represents the ratio of paid claims and claim adjustment expenses to earned premiums. [3] Prior accident year development (pts) represents the ratio of prior accident year development to earned premiums Current accident year catastrophe loss and loss adjustment expenses In 2004, the current accident year provision for claim and claim adjustment expenses of $6.6 billion included net catastrophe loss and loss adjustment expenses of $523, of which $394 related to Hurricanes Charley, Frances, Ivan and Jeanne. Gross of reinsurance, current accident year catastrophe losses were $811. The Company estimates of net loss and loss expenses arising from Hurricanes Charley, Frances, Ivan and Jeanne are based on information from reported claims and estimates of reinsurance recoverables on ceded losses. In the third quarter of 2004, the Company reinstated the limits under its reinsurance programs that were exhausted by the 2004 hurricanes, resulting in additional ceded premium of $17, which is reflected as a reduction in earned premium. Prior accident year development Included within prior accident year development for the year ended December 31, 2004 are the following reserve strengthenings (releases). Year Ended December 31, 2004 Business Personal Specialty Ongoing Other Total Insurance Lines Commercial Operations Operations P&C Release of September 11 reserves $ (175 ) $ (7 ) $ (116 ) $ (298 ) $ (97 ) $ (395 ) Strengthening of reserves for construction defects claims 23 167 190 190 Strengthening of reserves for auto liability and package business 63 63 63 Reduction in the reinsurance recoverable asset associated with older, long-term casualty liabilities, including asbestos liabilities 181 181 Strengthening of environmental reserves 75 75 Strengthening of reserves for assumed casualty reinsurance 170 170 Other reserve reestimates, net 22 10 18 50 80 130 Total prior accident year development for the year ended December 31, 2004 $ (67 ) $ 3 $ 69 $ 5 $ 409 $ 414 During the year ended December 31, 2004, the Company re-estimates of prior accident year reserves included the following significant reserve changes. Ongoing Operations Released September 11 net reserves by $298 due to favorable developments in 2004, including the closure of primary insurance property cases, a high participation rate within the Victim Compensation Fund and the expiration of the deadline for filing a liability claim in March 2004. 67 Table of Contents Strengthened reserves for construction defects claims by $190, representing 11% of the Company $1.8 billion of net reserves for general liability claims as of December 31, 2004. The Company construction defects claims, which relate primarily to accident years prior to 2000, have experienced increasing severity, particularly due to losses from contractors in California. Strengthened auto liability reserves by $25 and package business reserves by $38 related to accident years 1998 to 2002 as actual reported losses were above previous expectations. In particular, the Company observed a higher frequency of large claims (generally those greater than $100,000) than had been anticipated in prior estimates. The auto liability reserve strengthening of $25 represented 1% of the Company net reserves for auto liability claims as of December 31, 2004 and the package business reserve strengthening of $38 represented 3% of the Company net reserves for package business as of December 31, 2004. Within the Specialty Commercial segment there were other offsetting positive and negative adjustments. The principal offsetting adjustments related to a strengthening in specialty large deductible workers compensation reserves and a release in other liability reserves, each approximately $150. Other Operations Reduced the reinsurance recoverable asset associated with older, long-term casualty liabilities, including asbestos liabilities, by $181. Strengthened environmental reserves by $75. Strengthened reserves for assumed casualty reinsurance by $170, primarily related to assumed casualty treaty reinsurance for the years 1997 through 2001. The $170 of strengthening represents 13% of the $1.3 billion of net Reinsurance reserves as of December 31, 2004. In recent years, the Company has seen an increase in reported assumed reinsurance claims above previous expectations and this increase in reported claims contributed to the reserve re-estimates. Released September 11 net reserves by $97 due to favorable developments, including a lack of significant additional loss notices on assumed reinsurance property treaties. For the year ended December 31, 2003 Business Personal Specialty Ongoing Other Total Insurance Lines Commercial Operations Operations [1] P&C Beginning liabilities for unpaid claims and claim adjustment expenses-gross $ 4,744 $ 1,692 $ 5,000 $ 11,436 $ 5,655 $ 17,091 Reinsurance and other recoverables 366 49 2,007 2,422 1,528 3,950 Beginning liabilities for unpaid claims and claim adjustment expenses-net 4,378 1,643 2,993 9,014 4,127 13,141 Provision for unpaid claims and claim adjustment expenses Current year 2,346 2,324 1,130 5,800 302 6,102 Prior years (6 ) (6 ) 52 40 2,784 2,824 Total provision for unpaid claims and claim adjustment expenses 2,340 2,318 1,182 5,840 3,086 8,926 Payments (1,761 ) (2,211 ) (1,017 ) (4,989 ) (860 ) (5,849 ) Other [1] (56 ) (60 ) (106 ) (222 ) 222 Ending liabilities for unpaid claims and claim adjustment expenses-net 4,901 1,690 3,052 9,643 6,575 16,218 Reinsurance and other recoverables 395 43 2,096 2,534 2,963 5,497 Ending liabilities for unpaid claims and claim adjustment expenses-gross $ 5,296 $ 1,733 $ 5,148 $ 12,177 $ 9,538 $ 21,715 Earned premiums $ 3,696 $ 3,181 $ 1,558 $ 8,435 $ 370 $ 8,805 Loss and loss expense paid ratio [2] 47.7 69.5 65.4 59.2 Loss and loss expense incurred ratio 63.3 72.9 75.8 69.2 Prior accident year development (pts.) [3] (0.2 ) (0.2 ) 3.3 0.4 [1] Includes transfer of reserves from Ongoing to Other Operations pursuant to the MacArthur settlement. [2] The loss and loss expense paid ratio represents the ratio of paid claims and claim adjustment expenses to earned premiums. [3] Prior accident year development (pts) represents the ratio of prior accident year development to earned premium. Prior accident year development Included within prior accident year development for the year ended December 31, 2003 are the following reserve strengthenings (releases). Year Ended December 31, 2003 Business Personal Specialty Ongoing Other Total Insurance Lines Commercial Operations Operations P&C Strengthened net asbestos reserves $ $ $ $ $ 2,604 $ 2,604 Strengthened reserves for bond and professional liability 45 45 45 Strengthened assumed casualty reinsurance reserves 129 129 Other reserve reestimates, net (6 ) (6 ) 7 (5 ) 51 46 Total prior accident year development for the year ended December 31, 2003 $ (6 ) $ (6 ) $ 52 $ 40 $ 2,784 $ 2,824 68 Table of Contents During the year ended December 31, 2003, the Company re-estimates of prior accident year reserves included the following significant reserve changes. Ongoing Operations Strengthened reserves in Specialty Commercial by $52, primarily as a result of losses in the bond and professional liability lines of business. The bond reserve strengthening was isolated to a few severe contract surety claims related to accident year 2002. The professional liability reserve strengthening involved a provision for anticipated settlements of reinsurance obligations for contracts outstanding at the time of the original acquisition of Reliance Group Holdings auto residual value portfolio in the third quarter of 2000. Other Operations As discussed in the Other Operations segment section, strengthened net asbestos reserves by $2.6 billion. Strengthened assumed reinsurance reserves by $129, primarily related to accident years 1997 through 2000 and principally in the casualty line of HartRe assumed reinsurance. Impact of Re-estimates As explained in connection with the Company discussion of Critical Accounting Estimates, the establishment of Property and Casualty reserves is an estimation process, using a variety of methods, assumptions and data elements. Ultimate losses may vary significantly from the current estimates. Many factors can contribute to these variations and the need to change the previous estimate of required reserve levels. Subsequent changes can generally be thought of as being the result of the emergence of additional facts that were not known or anticipated at the time of the prior reserve estimate and/or changes in interpretations of information and trends. The table below shows the range of annual reserve re-estimates experienced by The Hartford over the past five years. The amount of prior accident year development (as shown in the reserve rollforward) for a given calendar year is expressed as a percent of the beginning calendar year reserves, net of reinsurance. The percentage relationships presented are significantly influenced by the facts and circumstances of each particular year and by the fact that only the last five years are included in the range. Accordingly, these percentages are not intended to be a prediction of the range of possible future variability. See Impact of key assumptions on reserve volatility within Critical Accounting Estimates for further discussion of the potential for variability in recorded loss reserves. Business Personal Specialty Ongoing Other Total Insurance Lines Commercial Operations Operations P&C Range of prior accident year development for the five years ended December 31, 2005 [1] [2] (1.4) 0.5 (5.2) 5.1 0.8 3.2 0.1 -1.4 2.9 67.5 1.2 21.5 [1] Bracketed prior accident year development indicates favorable development. Unbracketed amounts represent unfavorable development. [2] Before the reserve strengthening for asbestos and environmental reserves over the past ten years, reserve re-estimates for total Property and Casualty ranged from (3.0%) to 1.6% . The potential variability of the Company Property and Casualty reserves would normally be expected to vary by segment and the types of loss exposures insured by those segments. Illustrative factors influencing the potential reserve variability for each of the segments are discussed under Critical Accounting Estimates. In general, over the long term, the Company would expect the variability of its Personal Lines reserve estimates to be relatively less than the variability of the reserve estimates for its other property and casualty segments. The Company would expect the degree of variability of the remaining segments reserve estimates, from lower variability to higher variability, to be generally Business Insurance, Specialty Commercial, and Other Operations. The actual relative variability could prove to be different than anticipated. Risk Management Strategy The Hartford property and casualty operations have processes to manage catastrophic risk exposures to natural disasters, such as hurricanes and earthquakes, and other perils, such as terrorism. The Hartford risk management processes include, but are not limited to, disciplined underwriting protocols, exposure controls, sophisticated risk modeling, effective risk transfer, and efficient capital management strategies. In managing exposure, The Hartford risk management processes involve establishing underwriting guidelines for both individual risks, including individual policy limits, and in aggregate, including aggregate exposure limits by geographic zone and peril. The Company establishes exposure limits and actively monitors the risk exposures as a percent of Property & Casualty surplus. For natural catastrophe perils, the Company generally limits its exposure to natural catastrophes from a single 250-year event to less than 30% of Property & Casualty statutory surplus for losses prior to reinsurance and to less than 15% of Property & Casualty statutory surplus for losses net of reinsurance. For terrorism, the Company manages its exposure in major metropolitan areas to single-site conventional terrorism attacks, such that the Company endeavors to limit its exposure, including exposures resulting from the Company Group Life operations, to less than 7% of the combined statutory surplus of the Life and Property and Casualty operations. The Company monitors exposures monthly and employs both internally developed and vendor-licensed loss modeling tools as part of its risk management discipline. In managing risk, The Hartford utilizes reinsurance to transfer exposures to well-established and financially secure reinsurers. Reinsurance is used to manage aggregate exposures as well as specific risks based on accumulated property and casualty liabilities in certain geographic zones. All treaty purchases related to the Company property and casualty operations are administered by a 69 Table of Contents centralized function to support a consistent strategy and ensure that the reinsurance activities are fully integrated into the organization risk management processes. A variety of traditional reinsurance products are used as part of the Company risk management strategy, including excess of loss occurrence-based products that protect aggregate property and workers compensation exposures, and individual risk or quota share products, that protect specific classes or lines of business. There are no significant finite risk contracts in place and the statutory surplus benefit from all such prior year contracts is immaterial. Facultative reinsurance is also used to manage policy-specific risk exposures based on established underwriting guidelines. The Hartford also participates in governmentally administered reinsurance facilities such as the Florida Hurricane Catastrophe Fund ( FHCF ), the Terrorism Risk Insurance Program established under The Terrorism Risk Insurance Act of 2002 and other reinsurance programs relating to particular risks or specific lines of business. Catastrophe Treaty Protection The Company has several catastrophe reinsurance programs, including reinsurance treaties that cover property and workers compensation losses aggregating from single catastrophe events. For property catastrophe losses, the Company has a principal property catastrophe reinsurance program and other treaties that cover losses specific to a line of business. The Hartford principal property catastrophe reinsurance program for the treaty year effective January 1, 2005, provided coverage, on average, for 88% of $695 of losses incurred from a single catastrophe event in excess of a $125 retention. The exact amount and percentage of coverage varies by layer. Among the specific line of business treaties, the Company has two treaties covering losses on business written by the Specialty Commercial unit. For the treaty year effective January 1, 2005, one of the two specialty property treaties covered, on average, 95% of up to $290 of losses incurred from a single catastrophe event in excess of a $10 retention on excess and surplus property business. For the treaty year effective July 1, 2005, the other specialty property treaty covers 95% of up to $175 of losses incurred from a single catastrophe event in excess of a $10 retention on specialty property business written with national accounts. Property catastrophe losses incurred on specialty property business written with national accounts is also reimbursable under the principal catastrophe reinsurance program, subject to the overall program limits and retention. In addition, the Company has reinsurance from FHCF which covered, for the treaty year effective June 1, 2005, 90% of up to $312 of Personal Lines property losses incurred from a single catastrophe event in excess of an $83 retention. The Company has other treaties and facultative reinsurance agreements that cover property catastrophe losses on a per risk basis. Also, for the treaty year effective July 1, 2005, the Company reinsured 95% of up to $280 of workers compensation losses incurred from a single catastrophe event in excess of a $20 retention. For catastrophe treaties that renewed on January 1, 2006, the terms of the treaties are substantially unchanged in 2006, except that the principal property catastrophe program provides coverage, on average, for 88% of up to $675 of property losses incurred from a single catastrophe event in excess of a $175 retention. Also, the Company retention on the specialty property treaty covering excess and surplus lines property business was increased from $10 to $20 and provides coverage on average for 95% of up to $330 of losses incurred on a single catastrophe event. In the aftermath of the 2004 and 2005 hurricane season, third-party catastrophe loss models for hurricane loss events are being updated to incorporate medium-term forecasts of increased hurricane frequency and severity. Given the losses sustained by reinsurers from the 2004 and 2005 hurricanes and the changes being made to the third-party catastrophe loss models for the peril of hurricane, reinsurance pricing has increased with the January 1, 2006 renewals. Like other property and casualty insurance companies, the Company has been reviewing its capacity to write business in catastrophe prone areas and will consider further changes to its reinsurance programs. The principal property catastrophe reinsurance program and other reinsurance programs include a provision to reinstate limits in the event that a catastrophe loss exhausts limits on one or more layers under the treaties. Limits were reinstated under the principal catastrophe reinsurance program and the specialty property treaties after Hurricane Katrina and Hurricane Wilma, resulting in recording estimated reinstatement premium of $60 in the third quarter of 2005 and $13 in the fourth quarter of 2005. In addition to the reinstated limits under the principal catastrophe and other reinsurance programs, the Company purchased additional limits for losses that may arise from future catastrophe events, the premium for which will be recognized over the future coverage period. In addition to the reinsurance protection provided by The Hartford principal catastrophe reinsurance program, in November 2004, the Company purchased two fully collateralized, four-year reinsurance coverages for losses sustained from qualifying hurricane and earthquake loss events. The Company purchased this reinsurance from Foundation Re, a Cayman Islands reinsurance company, which financed the provision of reinsurance through the issuance of $248 in catastrophe bonds to investors under two separate bond tranches. The first coverage provides reinsurance protection above the Company principal reinsurance program and covers losses arising from large hurricane loss events affecting the Gulf and Eastern Coast of the United States. The coverage reinsures 45% of $400 in losses in excess of an index loss trigger equating to approximately $1.3 billion in Hartford losses. The index trigger has an estimated probability of attachment of approximately 1-in-100 years. The second coverage purchased by the Company reinsures 90% of $75 in losses in excess of an index loss trigger equating to approximately $125 in Hartford losses arising from qualifying hurricane and earthquake events. Qualifying hurricane and earthquake events are those which occur in the year following a large hurricane or earthquake event that has an estimated occurrence probability of 1-in-100 years. If industry loss estimates as of December 31, 2005 prove to be correct, neither Hurricane Katrina, Rita or Wilma would trigger a recovery under this program. Accordingly, the Company has not recorded any recoveries from Foundation Re. In February of 2006, the Company purchased $105 of additional four-year reinsurance protection from Foundation Re. This additional purchase provides coverage for 26% of $400 in losses in excess of an index loss trigger of $1.3 billion from Gulf and East Coast 70 Table of Contents hurricanes and from California, Pacific Northwest, and New Madrid earthquake events. Foundation Re financed the provision of this additional reinsurance through the issuance of $105 of catastrophe bonds to investors. For terrorism, private sector catastrophe reinsurance capacity is extremely limited and generally unavailable for terrorism losses caused by attacks with nuclear, biological, chemical or radiological weapons. As such, the Company principal reinsurance protection against large-scale terrorist attacks is the coverage currently provided through the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act of 2002 (TRIA). On December 22, 2005, the President signed the Terrorism Risk Insurance Extension Act of 2005 ( TRIEA ) extending the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act of 2002 ( TRIA ) through the end of 2007. TRIA provides a backstop for insurance-related losses resulting from any act of terrorism certified by the Secretary of the Treasury, in concurrence with the Secretary of State and Attorney General, that results in industry losses in excess of $50 in 2006 and $100 in 2007. Under the program, the federal government would pay 90% of covered losses from a certified act of terrorism in 2006 after an insurer losses exceed 17.5% of the Company eligible direct commercial earned premiums in 2005, up to a combined annual aggregate limit for the federal government and all insurers of $100 billion. In 2007, the federal government would pay 85% of covered losses from a certified act of terrorism after an insurer losses exceed 20% of the Company eligible direct commercial earned premiums in 2006, up to a combined annual aggregate limit for the federal government and all insurers of $100 billion. If an act of terrorism or acts of terrorism result in covered losses exceeding the $100 billion annual limit, insurers with losses exceeding their deductibles will not be responsible for additional losses. Given the possibility that TRIA may not be extended beyond December 31, 2007 and the very limited private terrorism reinsurance capacity available, including reinsurance against losses from terrorism acts using weapons of mass destruction, the Company has been actively managing its exposures to the peril of terrorism, including adopting underwriting actions designed to reduce exposures in specific locations of the country. The Company has worked with various industry groups to develop policy exclusions related to the peril of terrorism, including those associated with nuclear, biological, chemical and radiological attacks. The Company may include such exclusions in policies in the future in those jurisdictions and classes of business where such exclusions are permitted, and take additional underwriting actions as deemed appropriate. To manage the potential credit risk resulting from the use of reinsurance, a Reinsurance Security Committee, representing several disciplines within the Company (i.e. underwriting, legal, accounting, senior management), evaluates the credit standing, financial performance, management and operational quality of each potential reinsurer. Through that process, the committee maintains a list of reinsurers approved for participation on all treaty and facultative reinsurance placements. The Company approval designations reflect the differing credit exposure associated with various classes of business. Participation authorizations are categorized along property, short-tail casualty and long-tail casualty lines. In addition to defining participation eligibility, the Company regularly monitors each active reinsurer credit risk exposure in the aggregate and limits that exposure based upon independent credit rating levels. Reinsurance Recoverables The Company net reinsurance recoverables from various property and casualty reinsurance arrangements amounted to $5.6 billion and $5.2 billion as of December 31, 2005 and December 31, 2004, respectively. Of the total net reinsurance recoverables as of December 31, 2005, 8.9% relates to the Company mandatory participation in various involuntary assigned risk pools, which are backed by the financial strength of the property and casualty insurance industry. Of the remainder, $3.7 billion, or 73.0%, were rated by A.M. Best. Of the total rated by A.M. Best, 94.4% were rated A- (excellent) or better. The remaining $1.4 billion, or 27%, of net recoverables from reinsurers were comprised of the following: 5.7% related to voluntary pools, 3.7% related to captive insurance companies, and 17.6% related to companies not rated by A.M. Best. Where its contracts permit, the Company secures future claim obligations with various forms of collateral including irrevocable letters of credit, secured trusts, funds held accounts and group wide offsets. The allowance for uncollectible reinsurance was $413 and $374 as of December 31, 2005 and December 31, 2004, respectively. As part of its reinsurance recoverable review, the Company analyzes recent developments in commutation activity between reinsurers and cedants, recent trends in arbitration and litigation outcomes in disputes between cedants and reinsurers and the overall credit quality of the Company reinsurers. Due to the inherent uncertainties as to collection and the length of time before such amounts will be due, it is possible that future adjustments to the Company reinsurance recoverables, net of the allowance, could be required, which could have a material adverse effect on the Company consolidated results of operations or cash flows in a particular quarterly or annual period. Annually, the Company completes an evaluation of the reinsurance recoverable asset associated with older, long-term casualty liabilities reported in the Other Operations segment. As a result of this evaluation, the Company reduced its net reinsurance recoverable by $20 in 2005 and $181 in 2004. The after-tax income effect of the $181 reduction in 2004 was $118. The $181 primarily related to a reduction of the amount of liabilities, principally asbestos, that the Company expected to cede to reinsurers and, to a lesser extent, an increase in the allowance for uncollectible reinsurance recoverables. Premium Measures Written premium is a statutory accounting financial measure which represents the amount of premiums charged for policies issued, net of reinsurance, during a fiscal period. Earned premium is a GAAP and statutory measure. Premiums are considered earned and are included in the financial results on a pro rata basis over the policy period. Management believes that written premium is a performance measure that is useful to investors as it reflects current trends in the Company sale of property and casualty insurance products. Statutory accounting principles allow companies to report written premium for workers compensation business in either the period the premiums are billed or the period the policies incept . Prior to the fourth quarter of 2005, premiums for most workers compensation policies were recognized as written in the period the premiums were billed. In the fourth quarter of 2005, the Company changed its statutory accounting practice for workers compensation premium to recognize the premium as written in the period the policies incept, 71 Table of Contents consistent with the statutory accounting practice followed for the rest of the Company business. This change had no effect on earned premium. For all periods presented, written premium for workers compensation business has been adjusted to reflect written premium in the period the policies incept. Reinstatement premium represents additional ceded premium paid for the reinstatement of the amount of reinsurance coverage that was reduced as a result of a reinsurance loss payment. Unless otherwise specified, the following discussion speaks to changes for the year ended December 31, 2005 compared to the year ended December 31, 2004 and the year ended December 31, 2004 compared to the year ended December 31, 2003. ONGOING OPERATIONS Ongoing Operations includes the three underwriting segments of Business Insurance, Personal Lines and Specialty Commercial. Earned Premiums Earned premium growth is an objective for Business Insurance and Personal Lines. Earned premium growth is not a specific objective for Specialty Commercial since Specialty Commercial is comprised of transactional businesses where premium writings may fluctuate based on the segment view of perceived market opportunity. Written premiums are earned over the policy term, which is six months for certain Personal Lines auto business and 12 months for substantially all of the remainder of the Company business. Written pricing, new business growth and premium renewal retention are factors that contribute to growth in written and earned premium. 2005 2004 2003 Written premiums [1] Business Insurance $ 5,001 $ 4,575 $ 3,957 Personal Lines 3,676 3,557 3,272 Specialty Commercial 1,806 1,840 1,691 Total $ 10,483 $ 9,972 $ 8,920 Earned premiums [1] Business Insurance $ 4,785 $ 4,299 $ 3,696 Personal Lines 3,610 3,445 3,181 Specialty Commercial 1,757 1,726 1,558 Total $ 10,152 $ 9,470 $ 8,435 [1] The difference between written premiums and earned premiums is attributable to the change in unearned premium reserve. 2005 compared to 2004 Total Ongoing Operations earned premiums grew $682, or 7%, due primarily to growth in Business Insurance and Personal Lines. Earned premiums are net of third and fourth quarter property catastrophe reinstatement premiums related to hurricanes totaling $73 in 2005 and $17 in 2004. Earned premium growth of $486 in Business Insurance was primarily driven by new business premium growth outpacing non-renewals in the prior 12 months. Earned premium growth of $165 in Personal Lines was primarily driven by new business growth outpacing non-renewals in auto and the effect of earned pricing increases in homeowners. Specialty Commercial earned premiums increased by $31, primarily driven by a $90 reduction in earned premiums under retrospectively-rated policies during 2004 and increases in casualty, bond, professional liability and other premiums, partially offset by a $216 decrease in property earned premiums, primarily due to a decrease of $127 from exiting the multi-peril crop insurance business during 2004. 2004 compared to 2003 Total Ongoing Operations earned premiums grew $1.1 billion, or 13%, due to growth in all three segments. Earned premiums are net of third quarter property catastrophe reinstatement premium of $17 in 2004. Business Insurance and Personal Lines earned premiums increased by $867 due to earned pricing increases and new business premium growth outpacing non-renewals. Specialty Commercial earned premiums increased by $168, primarily due to a $75 increase in earned premiums from a captive insurance program and increases in earned premium for property, bond, professional liability and other, partially offset by a $90 decrease in earned premiums under retrospectively rated-rated policies recorded in 2004. 72 Table of Contents Operating Summary Net income for Ongoing Operations includes underwriting results for each of its segments, income from servicing business, net investment income, other expenses and net realized capital gains (losses), net of related income taxes. 2005 2004 2003 Operating Summary Written premiums $ 10,483 $ 9,972 $ 8,920 Change in unearned premium reserve 331 502 485 Earned premiums 10,152 9,470 8,435 Benefits, claims and claim adjustment expenses Current year 6,715 6,554 5,800 Prior year 36 5 40 Total benefits, claims and claim adjustment expenses 6,751 6,559 5,840 Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs 2,000 1,845 1,553 Insurance operating costs and expenses 710 621 744 Underwriting results 691 445 298 Net servicing income [1] 49 42 8 Net investment income 1,082 903 836 Net realized capital gains 19 98 151 Other expenses (202 ) (198 ) (260 ) Income tax expense (474 ) (335 ) (250 ) Net income $ 1,165 $ 955 $ 783 Loss and loss adjustment expense ratio Current year 66.1 69.2 68.8 Prior year 0.4 0.1 0.5 Total loss and loss adjustment expense ratio 66.5 69.3 69.2 Expense ratio 26.5 25.9 26.8 Policyholder dividend ratio 0.1 0.1 0.4 Combined ratio 93.2 95.3 96.5 Catastrophe ratio 3.6 2.2 3.1 Combined ratio before catastrophes 89.6 93.1 93.4 Combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development 89.4 89.7 92.8 [1] Net of expenses related to service business. 2005 Compared to 2004 Net income increased $210, or 22%, driven primarily by the following: A $246 increase in underwriting results, and A $179 increase in net investment income due, in part, to a larger investment base due to increased cash flows from underwriting, higher investment yields on fixed maturity investments and an increase in income from limited partnership investments. Also contributing to the increase, was the effect of allocating more invested assets to Ongoing Operations in 2005. Less invested assets were needed in Other Operations given the reduction in Other Operations loss reserves and the reduction in invested assets needed to support those reserves. The improvements in net income were partially offset by: A $79 decrease in net realized capital gains due to lower net realized gains on the sale of fixed maturity investments and lower net gains on non-qualifying derivatives, and A $139 increase in income tax expense, reflecting an increase in income before income taxes. Underwriting results increased by $246, with a corresponding 2.1 point improvement in the combined ratio from 95.3 to 93.2, driven primarily by the following factors. A $171 decrease in current accident year catastrophe losses. Catastrophe losses in 2005 included $264 of losses from Hurricanes Katrina, Rita and Wilma, whereas catastrophe losses in 2004 included $394 of losses from Hurricanes Charley, Frances, Ivan and Jeanne, A $106 improvement in current accident year underwriting results before catastrophes, with a corresponding 0.3 point improvement in the combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development, A net reserve release of $95 in 2005, predominantly related to allocated loss adjustment expenses on Personal Lines auto liability claims, A $75 release of workers compensation reserves in 2005 related to accident years 2003 and 2004, and 73 Table of Contents Net unfavorable reserve development of $5 in 2004, including reserve increases of $303, partially offset by a reserve release of $298 for September 11. Reserve increases in 2004 included $190 for construction defects claims, $38 for small commercial package business and $25 for auto liability claims. Partially offsetting these improvements were factors decreasing underwriting results and increasing the combined ratio: A $120 strengthening of workers compensation reserves in 2005 related to reserves for claim payments expected to emerge after 20 years of development, A $40 strengthening of general liability reserves within Business Insurance related to accident years 2000 to 2003, and Reserve strengthening of $33 related to the third quarter 2004 hurricanes. The $106 improvement in current accident year underwriting results before catastrophes is primarily due to earned premium growth and a slight improvement in current accident year non-catastrophe loss costs, partially offset by $64 of hurricane-related assessments in 2005. Earned premiums grew $682, primarily due to growth in Business Insurance and Personal Lines and the effect of a $90 decrease in earned premium on retrospectively rated policies recorded in 2004, partially offset by a decrease in specialty property earned premium and a $56 increase in catastrophe treaty reinstatement premiums. The combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development decreased from 2004 to 2005 due to the effect of the $90 decrease in earned premium on retrospectively-rated policies in 2004. Before the effect of the $90 earned premium reduction in 2004, the combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development increased 0.5 points, to 89.4 in 2005, principally due to an increase in the expense ratio, partially offset by a slight improvement in current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio. In 2005, the Company recognized improved current accident year performance for auto bodily injury and workers compensation claims, partially offset by the effect of an increase in non-catastrophe property loss costs. Non-catastrophe property loss costs increased primarily due to increasing claim severity and, in specialty property, increasing claim frequency as well. The expense ratio increased 0.6 points during 2005, to 26.5, primarily due to $64 of hurricane related assessments incurred in 2005 related to the 2004 and 2005 hurricanes. Apart from the impact of hurricane related assessments, the favorable effects on the expense ratio of an increase in earned premiums, a reduction in contingent commissions and a shift to lower commission workers compensation business were offset by the unfavorable effects of an increase in catastrophe treaty reinstatement premiums and reduced catastrophe treaty profit commissions. The reduction in contingent commissions was due, in part, to a decision made by some agents and brokers not to accept contingent commissions after the third quarter of 2004. The hurricane-related assessments were predominantly from the Citizens Property Insurance Corporation (Citizens) in Florida. Citizens is a company established by the State of Florida to provide personal and commercial insurance to individuals and businesses in Florida who are in high risk areas of the state and are unable to obtain insurance through the private insurance markets. The third quarter 2004 hurricanes caused a deficit in Citizens high risk account, which triggered an assessment to the Company of $15. In addition, the Company recorded an estimated Citizens assessment of $46 based on losses sustained by Citizens as a result of hurricane Wilma in the fourth quarter of 2005. Assessments recorded related to the 2004 and 2005 hurricanes could be adjusted in future periods as catastrophe losses develop. While the Company may recoup these assessments from Florida policyholders through surcharges that it will bill on new and renewal premium written in the future, the surcharges are not recognized until the period in which the future premium is earned. 2004 compared to 2003 Net income increased $172, or 22%, driven primarily by the following: A $147 increase in underwriting results. A $67 increase in net investment income, primarily as a result of an increase in underwriting cash flow, partially offset by a decrease in the before-tax investment yield, and A $62 decrease in other expenses, primarily due to $41 of severance costs in 2003 and a reduction in bad debt expense in 2004 due to improved collection efforts in Business Insurance. The improvements in net income were partially offset by: A $53 decrease in net realized capital gains due to lower net realized gains on the sale of fixed maturity investments, and An $85 increase in income tax expense reflecting the increase in income before income taxes. Underwriting results increased by $147, with a corresponding 1.2 point improvement in the combined ratio from 96.5 to 95.3, driven primarily by the factors described below. Factors improving underwriting results and the combined ratio: A $362 improvement in current accident year underwriting results before catastrophes, with a corresponding 3.1 point improvement in the combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development, and A $20 strengthening of contract surety claim reserves in 2003 related to accident year 2002 and a $25 provision in 2003 related to the auto residual value business acquired from Reliance Group Holdings in 2000. Partially offsetting these improvements were factors decreasing underwriting results and increasing the combined ratio: A $250 increase in current accident year catastrophe losses, due to losses from Hurricanes Charley, Frances, Ivan and Jeanne in the third quarter of 2004. 74 Table of Contents Net unfavorable reserve development of $5 in 2004, including reserve increases of $303, partially offset by a reserve release of $298 for September 11. Reserve increases in 2004 included $190 for construction defects claims, $38 for small commercial package business and $25 for auto liability claims. The $362 improvement in current accident year underwriting results before catastrophes is due to earned premium growth and an improvement in the combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development, partially offset by the effect of a $90 decrease in earned premium on retrospectively rated policies recorded in 2004. The combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development improved 3.1 points, to 89.7, primarily due to strong earned pricing, an improvement in non-catastrophe current accident year loss and loss adjustment expenses and a 0.9 point improvement in the expense ratio. The improvement in current accident year non-catastrophe loss and loss adjustment expenses was primarily due to favorable claim frequency. The 0.9 point improvement in the expense ratio was principally due to the effect of earned premium growth and a shift to lower commission workers compensation business. BUSINESS INSURANCE Business Insurance provides standard commercial insurance coverage to small and middle market commercial businesses, primarily throughout the United States. This segment offers workers compensation, property, automobile, liability, umbrella and marine coverages. The Business Insurance segment also provides commercial risk management products and services. Premiums 2005 2004 2003 Written Premiums [1] Small Commercial $ 2,545 $ 2,255 $ 1,862 Middle Market 2,456 2,320 2,095 Total $ 5,001 $ 4,575 $ 3,957 Earned Premiums [1] Small Commercial $ 2,421 $ 2,077 $ 1,782 Middle Market 2,364 2,222 1,914 Total $ 4,785 $ 4,299 $ 3,696 [1] The difference between written premiums and earned premiums is attributable to the change in unearned premium reserve. Earned Premiums 2005 Compared to 2004 Earned premiums for Business Insurance increased $486, or 11%, in 2005, primarily due to new business growth outpacing non-renewals in both small commercial and middle market over the preceding twelve months and modest earned pricing increases in small commercial, partially offset by earned pricing decreases in middle market. Growth in small commercial earned premium was driven primarily by growth in workers compensation and package business for both Select Xpand and traditional Select. New business written premium for small commercial increased by $6, as an increase in new business for workers compensation was largely offset by a decrease in new business for package and commercial auto. Premium renewal retention for small commercial increased from 83% to 86% in 2005, excluding the impact of modest written pricing increases. Growth in middle market earned premium was driven primarily by growth in workers compensation and marine, partially offset by a decrease in property and commercial auto. New business written premium for middle market increased by $22 for the year ended December 31, 2005, mostly related to workers compensation business. Premium renewal retention for middle market increased from 83% to 86%, excluding the impact of written pricing decreases, as stronger retention on smaller accounts was partially offset by a decrease in retention on larger accounts. For the year ended December 31, 2005, earned pricing increased 3% for small commercial and decreased 3% for middle market. As substantially all premiums in the segment are earned over a 12 month policy period, earned pricing changes for the year ended December 31, 2005 primarily reflect written pricing changes during the last six months of 2004 and the year ended December 31, 2005. Written pricing for small commercial increased 4% in the last six months of 2004 and 2% in 2005. Written pricing for middle market decreased 2% in the last six of 2004 and 5% in 2005. 2004 Compared to 2003 Earned premiums for the segment increased $603, or 16%, in 2004, primarily due to earned pricing increases and new business premium outpacing non-renewals. Growth in small commercial earned premiums was driven primarily by written premium growth for Select Xpand. The new business premium growth of $172 in Small Commercial was due primarily to growth from the Select Xpand product and growth from an increase in the number of agents, partially offset by the moderation in written pricing increases. Growth in middle market earned premiums was driven primarily by growth in workers compensation premium. New business premium decreased by $61 due largely to written pricing decreases. 75 Table of Contents Premium renewal retention remained strong, decreasing slightly from 87% for the year ended December 31, 2003 to 85% for the year ended December 31, 2004. Written pricing decreases for middle market during 2004 contributed to the decrease in premium renewal retention. For the year ended December 31, 2004, earned pricing increased 7% for small commercial and 3% for middle market. As substantially all premiums in the segment are earned over a 12 month policy period, earned pricing changes for the year ended December 31, 2004 primarily reflect written pricing increases of 9% during the last six months of 2003 and 2% in 2004. 2005 2004 2003 Underwriting Summary Written premiums $ 5,001 $ 4,575 $ 3,957 Change in unearned premium reserve 216 276 261 Earned premiums 4,785 4,299 3,696 Benefits, claims and claim adjustment expenses Current year 2,949 2,700 2,346 Prior year 22 (67 ) (6 ) Total benefits, claims and claim adjustment expenses 2,971 2,633 2,340 Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs 1,138 1,058 913 Insurance operating costs and expenses 280 248 285 Underwriting results $ 396 $ 360 $ 158 Loss and loss adjustment expense ratio Current year 61.6 62.8 63.5 Prior year 0.5 (1.6 ) (0.2 ) Total loss and loss adjustment expense ratio 62.1 61.2 63.3 Expense ratio 29.5 30.1 31.8 Policyholder dividend ratio 0.1 0.2 0.6 Combined ratio 91.7 91.6 95.7 Catastrophe ratio 2.0 (0.9 ) 2.7 Combined ratio before catastrophes 89.7 92.5 93.0 Combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development 89.4 89.7 93.0 Underwriting results and ratios 2005 Compared to 2004 Underwriting results increased by $36, with a 0.1 point increase in the combined ratio to 91.7. The net increase in underwriting results was principally driven by the following factors: A $67 improvement resulting from earned premium growth at a combined ratio less than 100.0 and from a decrease in the combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development of 0.3 points, from 89.7 to 89.4 A $58 decrease in current accident year catastrophe losses. Catastrophe losses in 2005 for Hurricanes Katrina, Rita and Wilma were $68 compared to catastrophe losses in 2004 for Hurricanes Charley, Frances, Ivan and Jeanne of $98, A $75 release of workers compensation reserves during 2005 related to accident years 2003 and 2004, and A $25 release of prior accident year reserves for allocated loss adjustment expenses during 2005. Partially offsetting the improvements in underwriting results were the following factors: Net favorable reserve development of $67 in 2004 included a $175 release of September 11 reserves, partially offset by a $38 strengthening of reserves for small commercial package business, a $25 strengthening of automobile liability reserves and a $23 strengthening of reserves for construction defects claims, A $50 strengthening of workers compensation reserves during 2005 related to reserves for claim payments expected to emerge after 20 years of development, A $40 strengthening of general liability reserves during 2005 for accident years 2000-2003 due to higher than anticipated loss payments beyond four years of development, and A $20 strengthening of third quarter 2004 hurricane reserves during 2005. The combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development decreased 0.3 points to 89.4, due primarily to earned pricing increases in small commercial, improved current accident year underwriting results for workers compensation business and a 0.6 point decrease in the expense ratio, partially offset by earned pricing decreases in middle market and increasing non-catastrophe property claim costs. The improved current accident year performance for workers compensation business was consistent with the favorable prior accident year development recorded in 2005 related to accident years 2003 and 2004. Contributing to the 0.6 point decrease in the expense ratio was earned premium growth, a shift to more workers compensation business which has lower commissions and a $16 reduction in contingent commissions, partially offset by $20 of hurricane related assessments in 2005. The $16 reduction in contingent commissions was due, in part, to a decision made by some agents and brokers not to accept contingent commissions after the third quarter of 2004. 76 Table of Contents 2004 Compared to 2003 Underwriting results increased by $202, with a corresponding 4.1 point decrease in the combined ratio to 91.6. The net increase in underwriting results was principally driven by the following factors: A $181 improvement resulting from earned premium growth at a combined ratio less than 100.0 and from a decrease in the combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development of 3.3 points, from 93.0 to 89.7, and Net favorable reserve development of $67 in 2004, including a $175 release of September 11 reserves, partially offset by a $38 strengthening of small commercial package business reserves, a $25 strengthening of auto liability claim reserves and a $23 strengthening of construction defects claim reserves. Partially offsetting the improvements in underwriting results was a $40 increase in current accident year catastrophe losses due to losses from Hurricanes Charley, Frances, Ivan and Jeanne during the third quarter of 2004. The combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development decreased 3.3 points, to 89.7, due primarily to earned pricing increases in excess of loss cost increases in both small commercial and middle market and a 1.7 point decrease in the expense ratio. Improved claim frequency was partially offset by increased claim severity. The 1.7 point improvement in the expense ratio was primarily due to earned premium growth a shift to more workers compensation business which has lower commissions. Outlook In 2006, management expects the Business Insurance segment to achieve mid- to high-single-digit written premium growth and to generate strong results. In both small commercial and middle market, the Company plans to continue to broaden its relationships with key agencies to increase new business, maintain renewal retention and expand market share in targeted states. The Company will also continue to enhance the technology used with its agents to further improve the ease of doing business with The Hartford. In small commercial, the Company expects double-digit written premium growth to be generated, in part, through the use of customized pricing, more sophisticated pricing models and automated underwriting decision making tools and increasing its underwriting appetite within certain industries and risks. Also, the Company increased the number of small commercial sales representatives by 20% in 2005 and expects to increase the sales staff further in 2006. Within middle market, the Company expects to focus on growing its property book of business as well as protecting its renewals. Management expects written pricing trends in 2006 to be affected by increased competition. While the increase in written pricing for small commercial business was 2% in 2005, management expects written pricing for small commercial to be flat to slightly negative for 2006. For middle market business, pricing continued to decline in the fourth quarter of 2005, particularly for property business in geographic areas not prone to catastrophes and in non-property lines of business. While written pricing for middle market business in 2005 declined by 5%, management believes that pricing declines will lessen somewhat as higher reinsurance costs are reflected in the market. Loss costs are expected to increase in 2006 as increasing claim severity is expected to outpace favorable claim frequency. As a result of the anticipated slight decrease in written pricing and increase in loss costs, management expects the current accident year loss and loss expense ratio for Business Insurance to increase moderately in 2006. 77 Table of Contents PERSONAL LINES Personal Lines provides automobile, homeowners and home-based business coverages to the members of AARP through a direct marketing operation; to individuals who prefer local agent involvement through a network of independent agents in the standard personal lines market ( Standard ) and in the non-standard automobile market through the Company Omni Insurance Group, Inc. ( Omni ) subsidiary. Personal Lines also operates a member contact center for health insurance products offered through AARP Health Care Options. The Hartford exclusive licensing arrangement with AARP continues through January 1, 2010 for automobile, homeowners and home-based business. The Health Care Options agreement continues through 2007. 2005 2004 2003 Written Premiums [1] Business Unit AARP $ 2,373 $ 2,244 $ 2,066 Other Affinity 109 128 148 Agency 1,020 942 804 Omni 174 243 254 Total $ 3,676 $ 3,557 $ 3,272 Product Line Automobile $ 2,753 $ 2,685 $ 2,508 Homeowners 923 872 764 Total $ 3,676 $ 3,557 $ 3,272 2005 2004 2003 Earned Premiums [1] Business Unit AARP $ 2,296 $ 2,146 $ 1,956 Other Affinity 118 138 163 Agency 997 907 807 Omni 199 254 255 Total $ 3,610 $ 3,445 $ 3,181 Product Line Automobile $ 2,728 $ 2,622 $ 2,458 Homeowners 882 823 723 Total $ 3,610 $ 3,445 $ 3,181 Combined Ratios Automobile 90.7 95.7 98.0 Homeowners 76.6 96.8 88.8 Total 87.3 96.0 95.9 [1] The difference between written premiums and earned premiums is attributable to the change in unearned premium reserve. Earned Premiums 2005 Compared to 2004 Earned premiums increased $165, or 5%, due primarily to earned premium growth in both AARP and Agency, partially offset by a reduction in Other Affinity and Omni. AARP earned premium grew $150, or 7%, reflecting an increase in the penetration of the AARP target market and the effect of direct marketing programs to increase premium writings, particularly in auto. Agency earned premium grew $90, or 10%, as a result of continued growth of the Dimensions class plans first introduced in 2004. Dimensions, which has been rolled out to 41 states for auto and 37 states for homeowners, allows Personal Lines to write a broader class of risks. Omni earned premium decreased by $55, or 22%, because of a strategic decision by management to focus on more profitable non-standard auto business. The earned premium growth in AARP and Agency during 2005 was primarily due to new business written premium outpacing non-renewals for auto business in 2004 and 2005 and to earned pricing increases in homeowners business. Auto earned premium grew $106, or 4%, primarily from growth in AARP and Agency, offset by a decline in Omni and Other Affinity auto business. Before considering the decline in Omni and Other Affinity business, auto earned premium grew $240, or 8%. Homeowners earned premium grew $59, or 7%, due to growth in AARP and Agency business, partially offset by a decline in Other Affinity business. Consistent with the growth in earned premium, the number of policies in force has increased in auto and homeowners from 2,166,922 and 1,348,573, respectively, as of December 31, 2004 to 2,222,688 and 1,384,364, respectively, as of December 31, 2005. The growth in policies in force does not correspond directly with the growth in earned premiums due to the effect of earned pricing changes and because policy in force counts are as of a point in time rather than over a period of time. 78 Table of Contents Auto new business written premium was $426 in 2005, down $43 from the prior year, due primarily to a $52 decline in Omni new business and, to a lesser extent, a decline in Agency and Other Affinity new business, partially offset by an increase in AARP new business. Homeowners new business written premium was $131 in 2005, up $16 from the prior year, primarily due to an increase in Agency new business written premium. Premium renewal retention for automobile decreased from 89% to 87% and premium renewal retention for homeowners decreased from 100% to 94%, primarily due to a decrease in retention of Agency business. Earned pricing increases for automobile of 1% in 2005 were down from 5% in 2004. Likewise, earned pricing increases for homeowners of 7% in 2005 were down from 11% in 2004. The moderation in earned pricing increases during 2005 is a reflection of written pricing changes from 2004 to 2005. Written pricing for automobile increased 2% in the last six months of 2004 but was flat in 2005. Written pricing for homeowners increased 7% in the last six months of 2004 and 6% in 2005. The written price declines are reflective of the company response in different states and different auto segments to the current levels of price adequacy. Written pricing for homeowners has increased primarily due to increased insurance to value. 2004 Compared to 2003 Earned premiums increased $264 due to growth in both AARP and Agency, partially offset by a reduction in Other Affinity earned premium. Earned premiums for Omni were flat from 2003 to 2004. AARP earned premium grew $190, or 10%, reflecting growth in the size of the AARP target market and the effect of direct marketing programs to increase premium writings, in both auto and homeowners. Agency earned premium grew $100, or 12%, as a result of the growth of the Dimensions auto and homeowners class plans. Dimensions, which had been rolled out to 37 states for auto and 28 states for homeowners in 2004, allows Personal Lines to write a broader class of risks. Omni earned premium was flat during 2004 because of a strategic decision by management to focus on more profitable non-standard auto business. The earned premium growth in AARP and Agency is primarily because new business growth over the prior 6 to 12 months exceeded non-renewals in both auto and homeowners. The number of policies in force at year end increased in auto and homeowners from 2,058,825 and 1,319,629, respectively, as of December 31, 2003, to 2,166,922 and 1,348,573, respectively, as of December 31, 2004. The growth in policies in force does not correspond directly with the growth in earned premium due to the impact of earned pricing increases and because policy in force counts are as of a point in time rather than over a period of time. Most of the growth in homeowners policies in force was generated by Agency while for auto policies in force, growth in both AARP and Agency is partially offset by a decline in Omni. For the year ended December 31, 2004, new business premiums in AARP and Agency were $311 and $167, respectively, which was up from $226 and $105, respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2003. Premium renewal retention for automobile decreased from 91% to 89%. The decrease in premium renewal retention for automobile was driven largely by the impact of declining written pricing increases. Premium renewal retention for homeowners decreased from 101% to 100%, also due to declining written pricing increases. Earned pricing increases for automobile of 5% for the year ended December 31, 2004 were down from 9% during the year ended December 31, 2003. Likewise, earned pricing increases for homeowners of 11% for the year ended December 31, 2004 were down from 14% during the year ended December 31, 2003. The moderation in earned pricing increases during 2004 is a reflection of a decline in written pricing increases from 2003 to 2004. Written pricing for automobile increased 8% in the last six months of 2003 and 3% in 2004. Written pricing for homeowners increased 13% in the last six months of 2003 and 9% in 2004. In addition to earned pricing increases, homeowners earned premiums included the effect of automatic increases in the amount of insurance coverage to adjust for construction cost inflation. 79 Table of Contents 2005 2004 2003 Underwriting Summary Written premiums $ 3,676 $ 3,557 $ 3,272 Change in unearned premium reserve 66 112 91 Earned premiums 3,610 3,445 3,181 Benefits, claims and claim adjustment expenses Current year 2,389 2,509 2,324 Prior year (95 ) 3 (6 ) Total benefits, claims and claim adjustment expenses 2,294 2,512 2,318 Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs 581 530 386 Insurance operating costs and expenses 275 265 347 Underwriting results $ 460 $ 138 $ 130 Loss and loss adjustment expense ratio Current year 66.2 72.8 73.1 Prior year (2.6 ) 0.1 (0.2 ) Total loss and loss adjustment expense ratio 63.6 72.9 72.9 Expense ratio 23.7 23.1 23.0 Combined ratio 87.3 96.0 95.9 Catastrophe ratio 2.9 7.4 4.1 Combined ratio before catastrophes 84.4 88.6 91.8 Combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development 87.2 88.2 91.7 Other revenues [1] $ 121 $ 123 $ 123 [1] Represents servicing revenue. Underwriting Results and Ratios 2005 Compared to 2004 Underwriting results increased $322, with a corresponding 8.7 point decrease in the combined ratio from 96.0 to 87.3. The net increase in underwriting results was principally driven by the following factors: A $166 decrease in current accident year catastrophe losses. Catastrophe losses in 2005 included losses for Hurricanes Katrina, Rita and Wilma of $50 whereas catastrophe losses in 2004 included losses for Hurricanes Charley, Frances, Ivan and Jeanne of $215, A $95 reduction in prior accident year reserves for allocated loss adjustment expenses, predominantly related to auto liability claims, and A $58 improvement in current accident year underwriting results derived from earned premium growth at a combined ratio less than 100.0, as well as from a decrease in the combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development of 1.0 point, from 88.2 to 87.2. The 1.0 point improvement in the combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development was primarily due to a lower current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio for auto liability claims and earned pricing increases for homeowners business slightly outpacing increases in non-catastrophe property loss costs, partially offset by the effect of the $24 increase in reinstatement premiums. The lower current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio for auto liability claims was consistent with the favorable prior accident year development on auto liability allocated loss adjustment expense reserves recognized in 2005. Within homeowners, an increase in loss costs was due entirely to increasing claim severity. The expense ratio increased by 0.6 points, to 23.7, primarily due to $31 of hurricane-related assessments in 2005. 2004 Compared to 2003 In 2004, underwriting results increased $8 and the combined ratio remained relatively flat at 96.0. Net prior accident year development was not significant in either 2004 or 2003. As a result, the net increase in underwriting results was principally driven by a $142 improvement resulting from earned premium growth at a combined ratio less than 100.0 and from a decrease in the combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development of 3.5 points, from 91.7 to 88.2. Largely offsetting this improvement was a $124 increase in current accident year catastrophe losses due to losses from hurricanes Charley, Frances, Ivan and Jeanne during the third quarter of 2004. The 3.5 point decrease in the combined ratio before catastrophes and prior year development was primarily due to earned pricing increases and favorable claim frequency, partially offset by increased claim severity. The expense ratio remained relatively flat at 23.1%, despite earned premium growth, because of higher commissions as a result of increased Agency business and increased other underwriting expenses. Outlook In 2006, the Personal Lines segment is expected to deliver written premium growth in the mid-single digits, including growth from both AARP and Agency. In 2006, the Company will continue to pursue a number of strategies to promote growth and profitability. Within the AARP business, growth is expected through an increase in marketing to AARP members, including the expansion of its AARP direct response television marketing initiative. Within the Agency business, these strategies include refinement of its Dimensions class 80 Table of Contents plans, expansion of its product breadth, an increase in the number of new agency appointments and the use of value pricing to long-time customers. The Company expects new business growth in Agency business as well as strong renewal retention in AARP. Strong underwriting profitability within the past couple of years has intensified the level of competition, putting downward pressure on rates, particularly in auto. For auto, written pricing in 2006 is expected to be flat to slightly negative. For homeowners, management expects written pricing increases in the mid-single digits. Regulatory requirements applying to premium rates vary from state to state, and, in most states, rates are subject to prior regulatory approval. State regulatory constraints may prevent companies from obtaining the necessary rates to achieve an underwriting profit. Industry rates may remain inadequate in certain states in 2006. Loss costs in 2006 are expected to increase in the mid-single digits as increasing claim severity is expected to slightly outpace favorable claim frequency. While earned pricing is expected to keep pace with loss cost increases in homeowners, margins will likely be reduced for auto. SPECIALTY COMMERCIAL Specialty Commercial offers a variety of customized insurance products and risk management services. The segment provides standard commercial insurance products including workers compensation, automobile and liability coverages to large-sized companies. Specialty Commercial also provides bond, professional liability, specialty casualty and livestock coverages, as well as core property and excess and surplus lines coverages not normally written by standard lines insurers. Specialty Commercial provides other insurance products and services primarily to captive insurance companies, pools and self-insurance groups. In addition, Specialty Commercial provides third-party administrator services for claims administration, integrated benefits, loss control and performance measurement through Specialty Risk Services. 2005 2004 2003 Written Premiums [1] Property $ 211 $ 443 $ 440 Casualty 815 743 670 Bond 228 197 162 Professional Liability 385 342 324 Other 167 115 95 Total $ 1,806 $ 1,840 $ 1,691 Earned Premiums [1] Property $ 245 $ 461 $ 429 Casualty 787 635 615 Bond 210 188 152 Professional Liability 345 335 296 Other 170 107 66 Total $ 1,757 $ 1,726 $ 1,558 [1] The difference between written premiums and earned premiums is attributable to the change in unearned premium reserve. Earned Premiums 2005 Compared to 2004 Earned premiums for the Specialty Commercial segment increased by $31, or 2%, due to a $247 increase in casualty, bond, professional liability and other earned premiums, partially offset by a $216 decrease in property earned premiums. Property earned premium decreased $216, or 47%, primarily because of a decline in new business and a decrease of $127 due to the decision made in the fourth quarter of 2004 to exit the multi-peril crop insurance ( MPCI ) business, partially offset by an increase in premium renewal retention. Also reducing earned premium was a $22 increase in reinstatement premiums paid to reinstate reinsurance treaty limits as a result of losses ceded from third and fourth quarter hurricanes of 2005 compared to reinstatement premiums paid as a result of losses ceded from the third quarter hurricanes of 2004. Casualty earned premiums grew $152, or 24%, primarily because earned premium in 2004 included a $90 decrease in earned premiums under retrospectively-rated policies. The remaining growth of $62 was largely attributable to the effect of earned pricing increases, partially offset by a decrease in new business growth. In 2005 and 2004, a single captive insurance program accounted for earned premium of $241 and $226, respectively. While this program was not renewed, the non-renewal is not expected to have a significant impact on Specialty Commercial underwriting results in 2006. Bond earned premium grew $22, or 12%, due to new business growth in commercial and contract surety business, an increase in earned pricing, a decrease in the portion of risks ceded to outside reinsurers and a decrease in the price of reinsurance with outside reinsurers. Professional liability earned premium increased $10, or 3%, primarily due to a decrease in the portion of risks ceded to outside reinsurers, partially offset by earned pricing decreases. Within the other category, earned premium increased by $63, or 59%, primarily due to increased premiums on inter-segment reinsurance programs. 2004 Compared to 2003 Earned premiums for the Specialty Commercial segment grew $168, or 11%, due primarily to earned premium growth in all lines of business, partially offset by a $90 reduction in premiums receivable under retrospectively-rated policies, reflecting a decrease in estimated earned premium under the terms of these policies. 81 Table of Contents Property earned premium increased $32, or 7%, primarily due to an increase of $43 in the portion of property business derived from multi-peril crop insurance premiums. In the fourth quarter of 2004, the Company transferred its entire book of multi-peril crop insurance (MPCI) to Rural Community Insurance Company (RCIC), a subsidiary of Wells Fargo & Company. The agreement transferred in bulk all 2005 crop year policies to RCIC in exchange for an initial payment and renewal fees based upon retention of the transferred business over a three year period. The Company retained responsibility for the MPCI business written for the 2004 and prior crop years. Earned premium for MPCI business for the year ended December 31, 2004 was $127. Before considering the increase in MPCI premiums, earned premiums for property declined by 6%, reflecting a business decision to write less new business and renew less premium as a result of the decline in written pricing. Casualty earned premiums increased $20, or 3%, primarily because of written premium growth in a single captive insurance program and high single-digit earned pricing increases, partially offset by a decrease in premium renewal retention. Of the total growth in earned premium for the year ended December 31, 2004, $75 was attributable to a single captive insurance program. The increase in earned premiums was partially offset by a $90 decrease in earned premiums under retrospectively-rated policies. Bond earned premium grew $36, or 24%, primarily as a result of an increase in contract surety business and a decrease in ceded premiums, partially offset by a slight decrease in premium renewal retention. Professional liability earned premiums grew $39, or 13%, primarily due to a decrease in the portion of risks ceded to outside reinsurers and earned pricing increases, partially offset by a decrease in renewal retention and new business growth. Earned pricing increases in professional liability were due entirely to written pricing increases in 2003 as prices declined in 2004. Within the other category, earned premiums increased $41, or 62%, primarily due to increased premiums on inter-segment reinsurance programs. Underwriting Summary 2005 2004 2003 Written premiums $ 1,806 $ 1,840 $ 1,691 Change in unearned premium reserve 49 114 133 Earned premiums 1,757 1,726 1,558 Benefits, claims and claim adjustment expenses Current year 1,377 1,345 1,130 Prior year 109 69 52 Total benefits, claims and claim adjustment expenses 1,486 1,414 1,182 Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs 281 257 254 Insurance operating costs and expenses 155 108 112 Underwriting results $ (165 ) $ (53 ) $ 10 Loss and loss adjustment expense ratio Current year 78.4 77.9 72.5 Prior year 6.2 4.0 3.3 Total loss and loss adjustment expense ratio 84.6 81.9 75.8 Expense ratio 24.3 21.1 22.9 Policyholder dividend ratio 0.5 0.1 0.7 Combined ratio 109.4 103.1 99.3 Catastrophe ratio 9.5 (0.4 ) 1.7 Combined ratio before catastrophes 99.9 103.5 97.6 Combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development 93.8 92.8 94.3 Other revenue [1] $ 342 $ 314 $ 306 [1] Represents servicing revenue Underwriting Results and Ratios 2005 Compared to 2004 Underwriting results decreased by $112, with a corresponding 6.3 point increase in the combined ratio to 109.4. Underwriting results of ($53) in 2004 included a $90 decrease in earned premiums under retrospectively rated policies. Before the decrease in earned premiums under retrospectively-rated policies, underwriting results decreased by $202, principally driven by the following factors: A $109 decrease in current accident year non-catastrophe underwriting results, A $53 increase in current accident year catastrophe losses. Catastrophe losses in 2005 for Hurricanes Katrina, Rita and Wilma were $145 compared to catastrophe losses in 2004 for Hurricanes Charley, Frances, Ivan and Jeanne of $81. Catastrophe losses in 2005 and 2004 include $70 and $19, respectively, of catastrophe losses assumed under inter-segment reinsurance programs and A $40 increase in unfavorable prior accident year loss development. Prior accident year loss development of $109 in 2005 consisted primarily of $70 of reserve strengthening for workers compensation reserves for claim payments expected to emerge after 20 years of development and $20 of reserve development for large deductible workers compensation reserves. Reserve development in 2005 also included a release of reserves for directors and officers insurance related to accident years 2003 and 2004 and strengthening of prior accident year reserves for contracts that provide auto financing gap coverage and auto lease residual value coverage; the release and offsetting strengthening were each approximately $80. Prior accident year loss development of $69 in 2004 included $167 of reserve strengthening for construction defect claims, a release of $116 in September 11 reserves and strengthening in large deductible workers compensation reserves and a release in other liability reserves, each approximately $150. 82 Table of Contents Contributing to the $109 decrease in current accident year underwriting results were higher non-catastrophe losses in property and a $22 increase in net catastrophe treaty reinstatement premiums, partially offset by improvement in professional liability. The expense ratio increased by 3.2 points, to 24.3, primarily due to a reduction in ceding commissions on professional liability business, a reduction in profit commissions due to increased catastrophe losses and a shift to more casualty business which has a higher expense ratio, partially offset by the impact on the expense ratio of the $90 earned premium adjustment in 2004. 2004 Compared to 2003 Underwriting results decreased $63, with a corresponding 3.8 point increase in the combined ratio from 99.3 to 103.1. Underwriting results of ($53) in 2004 included a $90 decrease in earned premiums under retrospectively rated policies. Before the decrease in earned premiums under retrospectively-rated policies, underwriting results improved by $27, principally driven by the following factors: A $131 improvement in current accident year underwriting results, partially offset by An $86 increase in current accident year catastrophe losses, principally due to losses incurred for hurricanes Charley, Frances, Ivan and Jeanne in the third quarter of 2004 and A $17 increase in unfavorable prior accident year loss development. Prior accident year loss development of $69 in 2004 included $167 of reserve strengthening for construction defect claims, a release of $116 in September 11 reserves and strengthening in large deductible workers compensation reserves and a release in other liability reserves, each approximately $150. Prior accident year loss development of $52 in 2003 consisted primarily of $20 of reserve strengthening for a few severe contract surety claims related to accident year 2002 and a $25 provision for anticipated settlements on reinsurance obligations for contracts outstanding at the time of the original acquisition of Reliance Group Holdings auto residual value portfolio in the third quarter of 2000. Current accident year non-catastrophe underwriting results improved in all lines of business. The improvement in casualty, bond and professional liability was due to earned pricing increases exceeding loss costs. The improvement in property was due to low non-catastrophe property losses, despite a decline in earned pricing. The expense ratio for the year ended December 31, 2004 decreased over the prior year expense ratio due primarily to earned premium growth. Outlook Specialty Commercial is comprised of businesses that provide specialized or customized products within niche markets. Management expects each of these businesses to maintain underwriting discipline in 2006 in an increasingly competitive environment. Accordingly, written premium growth is not a primary objective for the Specialty Commercial segment. Rather, the Company will grow opportunistically where risks are adequately priced to achieve targeted returns. Management expects to grow written premium in 2006 primarily in property and professional liability. The growth in property will likely come from new business growth and written pricing increases. A decrease in the percentage of risks ceded to reinsurers will likely contribute to the growth in professional liability written premium. Largely offsetting this growth, casualty written premiums will likely decline given the non-renewal of a captive insurance program which represented $241 of written premium in 2005. The non-renewal of this program is not expected to have a significant impact on underwriting results. Beginning in the fourth quarter of 2005, specialty property written pricing has been increasing in catastrophe prone areas and management expects rates to continue to increase in 2006. The written price increases reflect, in part, a medium-term forecast of increased hurricane frequency and severity as well as an increase in the cost of reinsurance. Although written pricing increases are expected for property and bond, written pricing decreases are expected for casualty and professional liability, In 2006, management expects that the written pricing increases in property will yield a lower loss and loss adjustment expense ratio, provided that catastrophe property claim experience returns to expected levels. The level of catastrophe losses can have a significant impact on Specialty Commercial underwriting results, however, due to specialty property exposures in hurricane-prone areas. Specialty Commercial expense ratio will likely continue to vary significantly from period to period depending, in part, on the level of profit commissions and reinstatement premium recognized related to catastrophe activity and changes in business mix. OTHER OPERATIONS (INCLUDING ASBESTOS AND ENVIRONMENTAL CLAIMS) Operating Summary 2005 2004 2003 Written premiums $ 4 $ (10 ) $ 224 Change in unearned premium reserve (34 ) (146 ) Earned premiums 4 24 370 Benefits, claims and claim adjustment expenses Current year 36 302 Prior year 212 409 2,784 Total benefits, claims and claim adjustment expenses 212 445 3,086 Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs (3 ) 5 89 Insurance operating costs and expenses 21 22 35 Underwriting results $ (226 ) $ (448 ) $ (2,840 ) Net investment income 283 345 336 Net realized capital gains 25 35 102 Other income (expense) (1 ) (37 ) 46 Income tax benefit (expense) (10 ) 60 828 Net income (loss) $ 71 $ (45 ) $ (1,528 ) 83 Table of Contents The Other Operations segment includes operations that are under a single management structure, Heritage Holdings, which is responsible for two related activities. The first activity is the management of certain subsidiaries and operations of the Company that have discontinued writing new business. The second is the management of claims (and the associated reserves) related to asbestos, environmental and other exposures. The Other Operations book of business contains policies written from approximately the 1940s to 2003. The Company experience has been that this book of runoff business has, over time, produced significantly higher claims and losses than were contemplated at inception. 2005 Compared to 2004 Net income increased $116, driven by the following: A $222 increase in underwriting results, primarily due to a $197 decrease in prior year loss development. Reserve development in 2005 included $85 of reserve strengthening for assumed reinsurance, $37 of environmental reserve strengthening, and a $20 increase in the allowance for uncollectible reinsurance. In 2004, reserve development was driven by a $181 provision for the reinsurance recoverable asset associated with older, long-term casualty liabilities, $170 of reserve strengthening for assumed reinsurance, and $75 of environmental reserve strengthening, which was partially offset by a $97 release of September 11 reserves. A $62 decrease in net investment income, primarily as a result of a decrease in invested assets resulting from net claims and claim adjustment expenses paid in 2004 and 2005. Other Operations net investment income includes income earned on the separate portfolios of Heritage Holdings and its subsidiaries, and on the Hartford Fire invested asset portfolio, which is allocated between Ongoing Operations and Other Operations. The Company attributes capital and invested assets to each segment using an internally developed, risk-based capital attribution methodology. A $70 decrease in income tax benefit (expense) reflecting an increase in income before taxes. 2004 Compared to 2003 Net loss decreased $1.5 billion, driven by the following: A $2.4 billion increase in underwriting results, primarily due to a $2.4 billion decrease in prior year loss development. Reserve development in 2004 included a $181 provision for the reinsurance recoverable asset associated with older, long-term casualty liabilities, $170 of reserve strengthening for assumed reinsurance, and $75 of environmental reserve strengthening, which was partially offset by a $97 release of September 11 reserves. In 2003, reserve development was driven by $2.6 billion of asbestos reserve strengthening. The $346 decrease in earned premiums and related decrease of $266 in current year benefits, claims and claim adjustment expenses were the result of the Company decision to exit from the assumed reinsurance business in the second quarter of 2003. A $768 decrease in income tax benefit reflecting a decrease in the loss before taxes. Asbestos and Environmental Claims The Company continues to receive asbestos and environmental claims. Asbestos claims relate primarily to bodily injuries asserted by people who came in contact with asbestos or products containing asbestos. Environmental claims relate primarily to pollution and related clean-up costs. The Company wrote several different categories of insurance contracts that may cover asbestos and environmental claims. First, the Company wrote primary policies providing the first layer of coverage in an insured liability program. Second, the Company wrote excess policies providing higher layers of coverage for losses that exhaust the limits of underlying coverage. Third, the Company acted as a reinsurer assuming a portion of those risks assumed by other insurers writing primary, excess and reinsurance coverages. Fourth, subsidiaries of the Company participated in the London Market, writing both direct insurance and assumed reinsurance business. With regard to both environmental and particularly asbestos claims, significant uncertainty limits the ability of insurers and reinsurers to estimate the ultimate reserves necessary for unpaid losses and related expenses. Traditional actuarial reserving techniques cannot reasonably estimate the ultimate cost of these claims, particularly during periods where theories of law are in flux. The degree of variability of reserve estimates for these exposures is significantly greater than for other more traditional exposures. In particular, the Company believes there is a high degree of uncertainty inherent in the estimation of asbestos loss reserves. In the case of the reserves for asbestos exposures, factors contributing to the high degree of uncertainty include inadequate loss development patterns, plaintiffs expanding theories of liability, the risks inherent in major litigation, and inconsistent emerging legal doctrines. Furthermore, over time, insurers, including the Company, have experienced significant changes in the rate at which asbestos claims are brought, the claims experience of particular insureds, and the value of claims, making predictions of future exposure from past experience uncertain. For example, in the past few years, insurers in general, including the Company, have experienced an increase in the number of asbestos-related claims due to, among other things, plaintiffs increased focus on new and previously peripheral defendants and an increase in the number of insureds seeking bankruptcy protection as a result of asbestos-related liabilities. Plaintiffs and insureds have sought to use bankruptcy proceedings, including pre-packaged bankruptcies, to accelerate and increase loss payments by insurers. In addition, some policyholders have asserted new classes of claims for coverages to which an aggregate limit of liability may not apply. Further uncertainties include insolvencies of other carriers and unanticipated developments pertaining to the Company ability to recover reinsurance for asbestos and environmental claims. Management believes these issues are not likely to be resolved in the near future. 84 Table of Contents In the case of the reserves for environmental exposures, factors contributing to the high degree of uncertainty include expanding theories of liability and damages; the risks inherent in major litigation; inconsistent decisions concerning the existence and scope of coverage for environmental claims; and uncertainty as to the monetary amount being sought by the claimant from the insured. It is also not possible to predict changes in the legal and legislative environment and their effect on the future development of asbestos and environmental claims. It is unknown whether potential Federal asbestos-related legislation will be enacted or what its effect would be on the Company aggregate asbestos liabilities. The reporting pattern for assumed reinsurance claims, including those related to asbestos and environmental claims, is much longer than for direct claims. In many instances, it takes months or years to determine that the policyholder own obligations have been met and how the reinsurance in question may apply to such claims. The delay in reporting reinsurance claims and exposures adds to the uncertainty of estimating the related reserves. Given the factors and emerging trends described above, the Company believes the actuarial tools and other techniques it employs to estimate the ultimate cost of claims for more traditional kinds of insurance exposure are less precise in estimating reserves for its asbestos and environmental exposures. For this reason, the Company relies on exposure-based analysis to estimate the ultimate costs of these claims and regularly evaluates new information in assessing its potential asbestos and environmental exposures. Reserve Activity Reserves and reserve activity in the Other Operations segment are categorized and reported as asbestos, environmental, or all other . The all other category of reserves covers a wide range of insurance and assumed reinsurance coverages, including, but not limited to, potential liability for construction defects, lead paint, silica, pharmaceutical products, molestation and other long-tail or late-emerging liabilities. In addition, within the all other category of reserves, Other Operations records its allowance for future reinsurer insolvencies and disputes that might affect reinsurance collectibility associated with asbestos, environmental, and other claims recoverable from reinsurers. The following table presents reserve activity, inclusive of estimates for both reported and incurred but not reported claims, net of reinsurance, for Other Operations, categorized by asbestos, environmental and all other claims, for the years ended December 31, 2005, 2004 and 2003. Other Operations Claims and Claim Adjustment Expenses 2005 Asbestos Environmental All Other [1] Total Beginning liability net [2] [3] $ 2,471 $ 385 $ 2,514 $ 5,370 Claims and claim adjustment expenses incurred 29 52 131 212 Claims and claim adjustment expenses paid (209 ) (77 ) (405 ) (691 ) Ending liability net [2] [3] $ 2,291 [4] $ 360 $ 2,240 $ 4,891 2004 Beginning liability net [2] [3] $ 3,783 $ 400 $ 2,392 $ 6,575 Claims and claim adjustment expenses incurred 217 78 150 445 Claims and claim adjustment expenses paid [5] (1,199 ) (83 ) (368 ) (1,650 ) Reclassification of allowance for uncollectible reinsurance (330 ) (10 ) 340 0 Ending liability net [2] [3] $ 2,471 $ 385 $ 2,514 $ 5,370 2003 Beginning liability net $ 1,107 $ 584 $ 2,436 $ 4,127 Claims and claim adjustment expenses incurred 2,609 (7 ) 484 3,086 Claims and claim adjustment expenses paid (158 ) (177 ) (525 ) (860 ) Other [6] 225 0 (3 ) 222 Ending liability net [2] [3] $ 3,783 $ 400 $ 2,392 $ 6,575 [1] All Other also includes unallocated loss adjustment expense reserves and the allowance for uncollectible reinsurance. [2] Excludes asbestos and environmental net liabilities reported in Ongoing Operations of $10 and $6, respectively, as of December 31, 2005, $13 and $9, respectively, as of December 31, 2004, and $11 and $8, respectively, as of December 31, 2003. Total net claim and claim adjustment expenses incurred in Ongoing Operations for the twelve months ended December 31, 2005, 2004, and 2003 includes $11, $13, and $13, respectively, related to asbestos and environmental claims. Total net claim and claim adjustment expenses paid in Ongoing Operations for the twelve months ended December 31, 2005, 2004, and 2003 includes $17, $11, and $12, respectively, related to asbestos and environmental claims. [3] Gross of reinsurance, asbestos and environmental reserves, including liabilities in Ongoing Operations, were $3,845 and $432, respectively, as of December 31, 2005, $4,322 and $501, respectively, as of December 31, 2004, and $5,884 and $542, respectively, as of December 31, 2003. [4] The one year and average three year net paid amounts for asbestos claims, including Ongoing Operations, are $215 and $526, respectively, resulting in a one year net survival ratio of 10.7 and a three year net survival ratio of 4.4 (12.7 excluding the MacArthur payments). Net survival ratio is the quotient of the net carried reserves divided by the average annual payment amount and is an indication of the number of years that the net carried reserve would last (i.e. survive) if the future annual claim payments were consistent with the calculated historical average. [5] Asbestos payments include payments pursuant to the MacArthur settlement. [6] Represents the transfer of reserves pursuant to the MacArthur settlement. The Company has been evaluating and closely monitoring assumed reinsurance reserves in Other Operations. For the years ended December 31, 2004 and December 31, 2003, the Company booked unfavorable reserve development of $170 and $129, respectively, related to HartRe assumed reinsurance. The Company reviewed certain of HartRe assumed reinsurance reserves during the first and second quarters of 2005. Unfavorable trends continued into 2005 and, as a result, the Company increased reserves by $12 and $73 in 85 Table of Contents the first and second quarters, respectively. The majority of the reserve strengthening of $85 was for assumed casualty reinsurance for the years 1997 through 2001. With the transfer of the HartRe assumed reinsurance business into Other Operations, the segment has exposure related to more recent assumed casualty reinsurance reserves, particularly for the underwriting years 1997 through 2001. Assumed reinsurance exposures are inherently less predictable than direct insurance exposures because the Company may not receive notice of a reinsurance claim until the underlying direct insurance claim is mature. This causes a delay in the receipt of information from the ceding companies. In recent years, the Company has seen an increase in reported losses above previous expectations and this increase in reported losses contributed to the reserve re-estimates. The Company completed an updated evaluation of HartRe assumed reinsurance reserves in the fourth quarter of 2005. The evaluation indicated no change in assumed reinsurance reserves. The Company currently expects to perform a review of its HartRe assumed reinsurance liabilities at least annually. During the third quarters of 2005 and 2004, the Company completed its annual environmental reserve evaluations. In each of these evaluations, the Company reviewed all of its domestic direct and assumed reinsurance accounts exposed to environmental liability. The Company also examined its London Market exposures for both direct insurance and assumed reinsurance. In both years, the Company found estimates for individual cases changed based upon the particular circumstances of each account, although the reviews found no apparent underlying cause or change in the claim environment. The net effect of these changes resulted in $37 and $75 increases in net environmental liabilities in 2005 and 2004, respectively. During the second quarters of 2005 and 2004, the Company completed its annual evaluations of the reinsurance recoveries associated with older, long-term casualty liabilities reported in the Other Operations segment. In conducting these reviews, the Company used its most recent detailed evaluations of ceded liabilities reported in the segment, including its estimate of future claims, the reinsurance arrangements in place and the years of potential reinsurance available. In each of these reviews, the Company also analyzed the overall credit quality of the Company reinsurers, recent trends in arbitration and litigation outcomes in disputes between cedants and reinsurers, and recent developments in commutation activity between reinsurers and cedants. The allowance for uncollectible reinsurance reflects management current estimate of reinsurance cessions that may be uncollectible in the future due to reinsurers unwillingness or inability to pay, and contemplates recoveries under ceded reinsurance contracts and settlements of disputes that could be different than the ceded liabilities. As a result of the evaluation in the second quarter of 2005, the Company increased its allowance for uncollectible reinsurance by $20 to reflect deterioration in the credit ratings of certain reinsurers and the Company opinion as to the ability of certain reinsurers to pay claims in the future. As a result of the evaluation in the second quarter of 2004, the Company reduced its estimated net reinsurance recoverable by $181, which was comprised of a $126 reduction of ceded amounts and a $55 increase in the allowance for uncollectible reinsurance. In the second quarter of 2004, the Company also consolidated within the all other category its allowance for reinsurer credit quality and disputes that might affect reinsurance coverage associated with Other Operations into a single allowance. As of December 31, 2005, the allowance for uncollectible reinsurance totals $335. The Company currently expects to perform its regular comprehensive review of Other Operations reinsurance recoverables in the second quarter of 2006. The Company is engaged in pending litigation in Connecticut Superior Court against certain of its upper-layer reinsurers under its Blanket Casualty Treaty ( BCT ). For discussion of the Company BCT litigation and the potential effect on the Company net reinsurance recoverables, see Note 12 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Uncertainties regarding the factors that affect the allowance for uncollectible reinsurance could cause the Company to change its estimates, and the effect of these changes could be material to the Company consolidated results of operations or cash flows. During the second quarter of 2005, the Company completed its annual asbestos reserve evaluation. As part of this evaluation, the Company reviewed all of its open direct domestic insurance accounts exposed to asbestos liability as well as assumed reinsurance accounts and certain closed accounts. The Company also examined its London Market exposures for both direct insurance and assumed reinsurance. The evaluation indicated no change in the overall gross or net reserves. During the first quarter of 2004, the Company completed an updated gross asbestos reserve evaluation. As part of this evaluation, the Company also reviewed all of its open direct domestic insurance accounts exposed to asbestos liability as well as assumed reinsurance accounts and certain closed accounts. The Company also examined its London Market exposures for both direct insurance and assumed reinsurance. The evaluation indicated no change in the overall gross asbestos reserves. On December 19, 2003, Hartford Accident and Indemnity Co. ( Hartford A&I ) entered into a settlement agreement with MacArthur Co. and its subsidiary, Western MacArthur Co. Under the settlement agreement, during the first quarter of 2004, Hartford A&I paid $1.15 billion into an escrow account owned by Hartford A&I. The funds were held in the escrow account until conditions precedent to the settlement occurred. On April 22, 2004, the funds were disbursed from the escrow account into a trust established for the benefit of present and future asbestos claimants pursuant to the bankruptcy plan. The settlement payments were accounted for as a reduction in unpaid claim and claim adjustment expenses during the first quarter of 2004. In the first quarter of 2003, several events occurred that in the Company view confirmed the existence of a substantial long-term deterioration in the asbestos litigation environment. As a result of these worsening conditions, the Company conducted a comprehensive evaluation of its asbestos exposures in an effort to project, beginning at the individual account level, the effect of these trends on the Company estimated total exposure to asbestos liability. Based on the Company evaluation of the deteriorating conditions, the Company strengthened its gross and net asbestos reserves by $3.9 billion and $2.6 billion, respectively. The reserve strengthening related primarily to policies effective in 1985 or prior years. The Company had incorporated an absolute asbestos exclusion in most of its general liability policies written after 1985. 86 Table of Contents A number of factors affect the variability of estimates for asbestos and environmental reserves including assumptions with respect to the frequency of claims, the average severity of those claims settled with payment, the dismissal rate of claims with no payment and the expense to indemnity ratio. The uncertainty with respect to the underlying reserve assumptions for asbestos and environmental adds a greater degree of variability to these reserve estimates than reserve estimates for more traditional exposures. While this variability is reflected in part in the size of the range of reserves developed by the Company, that range may still not be indicative of the potential variance between the ultimate outcome and the recorded reserves. The recorded net reserves as of December 31, 2005 of $2.7 billion ($2.3 billion and $360 for asbestos and environmental, respectively) is within an estimated range, unadjusted for covariance, of $2.0 billion to $3.1 billion. The process of estimating asbestos and environmental reserves remains subject to a wide variety of uncertainties, which are detailed in the Critical Accounting Estimates Property & Casualty Reserves, Net of Reinsurance section of Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations. Due to these uncertainties, further developments could cause the Company to change its estimates and ranges of its asbestos and environmental reserves, and the effect of these changes could be material to the Company consolidated operating results, financial condition and liquidity. The Company classifies its asbestos and environmental reserves into three categories: direct insurance, assumed reinsurance and London Market. Direct insurance includes primary and excess coverage. Assumed reinsurance includes both treaty reinsurance (covering broad categories of claims or blocks of business) and facultative reinsurance (covering specific risks or individual policies of primary or excess insurance companies). London Market business includes the business written by one or more of the Company subsidiaries in the United Kingdom, which are no longer active in the insurance or reinsurance business. Such business includes both direct insurance and assumed reinsurance. Of the three categories of claims (direct, assumed reinsurance and London Market), direct policies tend to have the greatest factual development from which to estimate the Company exposures. Assumed reinsurance exposures are inherently less predictable than direct insurance exposures because the Company may not receive notice of a reinsurance claim until the underlying direct insurance claim is mature. This causes a delay in the receipt of information at the reinsurer level and adds to the uncertainty of estimating related reserves. London Market exposures are the most uncertain of the three categories of claims. As a participant in the London Market (comprised of both Lloyd of London and London Market companies), certain subsidiaries of the Company wrote business on a subscription basis, with those subsidiaries involvement being limited to a relatively small percentage of a total contract placement. Claims are reported, via a broker, to the lead underwriter and, once agreed to, are presented to the following markets for concurrence. This reporting and claim agreement process makes estimating liabilities for this business the most uncertain of the three categories of claims. The following table sets forth, for the years ended December 31, 2005, 2004 and 2003, paid and incurred loss activity by the three categories of claims for asbestos and environmental. Paid and Incurred Loss and Loss Adjustment Expense ( LAE ) Development Asbestos and Environmental Asbestos [1] Environmental [1] Paid Incurred Paid Incurred 2005 Loss & LAE Loss & LAE Loss & LAE Loss & LAE Gross Direct $ 349 $ 10 $ 50 $ 14 Assumed Domestic 70 (4 ) 21 London Market 61 9 Total 480 6 80 14 Ceded (271 ) 23 (3 ) 38 Net $ 209 $ 29 $ 77 $ 52 2004 Gross Direct [2] $ 1,487 $ (18 ) $ 79 $ 75 Assumed Domestic 66 30 19 London Market 22 19 Total 1,575 12 117 75 Ceded (376 ) 205 (34 ) 3 Net $ 1,199 $ 217 $ 83 $ 78 2003 Gross Direct $ 222 $ 3,109 $ 100 $ 3 Assumed Domestic 53 585 16 (3 ) London Market 40 286 17 (8 ) Total 315 3,980 133 (8 ) Ceded (157 ) (1,371 ) 44 1 Net $ 158 $ 2,609 $ 177 $ (7 ) [1] Excludes asbestos and environmental paid and incurred loss and LAE reported in Ongoing Operations. Total gross claim and claim adjustment expenses paid in Ongoing Operations for the twelve months ended December 31, 2005, 2004, and 2003 includes $23, $11, and $13, respectively, related to asbestos and environmental claims. Total gross claim and claim adjustment expenses incurred in Ongoing Operations for the twelve months ended December 31, 2005, 2004, and 2003 includes $17, $14, and $13, respectively, related to asbestos and environmental claims. [2] Reflects payments pursuant to the MacArthur settlement of $1.15 billion. 87 Table of Contents Consistent with the Company long-standing reserving practices, the Company will continue to review and monitor its reserves in the Other Operations segment regularly and, where future developments indicate, make appropriate adjustments to the reserves. For a discussion of the Company reserving practices, please see the Critical Accounting Estimates Property & Casualty Reserves, Net of Reinsurance section of Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations. The loss reserving assumptions, drawn from both industry data and the Company experience, have been applied over time to all of this business and have resulted in reserve strengthening or reserve releases at various times over the past decade. The Company believes that its current asbestos and environmental reserves are reasonable and appropriate. However, analyses of future developments could cause the Company to change its estimates and ranges of its asbestos and environmental reserves, and the effect of these changes could be material to the Company consolidated operating results, financial condition and liquidity. The Company expects to perform its regular reviews of asbestos liabilities in the second quarter of 2006 and environmental liabilities in the third quarter of 2006. If there are significant developments that affect particular exposures, reinsurance arrangements or the financial condition of particular reinsurers, the Company will make adjustments to its reserves, or the portion of liabilities it expects to cede to reinsurers. Outlook The Other Operations segment will continue to manage the discontinued operations of The Hartford as well as claims (and associated reserves) related to asbestos, environmental and other exposures. The Hartford will continue to review various components of all of its reserves on a regular basis. INVESTMENTS General The Hartford investment portfolios are primarily divided between Life and Property & Casualty. The investment portfolios of Life and Property & Casualty are managed by HIMCO, a wholly-owned subsidiary of The Hartford. HIMCO manages the portfolios to maximize economic value, while attempting to generate the income necessary to support the Company various product obligations, within internally established objectives, guidelines and risk tolerances. The portfolio objectives and guidelines are developed based upon the asset/liability profile, including duration, convexity and other characteristics within specified risk tolerances. The risk tolerances considered include, for example, asset and credit issuer allocation limits, maximum portfolio below investment grade ( BIG ) holdings and foreign currency exposure. The Company attempts to minimize adverse impacts to the portfolio and the Company results of operations due to changes in economic conditions through asset allocation limits, asset/liability duration matching and through the use of derivatives. For a further discussion of how the investment portfolio credit and market risks are assessed and managed, see the Investment Credit Risk and Capital Markets Risk Management sections of the MD&A. HIMCO security selection process is a multi-dimensional approach that combines independent internal credit research along with a macro-economic outlook of technical trends (e.g. interest rates, slope of the yield curve and credit spreads) and market pricing to identify valuation inefficiencies and relative value buying and selling opportunities. Security selection and monitoring is performed by asset class specialists working within dedicated portfolio management teams. HIMCO portfolio managers may sell securities (except those securities in an unrealized loss position for which the Company has indicated its intent and ability to hold until the price recovers) due to portfolio guidelines or market technicals or trends. For example, the Company may sell securities to manage risk, capture market valuation inefficiencies or relative value opportunities, to remain compliant with internal asset/liability duration matching guidelines, or to modify a portfolio duration to capitalize on interest rate levels or the yield curve slope. HIMCO believes that advantageously buying and selling securities within a disciplined framework, provides the greatest economic value for the Company over the long-term. Return on general account invested assets is an important element of The Hartford financial results. Significant fluctuations in the fixed income or equity markets could weaken the Company financial condition or its results of operations. Additionally, changes in market interest rates may impact the period of time over which certain investments, such as mortgage-backed securities ( MBS ), are repaid and whether certain investments are called by the issuers. Such changes may, in turn, impact the yield on these investments and also may result in re-investment of funds received from calls and prepayments at rates below the average portfolio yield. Net investment income and net realized capital gains accounted for approximately 30%, 23% and 19% of the Company consolidated revenues for the years ended December 31, 2005, 2004 and 2003, respectively. The increase in the percentage of consolidated revenues for 2005, as compared to the prior years, is primarily due to an increase in the value of equity securities held for trading. Fluctuations in interest rates affect the Company return on, and the fair value of, fixed maturity investments, which comprised approximately 72% and 80% of the fair value of its invested assets as of December 31, 2005 and 2004, respectively. Other events beyond the Company control could also adversely impact the fair value of these investments. Specifically, a downgrade of an issuer credit rating or default of payment by an issuer could reduce the Company investment return. The Company invests in private placement securities, mortgage loans and limited partnership arrangements in order to further diversify its investment portfolio. These investment types comprised approximately 18% and 16% of the fair value of its invested assets as of December 31, 2005 and 2004, respectively. These security types are typically less liquid than direct investments in publicly traded fixed income or equity investments. However, generally these securities have higher yields to compensate for the liquidity risk. 88 Table of Contents A decrease in the fair value of any investment that is deemed other-than-temporary would result in the Company recognition of a net realized capital loss in its financial results prior to the actual sale of the investment. For a further discussion of the evaluation of other-than-temporary impairments, see the Critical Accounting Estimates section of the MD&A under Evaluation of Other-Than-Temporary Impairments on Available-for-Sale Securities . Valuation of Investments and Derivative Instruments The Hartford investments in fixed maturities, which include bonds, redeemable preferred stock and commercial paper; and certain equity securities, which include common and non-redeemable preferred stocks, are classified as available-for-sale and accordingly are carried at fair value with the after-tax difference from cost or amortized cost, as adjusted for the effect of deducting the life and pension policyholders share of the immediate participation guaranteed contracts; and certain life and annuity deferred policy acquisition costs and reserve adjustments, reflected in stockholders equity as a component of AOCI. The equity investments associated with the variable annuity products offered in Japan are recorded at fair value and are classified as trading with changes in fair value recorded in net investment income. Policy loans are carried at outstanding balance, which approximates fair value. Other investments primarily consist of mortgage loans, limited partnership interests and derivatives. Mortgage loans on real estate are recorded at the outstanding principal balance adjusted for amortization of premiums or discounts and net of valuation allowances, if any. Limited partnerships are accounted for under the equity method and accordingly the Company share of partnership earnings are included in net investment income. Derivatives are carried at fair value. Valuation of Fixed Maturities The fair value for fixed maturity securities is largely determined by one of three primary pricing methods: independent third party pricing service market quotations, independent broker quotations or pricing matrices, which use data provided by external sources. With the exception of short-term securities for which amortized cost is predominantly used to approximate fair value, security pricing is applied using a hierarchy or waterfall approach whereby prices are first sought from independent pricing services with the remaining unpriced securities submitted to brokers for prices or lastly priced via a pricing matrix. Prices from independent pricing services are often unavailable for securities that are rarely traded or are traded only in privately negotiated transactions. As a result, certain of the Company ABS and commercial mortgage-backed securities ( CMBS ) are priced via broker quotations. A pricing matrix is used to price securities for which the Company is unable to obtain either a price from an independent third party service or an independent broker quotation. The pricing matrix begins with current treasury rates and uses credit spreads and issuer-specific yield adjustments received from an independent third party source to determine the market price for the security. The credit spreads, as assigned by a nationally recognized rating agency, incorporate the issuer credit rating and a risk premium, if warranted, due to the issuer industry and the security time to maturity. The issuer-specific yield adjustments, which can be positive or negative, are updated twice annually, as of June 30 and December 31, by an independent third party source and are intended to adjust security prices for issuer-specific factors. The matrix-priced securities at December 31, 2005 and 2004, primarily consisted of non-144A private placements and have an average duration of 5.0 and 4.8 years, respectively. The following table identifies the fair value of fixed maturity securities by pricing source as of December 31, 2005 and 2004. 2005 2004 Percentage of Total Percentage of Total Fair Value Fair Value Fair Value Fair Value Priced via independent market quotations $ 65,986 86.3 % $ 63,176 84.1 % Priced via broker quotations 2,728 3.6 % 4,273 5.6 % Priced via matrices 5,452 7.1 % 4,847 6.5 % Priced via other methods 211 0.3 % 52 0.1 % Short-term investments [1] 2,063 2.7 % 2,752 3.7 % Total $ 76,440 100.0 % $ 75,100 100.0 % [1] Short-term investments are primarily valued at amortized cost, which approximates fair value. The fair value of a financial instrument is the amount at which the instrument could be exchanged in a current transaction between knowledgeable, unrelated willing parties. As such, the estimated fair value of a financial instrument may differ significantly from the amount that could be realized if the security was sold immediately. Valuation of Derivative Instruments Derivative instruments are reported at fair value based upon either pricing valuation models, which utilize independent third party data as inputs, or broker quotations. Other than the GMWB rider and the associated reinsurance contracts, which are discussed in the Critical Accounting Estimates section of the MD&A under Valuation of Guaranteed Minimum Withdrawal Benefit Derivatives , approximately 81% and 69% of derivatives, based upon notional values, were priced via valuation models, while the remaining 19% and 31% of derivatives were priced via broker quotations, as of December 31, 2005 and 2004, respectively. Life The primary investment objective of Life general account is to maximize economic value consistent with acceptable risk parameters, including the management of the interest rate sensitivity of invested assets, while generating sufficient after-tax income to support policyholder and corporate obligations, as discussed in the Capital Markets Risk Management section of the MD&A under Market Risk Life . 89 Table of Contents The following table identifies the invested assets by type held in the general account as of December 31, 2005 and 2004. Composition of Invested Assets 2005 2004 Amount Percent Amount Percent Fixed maturities, available-for-sale, at fair value $ 50,812 63.7 % $ 50,531 73.5 % Equity securities, available-for-sale, at fair value 800 1.0 % 525 0.8 % Equity securities held for trading, at fair value 24,034 30.1 % 13,634 19.8 % Policy loans, at outstanding balance 2,016 2.5 % 2,662 3.9 % Mortgage loans, at amortized cost 1,513 1.9 % 923 1.3 % Limited partnerships, at fair value 431 0.6 % 256 0.4 % Other investments 178 0.2 % 185 0.3 % Total investments $ 79,784 100.0 % $ 68,716 100.0 % Fixed maturity investments increased $281, or 1%, since December 31, 2004, primarily the result of positive operating cash flows, product sales and a decrease in long-term interest rates, substantially offset by an increase in short-term to intermediate-term interest rates, credit spread widening and foreign currency depreciation in comparison to the U.S. dollar for foreign denominated securities. Equity securities held for trading increased $10.4 billion, or 76%, since December 31, 2004, due to positive cash flow primarily generated from sales and deposits related to variable annuity products sold in Japan and positive performance of the underlying investment funds supporting the Japanese variable annuity product, partially offset by foreign currency depreciation in comparison to the U.S. dollar. Policy loans decreased $646, or 24%, since December 31, 2004, as a result of certain policy loan surrenders. Mortgage loans increased $590, or 64%, since December 31, 2004, as a result of a decision to increase Life investment in this asset class primarily due to its attractive yields and diversification opportunities. Investment Results The following table summarizes Life investment results. (Before-tax) 2005 2004 2003 Net investment income excluding income on policy loans and equity securities held for trading $ 2,854 $ 2,690 $ 1,831 Equity securities held for trading [1] 3,847 799 Policy loan income 144 186 210 Net investment income total $ 6,845 $ 3,675 $ 2,041 Yield on average invested assets [2] 5.7 % 5.8 % 6.0 % Gross gains on sale $ 346 $ 359 $ 267 Gross losses on sale (254 ) (147 ) (95 ) Impairments (37 ) (25 ) (162 ) Japanese fixed annuity contract hedges, net [3] (36 ) 3 Periodic net coupon settlements on credit derivatives/Japan (32 ) 8 3 GMWB derivatives, net (46 ) 8 6 Other, net [4] 34 (42 ) 7 Net realized capital gains (losses), before-tax $ (25 ) $ 164 $ 26 [1] Represents the change in value of equity securities held for trading. [2] Represents annualized net investment income (excluding income related to equity securities held for trading) divided by the monthly weighted average invested assets at cost or amortized cost, as applicable, excluding equity securities held for trading, the collateral received associated with the securities lending program and consolidated variable interest entity minority interests. [3] Relates to the Japanese fixed annuity product (product and related derivative hedging instruments excluding periodic net coupon settlements). [4] Primarily consists of changes in fair value on non-qualifying derivatives, changes in fair value of certain derivatives in fair value hedge relationships and hedge ineffectiveness on qualifying derivative instruments. 2005 Compared to 2004 Net investment income, excluding income on policy loans and equity securities held for trading, increased $164, or 6%, compared to the prior year. The increase in net investment income was primarily due to income earned on a higher average invested assets base as well as higher partnership income. The increase in the average invested assets base, as compared to the prior year, was primarily due to positive operating cash flows, investment contract sales such as retail and institutional notes, and universal life-type product sales such as individual fixed annuity products sold in Japan. The higher partnership income was due to certain of the Company partnerships reporting higher market values and the result of certain partnerships liquidating their underlying investment holdings in the favorable market environment. Net investment income on equity securities held for trading for 2005 was primarily generated by positive performance of the underlying investment funds supporting the Japanese variable annuity product, partially offset by foreign currency depreciation in comparison to the U.S. dollar. Net investment income on equity securities held for trading for 2004 was primarily generated by positive performance of the underlying investment funds supporting the Japanese variable annuity product as well as foreign currency appreciation in comparison to the U.S. dollar. The change in net investment income as compared to the prior year is primarily due to the performance of the underlying funds on a higher asset base. 90 Table of Contents For 2005, the yield on average invested assets was relatively consistent with the prior year. An increase in yield as a result of higher partnership income was offset by a reduction in yield due to lower policy loan income. Based upon forward interest rates as of December 31, 2005, Life expects the average before-tax new investment yield for fixed rate debt securities in 2006 to range from 5.1% to 5.3%, slightly below the current average portfolio yield. However, any slight decline in the average fixed rate debt security yield is expected to be offset by an average higher yield on variable rate securities as well as additional yield generated from diversifying into other asset types. Therefore, excluding partnership income and policy loan income, Life expects the yield on average invested assets for 2006 to be at or slightly higher than the 2005 level. If future interest rates differ from the forward rates as of December 31, 2005, the actual average new investment yields may be significantly different than yields currently expected. Net realized capital losses were recognized for 2005 compared to net realized capital gains for 2004. The significant components driving the changes in net realized capital gain and loss amounts between 2005 and 2004 include lower net gains on the sale of fixed maturity securities, losses associated with GMWB derivatives, Japanese fixed annuity contract hedges and periodic net coupon settlements. These losses were offset in part by gains in Other, net which was primarily related to changes in the value of non-qualifying foreign currency swaps. The circumstances giving rise to the changes in these components are as follows: The lower net gains on fixed maturity sales in 2005 were primarily the result of rising interest rates and losses associated with a major automotive manufacturer. See additional discussion of the gross gains and losses on sales below. If interest rates remain at current levels or rise during 2006, or credit spreads widen, net realized capital gains on fixed maturity sales for 2006 will likely be lower than the 2005 levels. The losses associated with the GMWB derivatives were primarily driven by changes in the GMWB rider valuation assumptions in the fourth quarter of 2005. For further discussion of the GMWB rider valuation assumption, see the Capital Markets Risk Management section of the MD&A under Market Risk-Life . The Japanese fixed annuity contract hedges amount consists of the foreign currency transaction remeasurements associated with the yen denominated fixed annuity contracts offered in Japan and the corresponding offsetting cross currency swaps. Although the Japanese fixed annuity contracts are economically hedged, the net realized capital losses result from the mixed attribute accounting model, which requires fixed annuity liabilities to be recorded at cost but the associated derivatives to be reported at fair value. The net realized capital losses in 2005 resulted from rising Japanese interest rates, and in the first half of the year, a decrease in U.S. interest rates. For additional discussion of the Japanese fixed annuity contract hedges see the Capital Markets Risk Management section of the MD&A under Market Risk-Life and Note 4 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. The periodic net coupon settlements on credit derivatives and the Japan fixed annuity cross currency swaps includes the net periodic income/expense or coupon associated with the swap contracts. The net loss for 2005 is associated with the Japan fixed annuity cross currency swaps and results from the interest rate differential between U.S. and Japanese interest rates. The Japanese fixed annuity product was first offered by the Company in the fourth quarter 2004. The adverse change in 2005 in comparison to 2004 primarily resulted from a full year of the Japanese fixed annuity product swap accruals in 2005. In 2005, gross gains were primarily within fixed maturities and included corporate, foreign government securities and CMBS. Corporate securities were sold primarily to reduce the Company exposure to certain lower credit quality issuers. The sale proceeds were primarily re-invested into higher credit quality securities. The gains on sales of corporate securities were primarily the result of credit spread tightening since the date of purchase. Foreign securities were sold primarily to reduce the foreign currency exposure in the portfolio due to the expected near term volatility in foreign exchange rates and to capture gains resulting from credit spread tightening since the date of purchase. The CMBS sales resulted from a decision to divest securities that were backed by a single asset due to the then scheduled expiration of the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act at the end of 2005. Gains on these sales were realized as a result of an improved credit environment and interest rate declines from the date of purchase. In 2005, gross losses on sales were primarily within the corporate sector. Gross losses for 2005 included $27 of losses on sales of securities related to a major automotive manufacturer, that primarily occurred during the second quarter. Sales related to actions taken to reduce issuer exposure in light of a downward adjustment in earnings and cash flows of the issuer primarily due to sluggish sales, rising employee and retiree benefit costs and an increased debt service interest burden, and to reposition the portfolio into higher quality securities. For 2005, excluding sales related to the automotive manufacturer noted above, there was no single security sold at a loss in excess of $6 and the average loss as a percentage of the fixed maturity amortized cost was less than 2%, which under the Company impairment policy was deemed to be depressed only to a minor extent. 2004 Compared to 2003 Net investment income, excluding income on policy loans and equity securities held for trading, increased $859, or 47%, compared to the prior year. The increase in net investment income was primarily due to income earned on a higher average invested assets base, as compared to the prior year, and an increase in income from prepayment penalties primarily associated with CMBS and yield adjustments related to changes in prepayment speeds associated with MBS held at a premium or discount. These increases were partially offset by a decrease in the average new invested assets yield and the repositioning of the portfolio into higher quality assets as described below. The increase in the average invested assets base, as compared to the prior year, was primarily the result of separate account assets reclassified to the general account pursuant to the adoption of SOP 03-1 and, to a lesser extent, assets acquired in the CNA acquisition and operating cash flows. Income earned on separate account assets reclassified to the general account, excluding equity securities held for trading, was $619 for 2004. Income earned on assets acquired in the CNA transaction was $116 for 2004. During 2004, the yield on average invested assets decreased from the prior year as a result of new investment purchases at rates below the average portfolio yield due to the continued low interest rate environment and decreased policy loan income. Since the Company invests primarily in long-term fixed rate debt securities, changes in long-term interest rates impact the yield on new asset purchases 91 Table of Contents and, therefore, have a gradual impact on the overall portfolio yield. The weighted average yield on new invested asset purchases in 2004 of approximately 4.9%, before-tax, was below the average portfolio yield. Net realized capital gains during 2004 increased by $138 compared to the prior year, primarily the result of lower other-than-temporary impairments. For further discussion of other-than-temporary impairments, see the Other-Than-Temporary Impairments commentary in this section of the MD&A. In 2004, gross gains were realized as fixed maturity credit spreads tightened and portions of the Life investment portfolios were repositioned into higher quality assets where the Company believed greater relative value existed. Credit spreads tightened primarily due to improved credit quality, market liquidity and demand for higher yielding assets, as well as the relatively low interest rate environment. It is expected that the higher quality assets will provide greater liquidity if the credit environment and issuer default rates return to historical norms. In addition, foreign government securities were sold, primarily in the first and fourth quarters of 2004, to reduce the portfolios exposure to foreign holdings and realize gains associated with the decline in value of the U.S. dollar against foreign currencies. In 2004, securities sold at a loss were predominantly corporate securities, U.S. government securities, certain ABS and CMBS with no single security sold at a loss in excess of $5 and an average loss as a percentage of the fixed maturity amortized cost of less than 5%, which under the Company impairment policy, were deemed to be depressed only to a minor extent. In 2003, no single security was sold at a loss in excess of $8. Separate Account Products Separate account products are those for which a separate investment and liability account is maintained on behalf of the policyholder. The Company separate accounts reflect two categories of risk assumption: non-guaranteed separate accounts wherein the policyholder assumes substantially all the risk and reward; and guaranteed separate accounts wherein the Company contractually guarantees either a minimum return or the account value to the policyholder. Investment objectives for non-guaranteed separate accounts, which consist of the participants account balances, vary by fund account type, as outlined in the applicable fund prospectus or separate account plan of operations. Non-guaranteed separate account products include variable annuities (except those sold in Japan), variable universal life insurance contracts and variable corporate owned life insurance. The assets and liabilities associated with variable annuity products sold in Japan do not meet the criteria to be recognized as a separate account because the assets are not legally insulated from the Company. Therefore, these assets are included with the Company general account assets effective January 1, 2004. As of December 31, 2005 and 2004, the Company non-guaranteed separate accounts totaled $150.9 billion and $140.0 billion, respectively. Guaranteed separate accounts primarily consist of modified guaranteed individual annuities and modified guaranteed life insurance and generally include market value adjustment features and surrender charges to mitigate the risk of disintermediation. The primary investment objective of these assets is to maximize after-tax returns consistent with acceptable risk parameters, including the management of the interest rate sensitivity of invested assets relative to that of policyholder obligations, as discussed in the Capital Markets Risk Management section of the MD&A under Market Risk Life . Effective January 1, 2004, the guaranteed separate accounts are included with the Company general account assets. Property & Casualty The primary investment objective for Property & Casualty Ongoing Operations segment is to maximize economic value while generating sufficient after-tax income to meet policyholder and corporate obligations. For Property & Casualty Other Operations segment, the investment objective is to ensure the full and timely payment of all liabilities. Property & Casualty investment strategies are developed based on a variety of factors including business needs, regulatory requirements and tax considerations. The following table identifies the invested assets by type held as of December 31, 2005 and 2004. Composition of Invested Assets 2005 2004 Amount Percent Amount Percent Fixed maturities, available-for-sale, at fair value $ 25,330 94.3 % $ 24,410 95.6 % Equity securities, available-for-sale, at fair value 661 2.5 % 307 1.2 % Real estate/Mortgage loans, at amortized cost 220 0.8 % 253 1.0 % Limited partnerships, at fair value 237 0.9 % 177 0.7 % Other investments 405 1.5 % 379 1.5 % Total investments $ 26,853 100.0 % $ 25,526 100.0 % During 2005, fixed maturities increased $920, or 4%, primarily due to positive operating cash flow and a decrease in long-term interest rates, partially offset by an increase in short-term to intermediate-term interest rates, credit spread widening and foreign currency depreciation in comparison to the U.S. dollar for foreign denominated securities. 92 Table of Contents Investment Results The following table below summarizes Property & Casualty investment results. (Before-tax) 2005 2004 2003 Net investment income, before-tax $ 1,365 $ 1,248 $ 1,172 Net investment income, after-tax [1] $ 1,016 $ 932 $ 889 Yield on average invested assets, before-tax [2] 5.5 % 5.4 % 5.5 % Yield on average invested assets, after-tax [1] [2] 4.1 % 4.1 % 4.2 % Gross gains on sale $ 163 $ 210 $ 397 Gross losses on sale (110 ) (83 ) (125 ) Impairments (10 ) (13 ) (38 ) Periodic net coupon settlements on credit derivatives 9 18 Other, net [3] 1 10 1 Net realized capital gains, before-tax $ 44 $ 133 $ 253 [1] Due to significant holdings in tax-exempt investments, after-tax net investment income and yield are also included. [2] Represents annualized net investment income divided by the monthly weighted average invested assets at cost or amortized cost, as applicable, excluding the collateral received associated with the securities lending program. [3] Primarily consists of changes in fair value on non-qualifying derivatives and hedge ineffectiveness on qualifying derivative instruments. 2005 Compared to 2004 Before-tax net investment income increased $117, or 9%, and after-tax net investment income increased $84, or 9%, compared to the prior year. The increases in net investment income were primarily due to income earned on a higher average invested assets base as well as higher partnership income. The increase in the average invested assets base, as compared to the prior year, was primarily due to positive operating cash flows. The higher partnership income was due to certain of the Company partnerships reporting higher market values and the result of certain partnerships liquidating their underlying investment holdings in the favorable market environment. In 2005, the yield on average invested assets increased from the prior year as a result of higher partnership income. Excluding partnership income, the yield on average invested assets for 2005 was relatively consistent with the prior year. Based upon forward interest rates as of December 31, 2005, Property & Casualty expects the average before-tax new investment yield for fixed rate debt securities in 2006 to range from 5.1% to 5.3%, slightly below the current average portfolio yield. However, any slight decline in the average fixed rate debt security yield is expected to be offset by an average higher yield generated from diversifying into other asset types. Therefore, excluding partnership income, Property & Casualty expects the yield on average invested assets for 2006 to be at or slightly higher than the 2005 level. If future interest rates differ from the forward rates as of December 31, 2005, the actual average new investment yields may be significantly different than yields currently expected. Net realized capital gains for 2005 decreased $89 as compared to the prior year primarily due to lower net realized gains on fixed maturity securities, lower periodic net coupon settlements on credit derivatives, as well as net losses on non-qualifying derivatives in 2005 compared to net gains in 2004. If interest rates remain at current levels or increase during 2006, or credit spreads widen, net realized capital gains would likely be lower than the 2005 levels. In 2005, gross gains on sales were primarily within fixed maturities and were concentrated in the corporate and foreign government sectors and were the result of decisions to reposition the portfolio due to credit spread tightening in certain sectors and changes in foreign currency exchange rates. Certain lower quality corporate securities that had appreciated in value as a result of an improved corporate credit environment were sold to reposition the corporate holdings into higher quality securities. Foreign securities were sold to reduce the foreign currency exposure in the portfolio due to the expected near term volatility in foreign exchange rates. Also, certain foreign government securities appreciated in price and were sold to capture gains resulting from credit spread tightening since the date of purchase. In 2005, gross losses were primarily within corporate and foreign government securities. Included in the corporate gross losses for 2005 are losses on sales of securities related to a major automotive manufacturer of $10 that primarily occurred during the second quarter. Sales related to actions taken to reduce issuer exposure in light of a downward adjustment in earnings and cash flows of the issuer primarily due to sluggish sales, rising employee and retiree benefit costs and an increased debt service interest burden, and to reposition the portfolio into higher quality securities. For 2005, excluding sales related to the automotive manufacturer noted above, there was no single security sold at a loss in excess of $3 and the average loss as a percentage of the fixed maturity amortized cost was less than 2%, which under the Company impairment policy, was deemed to be depressed only to a minor extent. 2004 Compared to 2003 Before-tax net investment income increased $76, or 6%, and after-tax net investment income increased $43, or 5%, compared to the prior year. The increases in net investment income were primarily due to income earned on a higher average invested assets base in 2004, as compared to prior year, partially offset by a decrease in the average new invested assets yield and the repositioning of the portfolio into higher quality assets as described below. In 2004, the yield on average invested assets decreased slightly from the prior year as a result of new investment purchases at rates below the average portfolio yield due to the continued low interest rate environment. Since the Company invests primarily in long-term fixed rate debt securities, changes in long-term interest rates impact the yield on new asset purchases and, therefore, have a gradual impact on the overall portfolio yield. The weighted average yield on new asset purchases in 2004 of approximately 4.9%, before-tax, was below the average portfolio yield. 93 Table of Contents Net realized capital gains for 2004 decreased $120 as compared to the prior year as a result of lower net realized gains on sales of fixed maturity securities, partially offset by lower other-than-temporary impairments. For further discussion of other-than-temporary impairments, see the Other-Than-Temporary Impairments commentary in this section of the MD&A. In 2004, gross gains were realized as fixed maturity credit spreads tightened and portions of the Property & Casualty portfolios were repositioned into higher quality assets where HIMCO believed greater relative value existed. Credit spreads tightened primarily due to improved credit quality, market liquidity and demand for higher yielding assets, as well as the relatively low interest rate environment. It is expected that the higher quality assets will provide greater liquidity if the credit environment and issuer default rates return to historical norms. In addition, foreign government securities were sold, primarily in the first and fourth quarters of 2004, to reduce the portfolios exposure to foreign holdings and realize gains associated with the decline in value of the U.S. dollar against foreign currencies. In 2004, securities sold at a loss were predominantly corporate securities, U.S. government securities, certain ABS and CMBS with no single security sold at a loss in excess of $5 and an average loss as a percentage of the fixed maturity amortized cost of less than 5%, which under the Company impairment policy were deemed to be depressed only to a minor extent. In 2003, no Property & Casualty security was sold at a loss in excess of $10. Corporate The investment objective of Corporate is to raise capital through financing activities to support the Life and Property & Casualty operations of the Company and to maintain sufficient funds to support the cost of those financing activities including the payment of interest for The Hartford Financial Services Group, Inc. ( HFSG ) issued debt and dividends to shareholders of The Hartford common stock. As of December 31, 2005 and 2004, Corporate held $298 and $159, respectively, of fixed maturity investments. In addition, Corporate held $7 of other investments as of December 31, 2004. Investment Management Activities HIMCO serves as collateral manager for four synthetic collateralized loan obligation trusts and a recently issued continuously offered ERISA-eligible institutional fund (collectively, synthetic CLOs ) that invests in senior secured bank loans through total return swaps ( referenced bank loan portfolios ). HIMCO assumed collateral manager responsibilities for two of the synthetic CLOs in 2004 and subsequently sponsored and issued three additional synthetic CLOs (one in 2004 and two in 2005). The outstanding notional value of the referenced bank loan portfolios from the five synthetic CLOs was $1.7 billion and $1.1 billion as of December 31, 2005 and 2004, respectively. As of December 31, 2005 and 2004, the synthetic CLOs had issued approximately $290 and $185 of notes and preferred shares ( CLO issuances ), respectively. The proceeds from the CLO issuances are invested in collateral accounts consisting of high credit quality securities and/or bank loans that are pledged to the referenced bank loan portfolios swap counterparties. Investors in the CLO issuances receive the net proceeds from the referenced bank loan portfolios. Any principal losses incurred by the swap counterparties associated with the referenced bank loan portfolios are borne by the CLO issuances investors through the total return swaps. Approximately $240 and $170 of the CLO issuances were held by third party investors as of December 31, 2005 and 2004, respectively. The third party investors in the synthetic CLOs have recourse only to the synthetic CLOs assets and not to the general credit of the Company. Accordingly, the Company financial exposure to these synthetic CLOs is limited to its direct investment in certain notes and preferred shares issued by the synthetic CLOs and loss of management fees. Pursuant to the requirements of Financial Accounting Standards Board Interpretation No. 46 (revised), Consolidation of Variable Interest Entities, an interpretation of ARB No. 51 ( FIN 46R ), the Company has concluded that the five synthetic CLOs are variable interest entities ( VIEs ) and for two of the synthetic CLOs, the Company is the primary beneficiary and must consolidate these synthetic CLOs. Accordingly, the Company has reflected the assets and liabilities of two synthetic CLOs in its consolidated financial statements. As of December 31, 2005, the Company recorded $75 of cash and fixed maturities, total return swaps with a fair value of $2 in other investments and $42 in other liabilities related to the CLO issuances in its consolidated balance sheets. As of December 31, 2004, the Company recorded in the consolidated balance sheets $65 of cash and fixed maturities, total return swaps with a fair value of $3 in other investments and $52 related to the CLO issuances in other liabilities. The Company investments and accrued management fees in the consolidated synthetic CLOs, which is its maximum exposure to loss, was $35 and $14, as of December 31, 2005 and 2004, respectively. Under FIN 46R, the Company is not deemed to be the primary beneficiary of the other three synthetic CLOs managed by HIMCO, one of which was issued in 2005. As a result, these synthetic CLOs are not consolidated by the Company. The Company maximum exposure to loss from the non-consolidated synthetic CLOs (consisting of the Company investments and accrued management fees) was approximately $21 and $3 as of December 31, 2005 and 2004. The collateral management fees earned by HIMCO for the three non-consolidated synthetic CLOs totaled $6 and $3 for the years ended December 31, 2005 and 2004, respectively, and are reported in other income in the consolidated statements of operations. The Company utilized qualitative and quantitative analyses to assess whether it was the primary beneficiary of the VIEs. The qualitative considerations included the Company co-investment in relation to the total CLO issuance. The quantitative analysis included calculating the variability of the CLO issuance based upon statistical techniques utilizing historical normalized default and recovery rates for the average credit quality of the initial referenced bank loan portfolio. 94 Table of Contents Other-Than-Temporary Impairments The Company has a security monitoring process overseen by a committee of investment and accounting professionals that, on a quarterly basis, identifies securities that could potentially be other-than-temporarily impaired. When a security is deemed to be other-than-temporarily impaired, its cost or amortized cost is written down to current market value and a realized loss is recorded in the Company consolidated statements of operations. For further discussion regarding the Company other-than-temporary impairment policy, see Evaluation of Other-Than-Temporary Impairments on Available-for-Sale Securities included in the Critical Accounting Estimates section of the MD&A and Note 1 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. The following table identifies the Company other-than-temporary impairments by type. 2005 2004 2003 ABS $ 5 $ 13 $ 101 Commercial mortgages 3 CMBS/Collateralized mortgage obligations ( CMOs ) 1 3 5 Corporate 32 5 56 Equity 9 12 30 MBS interest only securities 2 8 Total other-than-temporary impairments $ 47 $ 38 $ 200 The decrease in other-than-temporary impairments during 2004 and 2005 in comparison to 2003 levels is due to an improvement in the corporate credit environment, general economic conditions and operating fundamentals, and improved pricing levels for ABS. In general, security issuers operating fundamentals have improved due to reduced company leverage, improved liquidity and the successful implementation of various cost cutting measures. Improvement in pricing levels for ABS has been driven by a general stabilization in the performance of the underlying collateral and an increase in demand for these asset types due to improved economic and operating fundamentals of the underlying security issuers, better market liquidity and attractive yields. Future other-than-temporary impairment levels will depend primarily on economic fundamentals, political stability, issuer and/or collateral performance and future movements in interest rates. If interest rates continue to increase during 2006 or credit spreads widen, other-than-temporary impairments for 2006 may be higher than the 2005 levels. For further discussion of risk factors associated with sectors with significant unrealized loss positions, see the sector risk factor commentary under the Consolidated Total Available-for-Sale Securities with Unrealized Loss Greater than Six Months by Type table in the Investment Credit Risk section of the MD&A. The following discussion provides an analysis of significant other-than-temporary impairments recognized during 2005, 2004 and 2003, the related circumstances giving rise to the other-than-temporary impairments and the potential impact such circumstances may have on other material investments held. 2005 During 2005 there were no significant other-than-temporary impairments (e.g. $15 or greater) recorded on any single security or issuer. Other-than-temporary impairments recorded on ABS primarily related to deterioration of the underlying collateral supporting several securities and included $3 recorded on aircraft lease receivables related to one major U.S. carrier. These receivables are secured by certain older aircraft that recently experienced a significant decline in value. Other-than-temporary impairments recorded on equity securities primarily related to variable rate perpetual preferred securities issued by one highly-rated financial services company. These securities had sustained a decline in market value for an extended period of time as a result of issuer credit spread widening. Other-than-temporary impairments recorded on corporate securities were primarily the result of the Company uncertainty regarding its intent and ability to retain the investment for a period of time sufficient to allow for an anticipated recovery, not to the Company expectations regarding the issuers payments based upon the contractual terms of the securities. The circumstances giving rise to the decline in value of these corporate securities since the date of purchase and potential impact on other material holdings of these issuers are as follows: Approximately $15 of other-than-temporary impairments recorded on corporate securities related to three Canadian paper companies. These companies operations have recently suffered from high energy prices and falling demand, in part due to the appreciation of the Canadian dollar in comparison to the U.S. dollar. These investments continue to perform in accordance with the contractual terms of the securities. As of December 31, 2005, the Company held approximately $96 of securities issued by these three companies in a total net unrealized loss position of $5. Substantially all of the securities in an unrealized loss position, as of December 31, 2005, were depressed only to a minor extent and, as a result, the unrealized losses were deemed to be temporary in nature. Also included in the corporate securities other-than-temporary impairment amount for 2005 was $9 recorded on securities related to two major automotive manufacturers. The market values of these securities had fallen due to a downward adjustment in earnings and cash flow guidance primarily due to sluggish sales, rising employee and retiree benefit costs and an increased debt service burden. These investments continue to perform in accordance with the contractual terms of the securities. As of December 31, 2005, the Company held approximately $137 of securities issued by these two companies in a total net unrealized loss position of $7. Substantially all of the securities in an unrealized loss position, as of December 31, 2005, were depressed only to a minor extent and, as a result, the unrealized losses were deemed to be temporary in nature. 95 Table of Contents 2004 During 2004 there were no significant other-than-temporary impairments (e.g. $15 or greater) recorded on any single security or issuer. In aggregate, other-than-temporary impairments recorded on ABS primarily related to the decline in market values of certain previously impaired securities. Other-than-temporary impairments recorded on equity securities primarily related to variable rate perpetual preferred securities issued by two highly rated financial services companies. These securities are variable rate securities with unique structural interest rate reset characteristics that have sustained a decline in market value for an extended period of time primarily as a result of the increase in short-term interest rates after the security interest rate reset period. As of December 31, 2004, the Company did not hold other perpetual preferred securities in an unrealized loss position with similar interest rate reset characteristics. 2003 During 2003, other-than-temporary impairments were primarily recorded on ABS, corporate fixed maturities and equity securities. The ABS other-than-temporary impairments were primarily due to the continued deterioration of the underlying collateral supporting the various transactions. A significant portion of corporate fixed maturity other-than-temporary impairments during 2003 resulted from various issuers who experienced fraud or accounting irregularities. In addition, during the first half of the year, corporate debt issuers in the transportation sector, specifically issuers in the airline sector, deteriorated as a result of the continued decline in airline travel. During 2003, there was one security for which a significant (e.g. $15 or greater) other-than-temporary impairment was recorded, the circumstances of which are discussed in more detail below. Approximately $25 of impairments on corporate fixed maturities were within the food and beverage sector and related to securities issued by the Italian dairy concern, Parmalat SpA. Parmalat filed for bankruptcy in December 2003 due to liquidity problems when it was discovered that 4 billion euros of liquid investments previously reported on its balance sheet were non-existent. The following list identifies ABS and equity impairment losses recognized in 2003 that by issuer did not exceed $15 but did when combined with securities supported with similar collateral or equity security types. The circumstances giving rise to those losses are as follows: Within ABS other-than-temporary impairments, there were approximately $31 of collateralized debt obligations ( CDOs ) and $29 of aircraft lease receivables. The CDO impairments consisted of approximately ten securities, the majority of which were interests in the lower tranches of securities backed by high yield corporate debt and were primarily the result of continued high default rates in 2003 and lower recovery rates on the CDOs underlying collateral. The aircraft lease receivable impairments primarily consisted of investments in lower tranches of five transactions. These securities are supported by aircraft leases and enhanced equipment trust certificates issued by multiple airlines that had sustained a steep decline in market value and adverse change in expected cash flows due to continued lower aircraft lease rates, airline bankruptcies and the prolonged decline in airline travel. The $30 of the other-than-temporary impairments recorded on equity securities primarily related to various diversified mutual funds. The market values of these funds had fallen since the date of purchase due to declines in primarily the equity markets and were not expected to recover within a reasonable period of time. Due to the severity of the price depression and length of time the holdings were in an unrealized loss position, these securities were deemed to be other-than-temporarily impaired. INVESTMENT CREDIT RISK The Company has established investment credit policies that focus on the credit quality of obligors and counterparties, limit credit concentrations, encourage diversification and require frequent creditworthiness reviews. Investment activity, including setting of policy and defining acceptable risk levels, is subject to regular review and approval by senior management and by The Hartford Board of Directors. The Company invests primarily in securities which are rated investment grade and has established exposure limits, diversification standards and review procedures for all credit risks including borrower, issuer and counterparty. Creditworthiness of specific obligors is determined by consideration of external determinants of creditworthiness, typically ratings assigned by nationally recognized ratings agencies and is supplemented by an internal credit evaluation. Obligor, asset sector and industry concentrations are subject to established Company limits and are monitored on a regular basis. The Company is not exposed to any credit concentration risk of a single issuer greater than 10% of the Company stockholders equity other than certain U.S. government and government agencies. For further discussion of concentration of credit risk, see the Concentration of Credit Risk section in Note 4 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Derivative Instruments The Company derivative counterparty exposure policy establishes market-based credit limits, favors long-term financial stability and creditworthiness and typically requires credit enhancement/credit risk reducing agreements. Credit risk is measured as the amount owed to the Company based on current market conditions and potential payment obligations between the Company and its counterparties. Credit exposures are generally quantified daily, netted by counterparty for each legal entity of the Company, and collateral is pledged to and held by, or on behalf of, the Company to the extent the current value of derivatives exceeds the exposure policy thresholds which do not exceed $10. The Company also minimizes the credit risk in derivative instruments by entering into transactions with high quality counterparties rated Aa/A or better, which are monitored by the Company internal compliance unit and reviewed frequently by senior management. In addition, the compliance unit monitors counterparty credit exposure on a monthly basis to ensure compliance with Company policies and statutory limitations. The Company also maintains a policy of requiring that all 96 Table of Contents derivative contracts, other than exchange traded contracts and currency forward contracts, be governed by an International Swaps and Dealers Association Master Agreement which is structured by legal entity and by counterparty and permits right of offset. To date, the Company has not incurred any losses on derivative instruments due to counterparty nonperformance. In addition to counterparty credit risk, the Company periodically enters into swap agreements in which the Company assumes credit exposure from or reduces credit exposure to a single entity, referenced index or asset pool. Summaries of these derivatives are as follows: Total return swaps and credit spreadlocks involve the periodic exchange of payments with other parties, at specified intervals, calculated using the agreed upon index and notional principal amounts. Generally, no cash or principal payments are exchanged at the inception of the contract. Typically, at the time a swap is entered into, the cash flow streams exchanged by the counterparties are equal in value. As of December 31, 2005 and 2004, the notional value of total return swaps and credit spreadlocks totaled $1.9 billion and $1.5 billion, respectively, and the fair value totaled $5 and $6, respectively. Credit default swaps involve a transfer of credit risk from one party to another in exchange for periodic payments. One party to the contract will make a payment based on an agreed upon rate and a notional amount. The second party, who assumes credit exposure, will only make a payment when there is a credit event and such payment will be equal to the notional value of the swap contract less the value of the referenced security issuer debt obligation. A credit event is generally defined as default on contractually obligated interest or principal payments or bankruptcy. As of December 31, 2005 and 2004, the notional value of these credit default swaps, which exposed the Company to credit risk, totaled $700 and $447, respectively, and the swap fair value totaled $(4) and $3, respectively. As of December 31, 2005, the average S&P rating for these referenced security issuer debt obligations is A-. The Company also uses credit default swaps to reduce its credit exposure by entering into agreements in which the Company pays a derivative counterparty a periodic fee in exchange for compensation from the counterparty should a credit event occur on the part of the referenced security issuer. Alternatively, the derivative counterparty may be required to purchase the referenced security at a predetermined value. The Company enters into these agreements as an efficient means to reduce credit exposure to the specified issuers. As of December 31, 2005 and 2004, the notional value of these credit default swaps totaled $254 and $215, respectively, and the swap fair value totaled $2 and $(1), respectively. As of December 31, 2005, the average S&P rating for these referenced securities issuers is BBB. Fixed Maturities The following table identifies fixed maturity securities by type on a consolidated basis as of December 31, 2005 and 2004. Consolidated Fixed Maturities by Type 2005 2004 Percent Percent of Total of Total Amortized Unrealized Unrealized Fair Fair Amortized Unrealized Unrealized Fair Fair Cost Gains Losses Value Value Cost Gains Losses Value Value ABS $ 7,907 $ 60 $ (89 ) $ 7,878 10.3 % $ 7,446 $ 95 $ (72 ) $ 7,469 9.9 % CMBS 12,930 234 (162 ) 13,002 17.0 % 11,306 475 (33 ) 11,748 15.6 % Collateralized mortgage obligations ( CMOs ) 993 3 (6 ) 990 1.3 % 1,218 12 (3 ) 1,227 1.6 % Corporate Basic industry 3,086 107 (49 ) 3,144 4.1 % 3,143 234 (9 ) 3,368 4.5 % Capital goods 2,308 103 (28 ) 2,383 3.1 % 2,053 159 (10 ) 2,202 3.0 % Consumer cyclical 2,910 91 (56 ) 2,945 3.8 % 3,264 207 (13 ) 3,458 4.6 % Consumer non-cyclical 3,164 139 (37 ) 3,266 4.3 % 3,394 245 (12 ) 3,627 4.8 % Energy 1,545 118 (12 ) 1,651 2.2 % 1,770 147 (5 ) 1,912 2.5 % Financial services 9,413 350 (84 ) 9,679 12.7 % 8,779 589 (33 ) 9,335 12.4 % Technology and communications 4,256 239 (58 ) 4,437 5.8 % 4,940 440 (15 ) 5,365 7.2 % Transportation 850 33 (9 ) 874 1.1 % 769 52 (2 ) 819 1.1 % Utilities 4,043 182 (44 ) 4,181 5.5 % 3,361 302 (13 ) 3,650 4.9 % Other 1,444 33 (19 ) 1,458 1.9 % 1,001 69 (5 ) 1,065 1.4 % Government/Government agencies Foreign 1,378 96 (7 ) 1,467 1.9 % 1,648 153 (5 ) 1,796 2.4 % United States 877 27 (6 ) 898 1.2 % 1,116 22 (6 ) 1,132 1.5 % MBS agency 3,914 7 (60 ) 3,861 5.0 % 2,774 29 (4 ) 2,799 3.7 % Municipal Taxable 1,155 52 (8 ) 1,199 1.6 % 919 34 (9 ) 944 1.3 % Tax-exempt 10,486 549 (16 ) 11,019 14.4 % 9,670 726 (3 ) 10,393 13.8 % Redeemable preferred stock 44 1 45 0.1 % 36 3 39 0.1 % Short-term 2,063 2,063 2.7 % 2,752 2,752 3.7 % Total fixed maturities $ 74,766 $ 2,424 $ (750 ) $ 76,440 100.0 % $ 71,359 $ 3,993 $ (252 ) $ 75,100 100.0 % 97 Table of Contents The Company fixed maturity portfolio gross unrealized gains and losses as of December 31, 2005, in comparison to December 31, 2004, were primarily impacted by changes in interest rates as well as credit spread movements, changes in foreign currency exchange rates and security sales. The Company fixed maturity gross unrealized gains decreased $1.6 billion and gross unrealized losses increased $498 from December 31, 2004 to December 31, 2005, primarily due to an increase in short-term through intermediate-term interest rates as well as credit spread widening and foreign currency depreciation in comparison to the U.S. dollar for foreign denominated securities, offset in part by a decrease in long-term interest rates and other-than-temporary impairments taken during the year. Gross unrealized gains and losses were reduced by securities sold in a gain or loss position, respectively. For further discussion of risk factors associated with sectors with significant unrealized loss positions, see the sector risk factor commentary under the Consolidated Total Available-for-Sale Securities with Unrealized Loss Greater than Six Months by Type table in this section of the MD&A. Investment sector allocations as a percentage of total fixed maturities have changed since December 31, 2004, with a shift from certain corporate and short-term securities to CMBS due to their attractive yields relative to credit quality and MBS due to their relatively low risk profile and attractive spreads. The shift from corporate securities was primarily a result of capturing gains within the technology and communications sector due to credit spreads tightening as well as divesting securities that could be adversely impacted by issuers recapitalizing, pushing the Company interest lower in the repayment priority (e.g. leveraged buy-outs) or issuer capital uses that would not benefit the Company debt holders position (e.g. share repurchases). Also, HIMCO continues to overweight, in comparison to the Lehman Aggregate Index, ABS supported by diversified pools of consumer loans (e.g. home equity and auto loans and credit card receivables) and CMBS due to the securities attractive spread levels and underlying asset diversification and quality. In general, CMBS have lower prepayment risk than MBS due to contractual fees. As of December 31, 2005 and 2004, 22% and 19%, respectively, of the fixed maturities were invested in private placement securities, including 15% and 12%, respectively, in Rule 144A offerings to qualified institutional buyers. Private placement securities are generally less liquid than public securities. Most of the private placement securities are rated by nationally recognized rating agencies. At the January 2006 Federal Open Market Committee ( FOMC ) meeting, the Federal Reserve increased the target federal funds rate by 25 basis points to 4.50%, a 225 basis point increase from year-end 2004 levels. The FOMC stated that although recent economic data has been uneven, the expansion in economic activity appears solid, core inflation has stayed relatively low in recent months and longer-term inflation expectations remain contained. They noted that some further increases may be needed to keep the risks to the attainment of both sustainable economic growth and price stability roughly in balance. The Company believes the Federal Reserve is approaching the end of its rate tightening cycle with an increase or two possible during the first half of 2006. Ultimately, the level of rate increases will be largely dependent on future inflationary data. The risk of inflation could increase for a number of reasons including an increase in energy and commodity prices, an acceleration of wage rates, a slow down of productivity growth, an increase in U.S. budget or trade deficits or the U.S. dollar significantly depreciating in comparison to foreign currencies. Increases in future interest rates may result in lower fixed maturity valuations. The following table identifies fixed maturities by credit quality on a consolidated basis as of December 31, 2005 and 2004. The ratings referenced below are based on the ratings of a nationally recognized rating organization or, if not rated, assigned based on the Company internal analysis of such securities. Consolidated Fixed Maturities by Credit Quality 2005 2004 Percent of Percent of Amortized Total Fair Amortized Total Fair Cost Fair Value Value Cost Fair Value Value United States Government/Government agencies $ 5,720 $ 5,686 7.4 % $ 5,109 $ 5,160 6.9 % AAA 19,414 19,837 26.0 % 17,984 18,787 25.0 % AA 9,901 10,143 13.3 % 8,479 8,935 11.9 % A 18,232 18,914 24.7 % 17,156 18,382 24.5 % BBB 16,560 16,892 22.1 % 16,861 17,912 23.8 % BB & below 2,876 2,905 3.8 % 3,018 3,172 4.2 % Short-term 2,063 2,063 2.7 % 2,752 2,752 3.7 % Total fixed maturities $ 74,766 $ 76,440 100.0 % $ 71,359 $ 75,100 100.0 % As of December 31, 2005 and 2004, 96% and 95%, respectively, or greater of the fixed maturity portfolio was invested in short-term securities or securities rated investment grade (BBB and above). 98 Table of Contents The following table presents the BIG fixed maturities by type as of December 31, 2005 and 2004. Consolidated BIG Fixed Maturities by Type 2005 2004 Percent of Percent of Amortized Total Fair Amortized Total Fair Cost Fair Value Value Cost Fair Value Value ABS $ 298 $ 264 9.1 % $ 257 $ 228 7.2 % CMBS 105 121 4.2 % 154 166 5.3 % Corporate Basic industry 302 298 10.2 % 327 347 11.0 % Capital goods 177 175 6.0 % 180 181 5.7 % Consumer cyclical 376 371 12.8 % 227 242 7.6 % Consumer non-cyclical 252 257 8.8 % 250 263 8.3 % Energy 139 136 4.7 % 91 96 3.0 % Financial services 17 17 0.6 % 23 24 0.8 % Technology and communications 324 340 11.7 % 470 508 16.0 % Transportation 24 23 0.8 % 12 13 0.4 % Utilities 259 267 9.2 % 456 486 15.3 % Foreign government 503 535 18.4 % 484 531 16.7 % Other 100 101 3.5 % 87 87 2.7 % Total fixed maturities $ 2,876 $ 2,905 100.0 % $ 3,018 $ 3,172 100.0 % As of December 31, 2005 and 2004, the Company held no issuer of a BIG security with a fair value in excess of 4% of the total fair value for BIG securities. Total BIG securities decreased since December 31, 2004, as a result of a decision to reduce exposure to lower credit quality assets resulting from the securities significant credit spread tightening and re-investment in higher quality securities. The following table presents the Company unrealized loss aging for total fixed maturity and equity securities classified as available-for-sale on a consolidated basis, as of December 31, 2005 and 2004, by length of time the security was in an unrealized loss position. Consolidated Unrealized Loss Aging of Total Available-for-Sale Securities 2005 2004 Amortized Fair Unrealized Amortized Fair Unrealized Cost Value Loss Cost Value Loss Three months or less $ 17,986 $ 17,704 $ (282 ) $ 7,572 $ 7,525 $ (47 ) Greater than three months to six months 5,143 5,013 (130 ) 573 567 (6 ) Greater than six months to nine months 1,061 1,036 (25 ) 3,405 3,342 (63 ) Greater than nine months to twelve months 3,001 2,907 (94 ) 462 445 (17 ) Greater than twelve months 5,053 4,826 (227 ) 2,417 2,285 (132 ) Total $ 32,244 $ 31,486 $ (758 ) $ 14,429 $ 14,164 $ (265 ) The increase in the unrealized loss amount since December 31, 2004, is primarily the result of an increase in short-term through intermediate-term interest rates as well as credit spread widening and foreign currency depreciation in comparison to the U.S. dollar for foreign denominated securities offset in part by asset sales, a decrease in long-term interest rates and other-than-temporary impairments taken during the year. For further discussion, see the economic commentary under the Consolidated Fixed Maturities by Type table in this section of the MD&A. The average security unrealized loss at December 31, 2005 and 2004, as a percentage of amortized cost was less than 3% and 2%, respectively. As of December 31, 2005 and 2004, fixed maturities represented $750, or 99%, and $252, or 95%, respectively, of the Company total unrealized loss associated with securities classified as available-for-sale. There were no fixed maturities, as of December 31, 2005 and 2004, with a fair value less than 80% of the security amortized cost basis for six continuous months other than certain ABS and CMBS subject to EITF Issue No. 99-20. Other-than-temporary impairments for certain ABS and CMBS are recognized if the fair value of the security, as determined by external pricing sources, is less than its cost or amortized cost and there has been a decrease in the present value of the expected cash flows since the last reporting period. There were no ABS or CMBS included in the table above, as of December 31, 2005 and 2004, for which management best estimate of future cash flows adversely changed during the reporting period for which an impairment has not been recorded. For further discussion of the other-than-temporary impairments criteria, see Evaluation of Other-Than-Temporary Impairments on Available-for-Sale Securities included in the Critical Accounting Estimates section of the MD&A and Note 1 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. The Company held no securities of a single issuer that were at an unrealized loss position in excess of 6% and 5%, respectively, of the total unrealized loss amount as of December 31, 2005 and 2004. 99 Table of Contents The total securities classified as available-for-sale in an unrealized loss position for longer than six months by type as of December 31, 2005 and 2004 are presented in the following table. Consolidated Total Available-for-Sale Securities with Unrealized Loss Greater Than Six Months by Type 2005 2004 Percent of Percent of Total Total Amortized Fair Unrealized Unrealized Amortized Fair Unrealized Unrealized Cost Value Loss Loss Cost Value Loss Loss ABS Aircraft lease receivables $ 204 $ 152 $ (52 ) 15.0 % $ 227 $ 172 $ (55 ) 25.9 % CDOs 25 24 (1 ) 0.3 % 76 72 (4 ) 1.9 % Credit card receivables 162 160 (2 ) 0.6 % 88 86 (2 ) 0.9 % Other ABS 727 713 (14 ) 4.0 % 502 496 (6 ) 2.8 % CMBS 1,961 1,902 (59 ) 17.1 % 896 878 (18 ) 8.5 % Corporate Basic industry 501 480 (21 ) 6.1 % 355 347 (8 ) 3.8 % Consumer cyclical 459 434 (25 ) 7.2 % 277 269 (8 ) 3.8 % Consumer non-cyclical 418 401 (17 ) 4.9 % 436 425 (11 ) 5.2 % Financial services 1,847 1,796 (51 ) 14.7 % 1,271 1,234 (37 ) 17.5 % Technology and communications 481 458 (23 ) 6.7 % 435 421 (14 ) 6.6 % Transportation 40 39 (1 ) 0.3 % 31 31 Utilities 246 235 (11 ) 3.2 % 324 313 (11 ) 5.2 % Other 553 526 (27 ) 7.8 % 453 437 (16 ) 7.5 % Other securities 1,491 1,449 (42 ) 12.1 % 913 891 (22 ) 10.4 % Total $ 9,115 $ 8,769 $ (346 ) 100.0 % $ 6,284 $ 6,072 $ (212 ) 100.0 % The increase in total unrealized loss greater than six months since December 31, 2004, was primarily driven by an increase in short-term through intermediate-term interest rates as well as credit spread widening and foreign currency depreciation in comparison to the U.S. dollar for foreign denominated securities, offset in part by security sales, a decrease in long-term interest rates and other-than-temporary impairments taken during the year. With the exception of ABS security types, the majority of the securities in an unrealized loss position for six months or more as of December 31, 2005, were depressed primarily due to interest rate changes from the date of purchase. The sectors with the most significant concentration of unrealized losses at December 31, 2005 were CMBS, ABS supported by aircraft lease receivables and corporate fixed maturities primarily within the financial services sector. The Company current view of risk factors relative to these fixed maturity types is as follows: CMBS The CMBS in an unrealized loss position as of December 31, 2005, were primarily the result of an increase in interest rates from the security purchase date. Substantially all of these securities are investment grade securities priced at or greater than 90% of amortized cost as of December 31, 2005. Additional changes in fair value of these securities are primarily dependent on future changes in interest rates. Aircraft lease receivables The Company holdings are ABS secured by leases on aircraft. The decline in the fair values of these securities is primarily attributable to the high risk premium associated with the increase in volatility of airline travel demand in recent years, lack of market liquidity in this sector and long term to maturity of these securities. In recent years, aircraft demand and lease rates have improved as a result of an increase in worldwide travel. However, the continuing difficulties experienced by several major U.S. domestic airlines due to high operating costs, including fuel and certain employee benefits costs, continue to weigh heavily on this sector. Based on the Company projections of future cash flows under distressed scenarios, the Company expects to recover the full contractual principal and interest payments of these investments. However, future price recovery will depend on continued improvement in economic fundamentals, political stability, airline operating performance and collateral value. Financial services As of December 31, 2005, the Company held approximately 200 different securities in the financial services sector that had been in an unrealized loss position for greater than six months. Substantially all of these securities are investment grade securities priced at or greater than 90% of amortized cost as of December 31, 2005. These positions are a mixture of fixed and variable rate securities with extended maturity dates, which have been adversely impacted by changes in interest rates after the purchase date. Additional changes in fair value of these securities are primarily dependent on future changes in interest rates. As part of the Company ongoing security monitoring process by a committee of investment and accounting professionals, the Company has reviewed its investment portfolio and concluded that there were no additional other-than-temporary impairments as of December 31, 2005 and 2004. Due to the issuers continued satisfaction of the securities obligations in accordance with their contractual terms and the expectation that they will continue to do so, management intent and ability to hold these securities, as well as the evaluation of the fundamentals of the issuers financial condition and other objective evidence, the Company believes that the prices of the securities in the sectors identified above were temporarily depressed. The evaluation for other-than-temporary impairments is a quantitative and qualitative process, which is subject to risks and uncertainties in the determination of whether declines in the fair value of investments are other-than-temporary. The risks and uncertainties include changes in general economic conditions, the issuer financial condition or near term recovery prospects and the effects of changes in interest rates. In addition, for securitized financial assets with contractual cash flows (e.g. ABS and CMBS), projections of expected future cash flows may change based upon new information regarding the performance of the underlying 100 Table of Contents collateral. As of December 31, 2005 and 2004, management expectation of the discounted future cash flows on these securities was in excess of the associated securities amortized cost. For a further discussion, see Evaluation of Other-Than-Temporary Impairments on Available-for-Sale Securities included in the Critical Accounting Estimates section of the MD&A and Note 1 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. The following table presents the Company unrealized loss aging for BIG and equity securities on a consolidated basis as of December 31, 2005 and 2004. Consolidated Unrealized Loss Aging of Available-for-Sale BIG and Equity Securities 2005 2004 Amortized Fair Unrealized Amortized Fair Unrealized Cost Value Loss Cost Value Loss Three months or less $ 686 $ 657 $ (29 ) $ 326 $ 322 $ (4 ) Greater than three months to six months 252 242 (10 ) 33 32 (1 ) Greater than six months to nine months 170 165 (5 ) 174 165 (9 ) Greater than nine months to twelve months 89 85 (4 ) 81 75 (6 ) Greater than twelve months 353 309 (44 ) 285 240 (45 ) Total $ 1,550 $ 1,458 $ (92 ) $ 899 $ 834 $ (65 ) The increase in the BIG and equity security unrealized loss amount for securities classified as available-for-sale from December 31, 2004 to December 31, 2005, was primarily the result of the increase in short-term through intermediate-term interest rates as well as credit spread widening and foreign currency depreciation in comparison to the U.S. dollar for foreign denominated securities, offset in part by asset sales, a decrease in long-term interest rates and other-than-temporary impairments taken during the year. For further discussion, see the economic commentary under the Consolidated Fixed Maturities by Type table in this section of the MD&A. The BIG and equity securities classified as available-for-sale in an unrealized loss position for longer than six months by type as of December 31, 2005 and 2004 are presented in the following table. Consolidated Available-for-Sale BIG and Equity Securities with Unrealized Loss Greater Than Six Months by Type 2005 2004 Percent of Percent of Total Total Amortized Fair Unrealized Unrealized Amortized Fair Unrealized Unrealized Cost Value Loss Loss Cost Value Loss Loss ABS Aircraft lease receivables $ 119 $ 89 $ (30 ) 56.6 % $ 129 $ 96 $ (33 ) 55.0 % CDOs 2 1 (1 ) 1.9 % 27 25 (2 ) 3.3 % Credit card receivables 8 8 Other ABS 18 16 (2 ) 3.8 % 11 10 (1 ) 1.7 % Corporate Basic industry 73 72 (1 ) 1.9 % 24 23 (1 ) 1.7 % Consumer cyclical 92 89 (3 ) 5.6 % 9 9 Consumer non-cyclical 27 26 (1 ) 1.9 % 3 3 Financial services 92 89 (3 ) 5.6 % 169 158 (11 ) 18.3 % Technology & communication 52 50 (2 ) 3.8 % 61 57 (4 ) 6.7 % Utilities 26 24 (2 ) 3.8 % 37 34 (3 ) 5.0 % Other 108 101 (7 ) 13.2 % 46 41 (5 ) 8.3 % Other securities 3 2 (1 ) 1.9 % 16 16 Total $ 612 $ 559 $ (53 ) 100.0 % $ 540 $ 480 $ (60 ) 100.0 % The decrease in the consolidated available-for-sale BIG and equity securities greater than six months unrealized loss amount since December 31, 2004, was primarily the result of other-than-temporary impairments taken during the year, asset sales and a decrease in long-term interest rates partially offset by the increase in short-term through intermediate-term interest rates as well as credit spread widening and foreign currency depreciation in comparison to the U.S. dollar for foreign denominated securities. For further discussion of risk factors associated with sectors with significant unrealized loss positions, see the sector risk factor commentary under the Consolidated Total Available-for-Sale Securities with Unrealized Loss Greater than Six Months by Type table in this section of the MD&A. CAPITAL MARKETS RISK MANAGEMENT The Hartford has a disciplined approach to managing risks associated with its capital markets and asset/liability management activities. Investment portfolio management is organized to focus investment management expertise on the specific classes of investments, while asset/liability management is the responsibility of a dedicated risk management unit supporting Life and Property & Casualty operations. Derivative instruments are utilized in compliance with established Company policy and regulatory requirements and are monitored internally and reviewed by senior management. 101 Table of Contents Market Risk The Hartford is exposed to market risk, primarily relating to the market price and/or cash flow variability associated with changes in interest rates, equity prices or foreign currency exchange rates. Interest Rate Risk The Company exposure to interest rate risk relates to the market price and/or cash flow variability associated with the changes in market interest rates. The Company manages its exposure to interest rate risk through asset allocation limits, asset/liability duration matching and through the use of derivatives. The Company analyzes interest rate risk using various models including parametric models and cash flow simulation of the liabilities and the supporting investments, including derivative instruments under various market scenarios. Measures the Company uses to quantify its exposure to interest rate risk inherent in its invested assets and interest rate sensitive liabilities include duration and key rate duration. Duration is the weighted average term-to-maturity of a security cash flows, and is used to approximate the percentage change in the price of a security for a 100 basis point change in market interest rates. For example, a duration of 5 means the price of the security will change by approximately 5% for a 1% change in interest rates. The key rate duration analysis considers the expected future cash flows of assets and liabilities assuming non-parallel interest rate movements. To calculate duration, projections of asset and liability cash flows are discounted to a present value using interest rate assumptions. These cash flows are then revalued at alternative interest rate levels to determine the percentage change in fair value due to an incremental change in rates. Cash flows from corporate obligations are assumed to be consistent with the contractual payment streams on a yield to worst basis. The primary assumptions used in calculating cash flow projections include expected asset payment streams taking into account prepayment speeds, issuer call options and contract holder behavior. ABS, CMOs and MBS are modeled based on estimates of the rate of future prepayments of principal over the remaining life of the securities. These estimates are developed using prepayment speeds provided in broker consensus data. Such estimates are derived from prepayment speeds previously experienced at the interest rate levels projected for the underlying collateral. Actual prepayment experience may vary from these estimates. The Company is also exposed to interest rate risk based upon the discount rate assumption associated with the Company pension and other postretirement benefit obligations. The discount rate assumption is based upon an interest rate yield curve comprised of Aa with maturities between zero and thirty years. Declines in long-term interest rates have had a negative impact on the funded status of the plans. For a further discussion of interest rate risk associated with the plans, see the Critical Accounting Estimates section of the MD&A under Pension and Other Postretirement Benefit Obligations and Note 17 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. The Company believes that an increase in interest rates from the current levels is generally a favorable development for the Company. Rate increases are expected to provide additional net investment income, increase sales of fixed rate Life investment products, reduce the cost of the GMWB hedging program, limit the potential risk of margin erosion due to minimum guaranteed crediting rates in certain Life products and, if sustained, could reduce the Company prospective pension expense. Conversely, a rise in interest rates will reduce the net unrealized gain position of the investment portfolio, increase interest expense on the Company variable rate debt obligations and, if long-term interest rates rise dramatically within a six to twelve month time period, certain Life businesses may be exposed to disintermediation risk. Disintermediation risk refers to the risk that policyholders will surrender their contracts in a rising interest rate environment requiring the Company to liquidate assets in an unrealized loss position. In conjunction with the interest rate risk measurement and management techniques, significant portions of Life fixed income product offerings have market value adjustment provisions at contract surrender. Since the Company matches, and actively manages its assets and liabilities, an interest environment with an inverted yield curve (i.e. short-term interest rates are higher than intermediate-term or long-term interest rates) does not significantly impact the Company profits or operations. As noted above, the absolute level of interest rates is more significant than the shape of the yield curve. Equity Risk The Company does not have significant equity risk exposure from invested assets. The Company primary exposure to equity risk relates to the potential for lower earnings associated with certain of the Life businesses such as variable annuities where fee income is earned based upon the fair value of the assets under management. In addition, Life offers certain guaranteed benefits, primarily associated with variable annuity products, which increases the Company potential benefit exposure as the equity markets decline. For a further discussion, see Life Equity Risk in this section of the MD&A. The Company is also subject to equity risk based upon the expected long-term rate of return assumption associated with the Company pension and other postretirement benefit obligations. The Company determines the long-term rate of return assumption for the plans portfolio based upon an analysis of historical returns. Declines in equity returns have had a negative impact on the funded status of the plans. Foreign Currency Exchange Risk The Company currency exchange risk is related to non U.S. dollar denominated investments, which primarily consist of fixed maturity investments, the investment in the Japanese Life operation, its GMDB and GMIB benefits associated with its Japanese variable annuities, and a yen denominated individual fixed annuity product. A significant portion of the Company foreign currency exposure is mitigated through the use of derivatives. 102 Table of Contents Derivative Instruments The Hartford utilizes a variety of derivative instruments, including swaps, caps, floors, forwards, futures and options, in compliance with Company policy and regulatory requirements to mitigate interest rate, equity market or foreign currency exchange rate risk or volatility. Interest rate swaps involve the periodic exchange of payments with other parties, at specified intervals, calculated using the agreed upon rates and notional principal amounts. Generally, no cash or principal payments are exchanged at the inception of the contract. Typically, at the time a swap is entered into, the cash flow streams exchanged by the counterparties are equal in value. Interest rate cap and floor contracts entitle the purchaser to receive from the issuer at specified dates, the amount, if any, by which a specified market rate exceeds the cap strike interest rate or falls below the floor strike interest rate, applied to a notional principal amount. A premium payment is made by the purchaser of the contract at its inception and no principal payments are exchanged. Forward contracts are customized commitments to either purchase or sell designated financial instruments, at a future date, for a specified price and may be settled in cash or through delivery of the underlying instrument. Financial futures are standardized commitments to either purchase or sell designated financial instruments, at a future date, for a specified price and may be settled in cash or through delivery of the underlying instrument. Futures contracts trade on organized exchanges. Margin requirements for futures are met by pledging securities, and changes in the futures contract values are settled daily in cash. Option contracts grant the purchaser, for a premium payment, the right to either purchase from or sell to the issuer a financial instrument at a specified price, within a specified period or on a stated date. Foreign currency swaps exchange an initial principal amount in two currencies, agreeing to re-exchange the currencies at a future date, at an agreed upon exchange rate. There may also be a periodic exchange of payments at specified intervals calculated using the agreed upon rates and exchanged principal amounts. Derivative activities are monitored by an internal compliance unit and reviewed frequently by senior management. The notional amounts of derivative contracts represent the basis upon which pay or receive amounts are calculated and are not reflective of credit risk. Notional amounts pertaining to derivative instruments used in the management of market risk at December 31, 2005 and 2004, were $62.9 billion and $54.1 billion, respectively. The increase in the derivative notional amount during 2005 was primarily due to the embedded derivatives associated with the GMWB product feature. For further information, see Note 4 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. The following discussions focus on the key market risk exposures within Life and Property & Casualty portfolios. Life Life is responsible for maximizing economic value within acceptable risk parameters, including the management of the interest rate sensitivity of invested assets while generating sufficient after-tax income to support policyholder and corporate obligations. Life fixed maturity portfolios and certain investment contracts and insurance product liabilities have material market exposure to interest rate risk. In addition, Life operations are significantly influenced by changes in the equity markets. Life profitability depends largely on the amount of assets under management, which is primarily driven by the level of sales, equity market appreciation and depreciation and the persistency of the in-force block of business. Life foreign currency exposure is primarily related to non-U.S. dollar denominated fixed income securities, the investment in the Japanese Life operation and certain foreign currency based individual fixed annuity contracts, and its GMDB and GMIB benefits associated with its Japanese variable annuities. Interest Rate Risk Life exposure to interest rate risk relates to the market price and/or cash flow variability associated with changes in market interest rates. Changes in interest rates can potentially impact Life profitability. In certain scenarios where interest rates are volatile, Life could be exposed to disintermediation risk and a reduction in net interest rate spread or profit margins. The investments and liabilities primarily associated with interest rate risk are included in the following discussion. Certain product liabilities, including those containing GMWB or GMDB, expose the Company to interest rate risk but also have significant equity risk. These liabilities are discussed as part of the Equity Risk section below. Fixed Maturity Investments Life investment portfolios primarily consist of investment grade fixed maturity securities, including corporate bonds, ABS, CMBS, tax-exempt municipal securities and CMOs. The fair value of Life fixed maturities was $50.8 billion and $50.5 billion at December 31, 2005 and 2004, respectively. The fair value of Life fixed maturities and other invested assets fluctuates depending on the interest rate environment and other general economic conditions. During periods of declining interest rates, paydowns on MBS and CMOs increase as the underlying mortgages are prepaid. During such periods, the Company generally will not be able to re-invest the proceeds of any such prepayments at comparable yields. Conversely, during periods of rising interest rates, the rate of prepayments generally declines, exposing the Company to the possibility of asset/liability cash flow and yield mismatch. The weighted average 103 Table of Contents duration of the fixed maturity portfolio was approximately 5.3 and 5.0 years as of December 31, 2005 and 2004, respectively. In 2005, the duration of certain Life portfolios were modestly lengthened, which generated additional interest income. Liabilities Life investment contracts and certain insurance product liabilities, other than non-guaranteed separate accounts, include asset accumulation vehicles such as fixed annuities, guaranteed investment contracts, other investment and universal life-type contracts and certain insurance products such as long-term disability. Asset accumulation vehicles primarily require a fixed rate payment, often for a specified period of time. Product examples include fixed rate annuities with a market value adjustment feature and fixed rate guaranteed investment contracts. The duration of these contracts generally range from less than one year to ten years. In addition, certain products such as universal life contracts and the general account portion of Life variable annuity products, credit interest to policyholders subject to market conditions and minimum interest rate guarantees. The duration of these products is short-term to intermediate-term. While interest rate risk associated with many of these products has been reduced through the use of market value adjustment features and surrender charges, the primary risk associated with these products is that the spread between investment return and credited rate may not be sufficient to earn targeted returns. The Company also manages the risk of certain insurance liabilities similarly to investment type products due to the relative predictability of the aggregate cash flow payment streams. Products in this category may contain significant actuarial (including mortality and morbidity) pricing and cash flow risks. Product examples include structured settlement contracts, on-benefit annuities (i.e. the annuitant is currently receiving benefits thereon) and short-term and long-term disability contracts. The cash outflows associated with these policy liabilities are not interest rate sensitive but do vary based on the timing and amount of benefit payments. The primary risks associated with these products are that the benefits will exceed expected actuarial pricing and/or that the actual timing of the cash flows will differ from those anticipated, resulting in an investment return lower than that assumed in pricing. Average contract duration can range from less than one year to typically up to fifteen years. Derivatives Life utilizes a variety of derivative instruments to mitigate interest rate risk. Interest rate swaps are primarily used to convert interest receipts or payments to a fixed or variable rate. The use of such swaps enables the Company to customize contract terms and conditions to customer objectives and satisfies the operation asset/liability duration matching policy. Occasionally, swaps are also used to hedge the variability in the cash flow of a forecasted purchase or sale due to changes in interest rates. Interest rate caps and floors, swaptions and option contracts are primarily used to hedge against the risk of liability contract holder disintermediation in a rising interest rate environment, and to offset the changes in fair value of corresponding derivatives embedded in certain of the Company fixed maturity investments. At December 31, 2005 and 2004, notional amounts pertaining to derivatives utilized to manage interest rate risk totaled $10.6 billion and $9.9 billion, respectively ($7.5 billion and $7.7 billion, respectively, related to investments and $3.1 billion and $2.2 billion, respectively, related to life liabilities). The fair value of these derivatives was $(22) and $41 as of December 31, 2005 and 2004, respectively. Calculated Interest Rate Sensitivity The after-tax change in the net economic value of investment contracts (e.g. guaranteed investment contracts) and certain other insurance product liabilities (e.g. short-term and long-term disability contracts), for which the payment rates are fixed at contract issuance and the investment experience is substantially absorbed by Life, are included in the following table along with the corresponding invested assets. Also included in this analysis are the interest rate sensitive derivatives used by Life to hedge its exposure to interest rate risk. Certain financial instruments, such as limited partnerships, have been omitted from the analysis due to the fact that the investments are accounted for under the equity method and generally lack sensitivity to interest rate changes. Non-guaranteed separate account assets and liabilities and equity securities held for trading and the corresponding liabilities associated with the variable annuity products sold in Japan are excluded from the analysis because gains and losses in separate accounts accrue to policyholders. The hypothetical calculation of the estimated change in net economic value below assumes a 100 basis point upward and downward parallel shift in the yield curve. Change in Net Economic Value As of December 31, 2005 2004 Basis point shift - 100 + 100 - 100 + 100 Amount $ (48 ) $ 10 $ (73 ) $ 15 The fixed liabilities included above represented approximately 45% and 50% of Life general account liabilities as of December 31, 2005 and 2004, respectively. The assets supporting the fixed liabilities are monitored and managed within rigorous duration guidelines using scenario simulation techniques, and are evaluated on an annual basis, in compliance with regulatory requirements. The after-tax change in fair value of the invested asset portfolios that support certain universal life-type contracts and other insurance contracts are shown in the following table. The cash flows associated with these liabilities are less predictable than fixed liabilities. 104 Table of Contents The Company identifies the most appropriate investment strategy based upon the expected policyholder behavior and liability crediting needs. The hypothetical calculation of the estimated change in fair value below assumes a 100 basis point upward and downward parallel shift in the yield curve. Change in Fair Value As of December 31, 2005 2004 Basis point shift - 100 + 100 - 100 + 100 Amount $ 471 $ (451 ) $ 501 $ (491 ) The selection of the 100 basis point parallel shift in the yield curve was made only as a hypothetical illustration of the potential impact of such an event and should not be construed as a prediction of future market events. Actual results could differ materially from those illustrated above due to the nature of the estimates and assumptions used in the above analysis. The Company sensitivity analysis calculation assumes that the composition of invested assets and liabilities remain materially consistent throughout the year and that the current relationship between short-term and long-term interest rates will remain constant over time. As a result, these calculations may not fully capture the impact of portfolio re-allocations, significant product sales or non-parallel changes in interest rates. Equity Risk The Company operations are significantly influenced by changes in the equity markets. The Company profitability depends largely on the amount of assets under management, which is primarily driven by the level of sales, equity market appreciation and depreciation and the persistency of the in-force block of business. Prolonged and precipitous declines in the equity markets can have a significant effect on the Company operations, as sales of variable products may decline and surrender activity may increase, as customer sentiment towards the equity market turns negative. Lower assets under management will have a negative effect on the Company financial results, primarily due to lower fee income related to the Retail, Retirement Plans, Institutional and International and, to a lesser extent, the Individual Life segment, where a heavy concentration of equity linked products are administered and sold. Furthermore, the Company may experience a reduction in profit margins if a significant portion of the assets held in the variable annuity separate accounts move to the general account and the Company is unable to earn an acceptable investment spread, particularly in light of the low interest rate environment and the presence of contractually guaranteed minimum interest credited rates, which for the most part are at a 3% rate. In addition, prolonged declines in the equity market may also decrease the Company expectations of future gross profits, which are utilized to determine the amount of DAC to be amortized in a given financial statement period. A significant decrease in the Company future estimated gross profits would require the Company to accelerate the amount of DAC amortization in a given period, potentially causing a material adverse deviation in that period net income. Although an acceleration of DAC amortization would have a negative effect on the Company earnings, it would not affect the Company cash flow or liquidity position. The Company sells variable annuity contracts that offer one or more benefit guarantees, the value of which, generally increases with declines in equity markets. As is described in more detail below, the Company manages the equity market risks embedded in these guarantees through reinsurance, product design and hedging programs. The Company believes its ability to manage these equity market risks by these means gives it a competitive advantage; and, in particular, its ability to create innovative product designs that allow the Company to meet identified customer needs while generating manageable amounts of equity market risk. The Company relative sales and variable annuity market share have generally increased during periods when it has recently introduced new products to the market. In contrast, the Company relative sales and market share have generally decreased when competitors introduce products that cause an issuer to assume larger amounts of equity and other market risk than the Company is confident it can prudently manage. The Company believes its long-term success in the variable annuity market will continue to be aided by successful innovation in both product design and in equity market risk management and that, in the absence of this innovation, its market share could decline. Currently, the Company is experiencing lower levels of U.S. variable annuity sales as competitors continue to introduce equity guarantees of increasing risk and complexity. New product development is an ongoing process and during the fourth quarter of 2005, the Company introduced a new living income benefit, which guarantees a steady income stream for the life of the policyholder. Depending on customer acceptance and competitor reaction to the Company product innovations, the Company future level of sales is subject to a high level of uncertainty. The accounting for various benefit guarantees offered with variable annuity contracts can be significantly different. Those accounted for under SFAS No. 133 (such as GMWBs) are subject to significant fluctuation in value, which is reflected in net income, due to changes in interest rates, equity markets and equity market volatility as use of those capital market rates are required in determining the liability fair value at each reporting date. Benefit guarantee liabilities accounted for under SOP 03-1 (such as GMIBs and GMDBs) may also change in value; however, the change in value is not immediately reflected in net income. Under SOP 03-1, the income statement reflects the current period increase in the liability due to the deferral of a percentage of current period revenues. The percentage is determined by dividing the present value of claims by the present value of revenues using best estimate assumptions over a range of market scenarios. Current period revenues are impacted by actual increases or decreases in account value. Claims recorded against the liability have no immediate impact on the income statement unless those claims exceed the liability. As a result of these significant accounting differences the liability for guarantees recorded under SOP 03-1 may be significantly different if it was recorded under SFAS No. 133 and vice versa. In addition, the conditions in the capital markets in Japan vs. those in the U.S. are sufficiently different that if the Company GMWB product currently offered in the U.S. were offered in Japan, the capital market conditions in Japan would have a significant impact on the valuation of the GMWB, irrespective of the accounting model. The same would hold true if the Company GMIB product currently offered in Japan were to be offered in the U.S. Capital market conditions in the U.S. would 105 Table of Contents have a significant impact on the valuation of the GMIB. Many benefit guarantees meet the definition of an embedded derivative, under SFAS No. 133 (GMWB), and as such are recorded at fair value with changes in fair value recorded in net income. However, certain contract features that define how the contract holder can access the value of the guaranteed benefit change the accounting from SFAS No. 133 to SOP 03-1. For contracts where the contract holder can only obtain the value of the guaranteed benefit upon the occurrence of an insurable event such as death (GMDB) or by making a significant initial net investment (GMIB), such as when one invests in an annuity, the accounting for the benefit is prescribed by SOP 03-1. In the U.S., the Company sells variable annuity contracts that offer various guaranteed death benefits. The Company maintains a liability, under SOP 03-1, for the death benefit costs of $158, as of December 31, 2005. Declines in the equity market may increase the Company net exposure to death benefits under these contracts. The majority of the contracts with the guaranteed death benefit feature are sold by the Retail Products Group segment. For certain guaranteed death benefits, The Hartford pays the greater of (1) the account value at death; (2) the sum of all premium payments less prior withdrawals; or (3) the maximum anniversary value of the contract, plus any premium payments since the contract anniversary, minus any withdrawals following the contract anniversary. For certain guaranteed death benefits sold with variable annuity contracts beginning in June 2003, the Retail Products Group segment pays the greater of (1) the account value at death; or (2) the maximum anniversary value; not to exceed the account value plus the greater of (a) 25% of premium payments, or (b) 25% of the maximum anniversary value of the contract. The Company currently reinsures a significant portion of these death benefit guarantees associated with its in-force block of business. The Company total gross exposure (i.e. before reinsurance) to these guaranteed death benefits as of December 31, 2005 is $6.5 billion. Due to the fact that 82% of this amount is reinsured, the Company net exposure is $1.2 billion. This amount is often referred to as the retained net amount at risk. However, the Company will incur these guaranteed death benefit payments in the future only if the policyholder has an in-the-money guaranteed death benefit at their time of death. In Japan, the Company offers certain variable annuity products with both a guaranteed death benefit and a guaranteed income benefit. The Company maintains a liability for these death and income benefits, under SOP 03-1, of $50 as of December 31, 2005. Declines in equity markets as well as a strengthening of the Japanese Yen in comparison to the U.S. dollar may increase the Company exposure to these guaranteed benefits. This increased exposure may be significant in extreme market scenarios. For the guaranteed death benefits, the Company pays the greater of (1) account value at death; (2) a guaranteed death benefit which, depending on the contract, may be based upon the premium paid and/or the maximum anniversary value established no later than age 80, as adjusted for withdrawals under the terms of the contract. The guaranteed income benefit guarantees to return the contract holder initial investment, adjusted for any earnings withdrawals, through periodic payments that commence at the end of a minimum deferral period of 10, 15 or 20 years as elected by the contract holder. The Company net amount at risk to the guaranteed death and income benefits offered in Japan was $9 as of December 31, 2005. The Company will incur these guaranteed death or income benefits in the future only if the contract holder has an in-the-money guaranteed benefit at either the time of their death or if the account value is insufficient to fund the guaranteed living benefits. During 2005, the Company received regulatory approval and consummated a transaction to reinsure guaranteed minimum income benefit risk associated with the sale of variable annuities in Japan to Hartford Life and Annuity Insurance Company, a U.S. subsidiary. In addition, the Company offers certain variable annuity products with a GMWB rider. GMWB is accounted for under SFAS No. 133. Declines in the equity market may increase the Company exposure to benefits under the GMWB contracts. For all contracts in effect through July 6, 2003, the Company entered into a reinsurance arrangement to offset its exposure to the GMWB for the remaining lives of those contracts. As of July 6, 2003, the Company exhausted all but a small portion of the reinsurance capacity for new business under the current arrangement and has been ceding only a very small number of new contracts subsequent to July 6, 2003. Substantially all new contracts with the GMWB are not covered by reinsurance. These unreinsured contracts are expected to generate volatility in net income as the underlying embedded derivative liabilities are recorded at fair value each reporting period, resulting in the recognition of net realized capital gains or losses in response to changes in certain critical factors including capital market conditions and policyholder behavior. In order to minimize the volatility associated with the unreinsured GMWB liabilities, the Company established an alternative risk management strategy. During the third quarter of 2003, the Company began hedging its unreinsured GMWB exposure using interest rate futures, Standard and Poor ( S&P ) 500 and NASDAQ index put options and futures contracts. During the first quarter of 2004, the Company entered into Europe, Australasia and Far East ( EAFE ) Index swaps to hedge GMWB exposure to international equity markets. The hedging program involves a detailed monitoring of policyholder behavior and capital markets conditions on a daily basis and rebalancing of the hedge position as needed. While the Company actively manages this hedge position, hedge ineffectiveness may result due to factors including, but not limited to, policyholder behavior, capital markets dislocation or discontinuity and divergence between the performance of the underlying funds and the hedging indices. During 2005, the Company periodically entered into forward starting Standard and Poor ( S&P ) 500 put options, as well as S&P index futures and interest rate swap contracts ( anticipated future sales hedges ) to economically hedge the equity volatility risk exposure associated with anticipated future sales of the GMWB rider. As of December 31, 2005, there were no open anticipated future sales hedges and the net after-tax gain related to this hedge strategy was $8. The net effect of the change in value of the embedded derivative net of the results of the hedging program was a $46 loss and $8 gain before deferred policy acquisition costs and tax effects for the years ended December 31, 2005 and 2004, respectively. As of December 31, 2005, the notional and fair value related to the embedded derivatives, the hedging strategy and reinsurance was $45.5 billion and $166, respectively. As of December 31, 2004, the notional and fair value related to the embedded derivatives, the hedging strategy, and reinsurance was $37.7 billion and $170, respectively. 106 Table of Contents The Company purchases one and two year S&P 500 Index put option contracts to economically hedge certain liabilities that could increase if the equity markets decline. As of December 31, 2005 and 2004, the notional value related to this strategy was $1.1 billion and $1.9 billion, respectively, while the fair value related to this strategy was $14 and $32, respectively. Because this strategy is intended to partially hedge certain equity-market sensitive liabilities calculated under statutory accounting (see Capital Resources and Liquidity), changes in the value of the put options may not be closely aligned to changes in liabilities determined in accordance with Generally Accepted Accounting Principles ( GAAP ), causing volatility in GAAP net income. The Company anticipates employing similar strategies in the future, which could further increase volatility in GAAP net income. Foreign Currency Exchange Risk Foreign currency exchange risk exists with respect to investments in non-U.S. dollar denominated fixed maturities, primarily denominated in euro, sterling, yen and Canadian dollars, as well as Life investment in foreign operations, primarily Japan, and the yen based individual fixed annuity product and its GMDB and GMIB benefits associated with its Japanese variable annuities. The risk associated with the non-U.S. dollar denominated fixed maturities relates to potential decreases in value and income resulting from unfavorable changes in foreign exchange rates. The fair value of the non-U.S. dollar denominated fixed maturities at December 31, 2005 and 2004, were approximately $1.9 billion and $2.5 billion, respectively. In order to manage its currency exposures, Life enters into foreign currency swaps and forwards to hedge the variability in cash flow associated with certain foreign denominated fixed maturities. These foreign currency swap agreements are structured to match the foreign currency cash flows of the hedged foreign denominated securities. At December 31, 2005 and 2004, the derivatives used to hedge currency exchange risk related to non-U.S. dollar denominated fixed maturities had a total notional value of $2.0 billion and $1.7 billion, respectively, and total fair value of $(232) and $(503), respectively. The functional currency of the Japanese operation is the Japanese yen. Accordingly, the premiums, claims, commissions and investment income are paid or received in yen. In addition, most of the Japanese operation investments are yen denominated. In 2003, Life had entered into yen denominated forwards to hedge a substantial portion of the yen to U.S. dollar exchange rate volatility related to the net investment in the Japanese operation. The net investment in the Japanese operation was approximately $673 as of December 31, 2004. During the third quarter of 2005, the Company terminated its yen denominated forwards. The notional and fair value of the contracts terminated during the third quarter of 2005 was $408 and $17, respectively. At December 31, 2004, the derivatives used to hedge the net investment in the Japanese operation had a total notional and fair value of $401 and $(23), respectively. The after-tax net gains (losses) included in the foreign currency transaction adjustment associated with the net investment hedge was $12, $(14), and $(3) as of December 31, 2005, 2004, and 2003, respectively. The yen based fixed annuity product is written by Hartford Life Insurance KK ( HLIKK ), a wholly-owned Japanese subsidiary of Hartford Life, Inc. ( HLI ), and subsequently reinsured to Hartford Life Insurance Company, a U.S. dollar based wholly-owned indirect subsidiary of HLI. The underlying investment involves investing in U.S. securities markets, which offer favorable credit spreads. The yen denominated fixed annuity product ( yen fixed annuities ) is recorded in the consolidated balance sheets with invested assets denominated in dollars while policyholder liabilities are denominated in yen and converted to U.S. dollars based upon the December 31, yen to U.S. dollar spot rate. The difference between U.S. dollar denominated investments and yen denominated liabilities exposes the Company to currency risk. The Company manages this currency risk associated with the yen fixed annuities with primarily pay variable U.S. dollar receive fixed yen, zero coupon currency swaps ( currency swaps ). As of December 31, 2005, the notional value and fair value of the currency swaps were $1.7 billion and $(179), respectively. Although economically an effective hedge, a divergence between the yen denominated fixed annuity product liability and the currency swaps exists primarily due to the difference in the basis of accounting between the liability and the derivative instruments (i.e. historical cost versus fair value). The yen denominated fixed annuity product liabilities are recorded on a historical cost basis and are only adjusted for changes in foreign spot rates and accrued income. The currency swaps are recorded at fair value incorporating changes in value due to changes in forward foreign exchange rates, interest rates and accrued income. An after-tax net loss of $23 and a net gain of $2 for the years ended December 31, 2005 and 2004, respectively, which includes the changes in value of the currency swaps and the yen fixed annuity contract remeasurement, was recorded in net realized capital gains and losses. Based on the fair values of Life non-U.S. dollar denominated investments and derivative instruments (including its yen based individual fixed annuity product) as of December 31, 2005 and 2004, management estimates that a 10% unfavorable change in exchange rates would decrease the fair values by an after-tax total of $6 and $9, respectively. The estimated impact was based upon a 10% change in December 31 spot rates. The selection of the 10% unfavorable change was made only for hypothetical illustration of the potential impact of such an event and should not be construed as a prediction of future market events. Actual results could differ materially from those illustrated above due to the nature of the estimates and assumptions used in the above analysis. Property & Casualty Property & Casualty attempts to maximize economic value while generating appropriate after-tax income and sufficient liquidity to meet policyholder and corporate obligations. Property & Casualty investment portfolio has material exposure to interest rates. The Company continually monitors these exposures and makes portfolio adjustments to manage these risks within established limits. Interest Rate Risk The primary exposure to interest rate risk in Property & Casualty relates to its fixed maturity securities, including corporate bonds, ABS, municipal bonds, CMBS and CMOs. The fair value of these investments was $25.3 billion and $24.4 billion at December 31, 107 Table of Contents 2005 and 2004, respectively. The fair value of these and Property & Casualty other invested assets fluctuates depending on the interest rate environment and other general economic conditions. During periods of declining interest rates, embedded call features within securities are exercised with greater frequency and paydowns on MBS and CMOs increase as the underlying mortgages are prepaid. During such periods, the Company generally will not be able to re-invest the proceeds of any such prepayments at comparable yields. Conversely, during periods of rising interest rates, the rate of prepayments generally decline. Derivative instruments such as swaps, caps and options are used to manage interest rate risk and had a total notional amount as of December 31, 2005 and 2004 of $1.5 billion and fair value of $(9) and $7, respectively. One of the measures Property & Casualty uses to quantify its exposure to interest rate risk inherent in its invested assets is duration. The weighted average duration of the fixed maturity portfolio was 4.6 years as of December 31, 2005 and 2004. In 2005, the duration of the Property & Casualty portfolios were modestly shortened in anticipation of higher future interest rates. Calculated Interest Rate Sensitivity The following table provides an analysis showing the estimated after-tax change in the fair value of Property & Casualty fixed income investments and related derivatives, assuming 100 basis point upward and downward parallel shifts in the yield curve as of December 31, 2005 and 2004. Certain financial instruments, such as limited partnerships, have been omitted from the analysis due to the fact the investments are accounted for under the equity method and generally lack sensitivity to interest rate changes. Change in Fair Value As of December 31, 2005 2004 Basis point shift - 100 + 100 - 100 + 100 Amount $ 861 $ (760 ) $ 750 $ (725 ) As of December 31, 2005, a decrease in interest rates has a greater impact on the change in fair value of the fixed income investments and related derivatives than an increase in interest rates, as compared to December 31, 2004, due to the fact that there is greater positive convexity in the portfolios as a result of increases in interest rates during 2005 as well as the prepayment of certain asset classes, primarily municipalities. The selection of the 100 basis point parallel shift in the yield curve was made only for hypothetical illustration of the potential impact of such an event and should not be construed as a prediction of future market events. Actual results could differ materially from those illustrated above due to the nature of the estimates and assumptions used in the above analysis. The Company sensitivity analysis calculation assumes that the composition of invested assets remains materially consistent throughout the year and that the current relationship between short-term and long-term interest rates will remain constant over time. As a result, these calculations may not fully capture the impact of portfolio re-allocations or non-parallel changes in interest rates. Foreign Currency Exchange Risk Foreign currency exchange risk exists with respect to investments in non-U.S. dollar denominated fixed maturities, primarily euro, sterling and Canadian dollar denominated securities. The risk associated with these securities relates to potential decreases in value resulting from unfavorable changes in foreign exchange rates. The fair value of these fixed maturity securities at December 31, 2005 and 2004 was $1.1 billion and $1.4 billion, respectively. In order to manage its currency exposures, Property & Casualty enters into foreign currency swaps and forward contracts to hedge the variability in cash flow associated with certain foreign denominated securities. These foreign currency swap agreements are structured to match the foreign currency cash flows of the hedged foreign denominated securities. At December 31, 2005 and 2004, the derivatives used to hedge currency exchange risk had a total notional value of $515 and $370, respectively, and total fair value of $(19) and $(70), respectively. Based on the fair values of Property & Casualty non-U.S. dollar denominated securities and derivative instruments as of December 31, 2005 and 2004, management estimates that a 10% unfavorable change in exchange rates would decrease the fair values by an after-tax total of approximately $50 and $63, respectively. The estimated impact was based upon a 10% change in December 31 spot rates. The selection of the 10% unfavorable change was made only for hypothetical illustration of the potential impact of such an event and should not be construed as a prediction of future market events. Actual results could differ materially from those illustrated above due to the nature of the estimates and assumptions used in the above analysis. CAPITAL RESOURCES AND LIQUIDITY Capital resources and liquidity represent the overall financial strength of The Hartford and its ability to generate strong cash flows from each of the business segments, borrow funds at competitive rates and raise new capital to meet operating and growth needs. Liquidity Requirements The liquidity requirements of The Hartford have been and will continue to be met by funds from operations as well as the issuance of commercial paper, common stock, debt securities and borrowings from its credit facilities. Current and expected patterns of claim frequency and severity may change from period to period but continue to be within historical norms and, therefore, the Company current liquidity position is considered to be sufficient to meet anticipated demands. However, if an unanticipated demand was placed on the Company it is likely that the Company would either sell certain of its investments to fund claims which could result in larger 108 Table of Contents than usual realized capital gains and losses or the Company would enter the capital markets to raise further funds to provide the requisite liquidity. For a discussion and tabular presentation of the Company current contractual obligations by period including those related to its Life and Property & Casualty insurance refer to the Off-Balance Sheet and Aggregate Contractual Obligations section below. The Hartford endeavors to maintain a capital structure that provides financial and operational flexibility to its insurance subsidiaries, ratings that support its competitive position in the financial services marketplace (see the Ratings section below for further discussion), and strong shareholder returns. As a result, the Company may from time to time raise capital from the issuance of stock, debt or other capital securities. The issuance of common stock, debt or other capital securities could result in the dilution of shareholder interests or reduced net income due to additional interest expense. On October 21, 2004, the Financial Services Authority ( FSA ), the Company primary regulator in Japan, issued regulations concerning new reserving methodologies and Solvency Margin Ratio ( SMR ) standards for variable annuity contracts. The regulations allow a Standard methodology and an Alternative methodology to determine required reserve levels and SMR standards. On December 27, 2004, the FSA also issued administrative guidelines that describe the detailed requirements under the two methodologies. The regulations became effective on April 1, 2005. The new reserve methodologies and SMR standards only apply to capital requirements for Japanese regulatory purposes, and are not directly related to results under accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The Company has decided to adopt the Standard methodology. It was expected that the impact of adopting the Standard methodology, on the Company Japanese operations, based on the Company assessment, could have required as much as $400 $650 of additional capital during 2005. During the third quarter of 2005, the Company received Connecticut regulatory approval and consummated a transaction to reinsure guaranteed minimum income benefit risk associated with the sale of variable annuities in Japan to Hartford Life and Annuity Insurance Company, a U.S. subsidiary. This reinsurance strategy substantially eliminated the additional capital requirement in Japan. The Company believes that optimization of its capital management globally is a dynamic process. Therefore, management regularly evaluates its global capital position and may make further adjustments using reinsurance, hedging and other strategies from time to time. As previously disclosed, the Company has been in the process of evaluating alternative capital structures related to its Japanese life insurance operations that it believes in the long term could result in improved financial flexibility. The Company Japanese life insurance operations are conducted through Hartford Life Insurance K.K. ( HLIKK ), which, prior to September 1, 2005, was a wholly owned subsidiary of Hartford Life and Accident Insurance Company ( HLA ), one of the Company principal statutorily regulated operating subsidiaries. Prior to September 1, 2005, the Company funded the capital needs of its Japanese operations through investments in the common stock of HLIKK by HLA. This arrangement generally allowed some portion of the Company investment in its Japanese operations to be included as part of the aggregate statutory capital (for the purposes of regulatory and rating agency capital adequacy measures) of HLA. During the second quarter of 2005, the Company sought and secured approval of a proposed plan to change the ownership structure of HLIKK. The proposed plan provided for a change in the ownership of HLIKK whereby the stock of HLIKK, an insurance operating company, would be transferred to Hartford Life, Inc., HLA parent company. The proposed plan was approved by both the State of Connecticut Insurance Department, HLA primary regulator, as well as the FSA, HLIKK primary regulator. On September 1, 2005 this plan was executed and the stock of HLIKK was transferred from HLA to Hartford Life, Inc. The transfer of the stock has been treated as a return of capital for GAAP and statutory accounting purposes for the respective entities. This transaction had no effect on the Company consolidated financial statements. The primary financial effect of the transaction was to reduce the statutory capital of HLA by the amount of the carrying value of HLIKK, which was $963 as of September 1, 2005. In addition, for certain capital adequacy ratios, a corresponding reduction in required capital will occur, which will result in an improved capital adequacy ratio. However, as previously disclosed, this action could potentially reduce certain other capital adequacy ratios employed by regulators and rating agencies to assess the capital growth of The Hartford life insurance operations. At the current time, taking into consideration the effects of the transaction, the Company believes it has sufficient capital resources to maintain capital solvency ratios consistent with all of its objectives. The Company Board of Directors has authorized the repurchase of outstanding shares of its common stock and equity units from time to time, in an aggregate amount not to exceed $1 billion. For additional information regarding the Company authorization to repurchase its securities, please see the Stockholders Equity section below. HFSG and HLI are holding companies which rely upon operating cash flow in the form of dividends from their subsidiaries, which enable them to service debt, pay dividends, and pay certain business expenses. Dividends to the Company from its insurance subsidiaries are restricted. The payment of dividends by Connecticut-domiciled insurers is limited under the insurance holding company laws of Connecticut. Under these laws, the insurance subsidiaries may only make their dividend payments out of unassigned surplus. These laws require notice to and approval by the state insurance commissioner for the declaration or payment of any dividend, which, together with other dividends or distributions made within the preceding twelve months, exceeds the greater of (i) 10% of the insurer policyholder surplus as of December 31 of the preceding year or (ii) net income (or net gain from operations, if such company is a life insurance company) for the twelve-month period ending on the thirty-first day of December last preceding, in each case determined under statutory insurance accounting principles. In addition, if any dividend of a Connecticut-domiciled insurer exceeds the insurer earned surplus, it requires the prior approval of the Connecticut Insurance Commissioner. The insurance holding company laws of the other jurisdictions in which The Hartford insurance subsidiaries are incorporated (or deemed commercially domiciled) generally contain similar (although in certain instances somewhat more restrictive) 109 Table of Contents limitations on the payment of dividends. The Company insurance subsidiaries are permitted to pay up to a maximum of approximately $1.9 billion in dividends to HFSG in 2006 without prior approval from the applicable insurance commissioner. However, through August 31, 2006 HLA, comprising $667 of the $1.9 billion, will need prior approval from the insurance commissioner to pay dividends. In 2005, HFSG and HLI received a combined total of $1.9 billion from their insurance subsidiaries, which includes a $963 dividend of HLIKK to HLI. The principal sources of operating funds are premium, fees and investment income, while investing cash flows originate from maturities and sales of invested assets. The primary uses of funds are to pay claims, policy benefits, operating expenses and commissions and to purchase new investments. In addition, The Hartford has a policy of carrying a significant short-term investment position and accordingly does not anticipate selling intermediate- and long-term fixed maturity investments to meet any liquidity needs. (For a discussion of the Company investment objectives and strategies, see the Investments and Capital Markets Risk Management sections.) Sources of Liquidity Shelf Registrations On December 3, 2003, The Hartford shelf registration statement (Registration No. 333-108067) for the potential offering and sale of debt and equity securities in an aggregate amount of up to $3.0 billion was declared effective by the Securities and Exchange Commission. The Registration Statement allows for the following types of securities to be offered: (i) debt securities, preferred stock, common stock, depositary shares, warrants, stock purchase contracts, stock purchase units and junior subordinated deferrable interest debentures of the Company, and (ii) preferred securities of any of one or more capital trusts organized by The Hartford ( The Hartford Trusts ). The Company may enter into guarantees with respect to the preferred securities of any of The Hartford Trusts. As of December 31, 2005, the Company had $2.4 billion remaining on its shelf. On May 15, 2001, HLI filed with the SEC a shelf registration statement (Registration No. 333-60944) for the potential offering and sale of up to $1.0 billion in debt and preferred securities. The registration statement was declared effective on May 29, 2001. As of December 31, 2005, HLI had $1.0 billion remaining on its shelf. Commercial Paper and Revolving Credit Facilities The table below details the Company short-term debt programs and the applicable balances outstanding. Maximum Available As of Outstanding As of Effective Expiration December December 31, December December Description Date Date 31, 2005 2004 31, 2005 31, 2004 Commercial Paper The Hartford 11/10/86 N/A $ 2,000 $ 2,000 $ 471 $ 372 HLI 2/7/97 N/A 250 250 Total commercial paper $ 2,250 2,250 $ 471 $ 372 Revolving Credit Facility 5-year revolving credit facility 9/7/05 9/7/10 $ 1,600 $ $ $ 5-year revolving credit facility [1] 6/20/01 6/20/06 1,000 3-year revolving credit facility [1] 12/31/02 12/31/05 490 Total revolving credit facility $ 1,600 $ 1,490 $ $ Total Outstanding Commercial Paper and Revolving Credit Facility $ 3,850 $ 3,740 $ 471 $ 372 [1] Replaced by $1.6 billion Five-Year Competitive Advance and Revolving Credit Facility Agreement on September 7, 2005. For further information, see below. On September 7, 2005, The Hartford and HLI entered into a $1.6 billion Five-Year Competitive Advance and Revolving Credit Facility Agreement (the Credit Agreement ) with a syndicate of financial institutions. The Credit Agreement replaced (i) The Hartford $1.0 billion Second Amended and Restated Five-Year Competitive Advance and Revolving Credit Facility Agreement dated as of February 26, 2003, as amended, and (ii) The Hartford and HLI $490 Three-Year Competitive Advance and Revolving Credit Facility Agreement, dated as of December 31, 2002, as amended. The Credit Agreement provides for up to $1.6 billion of unsecured credit. Of the total availability under the Credit Agreement, up to $250 is available to support borrowing by HLI alone, and up to $100 is available to support letters of credit issued on behalf of The Hartford, HLI or other subsidiaries of The Hartford. As of December 31, 2005, the Company Japanese operation has a 2.0 billion yen, approximately $17, line of credit with a Japanese bank with no outstanding borrowings under this facility. Under the revolving credit facility, the Company must maintain a minimum level of consolidated statutory surplus. In addition, the Company must not exceed a maximum ratio of debt to capitalization. Quarterly, the Company certifies compliance with the financial covenants for its banks. As of December 31, 2005, the Company was in compliance with all such covenants. 110 Table of Contents Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements and Aggregate Contractual Obligations The Company does not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that are reasonably likely to have a material effect on the financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, or capital resources of the Company, except for the following: The Company has outstanding forward purchase contracts associated with the Company equity units under which the Company will issue between 17.8 and 22.2 million shares of common stock, depending on the stock price on the date of issuance, and receive proceeds of approximately $1.02 billion in 2006. See further disclosure in Notes 2 and 14 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. The Company has unfunded commitments to purchase investments in limited partnerships and mortgage loans totaling $754 as disclosed in Note 12 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. The following table identifies the Company aggregate contractual obligations due by payment period: Payments due by period Less More than 1 1-3 3-5 than 5 Total Year years years years Property and casualty obligations [1] $ 22,874 $ 6,605 $ 5,118 $ 3,276 $ 7,875 Life, annuity and disability obligations [2] 334,460 21,974 47,105 47,973 217,408 Long-term debt obligations [3] 8,557 524 2,214 588 5,231 Operating lease obligations 668 187 356 73 52 Purchase obligations [4] 1,494 1,285 102 10 97 Other long-term liabilities reflected on the balance sheet [5] [6] 1,292 1,250 42 Total [7] $ 369,345 $ 31,825 $ 54,895 $ 51,920 $ 230,705 [1] The following points are significant to understanding the cash flows estimated for obligations under property and casualty contracts: Reserves for Property & Casualty unpaid claim and claim adjustment expenses include case reserves for reported claims and reserves for claims incurred but not reported (IBNR). While payments due on claim reserves are considered contractual obligations because they relate to insurance policies issued by the Company, the ultimate amount to be paid to settle both case reserves and IBNR is an estimate, subject to significant uncertainty. The actual amount to be paid is not determined until the Company reaches a settlement with the claimant. Final claim settlements may vary significantly from the present estimates, particularly since many claims will not be settled until well into the future. In estimating the timing of future payments by year, the Company has assumed that its historical payment patterns will continue. However, the actual timing of future payments will likely vary materially from these estimates due to, among other things, changes in claim reporting and payment patterns and large unanticipated settlements. In particular, there is significant uncertainty over the claim payment patterns of asbestos and environmental claims. Also, estimated payments in 2006 do not include payments that will be made on claims incurred in 2006 on policies that were in force as of December 31, 2005. In addition, the table does not include future cash flows related to the receipt of premiums that will be used, in part, to fund loss payments. Under generally accepted accounting principles, the Company is only permitted to discount reserves for claim and claim adjustment expenses in cases where the payment pattern and ultimate loss costs are fixed and reliably determinable on an individual claim basis. For the Company, these include claim settlements with permanently disabled claimants and certain structured settlement contracts that fund loss runoffs for unrelated parties. As of December 31, 2005, the total property and casualty reserves in the above table of $22,874 are gross of the reserve discount of $608. [2] Estimated life, annuity and disability obligations include death and disability claims, policy surrenders, policyholder dividends and trail commissions offset by expected future deposits and premiums on in-force contracts. Estimated contractual policyholder obligations are based on mortality, morbidity and lapse assumptions comparable with Life historical experience, modified for recent observed trends. Life has also assumed market growth and interest crediting consistent with assumptions used in amortizing deferred acquisition costs. In contrast to this table, the majority of Life obligations are recorded on the balance sheet at the current account values and do not incorporate an expectation of future market growth, interest crediting, or future deposits. Therefore, the estimated contractual policyholder obligations presented in this table significantly exceed the liabilities recorded in reserve for future policy benefits and unpaid claims and claim adjustment expenses, other policyholder funds and benefits payable and separate account liabilities. Due to the significance of the assumptions used, the amounts presented could materially differ from actual results. As separate account obligations are legally insulated from general account obligations, the separate account obligations will be fully funded by cash flows from separate account assets. Life expects to fully fund the general account obligations from cash flows from general account investments and future deposits and premiums. [3] Includes contractual principal and interest payments. Payments exclude amounts associated with fair-value hedges of certain of the Company long-term debt. All long-term debt obligations have fixed rates of interest. Long-term debt obligations also includes principal and interest payments of $700 and $2.4 billion, respectively, related to junior subordinated debentures which are callable beginning in 2006. See Note 14 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional discussion of long-term debt obligations. [4] Includes $1.3 billion in commitments to purchase investments including $366 of limited partnerships and $388 of mortgage loans. Outstanding commitments under these limited partnerships and mortgage loans are included in payments due in less than 1 year since the timing of funding these commitments cannot be estimated. The remaining $520 relates to payables for securities purchased which are reflected on the Company consolidated balance sheet. [5] As of December 31, 2005, the Company has accepted cash collateral of $1.2 billion in connection with the Company securities lending program and derivative instruments. Since the timing of the return of the collateral is uncertain, the return of the collateral has been included in the payments due in less than 1 year. [6] Includes $42 in collateralized loan obligations ( CLOs ) issued to third-party investors by consolidated investment management entities sponsored by the Company in connection with synthetic CLO transactions. The CLO investors have no recourse to the Company assets other than the dedicated assets collateralizing the CLOs. Refer to Note 4 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional discussion of CLOs. [7] Does not include estimated voluntary contribution of $200 to the Company pension plan in 2006. 111 Table of Contents Pension Plans and Other Postretirement Benefits The Company made contributions to its pension plans of $504, $317 and $306 in 2005, 2004 and 2003, respectively. The Company 2005 required minimum funding contribution was immaterial. The Company presently anticipates contributing approximately $200 to its pension plans in 2006, based upon certain economic and business assumptions. These assumptions include, but are not limited to, equity market performance, changes in interest rates and the Company other capital requirements. The Company 2006 required minimum funding contribution is expected to be immaterial. Pension expense reflected in the Company net income was $137, $104 and $120 in 2005, 2004 and 2003, respectively. The Company estimates its 2006 pension expense will be approximately $147, based on current assumptions. As provided for under SFAS No. 87, the Company uses a five-year averaging method to determine the market-related value of Plan assets, which is used to determine the expected return component of pension expense. Under this methodology, asset gains/losses that result from returns that differ from the Company long-term rate of return assumption are recognized in the market-related value of assets on a level basis over a five year period. The difference in actual asset returns for the Plan of $176 and $289 for the years ended December 31, 2005 and 2004, respectively, as compared to expected returns of $221 and $201 for the years ended December 31, 2005 and 2004, respectively will be fully reflected in the market-related value of Plan assets over the next five years using the methodology described above. The level of unrecognized net losses continues to exceed the allowable amortization corridor as defined under SFAS No. 87. Based on the 5.50% discount rate selected as of December 31, 2005 and taking into account estimated future minimum funding, the difference between actual and expected performance in 2005 will increase annual pension expense in future years. The increase in pension expense will be approximately $2 in 2006 and will increase ratably to an increase of approximately $8 in 2010. Capitalization The capital structure of The Hartford as of December 31, 2005 and 2004 consisted of debt and equity, summarized as follows: As of December 31, 2005 2004 Short-term debt (includes current maturities of long-term debt) $ 719 $ 621 Long-term debt [1] 4,048 4,308 Total debt $ 4,767 $ 4,929 Equity excluding accumulated other comprehensive income, net of tax ( AOCI ) $ 15,235 $ 12,813 AOCI 90 1,425 Total stockholders equity $ 15,325 $ 14,238 Total capitalization including AOCI $ 20,092 $ 19,167 Debt to equity 31 % 35 % Debt to capitalization 24 % 26 % [1] Includes junior subordinated debentures of $691 and $704 and debt associated with equity units of $1,020 and $1,020 as of December 31, 2005 and 2004, respectively. The Hartford total capitalization increased $925 as of December 31, 2005 as compared with December 31, 2004. This increase was due to a $1.1 billion increase in equity partially offset by a $162 decrease in debt. The increase in total stockholders equity is primarily due to net income of $2.3 billion, partially offset by other comprehensive loss of $1.3 billion and repayments of debt of $250. In 2006, the Company equity unit notes will be remarketed and the underlying stock purchase agreements will be exercised. For additional information regarding this remarketing, see Note 14 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Debt The following discussion describes the Company debt financing activities for 2005. In December 2005, the Company issued $100 of commercial paper and used the proceeds, together with other sources, to fund a $300 contribution to its defined benefit plan. On June 15, 2005, HLI repaid $250 of 7.75% senior notes at maturity. For additional information regarding debt, see Note 14 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Stockholders Equity Dividends On February 16, 2006, The Hartford Board of Directors declared a quarterly dividend of $0.40 per share payable on April 3, 2006 to shareholders of record as of March 1, 2006. On October 20, 2005, The Hartford declared a dividend on its common stock of $0.30 per share payable on January 3, 2006 to shareholders of record as of December 1, 2005. The Hartford declared $350 and paid $345 in dividends to shareholders in 2005, declared $331 and paid $325 in dividends to shareholders in 2004 and declared $300 and paid $291 in dividends to shareholders in 2003. 112 Table of Contents Rights Agreement Pursuant to the terms of the Rights Agreement dated as of November 1, 1995 between The Hartford and The Bank of New York as Rights Agent, the shareholders rights associated with The Hartford common stock expired on November 1, 2005. AOCI - AOCI decreased by $1.3 billion as of December 31, 2005 compared with December 31, 2004. The decrease in AOCI is primarily due to the other comprehensive loss from change in unrealized gain/loss on fixed maturities available-for-sale and minimum pension adjustment. The funded status of the Company pension and postretirement plans is dependent upon many factors, including returns on invested assets and the level of market interest rates. Declines in the value of securities traded in equity markets coupled with declines in long-term interest rates have had a negative impact on the funded status of the plans. As a result, the Company recorded a minimum pension liability as of December 31, 2005, and 2004, which resulted in an after-tax reduction of stockholders equity of $620 and $480 respectively. This minimum pension liability did not affect the Company results of operations. For additional information on stockholders equity and AOCI see Notes 15 and 16, respectively, of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Cash Flow 2005 2004 2003 Net cash provided by operating activities $ 3,732 $ 2,634 $ 3,896 Net cash used for investing activities $ (4,860 ) $ (2,401 ) $ (8,387 ) Net cash provided by financing activities $ 1,280 $ 477 $ 4,608 Cash end of year $ 1,273 $ 1,148 $ 462 2005 Compared to 2004 The increase in cash from operating activities was primarily the result of the funding of $1.15 billion in settlement of the MacArthur litigation in 2004 and increased net income as compared to the prior year period. Cash provided by financing activities increased primarily due to higher net receipts from policyholder accounts related to investment and universal life contracts and increased proceeds from stock option exercises in 2005 as compared to the prior year period. Also contributing to the increase in cash provided by financing activities was a decrease in debt repayments in 2005 as compared to the prior year period. Net purchases of available-for-sale securities accounted for the majority of cash used for investing activities. 2004 Compared to 2003 Cash from operating activities primarily reflects premium cash flows in excess of claim payments. The decrease in cash provided by operating activities was due primarily to the $1.15 billion settlement of the MacArthur litigation in 2004. Cash provided by financing activities decreased primarily due to lower proceeds from investment and universal life-type contracts as a result of the adoption of SOP 03-1, decreased capital raising activities, repayment of commercial paper and early retirement of junior subordinated debentures in 2004. The decrease in cash from financing activities and operating cash flows invested long-term accounted for the majority of the change in cash used for investing activities. Operating cash flows in each of the last three years have been adequate to meet liquidity requirements. Equity Markets For a discussion of the potential impact of the equity markets on capital and liquidity, see the Capital Markets Risk Management section under Market Risk . Ratings Ratings are an important factor in establishing the competitive position in the insurance and financial services marketplace. There can be no assurance that the Company ratings will continue for any given period of time or that they will not be changed. In the event the Company ratings are downgraded, the level of revenues or the persistency of the Company business may be adversely impacted. 113 Table of Contents The following table summarizes The Hartford significant member companies financial ratings from the major independent rating organizations as of February 22, 2006. Insurance Financial Strength Ratings: A.M. Best Fitch Standard & Poor Moody Hartford Fire Insurance Company A+ AA AA- Aa3 Hartford Life Insurance Company A+ AA AA- Aa3 Hartford Life and Accident Insurance Company A+ AA AA- Aa3 Hartford Life Group Insurance Company A+ AA Hartford Life and Annuity Insurance Company A+ AA AA- Aa3 Hartford Life Insurance KK (Japan) AA- Hartford Life Limited (Ireland) AA- Other Ratings: The Hartford Financial Services Group, Inc.: Senior debt Commercial paper a- AMB-2 A F1 A- A-2 A3 P-2 Hartford Capital III trust originated preferred securities bbb A- BBB Baa1 Hartford Life, Inc. Senior debt Commercial paper a- AMB-1 A F1 A- A-2 A3 P-2 Hartford Life, Inc.: Capital II trust preferred securities bbb A- BBB Baa1 Hartford Life Insurance Company: Short Term Rating A-1+ P-1 These ratings are not a recommendation to buy or hold any of The Hartford securities and they may be revised or revoked at any time at the sole discretion of the rating organization. The agencies consider many factors in determining the final rating of an insurance company. One consideration is the relative level of statutory surplus necessary to support the business written. Statutory surplus represents the capital of the insurance company reported in accordance with accounting practices prescribed by the applicable state insurance department. The table below sets forth statutory surplus for the Company insurance companies. 2005 2004 Life Operations $ 4,364 $ 5,119 Japan Life Operations [1] 1,017 Property & Casualty Operations 6,981 6,337 Total $ 12,362 $ 11,456 [1] Japan Life Operation was valued in accordance with prescribed statutory accounting practices. Prior to September 1, 2005, Japan Life Operations was included in Life Operations. Risk-based Capital The National Association of Insurance Commissioners ( NAIC ) has regulations establishing minimum capitalization requirements based on risk-based capital ( RBC ) formulas for both life and property and casualty companies. The requirements consist of formulas, which identify companies that are undercapitalized and require specific regulatory actions. The RBC formula for life companies establishes capital requirements relating to insurance, business, asset and interest rate risks. RBC is calculated for property and casualty companies after adjusting capital for certain underwriting, asset, credit and off-balance sheet risks. As of December 31, 2005, each of The Hartford insurance subsidiaries within Life and Ongoing Property & Casualty had more than sufficient capital to meet the NAIC minimum RBC requirements. NAIC Developments Changes to the NAIC RBC Requirements for Variable Annuities with Guarantees C-3 Phase II Capital On October 14, 2005 the Executive Committee of the NAIC formally adopted the provisions of the C-3 Phase II Capital project with an effective date of December 31, 2005 for NAIC RBC purposes. The C-3 Phase II Capital project addresses the equity, interest rate and expense recovery risks associated with variable annuities and group annuities that contain death benefits or certain living benefit guarantees including GMWBs. The capital requirements under C-3 Phase II are principle-based, which represents a change from the current factor-based approach. Under the new methodology, capital requirements are determined at a point in time using stochastic scenario testing and give credit for risk management strategies employed such as hedging and reinsurance. The Company expects the capital requirements to fluctuate primarily with changes in market levels and returns. As of December 31, 2005 the implementation of C-3 Phase II Capital requirements had a positive impact on The Hartford life insurance companies NAIC RBC ratio. 114 Table of Contents Contingencies Legal Proceedings For a discussion regarding contingencies related to The Hartford legal proceedings, please see Item 3, Legal Proceedings . Dependence on Certain Third Party Relationships The Company distributes its annuity, life and certain property and casualty insurance products through a variety of distribution channels, including broker-dealers, banks, wholesalers, its own internal sales force and other third party organizations. The Company periodically negotiates provisions and renewals of these relationships and there can be no assurance that such terms will remain acceptable to the Company or such third parties. An interruption in the Company continuing relationship with certain of these third parties could materially affect the Company ability to market its products. For a discussion regarding contingencies related to the manner in which The Hartford compensates brokers and other producers, please see Overview Broker Compensation above. Regulatory Developments For a discussion regarding contingencies related to regulatory developments that affect The Hartford, please see Overview Regulatory Developments above. Terrorism Risk Insurance Act of 2002 On December 22, 2005, the President signed the Terrorism Risk Insurance Extension Act of 2005 ( TRIEA ) extending the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act of 2002 ( TRIA ) through the end of 2007. TRIA provides a backstop for insurance-related losses resulting from any act of terrorism certified by the Secretary of the Treasury, in concurrence with the Secretary of State and Attorney General, that result in industry losses in excess of $50 in 2006 and $100 in 2007. Under the program, the federal government would pay 90% of covered losses from a certified act of terrorism in 2006 after an insurer losses exceed 17.5% of the Company eligible direct commercial earned premiums in 2005, up to a combined annual aggregate limit for the federal government and all insurers of $100 billion. In 2007, the federal government would pay 85% of covered losses from a certified act of terrorism after an insurer losses exceed 20% of the Company eligible direct commercial earned premiums in 2006, up to a combined annual aggregate limit for the federal government and all insurers of $100 billion. If an act of terrorism or acts of terrorism result in covered losses exceeding the $100 billion annual limit, insurers with losses exceeding their deductibles will not be responsible for additional losses. TRIA requires all property and casualty insurers, including The Hartford, to make terrorism insurance available in all of their covered commercial property and casualty insurance policies (as defined in TRIA and amended in TRIEA). TRIA applies to a significant portion of The Hartford commercial property and casualty contracts, but it specifically excludes some of The Hartford other insurance business, including commercial auto, surety, burglary and theft, farm owners multi-peril, professional liability, livestock insurance, reinsurance and personal lines business. TRIA also does not apply to group life insurance contracts. TRIA is scheduled to expire on December 31, 2007. In the event terrorism reinsurance legislation is not extended or renewed after December 2007, the Company may attempt to limit certain of its writings or obtain supplemental reinsurance protection, if available. For a discussion of The Hartford Risk Management processes as they relate to terrorism reinsurance legislation, please see the Property & Casualty Risk Management Strategy section of Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations. Legislative Initiatives On May 26, 2005, the Senate Judiciary Committee approved legislation that provides for the creation of a Federal asbestos trust fund in place of the current tort system for determining asbestos liabilities. On February 6, 2006, the Senate began consideration of S. 852, The Fairness in Asbestos Injury Resolution Act of 2005 . However, the proponents were unable to secure the sixty votes necessary to overcome a procedural budget objection. The prospects for enactment and the ultimate details of any legislation creating a Federal asbestos trust fund remain very uncertain. Depending on the provisions of any legislation which is ultimately enacted, the legislation may have a material adverse effect on the Company. Legislation introduced in Congress would provide for new retirement and savings vehicles designed to simplify retirement plan administration and expand individual participation in retirement savings plans. If enacted, these proposals could have a material effect on sales of the Company life insurance and investment products. Prospects for enactment of this legislation in 2006 are uncertain. In addition, other tax proposals and regulatory initiatives which have been or are being considered by Congress could have a material effect on the insurance business. These proposals and initiatives include changes pertaining to the tax treatment of insurance companies and life insurance products and annuities, repeal or reform of the estate tax and comprehensive federal tax reform. The nature and timing of any Congressional action with respect to these efforts is unclear. Congress is considering provisions regarding age discrimination in defined benefit plans, transition relief for older and longer service workers affected by changes to traditional defined benefit pension plans and the replacement of the interest rate used to determine pension plan funding requirements. These changes could affect the Company pension plan. Guaranty Fund and Other Insurance-related Assessments In all states, insurers licensed to transact certain classes of insurance are required to become members of a guaranty fund. In most states, in the event of the insolvency of an insurer writing any such class of insurance in the state, members of the funds are assessed to 115 Table of Contents pay certain claims of the insolvent insurer. A particular state fund assesses its members based on their respective written premiums in the state for the classes of insurance in which the insolvent insurer was engaged. Assessments are generally limited for any year to one or two percent of premiums written per year depending on the state. Such assessments paid by The Hartford approximated $46 in 2005, $26 in 2004 and $26 in 2003. The Hartford accounts for guaranty fund and other insurance assessments in accordance with Statement of Position No. 97-3, Accounting by Insurance and Other Enterprises for Insurance-Related Assessments . Liabilities for guaranty fund and other insurance-related assessments are accrued when an assessment is probable, when it can be reasonably estimated, and when the event obligating the Company to pay an imposed or probable assessment has occurred. Liabilities for guaranty funds and other insurance-related assessments are not discounted and are included as part of other liabilities in the Consolidated Balance Sheets. As of December 31, 2005 and 2004, the liability balance was $223 and $215, respectively. As of December 31, 2005 and 2004, $20 and $14, respectively, related to premium tax offsets were included in other assets. IMPACT OF NEW ACCOUNTING STANDARDS For a discussion of accounting standards, see Note 1 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 
