CIK: 874716
Company Name: IDEXX LABORATORIES INC DE
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2007-03-01


ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSES OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS During 2006, we operated primarily through three business segments: products and services for the veterinary market, which we refer to as our Companion Animal Group ( CAG ), water quality products ( Water ) and products for production animal health, which we refer to as the Production Animal Segment ( PAS ). We also operate a smaller segment that comprises products for dairy quality, which we refer to as Dairy. Financial information about the Dairy operating segment is presented in an Other category. As of January 2007, we have added an operating segment, OPTI Medical, in connection with our acquisition of the Critical Care Division of Osmetech plc, which is presented in an Other category. CAG develops, designs, manufactures, and distributes products and performs services for veterinarians. Water develops, designs, manufactures and distributes products to detect contaminants in water. PAS develops, designs, manufactures and distributes products to detect diseases in production animals. Dairy develops, designs, manufactures and distributes products to detect contaminants in dairy products. OPTI Medical develops, manufactures, and sells point-of-care electrolyte and blood gas analyzers and related consumable products for the human medical diagnostics market. Unallocated items that are not allocated to our operating segments are comprised primarily of share-based compensation costs (effective January 1, 2006), corporate research and development expenses, interest income and expense, and income taxes. The segment information for the years ended December 31, 2005 and 2004 has been restated to conform to our presentation of reportable segments for the year ended December 31, 2006. Previously, PAS and Dairy were aggregated into a single reportable segment, which we referred to as the Food Diagnostics Group. See Note 16 to the consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2006 included in this Form 10-K for financial information about our segments, including geographic information, and about our product and service categories. 20 The following is a discussion of the strategic and operating factors that we believe have the most significant effect on the performance of our business. Companion Animal Group In the CAG segment, we believe we have developed a strategic advantage over companies with more narrow product or service offerings. The breadth of our products and services gives us scale in sales and distribution, permits us to offer integrated disease-management solutions that leverage the advantages of both point-of-care and outside laboratory testing, and facilitates the flow of medical and business information in the veterinary practice by connecting practice information software systems, including connecting the electronic health record with laboratory test data, in-clinic test data from our IDEXX VetLab suite of analyzers, and radiographic data in the IDEXX-PACS software taken by our digital radiography systems. In the U.S., we sell instrument consumables, rapid assay products and pharmaceutical products primarily through distributors, and, therefore, our reported sales of these products are sales made to distributors, rather than sales to veterinarians, the end users. Because distributors inventory levels and purchasing patterns may fluctuate, sales of a particular product line in a particular period may not always be representative of the underlying end-user demand for the product. Therefore, we closely track sales of these products by our U.S. distributors to the veterinarians ( practice-level sales ), which we think provide a more accurate picture of the real growth rate for these products. Instruments and Consumables . Our instrument strategy is to provide veterinarians with an integrated set of instruments that, individually and together, provide superior diagnostic information in the clinic, enabling veterinarians to practice better medicine and, in doing so, achieve their practice economic objectives, including growth and profitability. We derive substantial revenues and margins from the sale of consumables that are used in these instruments. During the early stage of an instrument life cycle, we derive relatively greater revenues from instrument placements, while consumable sales become relatively more significant in later stages as the installed base of instruments increases and instrument placement revenues begin to decline. We have a large installed base of VetTest Chemistry Analyzers, and substantially all of our revenues from that product line are now derived from consumables sales, although we continue to place instruments through sales, lease, rental and other programs. Our long-term success in this area of our business is dependent upon new customer acquisition, customer retention and increased customer utilization of existing and new assays introduced on these instruments. To increase utilization, we seek to educate veterinarians about best medical practices that emphasize the importance of blood and urine chemistry testing for a variety of diagnostic purposes. We purchase the consumables used in VetTest Chemistry Analyzers from Ortho under a supply agreement that continues through 2020. This supply agreement provides us with a long-term source of slides at costs that improve annually through 2010, and also improve over the term of the agreement as a result of increasing volume. Under this agreement, we are developing and expect to introduce a next-generation chemistry analyzer, named Catalyst Dx , for the veterinary market based primarily on the Ortho dry-slide technology and secondarily on OPTI electrolyte technology, and Ortho will supply us with slide consumables used in both the new instrument and the VetTest Chemistry Analyzer. We plan to launch Catalyst Dx in January 2008. In the fourth quarter of 2002, we introduced the LaserCyte Hematology Analyzer, which provides more extensive hematological diagnostic information than our original platform, the VetAutoread Hematology Analyzer. A substantial portion of LaserCyte placements have been made at veterinary clinics that already own our VetAutoread Hematology Analyzers. Although we have experienced growth in sales of hematology consumables, LaserCyte consumable sales have been partially offset by declines in sales of VetAutoread consumables. Because the gross margin percentage of LaserCyte consumables exceeds the gross margin percentage of the VetAutoread consumables, gross margin from hematology consumables is expected to increase with continued penetration of the LaserCyte Hematology Analyzer. 21 With all of our instrument lines, we seek to differentiate our products based on breadth of diagnostic menu, flexibility of menu selection, accuracy, reliability, ease of use, ability to handle compromised samples, time to result, analytical capability of software, integration with the IDEXX VetLab Station, education and training, and superior sales and customer service. Our instruments and consumables typically are sold at a premium price to competitive offerings. Our success depends, in part, on our ability to differentiate our products in a way that justifies premium pricing. Rapid Assay Products . Our rapid assay business consists primarily of single-use kits for point-of-care testing and, to a limited degree, microwell-based kits for laboratory testing for canine and feline diseases and conditions. Our rapid assay strategy is to develop, manufacture, market and sell proprietary tests that address important medical needs for particular diseases prevalent in the companion animal population. We seek to differentiate our tests through superior performance, including by providing our customers with proprietary combination tests that test a single sample for multiple analytes. Where alternative point-of-care offerings exist, we seek to differentiate our tests with superior performance. As in our other lines of business, we also seek to differentiate our products through superior customer service. These products carry price premiums over competitive products that we believe do not offer equivalent performance and diagnostic capabilities, and which we believe do not include a similar level of support. We further augment our product development and customer service efforts with sales and marketing programs that enhance medical awareness and understanding regarding our target diseases and the importance of diagnostic testing. In 2008, we plan to introduce a new IDEXX VetLab analyzer, SNAPshot Dx , that, later that year, will include the capability to interpret the test results from all SNAP assays and log the tests and their results in the IDEXX VetLab Station database and, therefore, in the medical and financial records of the practice. Reference Laboratory and Consulting Services . We believe that more than half of all diagnostic testing by U.S. veterinarians is done at outside reference laboratories such as our IDEXX Reference Laboratories. In markets outside the U.S., in-clinic testing is less prevalent and an even greater percentage of diagnostic testing is done in reference laboratories. We attempt to differentiate our laboratory testing services from those of our competitors primarily on the basis of quality, customer service, technology employed and specialized test menu. Revenue growth in this business is achieved both through increased sales at existing laboratories and through the acquisition of new customers, including through laboratory acquisitions and opening new laboratories. In 2004, we acquired a laboratory in Columbus, Ohio, opened a laboratory in Seattle, Washington, and acquired Vet Med Lab, which is based in Germany and is the largest European veterinary reference laboratory. In 2005, we acquired laboratories in Switzerland, the United Kingdom, and France and acquired veterinary laboratory customer lists in the U.S. and Germany. In 2006, we acquired laboratories in Clearwater, Florida, South Africa, and Canada and acquired a veterinary laboratory customer list in the U.S. Profitability of this business is largely the result of our ability to achieve efficiencies from both volume and operational improvements. New laboratories that we open typically will operate at a loss until testing volumes reach a level that permits profitability. Acquired laboratories frequently operate less profitably than our existing laboratories and those laboratories may not achieve profitability comparable to our existing laboratories for several years while we implement operating improvements and efficiencies. Therefore, in the short term, new and acquired reference laboratories generally will have a negative effect on the operating margin of the laboratory and consulting services business. Practice Information Management Systems and Digital Radiography . These businesses consist of veterinary practice information management systems ( PIMS ) including hardware and software and veterinary-specific digital radiography systems. Our strategy in the PIMS business is to provide superior total software and hardware integrated information solutions, backed by superior customer support and education, to allow the veterinarian to practice better medicine and achieve the practice business objectives. We differentiate our software systems through enhanced functionality and ease of use. Our veterinary-specific digital radiography systems allow veterinarians to capture digital radiographs with ease and without the use of hazardous chemicals. The digital radiography systems also incorporate IDEXX-PACS picture archiving and communication software developed by IDEXX that allows for image enhancement, manipulation, storage and retrieval, and integration with the practice information software. Our strategy in digital radiography is to offer a system that provides superior image quality and software capability at a competitive price, backed by the same customer support provided for our other products and services in the Companion Animal Group. 22 Pharmaceutical Products . We currently offer pharmaceutical products to regulate feline diabetes, eradicate internal parasites, and treat lameness in horses. Our pharmaceutical strategy is to develop, register and sell proprietary pharmaceutical products for the veterinary market. We seek to differentiate our pharmaceutical products through ease of use, which in turn enhances customers compliance with prescribed treatment programs. Our product development efforts are focused on applying superior and proprietary delivery technologies to existing pharmaceutical compounds. Water Our strategy in the water testing business is to develop, manufacture, market and sell proprietary products with superior performance, supported by exceptional customer service. Our customers are primarily water utilities to whom strong relationships and customer support are very important. Over the past several years, the rate of growth of this product line has slowed as a result of market penetration by competitors and increased competition. International sales of water testing products represented 42% of total water product sales in 2006, and we expect that future growth in this business will be significantly dependent on our ability to increase international sales. Growth also will be dependent on our ability to enhance and broaden our product line. Most water microbiological testing is driven by regulation, and, in many countries, a test may not be used for regulatory testing unless it has been approved by the applicable regulatory body. As a result, we maintain an active regulatory program under which we are seeking regulatory approvals in a number of countries, primarily in Europe. Production Animal Segment We develop, manufacture, market and sell a broad range of tests for various poultry, cattle and swine diseases and conditions, and have an active research and development and in-licensing program in this area. Our strategy is to offer proprietary tests with superior performance characteristics. Disease outbreaks are episodic and unpredictable, and certain diseases that are prevalent at one time may be substantially contained or eradicated at a later time. In response to outbreaks, testing initiatives may lead to exceptional demand for certain products in certain periods. Conversely, successful eradication programs may result in significantly decreased demand for certain products. The performance of this business, therefore, can be subject to fluctuation. In 2006, approximately 79% of our sales in this business were international. Because of the significant dependence of this business on international sales, the performance of the business is particularly subject to the various risks described below that are associated with doing business internationally. In 2004, we received USDA approval of our postmortem test for BSE (mad cow disease) and, in February 2005, we were informed that this test was approved by the European Commission for sale in EU member countries. While BSE testing is very limited in the U.S., a larger market for BSE testing exists in Europe. Other Dairy . Our strategy in the dairy testing business is to develop, manufacture and sell antibiotic residue testing products that satisfy applicable regulatory requirements for testing of bulk milk by producers and provide reliable field performance. The manufacture of these testing products leverage, almost exclusively, the SNAP platform as well as the production equipment and lines of our rapid assay business, incorporating customized reagents for antibiotic detection. Sales of dairy testing products have declined slightly over the last several years largely as a result of increased competition in the domestic market. To increase sales of dairy testing products, we look to increase penetration in geographies outside the U.S. and in the farm segment of the dairy market, and to develop product line enhancements and extensions. OPTI Medical Systems . Our strategy in the OPTI Medical Systems business is to develop, manufacture, and sell electrolyte and blood gas analyzers and related consumable products for the medical point-of-care diagnostics market worldwide, with a focus on small- to mid-sized hospitals. We seek to differentiate our products based on ease of use, menu, convenience, international distribution and service, and instrument reliability. Similar to our veterinary instruments and consumables strategy, a substantial portion of the revenues from this product line are derived from the sale of consumables for use on the installed base of electrolyte and blood gas analyzers. During the early stage of an instrument life cycle, relatively greater revenues are derived from instrument placements, while consumable sales become relatively more significant in later stages as the installed base of instruments increases and instrument placement revenues begin to decline. Our long-term success in this area of our business is dependent upon new customer acquisition, customer retention and increased customer utilization of existing and new assays introduced on these instruments. 23 CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the U.S. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates, including those related to revenue recognition, inventory, goodwill and other intangible assets, share-based compensation, income taxes, and contingencies. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates. Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2006 included in this Form 10-K describes the significant accounting policies used in preparation of these financial statements. We believe the following critical accounting policies reflect our more significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements. Revenue Recognition We recognize revenue when four criteria are met: (i) persuasive evidence that an arrangement exists, (ii) delivery has occurred or services have been rendered, (iii) the sales price is fixed or determinable, and (iv) collectibility is reasonably assured. We recognize revenue at the time of shipment to distributors for substantially all products sold through distributors, as title and risk of loss pass to these customers on delivery to the common carrier. Our distributors do not have the right to return products. We recognize revenue for the remainder of our customers when the product is delivered, except as noted below. We recognize revenue from the sales of instruments, noncancelable software licenses and hardware systems upon installation (and completion of training if applicable) and the customer acceptance of the instrument or system because at this time we have no significant further obligations. We recognize service revenue at the time the service is performed. We recognize revenue associated with extended maintenance agreements over the life of the contracts. Amounts collected in advance of revenue recognition are recorded as a current or long-term liability based on the time from the balance sheet date to the future date of revenue recognition. We recognize revenue on certain instrument systems under rental programs over the life of the rental agreement. Amounts collected in advance of revenue recognition are recorded as a current or long-term liability based on the time from the balance sheet date to the future date of revenue recognition. Certain diagnostic instruments and practice information management systems offered for sale may include software that is considered more than incidental to the utility and value of the product. Sales arrangements may provide for software update rights or postcontract customer support. Judgment is required to determine whether sales arrangements include multiple elements. When multiple products and/or services are sold together, we generally allocate the total consideration received amongst the elements based on their relative fair values, which is determined by amounts charged separately for the delivered and undelivered elements to other customers. When there is objective and reliable evidence of the fair value of the undelivered elements but no such evidence for the delivered elements, the fair value of the undelivered elements is deferred and the residual revenue is allocated to the delivered elements. The delivered elements are recognized as revenue when appropriate under the policies described above. If there is not sufficient evidence of the fair value of the undelivered elements, no revenue is allocated to the delivered elements and the total consideration received is deferred until delivery of those elements for which objective and reliable evidence of the fair value is not available. Shipping costs reimbursed by the customer are included in revenue. 24 We record estimated reductions to revenue in connection with customer programs and incentive offerings, which may give customers credits, award points, or trade-in rights. Awards points may be applied to trade receivables owed to us and/or toward future purchase of our products and services. We estimate these reductions based on our experience with similar customer programs in prior years. Revenue reductions are recorded on a quarterly basis based on issuance of credits, points actually awarded, and estimates of points to be awarded in the future based on current revenue. For the SNAP Up the Savings program, estimates of future points are revised quarterly and finalized annually in the third quarter of each year upon the issuance of points to customers. For our Practice Developer volume discount program, we have reduced revenue assuming all points granted will result in future credits because the historical forfeitures have been de minimus. On November 30 of each year, unused points awarded before January 1 of the prior year expire. We may offer customers the right to trade in instruments for credit against the purchase price of other instruments acquired in the future. For trade-in rights, we have reduced revenue using estimates regarding the percentage of qualifying instruments that will be traded in and the average trade-in value. We recognize revenue only in those situations where collection from the customer is reasonably assured. We maintain allowances for doubtful accounts for estimated losses resulting from the inability of our customers to make required payments. We base our estimates on detailed analysis of specific customer situations and a percentage of our accounts receivable by aging category. If the financial condition of our customers were to deteriorate, resulting in an impairment of their ability to make payments, additional allowances might be required. Inventory Valuation We write down inventory for estimated obsolescence when warranted by estimates of future demand and market conditions. If actual market conditions are less favorable than those we estimated, additional inventory write-downs may be required, which would have a negative effect on results of operations. Certain major components of inventory for which we have made critical valuation judgments are discussed in more detail below. LaserCyte Hematology Analyzer . At December 31, 2006, our net inventories included $11.5 million of component parts and finished goods associated with our LaserCyte hematology instrument. In addition, we had firm purchase commitments for an additional $4.2 million of component parts as of December 31, 2006. At December 31, 2006, $1.7 million of the net LaserCyte inventory required rework before it could be used to manufacture finished goods, which was net of $0.9 million write-downs for inventory estimated to be obsolete. We expect to fully realize our net investment in inventory and purchase commitments. However, if we alter the design of this product, we may be required to write off some or all of the remaining associated inventory. Nitazoxanide . Our nitazoxanide product, Navigator , for the treatment of equine protozoal myeloencephalitis ( EPM ) was approved by the FDA in November 2003. At December 31, 2006, our inventories included $9.3 million of inventory associated with Navigator , consisting of $0.2 million of finished goods and $9.1 million of active ingredient and other raw materials. We have an agreement with our supplier of nitazoxanide under which the supplier agreed until 2017 to replace any expiring inventory of nitazoxanide with longer-dated material. We paid $0.9 million in January 2005 for consideration for this agreement and capitalized this payment as inventory cost. We believe that this agreement has substantially mitigated the risk that we would be required to write down nitazoxanide inventory due to its anticipated expiration prior to sale. However, if actual market conditions or our market share through 2022 are less than we estimate, we may be required to write off some of the associated inventory. For example, if we sell approximately 50% fewer units through 2025 than we estimate, we would have approximately $5 million of excess inventory. Valuation of Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets A significant portion of the purchase prices of our business acquisitions is assigned to intangible assets. Intangible assets other than goodwill are initially valued at the lesser of fair value or, if applicable, fair value proportionately reduced by the excess of the fair value of acquired net assets over cost, (collectively, fair value ) when acquired. If a market value is not readily available, the fair value of the intangible asset is estimated based on discounted cash flows using market participant assumptions. The estimation of discounted cash flows requires significant assumptions about the timing and amounts of future cash flows, risks, the cost of capital, and the useful lives of intangible assets. When the fair values of acquired intangible assets are significant, we utilize independent valuation experts to advise and assist us in allocating the purchase prices of acquisitions to the fair values of the identified intangible assets and in determining appropriate amortization methods and periods for those intangible assets. Goodwill is initially valued based on the excess of the purchase price of a business combination over the fair values of acquired net assets. 25 We assess the impairment of identifiable intangible assets and other long-lived assets whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable. Factors we consider important that could trigger an impairment review include, but are not limited to, the following: Significant under-performance relative to historical or projected future operating results; Failure to obtain regulatory approval of certain products; Significant changes in regulations; Significant changes in the manner of our use of the acquired assets or the strategy for our overall business; Significant increase in the discount rate assumed to calculate the present value of future cash flow; Significant negative industry or economic trends; Significant advancements or changes in technology; and Cancellation or significant changes in contractual relationships. We continually assess the realizability of intangible assets other than goodwill in accordance with Statement of Financial Accounting Standards ( SFAS ) No. 144, Accounting for the Impairment or Disposal of Long-Lived Assets ( SFAS No. 144 ). If an impairment review is triggered, we evaluate the carrying value of long-lived assets by determining if impairment exists based on estimated undiscounted future cash flows over the remaining useful life of the assets and comparing that value to the carrying value of the assets. If the carrying value of the asset is greater than the estimated future cash flows, the asset is written down to its estimated fair value. In determining expected future cash flows, assets are grouped at the lowest level for which cash flows are identifiable and independent of cash flows from other asset groups. The cash flow estimates that are used contain our best estimates, using appropriate and customary assumptions and projections at the time. We assess goodwill for impairment annually and whenever events or circumstances indicate an impairment may exist, in accordance with SFAS No. 142, Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets ( SFAS No. 142 ). For impairment testing, we identify our reporting units, allocate assets and liabilities (including goodwill) to the reporting units and compare the reporting units net book value to their estimated fair value. The fair value of the reporting units is estimated using a discounted cash flow approach. The cash flow estimates used contain our best estimates, using appropriate and customary assumptions and projections at the time. If a reporting unit net book value exceeds its fair value, then the implied fair value of goodwill is determined. If the net book value of goodwill exceeds the implied fair value of goodwill, a goodwill impairment loss is recognized in an amount equal to that excess. No impairments have been identified as a result of the annual or event-driven reviews during the years ended December 31, 2006, 2005 or 2004. The determination of the fair value of our pharmaceutical products business unit requires significant assumptions about the timing and amounts of the unit future cash flows, including assumptions about the markets for our products and proprietary technologies, the future success of research and development activities, the attainment and timing of regulatory approvals to manufacture and sell new products, the introduction and success of competitive products by other market participants, and other business risks. We believe that the goodwill attributable to our pharmaceutical business of $13.7 million is not impaired at December 31, 2006. However, changes in our assumptions and estimates due to new information, or actual results that are below expectations, could result in an impairment in the future of some or all of the goodwill attributable to our pharmaceutical products business. 26 Share-based Compensation We adopted the provisions of SFAS No. 123(R), Share-Based Payment ( SFAS No. 123(R) ) on January 1, 2006. SFAS No. 123(R) requires all share-based compensation to employees, including grants of stock options, to be valued at fair value on the date of grant, and to be expensed over the requisite service period (generally the vesting period). Prior to January 1, 2006, we measured costs related to employee share-based compensation plans in accordance with Accounting Principles Board Opinion No. 25, Accounting for Stock Issued to Employees ( APB No. 25 ). Accordingly, no employee compensation cost was recognized for these plans prior to January 1, 2006. Effective January 1, 2006, under the modified prospective method of transition, share-based compensation expense includes expense for unvested awards at December 31, 2005 and all awards granted subsequent to December 31, 2005. Share-based compensation expense for the unvested awards outstanding at December 31, 2005 is based on the grant-date fair value previously calculated in developing the pro forma disclosures in accordance with the provisions of SFAS No. 123. Beginning in 2006, we modified our share-based employee compensation programs to shift from the grant of stock options and employee stock purchase rights only to the grant of a mix of restricted stock units and stock options, along with employee stock purchase rights. There were no modifications to the terms of outstanding options during 2006 or 2005. In connection with the adoption of SFAS No. 123(R), we adopted the straight-line method to prospectively expense share-based awards granted subsequent to December 31, 2005. The graded-vesting, or accelerated, method has been used to calculate the expense for stock options granted prior to January 1, 2006. If the total fair value of share-based compensation awards, as well as other features that impact expense, including forfeitures and capitalization of costs, was consistent from year-to-year in each of the last five years and through 2010, this change in expense method from graded-vesting to straight-line expensing would yield decreasing annual expense through 2010 until awards granted prior to January 1, 2006 were fully expensed. However, the total fair value of future awards may vary significantly from past awards based on a number of factors, including our share-based award practices. Therefore, share-based compensation expense is likely to fluctuate, possibly significantly, from year to year. Selected financial impacts of share-based compensation, excluding the impact of deferred stock units issued under our Director Deferred Compensation Plan or our Executive Deferred Compensation Plan that do not have vesting conditions (which are described below), are presented in the table below ( in thousands, except per share amounts ): For the Year Ended December 31, 2006 Share-based compensation expense included in cost of revenue $ 1,671 Share-based compensation expense included in operating expense 8,986 Total share-based compensation expense 10,657 Income tax benefit in net income for share-based compensation expense (1,845 ) Income tax benefit in net income for employees' disqualifying dispositions of shares acquired through the exercise of stock options and employee stock purchase rights (57 ) Total income tax benefit (1,902 ) Net impact of share-based compensation on net income $ 8,755 Net impact of share-based compensation on: Earnings per share, basic $ 0.28 Earnings per share, diluted 0.27 Share-based compensation costs are classified in costs of sales and operating expenses consistently with the classification of cash compensation paid to the employees receiving such share-based compensation. Capitalized share-based employee compensation cost at December 31, 2006 was $0.2 million, which was included in inventory on the consolidated balance sheet. 27 The fair value of options, restricted stock units, deferred stock units with vesting conditions, and employee stock purchase rights awarded during the years ended December 31, 2006, 2005 and 2004 totaled $11.9 million, $15.7 million and $13.4 million, respectively. The total unrecognized compensation cost for unvested share-based compensation awards outstanding at December 31, 2006, net of estimated forfeitures, was $14.6 million. Approximately $6.3 million is expected to be recognized in the year ending December 31, 2007 for outstanding awards and decreasing amounts of the total expense are expected to be recognized over the subsequent five years, resulting in a weighted average remaining expense recognition period of approximately 1.5 years. We use the Black-Scholes-Merton option-pricing model to determine the fair value of options granted. Option-pricing models require the input of highly subjective assumptions, particularly for the expected stock price volatility and the expected term of options. Changes in the subjective input assumptions can materially affect the fair value estimate. Our expected stock price volatility assumptions are based on the historical volatility of our stock over periods that are similar to the expected terms of grants, and other relevant factors. Lower estimated volatility reduces the fair value of an option. To develop the expected term assumption for 2006 option awards, we elected to use the simplified method described in the Securities and Exchange Commission Staff Accounting Bulletin No. 107, which is based on vesting and contractual terms. The application of the simplified method is allowable for options granted through December 31, 2007. We will transition to developing expected term assumptions for future awards based on historical experience and other relevant factors concerning expected employee behavior with regards to option exercise. Longer expected term assumptions increase the fair value of option awards, and therefore increase the expense recognized per award. The weighted average valuation assumptions used to determine the fair value of each option grant on the date of grant and the weighted average estimated fair values were as follows: For the Years Ended December 31, 2006 2005 2004 Expected stock price volatility 30 % 40 % 40 % Expected term, in years 5.0 5.8 5.8 Risk-free interest rate 4.6 % 4.2 % 3.1 % Share-based compensation expense is based on the number of awards ultimately expected to vest and is, therefore, reduced for an estimate of the number of awards that are expected to be forfeited. The forfeiture estimate is based on historical data and other factors, and compensation expense is adjusted for actual results. Changes in estimated forfeiture rates and differences between estimated forfeiture rates and actual experience may result in significant, unanticipated increases or decreases in share-based compensation expense from period to period. The termination of employment by certain employees who hold large numbers of share-based compensation instruments may also have a significant, unanticipated impact on forfeiture experience and, therefore, on share-based compensation expense. The tax benefit related to the option fair value is recognized when disqualifying dispositions of incentive stock options occur as either a reduction of the current period tax provision or an increase in additional paid-in capital, as required by SFAS No. 123(R) transitional accounting rules, depending on the vesting status of awards at the SFAS No. 123(R) adoption date, and the amounts previously expensed under SFAS No. 123(R). Employees exercise of vested options and disposition of shares acquired is influenced by the market price of the common stock and other factors outside of our control. The timing and volume of disqualifying dispositions; the vesting status of such exercised options at the date of our adoption of SFAS No. 123(R); and the relationship between the sale price of the common stock, the option exercise price and the option fair value may have a significant, unpredictable impact on our effective tax rate. As the aggregate fair value of outstanding options that has been expensed under SFAS No. 123(R) grows, we expect to recognize increasing tax benefits in net income related to disqualifying dispositions. However, the growth of the aggregate fair value of outstanding options that has been expensed under SFAS No. 123(R) will be limited in future years as a result of changes implemented in 2006 in our share-based compensation programs, under which we have shifted from the grant of stock options only to the grant of a mix of stock options and restricted stock unit awards that have a lower aggregate fair value than was awarded in prior years. Reductions in the fair value of options outstanding are expected to reduce the variability in our effective tax rate. 28 Income Taxes We account for income taxes under SFAS No. 109, Accounting for Income Taxes. This statement requires that we recognize a current tax liability or asset for current taxes payable or refundable, respectively; and a deferred tax liability or asset, as the case may be, for the estimated future tax effects of temporary differences between book and tax treatment of assets and liabilities and carryforwards to the extent they are realizable. We record a valuation allowance to reduce our deferred tax assets to the amount that is more likely than not to be realized. While we consider future taxable income and ongoing prudent and feasible tax planning strategies in assessing the need for a valuation allowance, in the event we were to determine that we would be able to realize our deferred tax assets in the future in excess of the net recorded amount, an adjustment to the deferred tax asset would increase income in the period such determination was made. Likewise, should we determine that we would not be able to realize all or part of our net deferred tax asset in the future, an adjustment to the deferred tax asset would be charged to income in the period such determination was made. Significant judgment is required in determining our worldwide provision for income taxes and our income tax filings are regularly under audit by tax authorities. We periodically assess our exposures related to our worldwide provision for income taxes and believe that we have appropriately accrued taxes for contingencies. Any reduction of these contingent liabilities or additional assessment would increase or decrease income, respectively, in the period such determination was made. We consider the operating earnings of non-United States subsidiaries to be indefinitely invested outside the United States, the cumulative amount of which was $111.4 million at December 31, 2006. No provision has been made for United States federal and state, or international taxes that may result from future remittances of undistributed earnings of non-United States subsidiaries. Should we repatriate non-United States earnings in the future, we would have to adjust the income tax provision in the period in which the decision to repatriate earnings is made. Estimates for Certain Contingencies Under our workers compensation insurance policies for U.S. employees for the years ended December 31, 2006, 2005, 2004 and 2003, we retain the first $250,000 in claim liability per incident and $3.1 million, $2.8 million, $3.0 million and $1.4 million, respectively, in aggregate claim liability. We entered into a similar workers compensation insurance policy effective January 1, 2007. The insurance company provides insurance for claims above the individual occurrence and aggregate limits. We estimate claim liability based on claims incurred and the estimated ultimate cost to settle the claims. Based on this analysis, we have recognized cumulative expenses of $1.3 million, $0.6 million, $0.7 million and $0.8 million for claims incurred during the years ended December 31, 2006, 2005, 2004 and 2003, respectively. Under our employee health care insurance policy, we retain claims liability risk up to $125,000 per incident and an aggregate claim limit based on the number of employees enrolled in the plan per month. We estimate our liability for the uninsured portion of employee health care obligations based on individual and aggregate coverage, our claims experience, the number of employees enrolled in the program, and the average time from when a claim is incurred to the time it is reported. Should actual employee health care claims liability exceed estimates, we are liable for up to an additional $1.5 million for potential uninsured obligations at December 31, 2006. We have insurance coverage of $1.0 million for claims above the aggregate limit. Should employee health insurance claims exceed this coverage, we would have further obligations for the amount in excess of such coverage. We are subject to claims that arise in the ordinary course of business, including with respect to actual and threatened litigation and other matters. We accrue contingent liabilities when it is probable that future expenditures will be made and such expenditures can reasonably be estimated. However, our actual losses with respect to these contingencies could exceed our accruals. 29 RESULTS OF OPERATIONS Twelve Months Ended December 31, 2006 Compared to Twelve Months Ended December 31, 2005 Revenue Total Company. Revenue increased $101.0 million, or 16%, to $739.1 million from $638.1 million for the prior year. The following table presents revenue by reportable operating segment: For the Twelve Months Ended December 31, Net Revenue (dollars in thousands) 2006 2005 Dollar Change Percentage Change Percentage Change from Currency (1) Percentage Change from Acquisitions (2) Percentage Change Net of Acquisitions and Currency Effect CAG $ 606,319 $ 520,830 $ 85,489 16.4 % 0.3 % 2.4 % 13.7 % Water 58,466 56,760 1,706 3.0 % 0.8 % -- 2.2 % PAS 58,940 44,945 13,995 31.1 % 0.9 % -- 30.2 % Other 15,392 15,560 (168 ) (1.1 %) (0.1 %) -- (1.0 %) Total $ 739,117 $ 638,095 $ 101,022 15.8 % 0.4 % 1.8 % 13.6 % (1) Represents the percentage change in revenue attributed to the effect of changes in currency rates from the twelve months ended December 31, 2005 to the twelve months ended December 31, 2006. (2) Represents the percentage change in revenue attributed to incremental revenues from businesses acquired since January 2005 during the twelve months ended December 31, 2005 compared to the twelve months ended December 31, 2006. Companion Animal Group. Revenue for CAG increased $85.5 million, or 16%, to $606.3 million from $520.8 million for the prior year. Incremental sales from businesses acquired since January 2005, consisting primarily of veterinary reference laboratories, a digital radiography business, and intellectual property and distribution rights of a veterinary diagnostics business, contributed 2% to CAG revenue growth. The following table presents revenue by product and service categories for CAG: For the Twelve Months Ended December 31, Net Revenue (dollars in thousands) 2006 2005 Dollar Change Percentage Change Percentage Change from Currency (1) Percentage Change from Acquisitions (2) Percentage Change Net of Acquisitions and Currency Effect Instruments and consumables $ 242,312 $ 217,537 $ 24,775 11.4 % 0.5 % -- 10.9 % Rapid assay products 114,536 100,255 14,281 14.2 % (0.1 %) 1.6 % 12.7 % Laboratory and consulting services 187,114 156,425 30,689 19.6 % 0.2 % 4.5 % 14.9 % Practice information management systems and digital radiography 44,427 32,589 11,838 36.3 % 0.9 % 11.5 % 23.9 % Pharmaceutical products 17,930 14,024 3,906 27.9 % -- -- 27.9 % Net CAG Revenue $ 606,319 $ 520,830 $ 85,489 16.4 % 0.3 % 2.4 % 13.7 % (1) Represents the percentage change in revenue attributed to the effect of changes in currency rates from the twelve months ended December 31, 2005 to the twelve months ended December 31, 2006. (2) Represents the percentage change in revenue attributed to incremental revenues from businesses acquired since January 2005 during the twelve months ended December 31, 2005 compared to the twelve months ended December 31, 2006. The following revenue analysis reflects the results of operations net of the impact of currency exchange rates on sales outside the U.S. 30 Because our instrument consumables, rapid assay products, and pharmaceutical products are sold in the U.S. and certain other geographies by distributors, distributor purchasing dynamics have an impact on our reported sales of these products. Distributors purchase products from us and sell them to veterinary practices, who are the end users. Distributor purchasing dynamics may be affected by many factors and may be unrelated to underlying end-user demand for our products. As a result, fluctuations in distributors inventories may cause reported results in a period not to be representative of underlying end-user demand. Therefore, we believe it is important to track distributor sales to end users and to distinguish between the impact of end-user demand and the impact of distributor purchasing dynamics on reported revenue growth. Where growth rates are affected by changes in end-user demand, we refer to the impact of practice-level sales on growth. Where growth rates are affected by distributor purchasing dynamics, we refer to the impact of changes in distributors inventories. If during the comparable period of the prior year, distributors inventories grew by more than those inventories grew in the current year, then changes in distributors inventories have a negative impact on our reported sales growth in the current period. Conversely, if during the comparable period of the prior year, distributors inventories grew by less than those inventories grew in the current year, then distributors inventories have a positive impact on our reported sales growth in the current period. The increase in sales of instruments and consumables from 2005 to 2006 was due mainly to higher unit sales volume of both instruments and of consumables and, to a lesser extent, to higher average unit sales prices for slides that are sold for use in VetTest Chemistry Analyzers. Higher consumables sales volumes were attributable primarily to higher worldwide practice-level sales of slides and, to a lesser extent, to increased U.S. practice-level sales of tubes used with our hematology analyzers, with all consumables categories benefiting from the continued growth of our installed base of instruments. Higher instrument sales volume resulted mainly from sales of VetStat Electrolyte and Blood Gas Analyzers and, to a lesser extent, LaserCyte Hematology Analyzers and SNAP Readers. The impact from changes in distributors inventory levels had no significant impact on reported revenue growth of instruments and consumables. The increase in sales of rapid assay products from 2005 to 2006 was due primarily to increased sales volume of canine products, including sales of SNAP 4Dx , which was launched in the U.S. in September 2006. The impact from changes in distributors inventory levels increased reported rapid assay revenue growth by 3%. To a lesser extent, higher average unit sales prices of canine products, in part due to less promotional discounting and higher relative sales of combination test products, also contributed to rapid assay revenue growth. These increases were partly offset by lower average unit sales prices of feline products, partly due to greater promotional discounting. Incremental sales of rapid assay products for which we acquired distribution rights in the second quarter of 2006 contributed 2% to rapid assay revenue growth. The increase in sales of laboratory and consulting services from 2005 to 2006 resulted primarily from higher testing volume and, to a lesser extent, the impact of price increases and incremental sales attributable to acquisitions since January 2005. Businesses acquired since January 2005 contributed 4% to laboratory and consulting services revenue growth. The increase in sales of practice information management systems and digital radiography from 2005 to 2006 resulted primarily from an increase in the number of digital radiography systems sold. Digital radiography sales volume growth was due primarily to sales attributable to a business acquired in the third quarter of 2005, which contributed 12% to practice information management systems and digital radiography revenue growth; higher sales volumes of existing products; and sales of the IDEXX-DR 1417 Digital Radiography System, which became commercially available during the third quarter of 2006. To a lesser extent, revenue growth was also due to the impact of price increases for support services for our practice information management systems, higher sales of computer hardware to practice information management systems customers, and a shift in sales mix to larger practice information management systems. The increase in sales of pharmaceutical products from 2005 to 2006 resulted primarily from increased practice-level demand and, to a lesser extent, from price increases, both impacts related largely to PZI VET , our insulin product for the treatment of diabetic cats. Water. Revenue for Water increased $1.7 million, or 3%, to $58.5 million from $56.8 million for the prior year. The increase resulted primarily from higher sales volume in the Americas and Europe and, to a lesser extent, to higher average unit sales prices. The favorable impact of currency exchange rates contributed an aggregate of $0.5 million, or 1%, to the increase in Water revenue. 31 Production Animal Segment. Revenue for PAS increased $14.0 million, or 31%, to $58.9 million from $44.9 million for the prior year. The increase resulted primarily from higher worldwide livestock diagnostics sales volume, including, notably, sales in Europe of our HerdChek products that test for transmissible spongiform encephalopathies. To a lesser extent, increased average unit sales prices in certain geographies, higher relative sales in geographies where products are sold at higher unit prices, and higher poultry diagnostics sales volume in the Americas also contributed to production animal products revenue growth. The favorable impact of currency exchange rates contributed an aggregate of $0.4 million, or 1%, to the increase in PAS revenue. Gross Profit Total Company. Gross profit increased $56.6 million, or 18%, to $379.5 million from $322.9 million for the prior year. As a percentage of total revenue, gross profit was approximately constant at 51%. We adopted the provisions of SFAS No. 123(R) and began expensing share-based compensation beginning on January 1, 2006, which had a negative impact on our gross profit percentages and on operating margins . Share-based compensation expense is not allocated to our operating segments and therefore has been categorized as unallocated amounts. The following table presents gross profit and gross profit percentage by reportable segment: For the Twelve Months Ended December 31, Gross Profit (dollars in thousands) 2006 Percent of Revenue 2005 Percent of Revenue Dollar Change Percentage Change CAG $ 297,999 49.1% $ 250,409 48.1% $ 47,589 19.0% Water 38,441 65.7% 38,277 67.4% 165 0.4% PAS 38,654 65.6% 27,788 61.8% 10,866 39.1% Other 6,106 39.7% 6,426 41.3% (320 ) (5.0% ) Unallocated amounts (1,671 ) N/A -- N/A (1,671 N/A Total Company $ 379,529 51.3% $ 322,900 50.6% $ 56,629 17.5% Companion Animal Group. Gross profit for CAG increased $47.6 million, or 19%, to $298.0 million from $250.4 million for the prior year due primarily to increased sales volume across the CAG product lines and, to a lesser extent, to an increase in the gross profit percentage to 49% from 48% for the prior year. The increase in the gross profit percentage was largely due to lower cost of slides that are sold for use in VetTest Chemistry Analyzers under the agreement with our supplier and higher average selling prices. The increase in the gross profit percentage was partly offset by greater relative sales of lower margin products and services such as laboratory and consulting services. Water. Gross profit for Water increased $0.2 million to $38.4 million from $38.3 million for the prior year due to higher sales volume, partly offset by a decrease in the gross profit percentage to 66% from 67%. The gross profit percentage was unfavorably impacted by increased freight and distribution costs and higher relative sales of lower margin products. Production Animal Segment. Gross profit for PAS increased $10.9 million, or 39%, to $38.7 million from $27.8 million for the prior year due primarily to increased sales volume and, to a lesser extent, to an increase in the gross profit percentage to 66% from 62%. The gross profit percentage was favorably impacted by higher relative sales of higher margin livestock products, the absence in 2006 of certain discrete costs that occurred in 2005, and higher average unit sales prices. Discrete costs in 2005 comprised integration costs and the impacts of purchase accounting that were associated with an acquisition in December 2004. Operating Expenses and Operating Income Total Company. Total operating expenses increased $44.0 million to $251.6 million from $207.6 million for the prior year. As a percentage of revenue, operating expenses increased to 34% from 33% for the prior year. The change in accounting for share-based compensation beginning January 1, 2006 resulted in an increase of $9.0 million, or 4%, in total company operating expenses for 2006. Share-based compensation expense is not allocated to our operating segments and therefore has been categorized as unallocated amounts. 32 Operating income increased $12.6 million to $127.9 million from $115.3 million for the prior year. As a percentage of revenue, operating income decreased to 17% from 18%. The change in accounting for share-based compensation beginning January 1, 2006 had a negative impact of 1% on reported operating income as a percentage of total company revenue. The following tables present operating expenses and operating income by reportable segment: For the Twelve Months Ended December 31, Operating Expenses (dollars in thousands) 2006 Percent of Revenue 2005 Percent of Revenue Dollar Change Percentage Change CAG $ 197,239 32.5% $ 167,439 32.1% $ 29,800 17.8% Water 12,679 21.7% 12,303 21.7% 376 3.1% PAS 22,482 38.1% 20,471 45.5% 2,011 9.8% Other 4,254 27.6% 3,849 24.7% 405 10.5% Unallocated amounts 14,942 N/A 3,507 N/A 11,435 326.1% Total Company $ 251,596 34.0% $ 207,569 32.5% $ 44,027 21.2% Operating Income (dollars in thousands) 2006 Percent of Revenue 2005 Percent of Revenue Dollar Change Percentage Change CAG $ 100,760 16.6% $ 82,970 15.9% $ 17,790 21.4% Water 25,762 44.1% 25,974 45.8% (212 ) (0.8% ) PAS 16,172 27.4% 7,317 16.3% 8,855 121.0% Other 1,852 12.0% 2,577 16.6% (725 ) (28.1% ) Unallocated amounts (16,613 ) N/A (3,507 ) N/A (13,106 ) (373.7% ) Total Company $ 127,933 17.3% $ 115,331 18.1% $ 12,602 10.9% Companion Animal Group. Operating expenses for CAG increased $29.8 million, or 18%, to $197.2 million from $167.4 million for the prior year and, as a percentage of revenue, increased to 33% from 32%. The increase was attributable to a 13% ($11.3 million) increase in sales and marketing expense, a 20% ($10.1 million) increase in general and administrative expense, and a 28% ($8.4 million) increase in research and development expense. The increase in sales and marketing expense resulted primarily from higher personnel-related costs due, in part, to expanded worldwide sales, marketing and customer service headcount and to higher sales commissions as a result of revenue performance. To a lesser extent, incremental activities associated with businesses acquired since January 2005 also contributed to the increase in sales and marketing expense. The increase in general and administrative expense resulted primarily from higher spending on facilities, information technology and other general support functions. To a lesser extent, incremental expenses associated with businesses acquired since January 2005, comprised mainly of amortization expense for intangible assets acquired and general and administrative expenses of a recurring nature to support the acquired businesses, also contributed to the increase in general and administrative expense. Increases in general and administrative expenses were partly offset by the favorable impact of net transaction gains on foreign currency denominated expenses in 2006 compared to transaction losses in 2005. The increase in research and development expense resulted primarily from increased product development spending related primarily to IDEXX VetLab instrumentation and, to a lesser extent, rapid assay and digital radiography products. Water. Operating expenses for Water increased $0.4 million, or 3%, to $12.7 million from $12.3 million for the prior year and, as a percentage of revenue, were constant at 22%. The increase was attributable to a 7% ($0.3 million) increase in general and administrative expense and a 3% ($0.1 million) increase in sales and marketing expense, partly offset by 5% ($0.1 million) decrease in research and development expense. The increase in general and administrative expense resulted primarily from higher spending on facilities, information technology and other general support functions; higher bad debt expense; higher compensation; and costs incurred to consolidate our office and production facilities based in the United Kingdom into a single facility. The increase in sales and marketing expense resulted primarily from higher personnel-related costs. The decrease in research and development expense resulted primarily from lower spending following the launch of the IDEXX Filta-Max xpress system, a Cryptosporidium and Giardia testing product, in the second quarter of 2006. 33 Production Animal Segment. Operating expenses for PAS increased $2.0 million, or 10%, to $22.5 million from $20.5 million for the prior year. As a percentage of revenue, PAS operating expenses decreased to 38% from 46%. The increase in operating expenses resulted primarily from a 14% ($1.1 million) increase in general and administrative expense and a 12% ($0.9 million) increase in sales and marketing expense. The increase in general and administrative expense resulted primarily from higher spending on facilities, information technology and other general support functions and, to a lesser extent, from a write-down of an equity investment in a technology licensor. Increases in general and administrative expenses were partly offset by the absence in 2006 of certain discrete costs that occurred in 2005 and the favorable impact of net transaction gains on foreign currency denominated expenses in 2006 compared to transaction losses in 2005. Discrete costs in 2005 were associated with the cessation of production in our Sweden-based facility in connection with the centralization of our European production animal diagnostics operations in Bern, Switzerland. The increase in sales and marketing expense resulted primarily from higher personnel-related costs. Increases in research and development expense from higher personnel-related costs due, in part, to expanded headcount and from higher patent-related costs were substantially offset by lower facilities and overhead costs in Europe as a result of the consolidation of our European production animal business, including research and development activities, during the second half of 2005. Unallocated Amounts. Operating expenses that are not allocated to our operating segments, consisting primarily of the company-wide share-based compensation expense and corporate research and development, increased $11.4 million to $14.9 million from $3.5 million for the prior year. This increase is primarily due to the inclusion of share-based compensation expense of $9.0 million in 2006 due to the adoption of SFAS No. 123(R) on January 1, 2006. Corporate research and development expense grew mainly due to personnel additions in 2005 and 2006 to support increased long-term product development activities. Interest Income and Interest Expense Interest income was $3.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2006 compared to $3.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2005. An increase in interest income from higher interest rates was largely offset by lower average invested cash balances. Interest expense was $0.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2006 compared to $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2005. The increase in interest expense was primarily due to interest expense incurred on the mortgage assumed in connection with the Westbrook, Maine facility purchase in May 2006. Provision for Income Taxes Our effective income tax rate was 28.4% for the year ended December 31, 2006 compared with 34.2% for the year ended December 31, 2005. The majority of this rate differential resulted from the favorable impact of the resolution in 2006 of an IRS income tax audit for the years ended December 31, 2003 and 2004. As a result of completing this audit, we reduced previously accrued taxes and recognized a tax benefit of 3.7% of income before tax. Other items that decreased our effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2006 included a reduction of previously recorded international deferred tax liabilities as a result of obtaining certain multi-year tax incentives and the release of a valuation allowance on international deferred tax assets as a result of a subsidiary demonstrating consistent sustained profitability. In addition, the effective rate for the year ended December 31, 2006 was less than the effective rate for the year ended December 31, 2005 due to the incremental tax expense in 2005 on the repatriation of $30.0 million pursuant to the American Jobs Creation Act of 2004 . These rate reductions were partly offset by the nonrecognition, in 2006, of tax benefits on compensation expense for incentive stock options and employee stock purchase rights that were recorded in accordance with SFAS No. 123(R) effective January 1, 2006. 34 Twelve Months Ended December 31, 2005 Compared to Twelve Months Ended December 31, 2004 Revenue Total Company. Revenue increased $88.9 million, or 16%, to $638.1 million from $549.2 million for the prior year. The following table presents revenue by reportable segment: For the Twelve Months Ended December 31, Net Revenue (dollars in thousands) 2005 2004 Dollar Change Percentage Change Percentage Change from Currency (1) Percentage Change from Acquisitions (2) Percentage Change Net of Acquisitions and Currency Effect CAG $ 520,830 $ 448,687 $ 72,143 16.1 % -- 6.5 % 9.6 % Water 56,760 53,098 3,662 6.9 % 0.3 % -- 6.6 % PAS 44,945 31,690 13,255 41.8 % (0.3 %) 17.1 % 25.0 % Other 15,560 15,706 (146 ) (0.9 %) 0.3 % -- (1.2 %) Total $ 638,095 $ 549,181 $ 88,914 16.2 % -- 6.3 % 9.9 % (1) Represents the percentage change in revenue attributed to the effect of changes in currency rates from the 12 months ended December 31, 2004 to the 12 months ended December 31, 2005. (2) Represents the percentage change in revenue attributed to incremental revenues from businesses acquired since January 2004 during the twelve months ended December 31, 2004 compared to the twelve months ended December 31, 2005. Companion Animal Group. Revenue for CAG increased $72.1 million, or 16%, to $520.8 million from $448.7 million for the prior year. Incremental sales from businesses acquired during 2004 and 2005, consisting of veterinary reference laboratories and a digital radiography business, contributed approximately 7% to CAG revenue growth during the period. The following table presents revenue by product and service categories for CAG: For the Twelve Months Ended December 31, Net Revenue (dollars in thousands) 2005 2004 Dollar Change Percentage Change Percentage Change from Currency (1) Percentage Change from Acquisitions (2) Percentage Change Net of Acquisitions and Currency Effect Instruments and consumables $ 217,537 $ 197,939 $ 19,598 9.9 % -- -- 9.9 % Rapid assay products 100,255 93,506 6,749 7.2 % 0.2 % -- 7.0 % Laboratory and consulting services 156,425 118,596 37,829 31.9 % (0.3 %) 22.9 % 9.3 % Practice information management systems and digital radiography 32,589 28,163 4,426 15.7 % 0.2 % 7.0 % 8.5 % Pharmaceutical products 14,024 10,483 3,541 33.8 % -- -- 33.8 % Net CAG Revenue $ 520,830 $ 448,687 $ 72,143 16.1 % -- 6.5 % 9.6 % (1) Represents the percentage change in revenue attributed to the effect of changes in currency rates from the 12 months ended December 31, 2004 to the 12 months ended December 31, 2005. (2) Represents the percentage change in revenue attributed to incremental revenues from businesses acquired since January 2004 during the twelve months ended December 31, 2004 compared to the twelve months ended December 31, 2005. The following revenue analysis reflects the results of operations net of the impact of currency exchange rates on sales outside the U.S. 35 The increase in sales of instruments and consumables from 2004 to 2005 was due mainly to increased sales volume. The increased sales volume of consumables was due primarily to higher worldwide practice-level sales of VetTest slides. To a lesser extent, increased domestic sales of consumables used with our VetLyte Electrolyte Analyzers and higher practice-level sales of tubes used with our hematology instruments also resulted in increased sales volume of consumables. Increased VetTest chemistry and hematology consumables sales volume was due primarily to an increase in our installed base of instruments throughout 2004 and 2005. The increase in sales of VetLyte consumables was due, in part, to lower sales in the fourth quarter of 2004 due to product unavailability, which had a favorable impact of 1% on the growth rate for instruments and consumables during 2005. Increased instrument sales volume resulted mainly from higher sales of LaserCyte Hematology Analyzers and, to a lesser extent, the launch of our VetStat Electrolyte and Blood Gas Analyzer. The increase in sales of rapid assay products from 2004 to 2005 was due primarily to increased domestic practice-level sales volume of our canine combination test, the SNAP 3Dx Canine Test, and to higher average unit sales prices for canine and feline products. The increase in sales of laboratory and consulting services from 2004 to 2005 resulted primarily from the inclusion of sales from laboratories acquired in the fourth quarter of 2004 and in 2005 and, to a lesser extent, the impact of price increases and higher testing volume. Incremental sales from laboratories acquired in the fourth quarter of 2004 and in 2005 contributed approximately 23% to laboratory and consulting services revenue growth during 2005. The increase in sales of practice information management and digital radiography systems from 2004 to 2005 resulted from increased sales volume of digital radiography instruments. The increase in digital radiography revenue was primarily due to an increase in the number of systems sold, including sales attributable to a business acquired in the third quarter of 2005. Incremental sales from this acquired business contributed approximately 7% to practice information management and digital radiography systems revenue growth during 2005. The increase in sales of pharmaceutical products in 2005 resulted primarily from increased practice-level demand and, to a lesser extent, from price increases on certain products. Water. Revenue for Water increased $3.7 million, or 7%, to $56.8 million from $53.1 million for the prior year. The increase resulted primarily from higher worldwide sales volume, partly offset by lower average unit sales prices attributable to both greater price competition in certain geographies and higher relative sales in geographies where products are sold at lower unit prices. The favorable impact of currency exchange rates contributed an aggregate of $0.2 million, or less than 1%, to the increase in Water revenue. Production Animal Segment. Revenue for PAS increased $13.3 million, or 42%, to $44.9 million from $31.7 million for the prior year. The increase resulted primarily from higher worldwide sales volume of livestock and, to a lesser extent, poultry diagnostics, including sales attributable to acquisitions in 2004. Incremental sales from businesses acquired during 2004 contributed approximately 17% to production animal products revenue growth during the period. Changes in foreign currency rates did not have a significant impact on the PAS revenue growth rate. Gross Profit Total Company. Gross profit increased $43.9 million, or 16%, to $322.9 million from $279.0 million for the prior year and, as a percentage of total revenue, was approximately constant at 51%. The following table presents gross profit and gross profit percentage by reportable segment: For the Twelve Months Ended December 31, Gross Profit (dollars in thousands) 2005 Percent of Revenue 2004 Percent of Revenue Dollar Change Percentage Change CAG $ 250,409 48.1% $ 214,927 47.9% $ 35,482 16.5% Water 38,277 67.4% 35,885 67.6% 2,392 6.7% PAS 27,788 61.8% 21,221 67.0% 6,567 30.9% Other 6,426 41.3% 6,984 44.4% (558 ) (8.0% ) Total Company $ 322,900 50.6% $ 279,017 50.8% $ 43,883 15.7% 36 Companion Animal Group. Gross profit for CAG increased $35.5 million, or 17%, to $250.4 million from $214.9 million for the prior year due primarily to increased sales volume across the CAG product lines. As a percentage of revenue, CAG gross profit was approximately constant at 48%. The gross profit percentage was positively impacted by relatively higher selling prices, particularly for laboratory and consulting services and rapid assay products; lower product and service costs associated with the LaserCyte Hematology Analyzer and lower product cost of slides sold for use in our VetTest Chemistry Analyzers under the agreement with our supplier; and the favorable impact of foreign currency rates on sales denominated in those currencies, net of foreign exchange hedge contract losses. The increases in the gross profit percentage were largely offset by higher overall net product and service costs, apart from the favorable LaserCyte and slide costs mentioned above; greater relative sales of lower margin products and services, mainly from higher sales growth of laboratory services; and write-downs of excess pharmaceutical product inventory. Water. Gross profit for Water increased $2.4 million, or 7%, to $38.3 million from $35.9 million for the prior year due primarily to increased sales volume, partly offset by a slight decrease in the gross profit percentage to 67% from 68%. The gross profit percentage was unfavorably impacted by costs related to a manufacturing issue during the third quarter of 2005 and by lower average unit sales prices. These decreases in the gross profit percentage were partly offset by the favorable impact of foreign currency rates on sales denominated in those currencies, net of foreign exchange hedge contract losses. Production Animal Segment. Gross profit for PAS increased $6.6 million, or 31%, to $27.8 million from $21.2 million for the prior year due to increased sales volume, partly offset by a decrease in the gross profit percentage to 62% from 67%. During the same period of the prior year, a reduction of approximately $1.8 million in an estimated liability for a third party claim was accounted for as a reduction in cost of revenue and increased the 2004 gross profit percentage by four percentage points. For 2005, an unfavorable impact on the gross margin percentage of two percentage points was attributable to incremental acquisition integration costs. The gross profit percentage was favorably impacted by higher relative sales of higher margin livestock products and by the favorable impact of foreign currency rates on sales denominated in those currencies, net of foreign exchange hedge contract losses, partially offset by higher net product costs. Operating Expenses and Operating Income Total Company. Total operating expenses increased $36.6 million to $207.6 million from $171.0 million for the prior year. As a percentage of revenue, operating expenses increased to 33% from 31% for the prior year. Operating income increased $7.3 million to $115.3 million from $108.0 million for the prior year. As a percentage of revenue, operating income decreased to 18% from 20%. During 2005, operating income was reduced by acquisition integration costs associated with businesses acquired in the fourth quarter of 2004 and in 2005, including costs incurred in connection with the centralization of our European production animal diagnostics operations in Bern, Switzerland. During 2004, operating income benefited from the settlement of a third party claim, described in the above discussion of Production Animal Segment gross profit, and a payment received in settlement of litigation, partly offset by acquisition integration costs. These discrete items in both years resulted in a reported decrease in operating income as a percentage of total company revenue of one percentage point. The remaining difference in the operating income percentage for 2005, compared to the prior year, was attributable, in part, to the expansion of the CAG sales, customer service and marketing organization during 2004 and the first half of 2005; amortization expense for intangible assets purchased in connection with businesses acquired in the fourth quarter of 2004 and in 2005; and other changes in gross profit and operating expenses described in this discussion. The following tables present operating expenses and operating income by reportable segment: For the Twelve Months Ended December 31, Operating Expenses (dollars in thousands) 2005 Percent of Revenue 2004 Percent of Revenue Dollar Change Percentage Change CAG $ 167,439 32.1% $ 137,804 30.7% $ 29,635 21.5% Water 12,303 21.7% 11,626 21.9% 677 5.8% PAS 20,471 45.5% 14,172 44.8% 6,299 44.4% Other 3,849 24.7% 4,202 26.8% (353 ) (8.4% ) Unallocated amounts 3,507 N/A 3,178 N/A 329 10.3% Total Company $ 207,569 32.5% $ 170,982 31.1% $ 36,587 21.4% 37 Operating Income (dollares in thousands) 2005 Percent of Revenue 2004 Percent of Revenue Dollar Change Percentage Change CAG $ 82,970 15.9% $ 77,123 17.2% $ 5,847 7.6% Water 25,974 45.8% 24,259 45.7% 1,715 7.1% PAS 7,317 16.3% 7,049 22.3% 268 3.8% Other 2,577 16.6% 2,782 17.7% (205 ) (7.4% ) Unallocated amounts (3,507 ) N/A (3,178 ) N/A (329 ) (10.3% ) Total Company $ 115,331 18.1% $ 108,035 19.7% $ 7,296 6.8% Companion Animal Group. Operating expenses for CAG increased $29.6 million, or 22%, to $167.4 million from $137.8 million for the prior year and, as a percentage of revenue, increased to 32% from 31%. The increase was attributable to a 21% ($15.1 million) increase in sales and marketing expense, a 25% ($10.1 million) increase in general and administrative expense, and a 17% ($4.4 million) increase in research and development expense. The increase in sales and marketing expense resulted primarily from the expansion of the worldwide sales, customer service and marketing organization; ongoing expenses attributable to the Vet Med Lab business acquired in the fourth quarter of 2004 and, to a lesser extent, the digital radiography business acquired in the third quarter of 2005 and higher sales commissions as a result of revenue performance. The increase in general and administrative expense resulted primarily from expenses attributable to businesses acquired in the fourth quarter of 2004 and in 2005, comprised of general and administrative expenses of a recurring nature, amortization expense for intangible assets acquired, and integration costs. To a lesser extent, the increase in general and administrative expense was also attributable to higher spending on information technology and other general support functions; the unfavorable impact of exchange rates on foreign currency denominated expenses; and the positive impact in 2004 of a payment received in the second quarter of 2004 to settle certain litigation. The increase in research and development expense resulted primarily from increased spending related to instrument development and, to a lesser extent, rapid assay and pharmaceutical product development. Water. Operating expenses for Water increased $0.7 million, or 6%, to $12.3 million from $11.6 million for the prior year and, as a percentage of revenue, were approximately constant at 22%. The dollar increase was attributable to a 13% ($0.6 million) increase in general and administrative expense and a 12% ($0.2 million) increase in research and development expense, partly offset by a 2% ($0.1 million) decrease in sales and marketing expense. The increase in general and administrative expense resulted primarily from higher spending on information technology and other corporate functions, and, to a lesser extent, from the unfavorable impact of exchange rates on foreign currency denominated expenses. The increase in research and development expense resulted primarily from increased spending on Cryptosporidium testing product development. There were no significant individual events or fluctuations in the nature and amounts of sales and marketing expense. Production Animal Segment. Operating expenses for PAS increased $6.3 million, or 44%, to $20.5 million from $14.2 million for the prior year and, as a percentage of revenue, increased to 46% from 45%. The increase resulted from a 103% ($4.1 million) increase in general and administrative expense, a 26% ($1.5 million) increase in sales and marketing expense, and a 15% ($0.7 million) increase in research and development expense. The increase in general and administrative expense resulted primarily from expenses associated with the acquisition of Bommeli in the fourth quarter of 2004 and the subsequent centralization of our European production animal diagnostics operations in Bern, Switzerland. These costs are composed mainly of general and administrative expenses of a recurring nature to support the Bommeli business, costs related to the cessation of production in our Sweden-based facility, and amortization expense for intangible assets acquired. To a lesser extent, higher spending on information technology and other corporate functions and the unfavorable impact of exchange rates on foreign currency denominated expenses also contributed to the increase in general and administrative expense. The increase in sales and marketing expense resulted primarily from the addition of Bommeli sales and marketing activities and from sales and marketing costs to support the launch of our HerdChek BSE Antigen Test Kit. The increase in research and development expense was due primarily to the addition of Bommeli research and development activities and to higher compensation costs, partly offset by reduced development activity following the launch of our HerdChek BSE Antigen Test Kit. Unallocated Amounts. Operating expenses that are not allocated to our operating segments, consisting primarily of corporate research and development, increased $0.3 million, or 10%, to $3.5 million from $3.2 million for the prior year due mainly to increased long-term development activities. 38 Interest Income and Interest Expense Interest income was $3.2 million for 2005 and 2004. The impact of higher interest rates was substantially offset by the impact of lower average invested cash balances. Interest expense was $0.1 million for 2005 compared to $0.2 million in 2004. The decrease was primarily due to interest incurred on a tax payment in December 2004 and the final payment of a note payable in February 2005. Provision for Income Taxes Our effective income tax rate was 34.2% for the year ended December 31, 2005 compared with 29.7% for the year ended December 31, 2004. The majority of this rate differential resulted from the favorable impact of the resolution in 2004 of an IRS income tax audit through the year ended December 31, 2001. As a result of completing this audit, we reduced previously accrued taxes. Other rate reductions resulted from the release in 2004 of a valuation allowance on international deferred tax assets as a result of a foreign subsidiary demonstrating consistent sustained profitability and changes in certain state and international tax estimates. In addition, 2005 tax expense increased by $1.0 million and the 2005 effective income tax rate increased by 0.8 percentage points due to incremental taxes on the repatriation of $30.0 million pursuant to the American Jobs Creation Act of 2004 . RECENT ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS A discussion of recent accounting pronouncements is included in Note 2(q) to the consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2006 included in this Form 10-K. LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES Liquidity We fund the capital needs of our business through cash generated from operations. At December 31, 2006 and 2005, we had $96.7 million and $132.7 million of cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments, respectively, and working capital of $177.5 million and $192.7 million, respectively. We consider the operating earnings of non-United States subsidiaries to be indefinitely invested outside the U.S. Changes to this policy could have adverse tax consequences. Subject to this policy, we manage our worldwide cash requirements considering available funds among all of our subsidiaries. Foreign cash balances are generally available without legal restrictions to fund ordinary business operations outside the U.S. In January 2007, we entered into an unsecured short-term revolving credit facility with a bank in the principal amount of $125.0 million that matures on June 30, 2007. The credit facility may be used for general corporate purposes, including repurchases of our common stock and business acquisitions. The applicable interest rates generally range from 0.375% to 0.875% above the London interbank rate or the Canadian Dollar-denominated bankers acceptance rate, dependent on our leverage ratio. Under the credit facility, we pay quarterly commitment fees of 0.08% to 0.20%, dependent on our leverage ratio, on any unused commitment. The credit facility contains financial and other affirmative and negative covenants, as well as customary events of default, that would allow any amounts outstanding under the credit facility to be accelerated, or restrict our ability to borrow thereunder, in the event of noncompliance. The financial covenant requires our ratio of debt to earnings before interest and taxes, as defined by the agreement, not to exceed 3-to-1. We expect to enter into a long-term credit facility with similar terms prior to June 30, 2007. We believe that current cash and cash equivalents, short-term investments, funds generated from operations, and amounts available under credit facilities will be sufficient to fund our operations, capital purchase requirements, and strategic growth needs. We further believe that we could obtain additional borrowings at comparable interest rates to fund our growth objectives. The extent and timing of acquisitions-related spending and repurchases of our common stock could cause variations on our liquidity and leverage levels. 39 Sources and Uses of Cash Cash provided by operating activities was $109.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2006, compared to $116.6 million for 2005. The total of net income and net non-cash charges was $120.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2006, compared to $105.8 million for 2005. Reported cash flows from operations were negatively impacted by a change in accounting for the tax benefits from exercises of stock options and disqualifying dispositions of shares acquired in connection with our adoption of SFAS No. 123(R) on January 1, 2006, which reduced reported cash flows from operations by $9.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2006. For the year ended December 31, 2006, the tax benefit on exercises of stock options and disqualifying dispositions of shares was classified as a cash flow from financing activities, whereas the benefit was classified as a cash flow from operating activities in prior years. In 2006, cash decreased $10.2 million due to changes in operating assets and liabilities, whereas in 2005 cash increased by $10.7 million due to changes in operating assets and liabilities, resulting in a year-to-year change of $21.0 million. The increase in cash used by changes in operating assets and liabilities, compared to 2005, was primarily attributable to $33.1 million of incremental cash used to purchase inventory, partly offset by $7.7 million of additional cash provided by an increase in accrued liabilities during the year ended December 31, 2006. The greater incremental increase in inventories was due, in part, to increased inventories in support of higher sales volumes, to our preparation for a supplier production facility transition, and to ensure adequate supply of certain instrument components and accessories that are being discontinued by the manufacturers. The reported increase in cash provided by changes in accrued liabilities, compared to 2005, was primarily attributable to the change in the presentation of tax benefits, noted above, of $9.4 million from exercises of stock options and disqualifying dispositions of shares acquired. Cash used by investing activities was $40.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2006, compared to cash provided by investing activities of $12.6 million for 2005. The increase in cash used by investing activities for 2006, compared to 2005, was primarily due to the increase in cash used for acquisitions. An incremental increase of $17.6 million in 2006 compared to 2005 was largely due to the $15.2 million paid to acquire a veterinary reference laboratory in Canada. Additionally, in 2006 we had lower incremental net proceeds from net sales and maturities of short- and long-term investments of $13.6 million, we paid $12.1 million for the purchase of land and buildings, and we had incremental purchases of property and equipment of $8.1 million. We paid cash of $12.1 million for land and buildings, primarily for the purchase of our Westbrook, Maine facility; $32.3 million to purchase other fixed assets; and $1.7 million to acquire rental instruments sold under recourse during the year ended December 31, 2006, principally related to the CAG segment. Our total capital plan for 2007 is approximately $65 million, which includes approximately $23 million towards the renovation and expansion of our headquarters facility in Westbrook, Maine. We preliminarily project additional capital spending of approximately $50 million during 2008 through 2009 to complete this expansion and renovation. In connection with the purchase of our Westbrook, Maine facility, we assumed a mortgage that is payable in equal monthly installments of approximately $0.1 million through May 1, 2015. The assumed mortgage had a face value of $6.5 million and a stated interest rate of 9.875%. We recorded the mortgage at a fair market value of $7.5 million, based on an effective market interest rate of 6.05%. The board of directors has authorized the repurchase of up to 18,000,000 shares of our common stock in the open market or in negotiated transactions. From the inception of the program in August 1999 to December 31, 2006, we repurchased 15,285,000 shares. We believe that the repurchase of our common stock is a favorable investment and we also repurchase to offset the dilutive effect of our employee share-based compensation programs. Repurchases of our common stock may vary depending upon the level of other investing activities and the share price. See Note 14 to the consolidated financial statements included in this Form 10-K for additional information about our share repurchases. 40 Other Commitments, Contingencies and Guarantees Under our workers compensation insurance policies for U.S. employees for the years ended December 31, 2006, 2005, 2004 and 2003, we retain the first $250,000 in claim liability per incident and $3.1 million, $2.8 million, $3.0 million and $1.4 million, respectively, in aggregate claim liability. We entered into a similar workers compensation insurance policy effective January 1, 2007. The insurance company provides insurance for claims above the individual occurrence and aggregate limits. We estimate claim liability based on claims incurred and the estimated ultimate cost to settle the claims. Based on this analysis, we have recognized cumulative expenses of $1.3 million, $0.6 million, $0.7 million and $0.8 million for claims incurred during the years ended December 31, 2006, 2005, 2004 and 2003, respectively. In connection with these policies, we have outstanding letters of credit totaling $2.1 million to the insurance companies as security for these claims. Under our employee health care insurance policy, we retain claims liability risk up to $125,000 per incident and an aggregate claim limit based on the number of employees enrolled in the plan per month. We estimate our liability for the uninsured portion of employee health care obligations based on individual and aggregate coverage, our claims experience, the number of employees enrolled in the program, and the average time from when a claim is incurred to the time it is reported. Should actual employee health care claims liability exceed estimates, we are liable for up to an additional $1.5 million for potential uninsured obligations at December 31, 2006. We have insurance coverage of $1.0 million for claims above the aggregate limit. Should employee health insurance claims exceed this coverage, we would have further obligations for the amount in excess of such coverage. In connection with acquisitions of businesses and intangible assets, we have commitments outstanding at December 31, 2006 for additional purchase price payments of up to $3.9 million, of which $1.8 million is contingent on the achievement by certain acquired businesses of specified milestones. We previously had a 40% equity interest in a joint venture to market production animal diagnostic products in China. In April 2006, we paid $0.6 million to acquire an additional 55% equity interest in the joint venture from our partner. We also committed to pay an additional $0.2 million in two years in consideration for the additional equity. In addition, the joint venture entered into a contract with the joint venture partner where the partner will provide promotional and agency services and will receive sales commissions at rates escalating from 2.5% to 8.5% annually based on sales volume. In January 2007, we acquired the Critical Care Division of Osmetech plc. The acquired business is based in the United States and develops, manufactures, and sells point-of-care electrolyte and blood gas analyzers and related consumable products for the human and veterinary diagnostics markets. We paid cash of approximately $45 million. On January 26, 2007 we announced that we had entered into an agreement to acquire all of the shares of Institut Pourquier. Based in Montpellier, France, Institut Pourquier develops, manufactures and sells production animal diagnostic products. The closing of this transaction is subject to certain conditions and is expected to occur in March 2007. Institut Pourquier had sales of approximately $7.5 million in 2006. In October 2005, our former supplier of VetAutoread Hematology Analyzers and consumables sold this business (including the human hematology testing products division) and we simultaneously entered into a new supply agreement for these products with the acquirer of the business. Under this new supply agreement, we received fixed pricing on certain products through December 31, 2020, among other benefits. In partial consideration for this new supply agreement, we paid cash of $2.5 million to the acquirer and guaranteed the acquirer note (the Note ) in the principal amount of $3.5 million given to our former supplier in partial consideration for the business. The acquirer is obligated to pay the Note through quarterly principal and interest payments through 2008 and to pay the remaining balance in 2008. The principal balance of the note that we have guaranteed is $2.6 million at December 31, 2006. We are obligated to make a second payment of $1.25 million upon the achievement of certain milestones by the acquirer, which we expect to occur in approximately 2007, and a third payment of $1.25 million twelve months later. Our obligations to make the second and third payments are subject to the acquirer payment of all amounts under the Note and the release of our guaranty. We purchase the slides sold for use in our VetTest Chemistry Analyzers under an agreement with Ortho that, as of December 31, 2006, required us to purchase a minimum of $59.0 million of slides through 2010. We purchase our VetAutoread Hematology Analyzers, components and consumables under an agreement under which we are required to make aggregate minimum purchases of $15.7 million through 2020, in addition to the payment obligations described above. We also have commitments under certain other agreements that commit us to aggregate future payments of $19.7 million. In addition, we have various minimum royalty payments due through 2024 of $15.1 million. 41 We are contractually obligated to make the following payments in the years below: (in thousands) Total 2007 2008-2009 2010-2011 After 2011 Long-term debt obligations (1) $ 7,125 $ 678 $ 1,485 $ 1,676 $ 3,286 Operating leases 32,522 7,369 11,936 7,767 5,450 Purchase obligations (2) 168,878 107,395 46,908 8,525 6,050 Minimum royalty payments 15,077 1,721 3,135 3,245 6,976 Other long-term liabilities (3) 5,828 2,831 2,797 200 -- Total contractual cash obligations $ 229,430 $ 119,994 $ 66,261 $ 21,413 $ 21,762 (1) Long-term debt amounts reflect principal payments only, excluding associated interest payments. (2) Purchase obligations include agreements to purchase goods or services that are enforceable and legally binding that specify all significant terms, including fixed or minimum quantities, pricing, and approximate timing of purchase transactions. Of this amount, $72.0 million represents amounts committed under purchase orders, $59.0 million represents our minimum purchase obligation under our VetTest supply agreement with Ortho and $18.2 million represents our minimum purchase obligation and related payments under our VetAutoread agreements. (3) Other long-term liabilities are liabilities that are reflected on our consolidated balance sheet in this Annual Report on Form 10-K and include warranty obligations and commitments for additional acquisition purchase price payments. 
