CIK: 874716
Company Name: IDEXX LABORATORIES INC DE
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2008-02-27


ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSES OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS During 2007, we operated primarily through three business segments: products and services for the veterinary market, which we refer to as our Companion Animal Group ( CAG ), water quality products ( Water ) and products for production animal health, which we refer to as the Production Animal Segment ( PAS ). We also operate two smaller segments that comprise products for dairy quality, which we refer to as Dairy, and products for the human medical diagnostic market, which we refer to as OPTI Medical. Financial information about the Dairy and OPTI Medical operating segments are combined and presented in an Other category because they do not meet the quantitative or qualitative thresholds for reportable segments. We added the OPTI Medical operating segment in connection with our acquisition of substantially all of the assets and assumption of certain liabilities of the Critical Care Division of Osmetech plc in January 2007. The segment information for the year ended December 31, 2005 has been restated to conform to our presentation of reportable segments for the years ended December 31, 2007 and 2006. Previously, PAS and Dairy were aggregated into a single reportable segment, which we referred to as the Food Diagnostics Group. See Note 17 to the consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2007 included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for financial information about our segments, including geographic information, and about our product and service categories. CAG develops, designs, manufactures, and distributes products and performs services for veterinarians. Water develops, designs, manufactures and distributes products to detect contaminants in water. PAS develops, designs, manufactures and distributes products to detect diseases in production animals. Dairy develops, designs, manufactures and distributes products to detect contaminants in dairy products. OPTI Medical develops, designs, manufactures, and distributes point-of-care electrolyte and blood gas analyzers and related consumable products for the human medical diagnostics market. Items that are not allocated to our operating segments are comprised primarily of corporate research and development expenses, interest income and expense, and income taxes. Share-based compensation expense was also reported in unallocated amounts in 2006. Beginning in 2007, we allocate a portion of share-based compensation expense to the operating segments. This allocation differs from the actual expense and consequently yields a difference between the total allocated share-based compensation expense and the actual expense for the total company, which was categorized as unallocated amounts. The following is a discussion of the strategic and operating factors that we believe have the most significant effect on the performance of our business. Companion Animal Group In the CAG segment, we believe we have developed a strategic advantage over companies with more narrow product or service offerings. The breadth and complementary nature of our products and services gives us scale in sales and distribution, permits us to offer integrated disease-management solutions that leverage the advantages of both point-of-care and outside laboratory testing, and facilitates the flow of medical and business information in the veterinary practice by connecting practice information software systems, including connecting the electronic health record with laboratory test data, in-clinic test data from our IDEXX VetLab suite of analyzers, and radiographic data in the IDEXX-PACS software taken by our digital radiography systems. In the U.S., we sell instrument consumables, rapid assay products and pharmaceutical products primarily through distributors, and, therefore, our reported sales of these products are sales made to distributors, rather than sales to veterinarians, the end users. Because distributors inventory levels and purchasing patterns may fluctuate, sales of a particular product line in a particular period may not always be representative of the underlying end-user demand for the product. Therefore, we closely track sales of these products by our U.S. distributors to the veterinarians which we refer to as practice-level sales. We believe these sales often provide a more accurate picture of the real growth rate for these products. Instruments and Consumables . Our strategy in our IDEXX VetLab instrument business is to provide veterinarians with an integrated set of instruments that, individually and together, provide superior diagnostic information in the clinic, enabling veterinarians to practice better medicine and, in doing so, achieve their practice economic objectives, including growth and profitability. We derive substantial revenues and margins from the sale of consumables that are used in these instruments. The principal instruments used by veterinarians for in-clinic diagnostic testing are chemistry and hematology analyzers. In addition we sell instruments used for endocrinology, blood gas, electrolytes, urinalysis, and blood coagulation testing. Our IDEXX VetLab Station is an in-clinic laboratory information management system that records and integrates patient diagnostic information from our analyzers for better practice management. 23 Table of Contents During the early stage of an instrument life cycle, we derive relatively greater revenues from instrument placements, while consumable sales become relatively more significant in later stages as the installed base of instruments increases and instrument placement revenues begin to decline. Instrument sales have significantly lower gross margins than sales of consumables, and therefore the mix of instrument and consumable sales in a particular period will impact our gross margins in this line of business. We have an installed base of approximately 30,000 active VetTest Chemistry Analyzers, and substantially all of our revenues from that product line are now derived from consumables sales, although we continue to place instruments through sales, lease, rental and other programs. Our long-term success in this area of our business is dependent upon new customer acquisition, customer retention and increased customer utilization of existing and new assays introduced on these instruments. To increase utilization, we seek to educate veterinarians about best medical practices that emphasize the importance of blood and urine chemistry testing for a variety of diagnostic purposes. In the first quarter of 2008 we announced the launch of our next-generation chemistry analyzer, Catalyst Dx . As a result of this launch, we expect that in 2008 we will derive a greater portion of our IDEXX VetLab revenues from the sale of instruments than we have derived in recent years. We purchase the consumables used in our VetTest and Catalyst Dx Chemistry Analyzers from Ortho under a supply agreement that continues through 2025. This supply agreement provides us with a long-term source of slides at costs that improve annually through 2010, and also improve over the term of the agreement as a result of increasing volume. Our principal hematology analyzer is the LaserCyte Hematology Analyzer, and in addition we sell the VetAutoread Hematology Analyzer. A substantial portion of LaserCyte placements have been made at veterinary clinics that already own our VetAutoread Hematology Analyzers. Although we have experienced growth in sales of hematology consumables, LaserCyte consumable sales have been partly offset by declines in sales of VetAutoread consumables. Because the gross margin percentage of LaserCyte consumables exceeds the gross margin percentage of the VetAutoread consumables, gross margin from hematology consumables is expected to increase with continued penetration of the LaserCyte Hematology Analyzer. With all of our instrument lines, we seek to differentiate our products based on breadth of diagnostic menu, flexibility of menu selection, accuracy, reliability, ease of use, ability to handle compromised samples, time to result, analytical capability of software, integration with the IDEXX VetLab Station, education and training, and superior sales and customer service. Our instruments and consumables typically are sold at a premium price to competitive offerings. Our success depends, in part, on our ability to differentiate our products in a way that justifies premium pricing. Rapid Assay Products . Our rapid assay business consists primarily of single-use kits for point-of-care testing and, to a limited degree, microwell-based kits for laboratory testing for canine and feline diseases and conditions. Our rapid assay strategy is to develop, manufacture, market and sell proprietary tests that address important medical needs for particular diseases prevalent in the companion animal population. We seek to differentiate our tests through superior performance, including by providing our customers with proprietary combination tests that test a single sample for multiple analytes. Where alternative point-of-care offerings exist, we seek to differentiate our tests with superior performance. As in our other lines of business, we also seek to differentiate our products through superior customer service. These products carry price premiums over competitive products that we believe do not offer equivalent performance and diagnostic capabilities, and which we believe do not include a similar level of support. We further augment our product development and customer service efforts with sales and marketing programs that enhance medical awareness and understanding regarding our target diseases and the importance of diagnostic testing. 24 Table of Contents Veterinary Reference Laboratory and Consulting Services . We believe that more than half of all diagnostic testing by U.S. veterinarians is done at outside reference laboratories such as our IDEXX Reference Laboratories. In markets outside the U.S., in-clinic testing is less prevalent and an even greater percentage of diagnostic testing is done in reference laboratories. We attempt to differentiate our laboratory testing services from those of our competitors primarily on the basis of quality, customer service, technology employed and specialized test menu. Revenue growth in this business is achieved both through increased sales at existing laboratories and through the acquisition of new customers, including through laboratory acquisitions and opening new laboratories. In 2005, we acquired laboratories in Switzerland, the United Kingdom, and France and acquired veterinary laboratory customer lists in the U.S. and Germany. In 2006, we acquired laboratories in the U.S., South Africa, and Canada and acquired a veterinary laboratory customer list in the U.S. In 2007, we acquired laboratories in the U.S. and Canada and acquired veterinary laboratory customer lists in the U.S., Switzerland, and United Kingdom. Profitability of this business is largely the result of our ability to achieve efficiencies from both volume and operational improvements. New laboratories that we open typically will operate at a loss until testing volumes reach a level that permits profitability. Acquired laboratories frequently operate less profitably than our existing laboratories and those laboratories may not achieve profitability comparable to our existing laboratories for several years while we implement operating improvements and efficiencies. Therefore, in the short term, new and acquired reference laboratories generally will have a negative effect on the operating margin of the laboratory and consulting services business. Practice Information Systems and Digital Radiography . These businesses consist of veterinary practice information systems including hardware and software and veterinary-specific digital radiography systems. Our strategy in the practice information systems business is to provide superior total software and hardware integrated information solutions, backed by superior customer support and education, to allow the veterinarian to practice better medicine and achieve the practice business objectives. We differentiate our software systems through enhanced functionality and ease of use. Our veterinary-specific digital radiography systems allow veterinarians to capture digital radiographs with ease and without the use of hazardous chemicals. The digital radiography systems also incorporate IDEXX-PACS picture archiving and communication software developed by IDEXX that allows for image enhancement, manipulation, storage and retrieval, and integration with the practice information software. Our strategy in digital radiography is to offer a system that provides superior image quality and software capability at a competitive price, backed by the same customer support provided for our other products and services in the Companion Animal Group. Pharmaceutical Products . We currently offer pharmaceutical products to regulate feline diabetes, eradicate internal parasites, and treat lameness in horses. Our pharmaceutical strategy is to develop and commercialize proprietary pharmaceutical products for the veterinary market. We seek to differentiate our pharmaceutical products through ease of use, which in turn enhances customers compliance with prescribed treatment programs. Our product development efforts are focused on applying superior and proprietary delivery technologies to existing pharmaceutical compounds. Water Our strategy in the water testing business is to develop, manufacture, market and sell proprietary products with superior performance, supported by exceptional customer service. Our customers are primarily water utilities to whom strong relationships and customer support are very important. Over the past several years, the rate of growth of this product line has slowed as a result of market penetration by competitors and increased competition. International sales of water testing products represented 45% of total water product sales in 2007, and we expect that future growth in this business will be significantly dependent on our ability to increase international sales. Growth also will be dependent on our ability to enhance and broaden our product line. Most water microbiological testing is driven by regulation, and, in many countries, a test may not be used for regulatory testing unless it has been approved by the applicable regulatory body. As a result, we maintain an active regulatory program under which we are seeking regulatory approvals in a number of countries, primarily in Europe. 25 Table of Contents Production Animal Segment We develop, manufacture, market and sell a broad range of tests for various poultry, cattle and swine diseases and conditions, and have an active research and development and in-licensing program in this area. Our strategy is to offer proprietary tests with superior performance characteristics. Disease outbreaks are episodic and unpredictable, and certain diseases that are prevalent at one time may be substantially contained or eradicated at a later time. In response to outbreaks, testing initiatives may lead to exceptional demand for certain products in certain periods. Conversely, successful eradication programs may result in significantly decreased demand for certain products. The performance of this business, therefore, can be subject to fluctuation. In 2007, approximately 83% of our sales in this business were international. Because of the significant dependence of this business on international sales, the performance of the business is particularly subject to the various risks described above that are associated with doing business internationally. Other Dairy . Our strategy in the dairy testing business is to develop, manufacture and sell antibiotic residue testing products that satisfy applicable regulatory requirements for testing of bulk milk by producers and provide reliable field performance. The manufacture of these testing products leverage, almost exclusively, the SNAP platform as well as the production equipment and lines of our rapid assay business, incorporating customized reagents for antibiotic detection. To successfully increase sales of dairy testing products, we believe that we need to increase penetration in geographies outside the U.S. and in the farm segment of the dairy market, and to develop product line enhancements and extensions. OPTI Medical Systems . Our strategy in the OPTI Medical Systems business for the human market is to develop, manufacture, and sell electrolyte and blood gas analyzers and related consumable products for the medical point-of-care diagnostics market worldwide, with a focus on small- to mid-sized hospitals. We seek to differentiate our products based on ease of use, menu, convenience, international distribution and service, and instrument reliability. Similar to our veterinary instruments and consumables strategy, a substantial portion of the revenues from this product line is derived from the sale of consumables for use on the installed base of electrolyte and blood gas analyzers. During the early stage of an instrument life cycle, relatively greater revenues are derived from instrument placements, while consumable sales become relatively more significant in later stages as the installed base of instruments increases and instrument placement revenues begin to decline. Our long-term success in this area of our business is dependent upon new customer acquisition, customer retention and increased customer utilization of existing and new assays introduced on these instruments. OPTI Medical Systems is also the supplier, including development and manufacturing, of our VetStat Analyzer, an instrument and consumable system that is a member of the IDEXX VetLab for the veterinary market. In addition, OPTI Medical Systems provides the electrolyte module and dry slide reagents that make up the electrolyte testing functionality of Catalyst Dx . Our strategy in the OPTI Medical Systems business for the veterinary market is to utilize this unit know-how, intellectual property and manufacturing capability to continue to expand the menu and instrument capability of the VetStat Analyzer and Catalyst Dx platforms for veterinary applications. CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the U.S. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates. Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2007 describes the significant accounting policies used in preparation of these consolidated financial statements. We believe the following critical accounting estimates and assumptions may have a material impact on reported financial condition and operating performance and involve significant levels of judgment to account for highly uncertain matters or are susceptible to significant change. 26 Table of Contents Revenue Recognition Customer programs . We record estimated reductions to revenue in connection with customer marketing programs and incentive offerings that may give customers credits or award points. Award points may be applied to trade receivables owed to us and/or toward future purchases of our products or services. We establish accruals for estimated revenue reductions attributable to customer programs and incentive offerings for each program based on numerous factors, including: program design and award levels; forecasted purchasing patterns of those enrolled in the program based on historical experience with similar programs, current sales trends and market analyses; inventory levels of eligible products in the distribution channel; and estimated number of participants that will ultimately reach volume purchase thresholds. Revenue reductions are recorded quarterly based on issuance of credits, points earned but not yet issued, and estimates of credits and points to be earned in the future based on current revenue. In our analysis, we utilize data supplied from distributors and collected in-house that details the volume of qualifying products purchased as well as price paid per clinic ( practice-level sales data ). Our two most significant customer programs are Practice Developer and SNAP up the Savings TM ( SUTS ), both of which are offered only to North American customers. For the years ended December 31, 2007, 2006 and 2005, we recorded revenue reductions of $6.6 million, $5.1 million and $4.8 million, respectively, related to our Practice Developer program and $4.3 million, $4.9 million and $5.1 million, respectively, related to our SUTS program. At December 31, 2007, 2006 and 2005, the accrued revenue reductions were $12.0 million, $10.4 million and $7.1 million, respectively, for the Practice Developer program and $1.2 million, $1.4 million and $1.4 million, respectively, for the SUTS program. Following is a summary of changes in the accrual for estimated revenue reductions attributable to customer programs and incentive offerings for the years ended December 31, 2007, 2006 and 2005 ( in thousands ): For the Years Ended December 31, 2007 2006 2005 Practice Developer Balance, beginning of the year $ 10,399 $ 7,145 $ 3,862 Current provision related to current period 6,623 5,089 4,780 Current provision (benefit) related to prior periods (228 ) 112 21 Issuance of points for SNAP up the Savings program (1) 4,703 5,010 5,145 Issuance of points for other programs (1) 4,855 3,099 1,468 Actual points redeemed (14,398 ) (10,056 ) (8,131 ) Balance, end of year $ 11,954 $ 10,399 $ 7,145 SNAP up the Savings Balance, beginning of the year $ 1,429 $ 1,422 $ 2,176 Current provision related to current period 4,334 4,936 5,070 Current provision (benefit) related to prior periods 95 81 (38 ) Credits issued (641 ) Issuance of points for SNAP up the Savings program (1) (4,703 ) (5,010 ) (5,145 ) Balance, end of year $ 1,155 $ 1,429 $ 1,422 Other Customer Programs Balance, beginning of the year $ 2,184 $ 1,416 $ 1,678 Current provision related to current period 6,031 5,236 2,054 Current provision (benefit) related to prior periods (85 ) (169 ) 7 Issuance of points for other programs (1) (4,855 ) (3,099 ) (1,468 ) Actual credits issued (1,357 ) (1,228 ) (821 ) Exchange impact on balances denominated in foreign currency 80 28 (34 ) Balance, end of year $ 1,998 $ 2,184 $ 1,416 (1) SNAP up the Savings and certain other customer program liabilities are settled through the issuance of Practice Developer points. 27 Table of Contents Our Practice Developer program is a Companion Animal Group awards program that permits customers to earn points by purchasing quarterly minimums in certain product and service categories, including IDEXX Reference Laboratories services, VetTest slides, VetTest Snapreader reagents, LaserCyte tubes, Feline and Canine SNAP tests, and service and maintenance agreements. Points may then be applied against the purchase price for IDEXX products and services purchased in the future or applied to trade receivables due to us. SUTS is our volume incentive program for selected SNAP tests that provides customers with benefits in the form of (1) discounts off invoice at the time of purchase and (2) points under the Practice Developer program awarded quarterly throughout the SUTS program year (which ends on August 31) based on total purchase volume of qualified SNAP products during the year. For the Practice Developer program, the accrued revenue reduction is calculated each quarter based on sales to end users during the quarter by either us or our distributors and on our estimate of future points to be issued upon sale of applicable product inventories held by distributors at the end of the quarter. As points are redeemed we recognize the benefit of points expected to expire, or breakage, using historical forfeiture rates. On November 30 of each year, unused points granted before January 1 of the prior year expire and any variance from the breakage estimate is accounted for as a change in estimate. Under the SUTS program, commencing September 1, 2007, customers receive a 5% rebate of their purchase price if they purchase a minimum volume of products, either from us or our distributors. We cannot be certain what percentage of customers will purchase the minimum volume of products until that program year has ended. At the beginning of the program year, we develop an estimate of the percentage of customers that we expect to meet the minimum purchase threshold over the program period based on program enrollee purchasing patterns, historical experience with similar programs, current sales trends, and marketing analysis. The percentage of customers expected to meet the minimum purchase threshold is adjusted quarterly during the program year based on our experience with the program and finalized when the program year ends in August. The 5% revenue reduction is calculated quarterly based on the applicable gross sales during the period, at end-user prices, and the estimated percentage of end users that are expected to meet the minimum purchase threshold by the end of the program year. The accrued revenue reduction also includes our estimate of future points to be issued upon sale of applicable product inventories held by distributors at the end of the quarter. If the estimated percentage of customers expected to meet the minimum purchase threshold required to receive the 5% rebate under the SUTS program were to increase or decrease by 5%, we would be required to further reduce revenue or increase revenue, respectively, by $0.1 million. Doubtful accounts receivable . We recognize revenue only in those situations where collection from the customer is reasonably assured. We maintain allowances for doubtful accounts for estimated losses resulting from the inability of our customers to make required payments. We base our estimates on detailed analysis of specific customer situations and a percentage of our accounts receivable by aging category. If the financial condition of our customers were to deteriorate, resulting in an impairment of their ability to make payments, additional allowances might be required. Account balances are charged off against the allowance when we believe the receivable will not be recovered. Write-offs of customer accounts during the years ended December 31, 2007, 2006 and 2005, were $0.7 million, $0.5 million and $0.4 million, respectively. Inventory Valuation We write down inventory for estimated obsolescence when warranted by estimates of future demand, market conditions, and remaining shelf life. If actual market conditions are less favorable than those we estimated, additional inventory write-downs may be required, which would have a negative effect on results of operations. Certain major components of inventory for which we have made critical valuation judgments are discussed in more detail below. LaserCyte Hematology Analyzer . At December 31, 2007 and 2006, $2.7 million and $1.7 million, respectively, of inventory associated with our LaserCyte hematology instrument required rework before it could be used to manufacture finished goods, which was net of $1.7 million and $0.9 million, respectively, of write-downs for inventory estimated to be obsolete. We determined write-downs based on our estimate of the costs to rework inventory compared to replacement cost and the probability of success, primarily based on historical experience. We expect to fully realize our net investment in this inventory. However, if we are unsuccessful reworking this inventory, if we revise our judgment of our ability to successfully rework inventory due to new experience in reworking this inventory, or if we alter the design of this product, we may be required to write off some or all of the remaining associated inventory. 28 Table of Contents Nitazoxanide . At December 31, 2006, our inventories included $9.3 million of inventory associated with Navigator , our nitazoxanide product for the treatment of equine protozoal myeloencephalitis. This inventory consisted of $0.2 million of finished goods and $9.1 million of active ingredient and other raw materials. We have an agreement with our supplier of nitazoxanide under which the supplier agreed until 2017 to replace any expiring inventory of nitazoxanide with longer-dated material. During 2007, we recognized a write-down of nitazoxanide raw materials inventory of $9.1 million and a write-off of a prepaid royalty license of $1.0 million associated with Navigator . Our analysis of the realizability of these assets was triggered upon our receipt of notice from the third-party contract manufacturer of finished goods that it would discontinue manufacturing the product in 2009. Because of the low production volume of Navigator , we believed that we would not be able to enter into a replacement manufacturing arrangement on economically feasible terms, and therefore we would not be able to obtain the product after termination of the existing manufacturing arrangement. Accordingly, we evaluated our associated inventory for obsolescence based on our changed estimates of product availability and estimated future demand and market conditions. This inventory comprised $9.1 million of active ingredient and other raw materials, for which we recognized a full write-down during 2007. At December 31, 2007, this inventory, net of reserves, comprised less than $0.1 million of finished goods. Sales of Navigator were $0.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2007. Valuation of Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets A significant portion of the purchase price for acquired businesses is assigned to intangible assets. Intangible assets other than goodwill are initially valued at the lesser of fair value or, if applicable, fair value proportionately reduced by the excess of the fair value of acquired net assets over the purchase price (collectively, fair value ) of the acquired business. If a market value is not readily available, the fair value of the intangible asset is estimated based on discounted cash flows using market participant assumptions, which are assumptions that are not specific to IDEXX. The selection of appropriate valuation methodologies and the estimation of discounted cash flows require significant assumptions about the timing and amounts of future cash flows, risks, appropriate discount rates, and the useful lives of intangible assets. When deemed appropriate by management, we utilize independent valuation experts to advise and assist us in allocating the purchase prices for acquired businesses to the fair values of the identified intangible assets and in determining appropriate amortization methods and periods for those intangible assets. Goodwill is initially valued based on the excess of the purchase price of a business combination over the fair values of acquired net assets. We assess goodwill for impairment annually and whenever events or circumstances indicate an impairment may exist, in accordance with Statement of Financial Accounting Standards ( SFAS ) No. 142, Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets ( SFAS No. 142 ). For impairment testing, the fair values of the reporting units that include goodwill are estimated using a discounted cash flow approach. The cash flows used contain our best estimates, using appropriate and customary assumptions and projections at the time. Because our pharmaceutical business is still substantially in an investment stage, the determination of the fair value of this business unit requires significant assumptions about the timing and amounts of the unit future cash flows, including assumptions about the markets for our products and proprietary technologies, the future success of research and development activities, the attainment and timing of regulatory approvals to manufacture and sell new products, the introduction and success of competitive products by other market participants, and other business risks. Changes in forecast cash flows or the discount rate would affect the estimated fair values of reporting units and could result in a goodwill impairment charge in a future period. However, a 25% decrease in the current estimated fair value of any of our reporting units would not result in a goodwill impairment charge for any of our reporting units that include goodwill. No impairments were identified as a result of the annual or event-driven reviews during the years ended December 31, 2007, 2006 or 2005. We assessed goodwill attributable to our pharmaceutical business for impairment at June 30, 2007 due to the matters discussed above and the resulting Nitazoxanide inventory write-down and prepaid royalty license impairment charge. The goodwill attributable to our pharmaceutical business of $13.7 million was not impaired at June 30, 2007, or subsequently, when evaluated as part of the annual assessment. 29 Table of Contents We assess the realizability of intangible assets other than goodwill whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable in accordance with SFAS No. 144, Accounting for the Impairment or Disposal of Long-Lived Assets ( SFAS No. 144 ). If an impairment review is triggered, we evaluate the carrying value of intangible assets based on estimated undiscounted future cash flows over the remaining useful life of the assets and comparing that value to the carrying value of the assets. The cash flows that are used contain our best estimates, using appropriate and customary assumptions and projections at the time. No impairments were identified during the years ended December 31, 2006 or 2005. During 2007, we recognized an impairment charge to write off a prepaid royalty license of $1.0 million associated with Navigator paste. We also recognized a related inventory write-down and the circumstances are described in the above discussion of critical accounting estimates and assumptions used in inventory valuation and in Note 6 to the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Based on our changed estimates of product availability and estimated future demand and market conditions, we determined that we would not realize our investment in prepaid royalties and, therefore, fully expensed this asset. No other impairments were identified during the year ended December 31, 2007. Share-Based Compensation We adopted the provisions of SFAS No. 123(R), Share-Based Payment ( SFAS No. 123(R) ) on January 1, 2006. Beginning in 2006, we modified our share-based employee compensation programs to shift from the grant of stock options and employee stock purchase rights only to the grant of a mix of restricted stock units and stock options, along with employee stock purchase rights. There were no modifications to the terms of outstanding options during 2007 or 2006. In connection with the adoption of SFAS No. 123(R), we adopted the straight-line method to prospectively expense share-based awards granted subsequent to December 31, 2005. The graded-vesting, or accelerated, method has been used to calculate the expense for stock options granted prior to January 1, 2006. If the total fair value of share-based compensation awards, as well as other features that impact expense, including forfeitures and capitalization of costs, was consistent from year-to-year in each of the last five years and through 2010, this change in expense method from graded-vesting to straight-line expensing would yield decreasing annual expense through 2010 until awards granted prior to January 1, 2006 were fully expensed. However, the total fair value of future awards may vary significantly from past awards based on a number of factors, including our share-based award practices. Therefore, share-based compensation expense is likely to fluctuate, possibly significantly, from year to year. The fair value of options, restricted stock units, deferred stock units with vesting conditions, and employee stock purchase rights awarded during the years ended December 31, 2007, 2006 and 2005 totaled $18.2 million, $11.9 million and $15.7 million, respectively. The total unrecognized compensation cost for unvested share-based compensation awards outstanding at December 31, 2007, before consideration of estimated forfeitures, was $24.2 million. The weighted average remaining expense recognition period is approximately 2.0 years. The weighted average valuation assumptions used to determine the fair value of each option grant on the date of grant were as follows: For the For the Year Ended Year Ended December 31, December 31, 2007 2006 Expected stock price volatility 29 % 30 % Expected term, in years 5.0 5.0 Risk-free interest rate 4.7 % 4.6 % We use the Black-Scholes-Merton option-pricing model to determine the fair value of options granted. Option-pricing models require the input of highly subjective assumptions, particularly for the expected stock price volatility and the expected term of options. Changes in the subjective input assumptions can materially affect the fair value estimate. Our expected stock price volatility assumptions are based on the historical volatility of our stock over periods that are similar to the expected terms of grants and other relevant factors. Lower estimated volatility reduces the fair value of an option. The total fair value of options awarded during the year ended December 31, 2007 ($7.4 million) would have increased or decreased by approximately 7% if the stock price volatility assumption were increased or decreased by 10%, respectively. The total cost recognized for options awarded during the year ended December 31, 2007 would have increased or decreased by $0.1 million if the stock price volatility assumption were increased or decreased by 10%, respectively. 30 Table of Contents To develop the expected term assumption for 2007 and 2006 option awards, we elected to use the simplified method described in the Securities and Exchange Commission Staff Accounting Bulletin No. 107, which is based on vesting and contractual terms. The application of the simplified method is allowable for options granted through December 31, 2007. We will transition to developing expected term assumptions for future awards based on historical experience and other relevant factors concerning expected employee behavior with regard to option exercise. Longer expected term assumptions increase the fair value of option awards, and therefore increase the expense recognized per award. The total fair value of options awarded during the year ended December 31, 2007 ($7.4 million) would have increased by approximately 12% or decreased by approximately 9% if the expected term assumption were increased or decreased by one year, respectively. The total cost recognized for options awarded during the year ended December 31, 2007 would have increased by $0.2 million or decreased by $0.1 million if the expected term assumption were increased or decreased by one year, respectively. Share-based compensation expense is based on the number of awards ultimately expected to vest and is, therefore, reduced for an estimate of the number of awards that are expected to be forfeited. The forfeiture estimates are based on historical data and other factors, and compensation expense is adjusted for actual results. At December 31, 2007, we applied annual forfeiture rates ranging from 4% to 16% to estimate future forfeitures of previously granted options and restricted stock units that had vesting dates after December 31, 2007. Net share-based compensation costs for the year ended December 31, 2007 were $8.6 million, which is net of a reduction of $2.0 million for estimated forfeitures. Changes in estimated forfeiture rates and differences between estimated forfeiture rates and actual experience may result in significant, unanticipated increases or decreases in share-based compensation expense from period to period. The termination of employment by certain employees who hold large numbers of share-based compensation instruments may also have a significant, unanticipated impact on forfeiture experience and, therefore, on share-based compensation expense. Income Taxes We recognize a current tax liability or asset for current taxes payable or refundable, respectively, and a deferred tax liability or asset, as the case may be, for the estimated future tax effects of temporary differences between book and tax treatment of assets and liabilities and carryforwards to the extent they are realizable. The future tax benefit arising from net deductible temporary differences and tax carryforwards, net of valuation allowances, was $15.4 million and $12.9 million at December 31, 2007 and 2006, respectively. We believe that our earnings during the periods when the temporary differences become deductible will be sufficient to realize the related future tax benefits. Should we determine that we would not be able to realize all or part of our net deferred tax asset in the future, an adjustment to the deferred tax asset would be charged to income in the period such determination was made. A reduction of net income before taxes in each subsidiary equal to 5% of revenue, compared to the corresponding reported amounts for the year ended December 31, 2007, would not result in the recognition of incremental valuation allowances except in one subsidiary where a 5% reduction could result in our recording a valuation allowance of $0.7 million for that subsidiary. For those jurisdictions where the expiration date of tax carryforwards or the projected operating results indicate that realization is not likely, a valuation allowance is recorded to offset the deferred tax asset within that jurisdiction. In assessing the need for a valuation allowance, we consider future taxable income and ongoing prudent and feasible tax planning strategies. In the event that we were to determine that we would be able to realize our deferred tax assets in the future in excess of the net recorded amount, an adjustment to the deferred tax asset would increase income in the period such determination was made. Similarly, a determination that a higher valuation allowance is required would decrease income in the period such determination was made. 31 Table of Contents Our net deductible temporary differences and tax carryforwards are recorded using the enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the periods in which the deferred tax liability or asset is expected to be settled or realized. Should the expected applicable tax rates change in the future, an adjustment to the net deferred tax asset would be credited or charged, as appropriate, to income in the period such determination was made. For example, an increase of one percentage point in our anticipated U.S. state income tax rate would cause us to increase our net deferred tax asset balance by $0.5 million. This increase in the net deferred asset would increase net income in the period that our rate was adjusted. Likewise, a decrease of one percentage point to our anticipated U.S. state income tax rate would have the opposite effect. We periodically assess our exposures related to our worldwide provision for income taxes and believe that we have appropriately accrued taxes for contingencies. Any reduction of these contingent liabilities or additional assessment would increase or decrease income, respectively, in the period such determination was made. We consider certain operating earnings of non-United States subsidiaries to be indefinitely invested outside the U.S. The cumulative earnings of these subsidiaries was $129.6 million at December 31, 2007. No provision has been made for U.S. federal and state, or international taxes that may result from future remittances of these undistributed earnings of non-United States subsidiaries. Should we repatriate these earnings in the future, we would have to adjust the income tax provision in the period in which the decision to repatriate earnings is made. For the operating earnings not considered to be indefinitely invested outside the United States we have accrued taxes on a current basis. Estimates for Certain Contingencies Under our workers compensation insurance policies for U.S. employees since January 1, 2003, we have retained the first $250,000 in claim liability per incident and aggregate claim liability based on payroll for each year. The insurance company provides insurance for claims above the individual occurrence and aggregate limits. We estimate claim liability based on claims incurred and the estimated ultimate cost to settle the claims. Claims incurred during the year ended December 31, 2007 and year ended December 31, 2006 are relatively new and significant additional healthcare and wage indemnification costs could arise from those claims. Our liability for claims incurred during the years ended December 31, 2007 and 2006 could exceed our estimates and we could be liable for up to $2.5 million and $1.0 million, respectively, in excess of the expense we have recognized. For the three years ended on or prior to December 31, 2005, based on our retained claim liability per incident and our aggregate claim liability, our maximum liability at December 31, 2007 is $0.4 million in excess of the amounts deemed probable and previously recognized. 32 Table of Contents RESULTS OF OPERATIONS Twelve Months Ended December 31, 2007 Compared to Twelve Months Ended December 31, 2006 Revenue Total Company. Revenue increased $183.4 million, or 25%, to $922.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2007 from $739.1 million for the prior year. Incremental sales from businesses and from customer-related and other intangible assets acquired subsequent to January 1, 2006 contributed 8% to revenue growth. These acquisitions consisted primarily of veterinary reference laboratories and customer-related assets in Canada, the United States, Europe and South Africa; intellectual property and distribution rights of a veterinary diagnostics business; a production animal diagnostic products business in France; and the Critical Care Division of Osmetech plc. The favorable impact of currency exchange rates contributed 3% to revenue growth. The following table presents revenue by operating segment: For the Year Ended December 31, Percentage Change Net of Percentage Percentage Acquisitions Net Revenue Dollar Percentage Change from Change from and Currency (dollars in thousands) 2007 2006 Change Change Currency (1) Acquisitions (2) Effect CAG $ 752,463 $ 606,319 $ 146,144 24.1 % 2.7 % 6.0 % 15.4 % Water 66,235 58,466 7,769 13.3 % 3.5 % 9.8 % PAS 75,085 58,940 16,145 27.4 % 7.4 % 12.4 % 7.6 % Other 28,772 15,392 13,380 86.9 % 3.4 % 82.7 % 0.8 % Total $ 922,555 $ 739,117 $ 183,438 24.8 % 3.2 % 7.6 % 14.0 % (1) Represents the percentage change in revenue attributed to the effect of changes in currency rates from the year ended December 31, 2006 to the year ended December 31, 2007. (2) Represents the percentage change in revenue attributed to incremental revenues during the year ended December 31, 2007 compared to the year ended December 31, 2006 from businesses acquired subsequent to January 1, 2006. Companion Animal Group. Revenue for CAG increased $146.1 million, or 24%, to $752.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2007 from $606.3 million for the prior year. Incremental sales from veterinary reference laboratory businesses and customer-related assets and from intellectual property and distribution rights of a veterinary diagnostics business acquired subsequent to January 1, 2006 contributed 6% to CAG revenue growth. The favorable impact of currency exchange rates contributed 3% to the increase in CAG revenue. The following table presents revenue by product and service category for CAG: For the Year Ended December 31, Percentage Change Net of Percentage Percentage Acquisitions Net Revenue Dollar Percentage Change from Change from and Currency (dollars in thousands) 2007 2006 Change Change Currency (1) Acquisitions (2) Effect Instruments and consumables $ 289,271 $ 242,312 $ 46,959 19.4 % 3.5 % 15.9 % Rapid assay products 132,500 114,536 17,964 15.7 % 0.8 % 1.5 % 13.4 % Laboratory and consulting services 255,193 187,114 68,079 36.4 % 3.4 % 18.4 % 14.6 % Practice information systems and digital radiography 53,385 44,427 8,958 20.2 % 1.5 % 18.7 % Pharmaceutical products 22,114 17,930 4,184 23.3 % 23.3 % Net CAG revenue $ 752,463 $ 606,319 $ 146,144 24.1 % 2.7 % 6.0 % 15.4 % (1) Represents the percentage change in revenue attributed to the effect of changes in currency rates from the year ended December 31, 2006 to the year ended December 31, 2007. (2) Represents the percentage change in revenue attributed to incremental revenues during the year ended December 31, 2007 compared to the year ended December 31, 2006 from businesses acquired subsequent to January 1, 2006. 33 Table of Contents The following revenue analysis reflects the results of operations net of the impact of currency exchange rates on sales outside the U.S. and net of incremental sales from businesses and from customer-related and other intangible assets acquired subsequent to January 1, 2006. Because our instrument consumables, rapid assay products, and pharmaceutical products are sold in the U.S. and certain other geographies by distributors, distributor purchasing dynamics have an impact on our reported sales of these products. Distributors purchase products from us and sell them to veterinary practices, who are the end users. Distributor purchasing dynamics may be affected by many factors and may be unrelated to underlying end-user demand for our products. As a result, fluctuations in distributors inventories may cause reported results in a period not to be representative of underlying end-user demand. Therefore, we believe it is important to track distributor sales to end users and to distinguish between the impact of end-user demand and the impact of distributor purchasing dynamics on reported revenue growth. Where growth rates are affected by changes in end-user demand, we refer to the impact of practice-level sales on growth. Where growth rates are affected by distributor purchasing dynamics, we refer to the impact of changes in distributors inventories. If during the comparable period of the prior year, distributors inventories grew by more than those inventories grew in the current year, then changes in distributors inventories have a negative impact on our reported sales growth in the current period. Conversely, if during the comparable period of the prior year, distributors inventories grew by less than those inventories grew in the current year, then changes in distributors inventories have a positive impact on our reported sales growth in the current period. The increase in sales of instruments and consumables was due mainly to higher unit sales volume. Higher consumables sales volumes were attributable primarily to higher worldwide practice-level sales of slides and, to a lesser extent, to increased practice-level sales of tubes used with our hematology analyzers, with all consumables categories benefiting from the continued growth of our installed base of instruments. Sales volumes of consumables also benefited from temporary additional diagnostic testing volume related to the recall of certain pet foods in mid-March 2007 in the U.S. and Canada. We believe that the recall resulted in a higher than usual number of pet visits to veterinary clinics in North America in the first and second quarters of 2007. Higher instrument sales revenue resulted mainly from increased sales of our LaserCyte Hematology Analyzer and, to a lesser extent, our IDEXX VetLab Station, an in-clinic laboratory information management system. The impact from changes in U.S. distributors inventory levels reduced reported instruments and consumables revenue growth by less than 1%. The increase in practice-level sales of rapid assay products was due to both higher average unit sales prices and higher sales volumes. Higher average unit sales prices were due, in part, to higher relative sales of canine combination test products, such as the SNAP 4Dx , which was launched in the U.S. in September 2006, and less promotional discounting in connection with our SNAP up the Savings and other customer programs. We expect the rate of end users conversion from canine heartworm-only tests to combination test products and, therefore, the rate of increase of average unit sales prices, will lessen in future periods. Higher sales volumes resulted in part from the July 2007 launch of the SNAP cPL , our test for pancreatitis in dogs. Effective January 2008, we changed our distribution methods in Japan from a combination of direct sales and the use of multiple distributors to an exclusive distribution arrangement for our rapid assay products and instrument consumables. The impact from the distributor initial stocking orders to build inventory levels increased reported revenue growth by 1%. The impact from changes in U.S. distributors inventory levels reduced reported rapid assay revenue growth by 4%. The increase in sales of laboratory and consulting services resulted primarily from higher testing volume and, to a lesser extent, the impact of price increases. Higher testing volume was attributable to both new customers and to increased testing volume from existing customers, and benefited from temporary additional diagnostic testing volume resulting from the March 2007 pet food recall, as discussed above, and from new test offerings. The increase in sales of practice information management systems and digital radiography resulted primarily from higher sales volumes of companion animal and equine radiography systems, higher sales of Cornerstone practice information management systems and services, and the favorable impact of implementing tiered support service level offerings with differentiated pricing for our practice information management systems, partly offset by lower average unit prices for radiography systems due to increased competition. 34 Table of Contents The increase in sales of pharmaceutical products resulted primarily from higher sales volume and price increases, in each case related largely to PZI VET , our insulin product for the treatment of diabetic cats. Water. Revenue for Water increased $7.8 million, or 13%, to $66.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2007 from $58.5 million for the prior year. The increase resulted primarily from higher worldwide sales volume, partly offset by lower average unit sales prices due to both higher relative sales in geographies where products are sold at lower average unit sales prices and greater price competition in certain geographies. Higher sales volumes resulted in part from our commencement in September 2007 of distribution of certain water testing kits manufactured by Invitrogen Corporation ( Invitrogen ), which increased reported Water revenue growth by 2%. The favorable impact of currency exchange rates contributed 4% to the increase in Water revenue. Production Animal Segment. Revenue for PAS increased $16.1 million, or 27%, to $75.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2007 from $58.9 million for the prior year. The increase resulted primarily from higher livestock diagnostics sales volume, including sales attributable to Institut Pourquier, a manufacturer of production animal diagnostic products in France that we acquired in March 2007. Sales of Pourquier products contributed 12% to PAS revenue growth. The favorable impact of higher sales volume was partly offset by lower average unit sales prices for our HerdChek products that test for transmissible spongiform encephalopathies ( TSEs ) due to both greater price competition and higher relative sales in geographies where products are sold at lower average unit sales prices. The favorable impact of currency exchange rates contributed 7% to the increase in PAS revenue. Other. Revenue for Other operating units increased $13.4 million, or 87%, to $28.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2007 from $15.4 million for the prior year due primarily to incremental revenue attributable to OPTI Medical, which was acquired in January 2007. Gross Profit Total Company. Gross profit increased $84.0 million, or 22%, to $463.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2007 from $379.5 million for the prior year. As a percentage of total revenue, gross profit decreased to 50% from 51%. During 2007, we recognized a write-down of nitazoxanide raw materials inventory of $9.1 million and a write-off of a prepaid royalty license of $1.0 million associated with Navigator , which resulted in an unfavorable impact of 1.1% of total company gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2007. These write-downs are included in cost of product revenue in the consolidated statement of operations. Our analysis of the realizability of these assets was triggered upon our receipt of notice from the third-party contract manufacturer of finished goods that it would discontinue manufacturing the product in 2009. Because of the low production volume of Navigator , we believed that we would not be able to enter into a replacement manufacturing arrangement on economically feasible terms, and therefore we would not be able to obtain the product after termination of the existing manufacturing arrangement. Accordingly, we evaluated our associated inventory for obsolescence based on our changed estimates of product availability and estimated future demand and market conditions. Share-based compensation expense of $0.7 million was included in cost of revenue for the year ended December 31, 2007, compared to $1.1 million for the prior year. Beginning in 2007, we allocate share-based compensation expense to the operating segments based on headcount and other personnel data. This allocation differs from the actual expense and consequently yields a difference between the total allocated share-based compensation expense and the actual expense for the total company, which was categorized as unallocated amounts. Share-based compensation expense was not allocated to our operating segments in 2006. Therefore, the total company share-based compensation expense was categorized as unallocated amounts for the year ended December 31, 2006. 35 Table of Contents The following table presents gross profit and gross profit percentage by operating segment: For the Year Ended December 31, Gross Profit Percent of Percent of Dollar Percentage (dollars in thousands) 2007 Revenue 2006 Revenue Change Change CAG $ 363,240 48.3 % $ 297,999 49.1 % $ 65,241 21.9 % Water 41,656 62.9 % 38,441 65.7 % 3,215 8.4 % PAS 46,728 62.2 % 38,654 65.6 % 8,074 20.9 % Other 11,377 39.5 % 6,106 39.7 % 5,271 86.3 % Unallocated amounts 521 N/A (1,671 ) N/A 2,192 N/A Total Company $ 463,522 50.2 % $ 379,529 51.3 % $ 83,993 22.1 % Companion Animal Group. Gross profit for CAG increased $65.2 million, or 22%, to $363.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2007 from $298.0 million for the prior year due primarily to increased sales volume across the CAG product and service lines, partly offset by a decrease in gross profit percentage to 48% from 49%. The write-down of pharmaceutical inventory and the related prepaid royalty impairment charge, discussed above, resulted in an unfavorable impact of 1.4% of CAG revenue. Greater relative sales of lower margin products and services, such as laboratory and consulting services and IDEXX VetLab instruments, also contributed to the decrease in the gross profit percentage. These unfavorable impacts were partly offset by higher relative sales of our canine combination test product, SNAP 4Dx and, to a lesser extent, all other CAG product and service lines, except in the Digital Radiography business; lower cost of slides that are sold for use in VetTest Chemistry Analyzers; and the favorable impact of foreign currency rates on sales denominated in those currencies, net of foreign exchange hedge contract losses. Water. Gross profit for Water increased $3.2 million, or 8%, to $41.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2007 from $38.4 million for the prior year due to higher sales volume, partly offset by a decrease in the gross profit percentage to 63% from 66%. The decrease in gross profit percentage was due primarily to higher manufacturing costs; lower average unit sales prices, and greater relative sales of lower margin products, which was primarily due to the lower gross margin earned on certain water testing kits manufactured by Invitrogen Corporation ( Invitrogen ) that we began distributing in September 2007. Production Animal Segment. Gross profit for PAS increased $8.1 million, or 21%, to $46.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2007 from $38.7 million for the prior year due to increased sales volume, partly offset by a decrease in the gross profit percentage to 62% from 66%. The gross profit percentage was unfavorably impacted by lower average unit sales prices; net higher production costs; the effect of purchase accounting for inventory acquired in connection with the Pourquier business acquisition; and a relatively lower gross profit rate realized on sales by Pourquier, largely offset by greater relative sales of higher margin products, exclusive of the impact of the Pourquier business. The gross profit percentage earned on sales by Pourquier, excluding the impact of purchase accounting, was lower than our historical PAS gross profit rate due to greater price competition in the primary markets served by Pourquier. Additionally, purchase accounting for inventory had an unfavorable impact of 0.8% of PAS revenue because finished goods inventory acquired in connection with a business acquisition are assigned a fair value that exceeds replacement cost, which results in a low gross margin on the sale of those finished goods by the acquirer. Additionally, decreases in the gross profit percentage were partly offset by the favorable impact of foreign currency rates on sales denominated in those currencies, net of foreign exchange hedge contract losses. Other. Gross profit for Other operating units increased $5.3 million, or 86%, to $11.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2007 from $6.1 million for the prior year due primarily to incremental revenue attributable to OPTI Medical, which resulted in incremental gross profit for the Other operating units. Excluding the acquisition of OPTI Medical, the gross profit percentage was 38% for the year ended December 31, 2007 compared to 40% for the prior year. The decrease in the gross profit percentage was due to lower average unit sales prices for certain Dairy products and higher manufacturing and distribution costs, partly offset by the favorable impact of the effect of foreign currency rates on sales denominated in those currencies. 36 Table of Contents Operating Expenses and Operating Income Total Company. Total operating expenses increased $75.7 million, or 30%, to $327.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2007 from $251.6 million for the prior year. As a percentage of revenue, operating expenses increased to 35% from 34%. Share-based compensation expense of $7.9 million was included in operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2007, compared to $9.0 million for the prior year. Beginning in 2007, we allocate share-based compensation expense to the operating segments, as discussed above. The total company share-based compensation expense was categorized as unallocated amounts for the year ended December 31, 2006. Operating income increased $8.3 million, or 6%, to $136.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2007 from $127.9 million for the prior year. As a percentage of revenue, operating income decreased to 15% from 17%. The following tables present operating expenses and operating income by operating segment: For the Year Ended December 31, Operating Expenses Percent of Percent of Dollar Percentage (dollars in thousands) 2007 Revenue 2006 Revenue Change Change CAG $ 261,877 34.8 % $ 197,239 32.5 % $ 64,638 32.8 % Water 14,809 22.4 % 12,679 21.7 % 2,130 16.8 % PAS 31,272 41.6 % 22,482 38.1 % 8,790 39.1 % Other 11,452 39.8 % 4,254 27.6 % 7,198 169.2 % Unallocated amounts 7,929 N/A 14,942 N/A (7,013 ) (46.9 %) Total Company $ 327,339 35.5 % $ 251,596 34.0 % $ 75,743 30.1 % Operating Income Percent of Percent of Dollar Percentage (dollars in thousands) 2007 Revenue 2006 Revenue Change Change CAG $ 101,363 13.5 % $ 100,760 16.6 % $ 603 .6 % Water 26,847 40.5 % 25,762 44.1 % 1,085 4.2 % PAS 15,456 20.6 % 16,172 27.4 % (716 ) (4.4 %) Other (75 ) (0.3 %) 1,852 12.0 % (1,927 ) (104.0 %) Unallocated amounts (7,408 ) N/A (16,613 ) N/A 9,205 55.4 % Total Company $ 136,183 14.8 % $ 127,933 17.3 % $ 8,250 6.4 % Companion Animal Group. Operating expenses for CAG increased $64.6 million, or 33%, to $261.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2007 from $197.2 million for the prior year and, as a percentage of revenue, increased to 35% from 33%. Share-based compensation expense of $6.0 million, or 0.8% of revenue, was included in CAG operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2007. The following table presents CAG operating expenses by functional area: For the Year Ended December 31, Operating Expenses Percent of Percent of Dollar Percentage (dollars in thousands) 2007 Revenue 2006 Revenue Change Change Sales and marketing $ 128,593 17.1 % $ 98,748 16.3 % $ 29,845 30.2 % General and administrative 87,179 11.6 % 60,267 9.9 % 26,912 44.7 % Research and development 46,105 6.1 % 38,224 6.3 % 7,881 20.6 % Total operating expenses $ 261,877 34.8 % $ 197,239 32.5 % $ 64,638 32.8 % The increase in sales and marketing expense resulted primarily from higher personnel-related costs due, in part, to expanded worldwide sales, marketing and customer service support resources and higher sales commissions as a result of revenue performance. Additionally, the unfavorable impact of exchange rates on foreign currency denominated expenses, the inclusion of share-based compensation expense, and incremental expenses associated with businesses acquired subsequent to January 1, 2006 also contributed to the increase in sales and marketing expense. 37 Table of Contents The increase in general and administrative expense resulted primarily from higher personnel-related costs due, in part, to expanded resources and spending on information technology, facilities, and other general support functions. To a lesser extent, the inclusion of share-based compensation expense; incremental expenses associated with businesses acquired subsequent to January 1, 2006, comprised mainly of administrative expenses of a recurring nature to support the acquired businesses and amortization expense for intangible assets acquired; and the unfavorable impact of exchange rates on foreign currency denominated expenses also contributed to the increase in general and administrative expense. The increase in research and development expense resulted primarily from increased product development spending, including additional professional resources, related primarily to IDEXX VetLab instrumentation and rapid assay products. To a lesser extent, product development activities in all other CAG product and service categories and the inclusion of share-based compensation expense also contributed to the increases in research and development expense. Water. Operating expenses for Water increased $2.1 million, or 17%, to $14.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2007 from $12.7 million for the prior year and, as a percentage of revenue, were approximately constant at 22%. Share-based compensation expense of $0.4 million, or 0.6% of revenue, was included in Water operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2007. The following table presents Water expenses by functional area: For the Year Ended December 31, Operating Expenses Percent of Percent of Dollar Percentage (dollars in thousands) 2007 Revenue 2006 Revenue Change Change Sales and marketing $ 6,791 10.3 % $ 5,465 9.3 % $ 1,326 24.3 % General and administrative 5,532 8.4 % 5,167 8.8 % 365 7.1 % Research and development 2,486 3.8 % 2,047 3.5 % 439 21.4 % Total operating expenses $ 14,809 22.4 % $ 12,679 21.7 % $ 2,130 16.8 % The increase in sales and marketing expense resulted primarily from higher personnel-related costs due, in part, to expanded headcount and, to a lesser extent, the unfavorable impact of exchange rates on foreign currency denominated expenses. The increase in general and administrative expense resulted primarily from the inclusion of share-based compensation expense and higher spending on information technology, facilities, and other general support functions, partly offset by the favorable comparison due to costs incurred during the third quarter of 2006 to consolidate our office and production facilities based in the United Kingdom into a single facility and other net cost reductions. The increase in research and development expense resulted primarily from higher costs associated with coliform and E. coli water test product development. Production Animal Segment. Operating expenses for PAS increased $8.8 million, or 39%, to $31.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2007 from $22.5 million for the prior year and, as a percentage of revenue, increased to 42% from 38%. Share-based compensation expense of $0.8 million, or 1.0% of revenue, was included in PAS operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2007. The following table presents PAS operating expenses by functional area: For the Year Ended December 31, Operating Expenses Percent of Percent of Dollar Percentage (dollars in thousands) 2007 Revenue 2006 Revenue Change Change Sales and marketing $ 12,234 16.3 % $ 8,162 13.8 % $ 4,072 49.9 % General and administrative 11,347 15.1 % 9,258 15.7 % 2,089 22.6 % Research and development 7,691 10.2 % 5,062 8.6 % 2,629 51.9 % Total operating expenses $ 31,272 41.6 % $ 22,482 38.1 % $ 8,790 39.1 % 38 Table of Contents The increase in sales and marketing expense resulted primarily from incremental activities associated with the Pourquier business, higher personnel-related costs, and, to a lesser extent, the unfavorable impact of exchange rates on foreign currency denominated expenses. The increase in general and administrative expense resulted primarily from incremental expenses associated with the Pourquier business, comprised mainly of administrative expenses of a recurring nature to support the acquired business and amortization expense for intangible assets, and higher spending on information technology, facilities, and other general support functions. To a lesser extent, the unfavorable impact of exchange rates on foreign currency denominated expenses and the inclusion of share-based compensation expense also contributed to the increase in general and administrative expense. These increases were partly offset by a favorable comparison due to the write-off, in the second quarter of 2006, of certain fixed assets located in our facility in China. The increase in research and development expense resulted primarily from higher development activities and associated higher personnel-related costs, including incremental development activities attributable to the Pourquier business acquired in March 2007, and, to a lesser extent, the inclusion of share-based compensation expense. Other. Operating expenses for Other operating units increased $7.2 million to $11.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2007 from $4.3 million for the prior year due primarily to incremental expenses attributable to OPTI Medical, which was acquired in January 2007. These costs are mainly composed of operating expenses of a recurring nature to support the OPTI Medical business and amortization expense for intangible assets acquired. Share-based compensation expense of $0.3 million, or 1.0% of revenue, was included in Other operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2007. Unallocated Amounts. Operating expenses that are not allocated to our operating segments decreased $7.0 million to $7.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2007 from $14.9 million for the prior year. As described above, share-based compensation expense was not allocated to our operating segments in 2006. Therefore, total company share-based compensation expense included in operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2006 of $9.0 million was categorized as unallocated amounts. Beginning in 2007, we allocate a portion of share-based compensation expense to the operating segments. The unallocated share-based compensation expense for the year ended December 31, 2007 was $0.5 million. Corporate research and development expense was also included in unallocated amounts for both periods and grew mainly due to personnel additions in 2007 to support increased long-term product development activities. Interest Income and Interest Expense Interest income was $2.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2007 compared to $3.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2006. The decrease in interest income was due primarily to lower invested cash balances, partly offset by higher effective interest rates. Interest expense was $4.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2007 compared to $0.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2006. The increase in interest expense was due primarily to interest expense incurred on borrowings under a revolving credit facility. Provision for Income Taxes Our effective income tax rate was 30.3% for the year ended December 31, 2007 and 28.4% for the year ended December 31, 2006. The increase in tax rate is primarily attributable to several non-recurring items that benefited the tax rate in the year ended December 31, 2006. These 2006 items included the resolution of an income tax audit for years ended December 31, 2003 and 2004, a reduction of previously recorded deferred tax liabilities as a result of obtaining certain multi-year tax incentives and the release of a valuation allowance on international deferred tax assets as a result of a foreign subsidiary demonstrating consistent sustained profitability. Offsetting the impact of the items occurring in 2006 were several favorable impacts to our rate that occurred during the year ended December 31, 2007. These items included an increase in certain federal tax incentives due to changes in legislation, tax benefits related to reductions in international rates, and the recognition of state tax benefits resulting from the completion of an audit. 39 Table of Contents We anticipate recognizing approximately $0.5 million of income tax benefits that have not been recognized at December 31, 2007 in accordance with FASB Interpretation ( FIN ) No. 48, Accounting for Uncertainty in Income Taxes ( FIN 48 ). The income tax benefits are primarily due to the lapse in the statute of limitations for various foreign and state tax jurisdictions. Twelve Months Ended December 31, 2006 Compared to Twelve Months Ended December 31, 2005 Revenue Total Company. Revenue increased $101.0 million, or 16%, to $739.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2006 from $638.1 million for the prior year. The following table presents revenue by reportable operating segment: For the Year Ended December 31, Percentage Change Net of Percentage Percentage Acquisitions Net Revenue Dollar Percentage Change from Change from and Currency (dollars in thousands) 2006 2005 Change Change Currency (1) Acquisitions (2) Effect CAG $ 606,319 $ 520,830 $ 85,489 16.4 % 0.3 % 2.4 % 13.7 % Water 58,466 56,760 1,706 3.0 % 0.8 % 2.2 % PAS 58,940 44,945 13,995 31.1 % 0.9 % 30.2 % Other 15,392 15,560 (168 ) (1.1 %) (0.1 %) (1.0 %) Total $ 739,117 $ 638,095 $ 101,022 15.8 % 0.4 % 1.8 % 13.6 % (1) Represents the percentage change in revenue attributed to the effect of changes in currency rates from the year ended December 31, 2005 to the year ended December 31, 2006. (2) Represents the percentage change in revenue attributed to incremental revenues during the year ended December 31, 2006 compared to the year ended December 31, 2005 from businesses acquired subsequent to January 1, 2005. Companion Animal Group. Revenue for CAG increased $85.5 million, or 16%, to $606.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2006 from $520.8 million for the prior year. Incremental sales from businesses acquired since January 1, 2005, consisting primarily of veterinary reference laboratories, a digital radiography business, and intellectual property and distribution rights of a veterinary diagnostics business, contributed 2% to CAG revenue growth. The following table presents revenue by product and service categories for CAG: For the Year Ended December 31, Percentage Change Net of Percentage Percentage Acquisitions Net Revenue Dollar Percentage Change from Change from and Currency (dollars in thousands) 2006 2005 Change Change Currency (1) Acquisitions (2) Effect Instruments and consumables $ 242,312 $ 217,537 $ 24,775 11.4 % 0.5 % 10.9 % Rapid assay products 114,536 100,255 14,281 14.2 % (0.1 %) 1.6 % 12.7 % Laboratory and consulting services 187,114 156,425 30,689 19.6 % 0.2 % 4.5 % 14.9 % Practice information systems and digital radiography 44,427 32,589 11,838 36.3 % 0.9 % 11.5 % 23.9 % Pharmaceutical products 17,930 14,024 3,906 27.9 % 27.9 % Net CAG revenue $ 606,319 $ 520,830 $ 85,489 16.4 % 0.3 % 2.4 % 13.7 % (1) Represents the percentage change in revenue attributed to the effect of changes in currency rates from the year ended December 31, 2006 to the year ended December 31, 2005. (2) Represents the percentage change in revenue attributed to incremental revenues during the year ended December 31, 2006 compared to the year ended December 31, 2005 from businesses acquired subsequent to January 1, 2005. 40 Table of Contents The following revenue analysis reflects the results of operations net of the impact of currency exchange rates on sales outside the U.S. The increase in sales of instruments and consumables was due mainly to higher unit sales volume of both instruments and of consumables and, to a lesser extent, to higher average unit sales prices for slides that are sold for use in VetTest Chemistry Analyzers. Higher consumables sales volumes were attributable primarily to higher worldwide practice-level sales of slides and, to a lesser extent, to increased U.S. practice-level sales of tubes used with our hematology analyzers, with all consumables categories benefiting from the continued growth of our installed base of instruments. Higher instrument sales volume resulted mainly from sales of VetStat Electrolyte and Blood Gas Analyzers and, to a lesser extent, LaserCyte Hematology Analyzers and SNAP Readers. The impact from changes in distributors inventory levels had no significant impact on reported revenue growth of instruments and consumables. The increase in sales of rapid assay products was due primarily to increased sales volume of canine products, including sales of SNAP 4Dx , which was launched in the U.S. in September 2006. The impact from changes in distributors inventory levels increased reported rapid assay revenue growth by 3%. To a lesser extent, higher average unit sales prices of canine products, in part due to less promotional discounting and higher relative sales of combination test products, also contributed to rapid assay revenue growth. These increases were partly offset by lower average unit sales prices of feline products, partly due to greater promotional discounting. Incremental sales of rapid assay products for which we acquired distribution rights in the second quarter of 2006 contributed 2% to rapid assay revenue growth. The increase in sales of laboratory and consulting services resulted primarily from higher testing volume and, to a lesser extent, the impact of price increases and incremental sales attributable to acquisitions between January 1, 2005 and December 31, 2006. Businesses acquired since January 1, 2005 contributed 4% to laboratory and consulting services revenue growth. The increase in sales of practice information management systems and digital radiography resulted primarily from an increase in the number of digital radiography systems sold. Digital radiography sales volume growth was due primarily to sales attributable to a business acquired in the third quarter of 2005, which contributed 12% to practice information management systems and digital radiography revenue growth; higher sales volumes of existing products; and sales of the IDEXX-DR 1417 Digital Radiography System, which became commercially available during the third quarter of 2006. To a lesser extent, revenue growth was also due to the impact of price increases for support services for our practice information management systems, higher sales of computer hardware to practice information management systems customers, and a shift in sales mix to larger practice information management systems. The increase in sales of pharmaceutical products resulted primarily from increased practice-level demand and, to a lesser extent, from price increases, both impacts related largely to PZI VET , our insulin product for the treatment of diabetic cats. Water. Revenue for Water increased $1.7 million, or 3%, to $58.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2006 from $56.8 million for the prior year. The increase resulted primarily from higher sales volume in the Americas and Europe and, to a lesser extent, to higher average unit sales prices. The favorable impact of currency exchange rates contributed an aggregate of $0.5 million, or 1%, to the increase in Water revenue. Production Animal Segment. Revenue for PAS increased $14.0 million, or 31%, to $58.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2006 from $44.9 million for the prior year. The increase resulted primarily from higher worldwide livestock diagnostics sales volume, including, notably, sales in Europe of our HerdChek products that test for transmissible spongiform encephalopathies. To a lesser extent, increased average unit sales prices in certain geographies, higher relative sales in geographies where products are sold at higher unit prices, and higher poultry diagnostics sales volume in the Americas also contributed to production animal products revenue growth. The favorable impact of currency exchange rates contributed an aggregate of $0.4 million, or 1%, to the increase in PAS revenue. 41 Table of Contents Gross Profit Total Company. Gross profit increased $56.6 million, or 18%, to $379.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2006 from $322.9 million for the prior year. As a percentage of total revenue, gross profit was approximately constant at 51%. We adopted the provisions of SFAS No. 123(R) and began expensing share-based compensation beginning on January 1, 2006, which had a negative impact on our gross profit percentages and on operating margins . For the year ended December 31, 2006, share-based compensation expense was not allocated to our operating segments and therefore has been categorized as unallocated amounts. The following table presents gross profit and gross profit percentage by reportable segment: For the Year Ended December 31, Gross Profit Percent of Percent of Dollar Percentage (dollars in thousands) 2006 Revenue 2005 Revenue Change Change CAG $ 297,999 49.1 % $ 250,409 48.1 % $ 47,590 19.0 % Water 38,441 65.7 % 38,277 67.4 % 164 0.4 % PAS 38,654 65.6 % 27,788 61.8 % 10,866 39.1 % Other 6,106 39.7 % 6,426 41.3 % (320 ) (5.0 %) Unallocated amounts (1,671 ) N/A N/A (1,671 ) N/A Total Company $ 379,529 51.3 % $ 322,900 50.6 % $ 56,629 17.5 % Companion Animal Group. Gross profit for CAG increased $47.6 million, or 19%, to $298.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2006 from $250.4 million for the prior year due primarily to increased sales volume across the CAG product lines and, to a lesser extent, to an increase in the gross profit percentage to 49% from 48% for the prior year. The increase in the gross profit percentage was largely due to lower cost of slides that are sold for use in VetTest Chemistry Analyzers under the agreement with our supplier and higher average selling prices. The increase in the gross profit percentage was partly offset by greater relative sales of lower margin products and services such as laboratory and consulting services. Water. Gross profit for Water increased $0.2 million to $38.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2006 from $38.3 million for the prior year due to higher sales volume, partly offset by a decrease in the gross profit percentage to 66% from 67%. The gross profit percentage was unfavorably impacted by increased freight and distribution costs and higher relative sales of lower margin products. Production Animal Segment. Gross profit for PAS increased $10.9 million, or 39%, to $38.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2006 from $27.8 million for the prior year due primarily to increased sales volume and, to a lesser extent, to an increase in the gross profit percentage to 66% from 62%. The gross profit percentage was favorably impacted by higher relative sales of higher margin livestock products, the absence in 2006 of certain discrete costs that occurred in 2005, and higher average unit sales prices. Discrete costs in 2005 comprised integration costs and the impacts of purchase accounting that were associated with an acquisition in December 2004. Operating Expenses and Operating Income Total Company. Total operating expenses increased $44.0 million to $251.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2006 from $207.6 million for the prior year. As a percentage of revenue, operating expenses increased to 34% from 33% for the prior year. The change in accounting for share-based compensation beginning January 1, 2006 resulted in an increase of $9.0 million, or 4%, in total company operating expenses for 2006. For the year ended December 31, 2006, share-based compensation expense was not allocated to our operating segments and therefore has been categorized as unallocated amounts. Operating income increased $12.6 million to $127.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2006 from $115.3 million for the prior year. As a percentage of revenue, operating income decreased to 17% from 18%. The change in accounting for share-based compensation beginning January 1, 2006 had a negative impact of 1% on reported operating income as a percentage of total company revenue. 42 Table of Contents The following tables present operating expenses and operating income by reportable segment: For the Year Ended December 31, Operating Expenses Percent of Percent of Dollar Percentage (dollars in thousands) 2006 Revenue 2005 Revenue Change Change CAG $ 197,239 32.5 % $ 167,439 32.1 % $ 29,800 17.8 % Water 12,679 21.7 % 12,303 21.7 % 376 3.1 % PAS 22,482 38.1 % 20,471 45.5 % 2,011 9.8 % Other 4,254 27.6 % 3,849 24.7 % 405 10.5 % Unallocated amounts 14,942 N/A 3,507 N/A 11,435 326.1 % Total Company $ 251,596 34.0 % $ 207,569 32.5 % $ 44,027 21.2 % Operating Income Percent of Percent of Dollar Percentage (dollars in thousands) 2006 Revenue 2005 Revenue Change Change CAG $ 100,760 16.6 % $ 82,970 15.9 % $ 17,790 21.4 % Water 25,762 44.1 % 25,974 45.8 % (212 ) (0.8 %) PAS 16,172 27.4 % 7,317 16.3 % 8,855 121.0 % Other 1,852 12.0 % 2,577 16.6 % (725 ) (28.1 %) Unallocated amounts (16,613 ) N/A (3,507 ) N/A (13,106 ) (373.7 %) Total Company $ 127,933 17.3 % $ 115,331 18.1 % $ 12,602 10.9 % Companion Animal Group. Operating expenses for CAG increased $29.8 million, or 18%, to $197.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2006 from $167.4 million for the prior year and, as a percentage of revenue, increased to 33% from 32%. The following table presents CAG operating expenses by functional area: For the Year Ended December 31, Operating Expenses Percent of Percent of Dollar Percentage (dollars in thousands) 2006 Revenue 2005 Revenue Change Change Sales and marketing $ 98,748 16.3 % $ 87,421 16.8 % $ 11,327 13.0 % General and administrative 60,267 9.9 % 50,194 9.6 % 10,073 20.1 % Research and development 38,224 6.3 % 29,824 5.7 % 8,400 28.2 % Total operating expenses $ 197,239 32.5 % $ 167,439 32.1 % $ 29,800 17.8 % The increase in sales and marketing expense resulted primarily from higher personnel-related costs due, in part, to expanded worldwide sales, marketing and customer service headcount and to higher sales commissions as a result of revenue performance. To a lesser extent, incremental activities associated with businesses acquired since January 1, 2005 also contributed to the increase in sales and marketing expense. The increase in general and administrative expense resulted primarily from higher spending on facilities, information technology and other general support functions. To a lesser extent, incremental expenses associated with businesses acquired since January 1, 2005, comprised mainly of amortization expense for intangible assets acquired and general and administrative expenses of a recurring nature to support the acquired businesses, also contributed to the increase in general and administrative expense. Increases in general and administrative expenses were partly offset by the favorable impact of net transaction gains on foreign currency denominated expenses in 2006 compared to transaction losses in 2005. The increase in research and development expense resulted primarily from increased product development spending related primarily to IDEXX VetLab instrumentation and, to a lesser extent, rapid assay and digital radiography products. 43 Table of Contents Water. Operating expenses for Water increased $0.4 million, or 3%, to $12.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2006 from $12.3 million for the prior year and, as a percentage of revenue, were constant at 22%. The following table presents Water operating expenses by functional area: For the Year Ended December 31, Operating Expenses Percent of Percent of Dollar Percentage (dollars in thousands) 2006 Revenue 2005 Revenue Change Change Sales and marketing $ 5,465 9.3 % $ 5,319 9.4 % $ 146 2.7 % General and administrative 5,167 8.8 % 4,822 8.5 % 345 7.2 % Research and development 2,047 3.5 % 2,162 3.8 % (115 ) (5.3 %) Total operating expenses $ 12,679 21.7 % $ 12,303 21.7 % $ 376 3.1 % The increase in general and administrative expense resulted primarily from higher spending on facilities, information technology and other general support functions; higher bad debt expense; higher compensation; and costs incurred to consolidate our office and production facilities based in the United Kingdom into a single facility. The increase in sales and marketing expense resulted primarily from higher personnel-related costs. The decrease in research and development expense resulted primarily from lower spending following the launch of the IDEXX Filta-Max xpress system, a Cryptosporidium and Giardia testing product, in the second quarter of 2006. Production Animal Segment. Operating expenses for PAS increased $2.0 million, or 10%, to $22.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2006 from $20.5 million for the prior year. As a percentage of revenue, PAS operating expenses decreased to 38% from 46%. The following table presents PAS operating expenses by functional area: For the Year Ended December 31, Operating Expenses Percent of Percent of Dollar Percentage (dollars in thousands) 2006 Revenue 2005 Revenue Change Change Sales and marketing $ 8,162 13.8 % $ 7,280 16.2 % $ 882 12.1 % General and administrative 9,258 15.7 % 8,146 18.1 % 1,112 13.7 % Research and development 5,062 8.6 % 5,045 11.2 % 17 0.3 % Total operating expenses $ 22,482 38.1 % $ 20,471 45.5 % $ 2,011 9.8 % The increase in general and administrative expense resulted primarily from higher spending on facilities, information technology and other general support functions and, to a lesser extent, from a write-down of an equity investment in a technology licensor. Increases in general and administrative expenses were partly offset by the absence in 2006 of certain discrete costs that occurred in 2005 and the favorable impact of net transaction gains on foreign currency denominated expenses in 2006 compared to transaction losses in 2005. Discrete costs in 2005 were associated with the cessation of production in our Sweden-based facility in connection with the centralization of our European production animal diagnostics operations in Bern, Switzerland. The increase in sales and marketing expense resulted primarily from higher personnel-related costs. Increases in research and development expense from higher personnel-related costs due, in part, to expanded headcount and from higher patent-related costs were substantially offset by lower facilities and overhead costs in Europe as a result of the consolidation of our European production animal business, including research and development activities, during the second half of 2005. Unallocated Amounts. Operating expenses that are not allocated to our operating segments, consisting primarily of the company-wide share-based compensation expense and corporate research and development, increased $11.4 million to $14.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2006 from $3.5 million for the prior year. This increase is primarily due to the inclusion of share-based compensation expense of $9.0 million in 2006 due to the adoption of SFAS No. 123(R) on January 1, 2006. Corporate research and development expense grew mainly due to personnel additions in 2005 and 2006 to support increased long-term product development activities. 44 Table of Contents Interest Income and Interest Expense Interest income was $3.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2006 compared to $3.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2005. An increase in interest income from higher interest rates was largely offset by lower average invested cash balances. Interest expense was $0.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2006 compared to $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2005. The increase in interest expense was primarily due to interest expense incurred on the mortgage assumed in connection with the Westbrook, Maine facility purchase in May 2006. Provision for Income Taxes Our effective income tax rate was 28.4% for the year ended December 31, 2006 compared with 34.2% for the year ended December 31, 2005. The majority of this rate differential resulted from the favorable impact of the resolution in 2006 of an IRS income tax audit for the years ended December 31, 2003 and 2004. As a result of completing this audit, we reduced previously accrued taxes and recognized a tax benefit of 3.7% of income before tax. Other items that decreased our effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2006 included a reduction of previously recorded international deferred tax liabilities as a result of obtaining certain multi-year tax incentives and the release of a valuation allowance on international deferred tax assets as a result of a subsidiary demonstrating consistent sustained profitability. In addition, the effective rate for the year ended December 31, 2006 was less than the effective rate for the year ended December 31, 2005 due to the incremental tax expense in 2005 on the repatriation of $30.0 million pursuant to the American Jobs Creation Act of 2004 . These rate reductions were partly offset by the nonrecognition, in 2006, of tax benefits on compensation expense for incentive stock options and employee stock purchase rights that were recorded in accordance with SFAS No. 123(R) effective January 1, 2006. RECENT ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS A discussion of recent accounting pronouncements is included in Note 2(r) to the consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2007 included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES Liquidity We fund the capital needs of our business through cash on hand, funds generated from operations, and amounts available under our credit facilities. At December 31, 2007 and December 31, 2006, we had $60.4 million and $96.7 million, respectively, of cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments, and working capital of $82.3 million and $177.5 million, respectively. Additionally, at December 31, 2007, we had borrowing availability under our revolving credit facility of $52.8 million. We believe that current cash and cash equivalents, funds generated from operations, and amounts available under our credit facilities will be sufficient to fund our operations, capital purchase requirements, and strategic growth needs. We further believe that we could obtain additional borrowings at customary interest rates to fund our growth objectives. In February 2008, we increased the aggregate principal amount available under our unsecured revolving credit facility to $200.0 million. The extent and timing of acquisitions-related spending and repurchases of our common stock could cause variations in our liquidity and leverage levels. We consider certain operating earnings of non-United States subsidiaries to be indefinitely invested outside the U.S. Changes to this policy could have adverse tax consequences. Subject to this policy, we manage our worldwide cash requirements considering available funds among all of our subsidiaries. Foreign cash balances are generally available without legal restrictions to fund ordinary business operations outside the U.S. 45 Table of Contents The following table presents additional key information concerning working capital: For the Three Months Ended December 31, 2007 2006 Days sales outstanding 39 38 Inventory turns 2.3 1.9 Sources and Uses of Cash Cash generated by operating activities was $135.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2007, compared to $109.8 million for the same period in 2006. The total of net income and net non-cash charges was $136.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2007, compared to $120.0 million for the same period in 2006. We have historically experienced proportionally lower or net negative cash flows from operating activities during the first quarter and net positive cash flows from operating activities for the remainder of the year and for the annual period. Several factors contribute to the seasonal fluctuations in cash flows generated by operating activities, including the following: We have agreements with certain suppliers that require us to make minimum annual inventory purchases, in some cases in order to retain exclusive distribution rights, and we have other agreements with suppliers that provide for lower pricing based on annual purchase volumes. We may place a higher volume of purchase orders for inventory during the fourth quarter in order to meet our minimum commitments or realize volume pricing discounts and we receive that inventory in the fourth or first quarters and pay in the first quarter. The specific facts and circumstances that we consider in determining the timing and level of inventory purchases throughout the year related to these agreements may yield inconsistent cash flows from operations, most typically in the first and fourth quarters. We have management and non-management employee incentive programs that provide for the payment of annual bonuses in the first quarter following the year for which the bonuses were earned. In the U.S., we pay our final income tax payments for each fiscal year on March 15 th of the following year, in addition to paying our first quarter payment for the current fiscal year. Our method of depositing estimated taxes delays a portion of the payment relating to the preceding year until this final payment date and, as a result, tax payments are higher in the first quarter of each year. Net income for the year ended December 31, 2007 increased $0.3 million to $94.0 million from $93.7 million for the prior year. Income adjusted for noncash items and the tax benefit from exercises of stock options was $145.4 million, compared to $129.4 million, resulting in a year-to-year increase of $16.0 million. The changes in noncash adjustments are primarily due to the inclusion in net income for the year ended December 31, 2007 of the write-down of Navigator inventory and the associated royalty license impairment of $10.1 million and the increase in depreciation and amortization expense for the year ended December 31, 2007, compared to the prior year, of $11.2 million. The increase in depreciation and amortization expense is due, in part, to the increase in amortization expense recognized for acquired intangibles assets of $3.7 million. See Notes 3, 6 and 8 to the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information about our acquisitions of businesses and intangible assets, the Navigator inventory write-down, and intangible assets, respectively. During the year ended December 31, 2007, cash decreased by $1.0 million due to changes in operating assets and liabilities, compared to a decrease in the same period of 2006 of $10.2 million, resulting in a year-to-year change of $9.2 million. The decrease in cash used by changes in operating assets and liabilities, compared to 2006, was primarily attributable to $20.4 million less cash used by changes in inventory and an increase of $15.5 million of cash provided by increases in accounts payable and accrued expenses, partly offset by an increase of $19.0 million of cash used to fund increases in accounts receivable and $8.7 million used for other assets. The decrease in cash used by inventory compared to the same period of 2006 was due, in part, to the receipt in the first quarter of 2006 of VetTest slide inventory receipts from our supplier that were deferred from the fourth quarter of 2005, which resulted in an unusually large increase in VetTest slide inventory during the year ended December 31, 2006. 46 Table of Contents Additionally, during 2007, certain inventory levels that grew during the later part of 2006 subsequently decreased due to consumption and sales. These inventory levels had increased during the second half of 2006 in preparation for a supplier production facility transition and to ensure adequate supply of certain instrument components and accessories that were being discontinued by the manufacturers. The increase in cash provided by accounts payable and accrued expenses was due, in part, to higher development costs associated with new products that were launched during the first quarter of 2008; incremental receipts of VetTest slide inventory near the end of 2007; incremental royalties payable due to higher revenue, including revenue from businesses acquired during 2007; and higher deferred rent liabilities, including real estate rental obligations associated with business acquisitions. The increase in cash used to fund accounts receivable was due largely to higher sales during the three months and the year ended December 31, 2007. Cash used by investing activities was $121.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2007, compared to cash used of $40.7 million for the same period of 2006. The increase in cash used by investing activities for 2007, compared to 2006, was largely due to $64.7 million of incremental cash used for business acquisitions and intangible assets, which are described below, and incremental purchases of property and equipment of $32.8 million. These decreases in cash were partly offset by higher net proceeds from investments in 2007 of $4.3 million and the absence of expenditures on land and buildings in 2007 compared to $12.1 million during 2006, primarily for the purchase of our Westbrook, Maine facility. We paid $86.6 million and assumed liabilities, including contingent liabilities and deferred tax liabilities associated with purchase accounting, of $17.9 million to acquire businesses and certain intangible assets that did not comprise businesses during the year ended December 31, 2007. We also paid $3.2 million in relation to businesses acquired in prior years. In January 2007, we acquired substantially all of the assets and assumed certain liabilities of the Critical Care Division of Osmetech plc. The acquired business is based in the United States and develops, designs, manufactures, and distributes point-of-care electrolyte and blood gas analyzers and related consumable products for the human medical and veterinary diagnostics markets. In March 2007, we acquired all of the equity of Vita-Tech Canada Inc. ( Vita-Tech ) and Institut Pourquier SAS ( Pourquier ) in separate transactions. Vita-Tech is the largest provider of reference laboratory testing services to veterinarians in Canada and has operations in Toronto and Montreal, Canada. Pourquier is based in Montpellier, France and develops, designs, manufactures, and distributes production animal diagnostic products. In March and October 2007, we acquired veterinary reference laboratories located in the United States. We also acquired certain assets of other veterinary reference laboratories during the year ended December 31, 2007 that did not comprise businesses. See Note 3 to the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information about our acquisitions of businesses. We paid $65.1 million to purchase fixed assets and $1.1 million to acquire rental instruments sold under recourse during the year ended December 31, 2007. Our total capital expenditures for 2007 included approximately $13 million towards the renovation and expansion of our primary facility in Westbrook, Maine. We preliminarily project additional capital spending of approximately $140 million during 2008 through 2011 to complete this project, with $75 million of the projected spending during 2008. The first phase of this project will provide more efficient manufacturing and research and development facilities. In January 2007, we entered into an unsecured short-term revolving credit facility with a bank in the principal amount of $125.0 million that would have matured on June 30, 2007. On March 30, 2007, we refinanced this short-term facility by entering into an unsecured revolving credit facility with four multinational banks that matures on March 30, 2012 (the Credit Facility ). In February 2008, we increased the aggregate principal amount available under our unsecured revolving credit facility to $200.0 million. The Credit Facility may be used for general corporate purposes, including repurchases of our common stock and business acquisitions. The applicable interest rates generally range from 0.375% to 0.875% above the London interbank rate or the Canadian Dollar-denominated bankers acceptance rate, dependent on our leverage ratio. Under the Credit Facility, we pay quarterly commitment fees of 0.08% to 0.20%, dependent on our leverage ratio, on any unused commitment. The Credit Facility contains financial and other affirmative and negative covenants, as well as customary events of default, that would allow any amounts outstanding under the Credit Facility to be accelerated, or restrict our ability to borrow thereunder, in the event of noncompliance. The financial covenant requires our ratio of debt to earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization, as defined by the agreement, not to exceed 3-to-1. At December 31, 2007, we had $72.2 million outstanding under the Credit Facility. 47 Table of Contents The board of directors has authorized the repurchase of up to 40,000,000 shares of our common stock in the open market or in negotiated transactions. From the inception of the program in August 1999 to December 31, 2007, we repurchased 33,148,000 shares. We believe that the repurchase of our common stock is a favorable investment and we also repurchase to offset the dilutive effect of our employee share-based compensation programs. Repurchases of our common stock may vary depending upon the level of other investing activities and the share price. See Note 15 to the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information about our share repurchases. Other Commitments, Contingencies and Guarantees Under our workers compensation insurance policies for U.S. employees since January 1, 2003, we have retained the first $250,000 in claim liability per incident and aggregate claim liability based on payroll for each year. The insurance company provides insurance for claims above the individual occurrence and aggregate limits. We estimate claim liability based on claims incurred and the estimated ultimate cost to settle the claims. Based on this analysis, we have recognized cumulative expenses of $0.3 million, $1.2 million, $0.5 million, $0.8 million and $0.9 million for claims incurred during the years ended December 31, 2007 through 2003, respectively. Claims incurred during the year ended December 31, 2007 and year ended December 31, 2006 are relatively new and significant additional healthcare and wage indemnification costs could arise from those claims. Our liability for claims incurred during the years ended December 31, 2007 and 2006 could exceed our estimates and we could be liable for up to $2.5 million and $1.0 million, respectively, in excess of the expense we have recognized. For the three years ended on or prior to December 31, 2005, based on our retained claim liability per incident and our aggregate claim liability, our maximum liability at December 31, 2007 is $0.4 million in excess of the amounts deemed probable and previously recognized. In connection with these policies, we have outstanding letters of credit totaling $2.1 million to the insurance companies as security for these claims. We have commitments outstanding at December 31, 2007 for additional purchase price payments of up to $1.7 million in connection with acquisitions of businesses and intangible assets during the current and prior periods, of which $0.8 million is contingent on the achievement by certain acquired businesses of specified milestones. We also have agreed to make additional payments of up to $0.8 million to sellers of certain acquired businesses that are conditional upon those sellers providing future services to IDEXX for specified periods of time. In January 2008, we paid $4.4 million to acquire certain technology licensing rights and agreed to future royalty and milestone payments based on the issuance of a certain patent to the licensor and revenue from products and services incorporating that technology. In October 2005, our former supplier of VetAutoread Hematology Analyzers and consumables sold this business (including the human hematology testing products division) and we simultaneously entered into a new supply agreement for these products with the acquirer of the business. Under this new supply agreement, we received fixed pricing on certain products through December 31, 2020, among other benefits. In partial consideration for this new supply agreement, we paid cash of $2.5 million to the acquirer and guaranteed the acquirer note (the Note ) in the principal amount of $3.5 million given to our former supplier in partial consideration for the business. The acquirer is obligated to pay the Note through quarterly principal and interest payments through 2008 and to pay the remaining balance in 2008. The principal balance of the note that we have guaranteed is $1.7 million at December 31, 2007. We recorded the fair value of the guaranty of $0.5 million and recognized the associated assets as of the effective date of the agreement. At December 31, 2007, we have written off the guaranty liability because our recognized contractual liabilities to the supplier exceed the principal balance of the Note and a legal right of offset exists whereby we may elect to pay to the holder of the Note the amounts otherwise due to the supplier. We are obligated to make a second payment of $1.25 million upon the achievement of certain milestones by the acquirer, which occurred in January 2008, and a third payment of $1.25 million in January 2009. The proceeds of the second payment were used to reduce the Note balance. In February 2008, the acquirer paid the remaining payment under the Note, which released our guaranty. 48 Table of Contents We are contractually obligated to make the following payments in the years below: (in thousands) Total 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 After 2012 Long-term debt obligations (1) $ 7,998 $ 1,091 $ 2,181 $ 2,181 $ 2,545 Operating leases 54,549 9,498 15,731 11,076 18,244 Purchase obligations (2) 262,575 238,991 23,584 Minimum royalty payments 10,926 2,136 3,018 2,932 2,840 Other long-term liabilities (3) 3,621 2,921 700 Total contractual cash obligations $ 339,669 $ 254,637 $ 45,214 $ 16,189 $ 23,629 (1) Long-term debt amounts include interest payments associated with long-term debt. (2) Purchase obligations include agreements to purchase goods or services that are enforceable and legally binding that specify all significant terms, including fixed or minimum quantities, pricing, and approximate timing of purchase transactions. Of this amount, $225.2 million represents amounts committed under purchase orders and $35.4 million represents our minimum purchase obligation under our VetTest supply agreement with Ortho. (3) Other long-term liabilities are liabilities that are reflected on our consolidated balance sheet in this Annual Report on Form 10-K and include warranty obligations and commitments for additional acquisition purchase price payments. These liabilities do not reflect unrecognized tax benefits of $5.1 million as the timing of recognition is uncertain. Refer to Note 11 of the consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2007 included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional discussion on unrecognized tax benefits. 
