CIK: 874766
Company Name: HARTFORD FINANCIAL SERVICES GROUP INC DE
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2008-02-22


Item 7. MANAGEMENT S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS (Dollar amounts in millions, except for per share data, unless otherwise stated) Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations ( MD&A ) addresses the financial condition of The Hartford Financial Services Group, Inc. and its subsidiaries (collectively, The Hartford or the Company ) as of December 31, 2007, compared with December 31, 2006, and its results of operations for each of the three years in the period ended December 31, 2007. This discussion should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and related Notes beginning on page F-1. Certain reclassifications have been made to prior year financial information to conform to the current year presentation. Certain of the statements contained herein are forward-looking statements. These forward-looking statements are made pursuant to the safe harbor provisions of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 and include estimates and assumptions related to economic, competitive and legislative developments. These forward-looking statements are subject to change and uncertainty which are, in many instances, beyond the Company control and have been made based upon management expectations and beliefs concerning future developments and their potential effect upon the Company. There can be no assurance that future developments will be in accordance with management expectations or that the effect of future developments on The Hartford will be those anticipated by management. Actual results could differ materially from those expected by the Company, depending on the outcome of various factors, including, but not limited to, those set forth in Part I, Item 1A, Risk Factors. These factors include: the difficulty in predicting the Company potential exposure for asbestos and environmental claims; the possible occurrence of terrorist attacks; the response of reinsurance companies under reinsurance contracts and the availability, pricing and adequacy of reinsurance to protect the Company against losses; changes in financial and capital markets, including changes in interest rates, credit spreads, equity prices and foreign exchange rates; the inability to effectively mitigate the impact of equity market volatility on the Company financial position and results of operations arising from obligations under annuity product guarantees; the possibility of unfavorable loss development; the incidence and severity of catastrophes, both natural and man-made; stronger than anticipated competitive activity; unfavorable judicial or legislative developments; the potential effect of domestic and foreign regulatory developments, including those which could increase the Company business costs and required capital levels; the possibility of general economic and business conditions that are less favorable than anticipated; the Company ability to distribute its products through distribution channels, both current and future; the uncertain effects of emerging claim and coverage issues; a downgrade in the Company financial strength or credit ratings; the ability of the Company subsidiaries to pay dividends to the Company; the Company ability to adequately price its property and casualty policies; the ability to recover the Company systems and information in the event of a disaster or other unanticipated event; potential for difficulties arising from outsourcing relationships; potential changes in Federal or State tax laws, including changes impacting the availability of the separate account dividend received deduction; losses due to defaults by others; the Company ability to protect its intellectual property and defend against claims of infringement; and other factors described in such forward-looking statements. INDEX Overview 32 Critical Accounting Estimates 33 Consolidated Results of Operations 48 Life 54 Retail 62 Retirement Plans 65 Institutional 67 Individual Life 69 Group Benefits 71 International 73 Other 75 Property & Casualty 76 Total Property & Casualty 99 Ongoing Operations 100 Personal Lines 106 Small Commercial 113 Middle Market 118 Specialty Commercial 123 Other Operations (Including Asbestos and Environmental Claims) 128 Investments 136 Investment Credit Risk 145 Capital Markets Risk Management 155 Capital Resources and Liquidity 164 Impact of New Accounting Standards 170 OVERVIEW The Hartford is a diversified insurance and financial services company with operations dating back to 1810. The Company is headquartered in Connecticut and is organized into two major operations: Life and Property & Casualty, each containing reporting segments. Within the Life and Property & Casualty operations, The Hartford conducts business principally in eleven reporting segments. Corporate primarily includes the Company debt financing and related interest expense, as well as other capital raising activities and purchase accounting adjustments. Life is organized into six reporting segments: Retail Products Group ( Retail ), Retirement Plans, Institutional Solutions Group ( Institutional ), Individual Life, Group Benefits and International. Through Life the Company provides retail and institutional investment products such as variable and fixed annuities, mutual funds, private placement life insurance and retirement plan services, individual life insurance products including variable universal life, universal life, interest sensitive whole life and term life; and group benefit products, such as group life and group disability insurance. In 2007, Life changed its reporting for realized gains and losses, as 32 Table of Contents well as credit risk charges previously allocated between Life Other and each of Life reporting segments. All segment data for prior reporting periods have been adjusted to reflect the current segment reporting. Property & Casualty is organized into five reporting segments: the underwriting segments of Personal Lines, Small Commercial, Middle Market and Specialty Commercial (collectively Ongoing Operations ), and the Other Operations segment. Through Property & Casualty the Company provides a number of coverages, as well as insurance-related services, to businesses throughout the United States, including workers compensation, property, automobile, liability, umbrella, specialty casualty, marine, livestock, fidelity and surety, professional liability and director and officer liability coverages. Property & Casualty also provides automobile, homeowners, and home-based business coverage to individuals throughout the United States, as well as insurance-related services to businesses. In 2007, Property & Casualty changed its reporting segments to reflect the current manner by which its chief operating decision maker views and manages the business. All segment data for prior reporting periods have been adjusted to reflect the current segment reporting. Many of the principal factors that drive the profitability of The Hartford Life and Property & Casualty operations are separate and distinct. Management considers this diversification to be a strength of The Hartford that distinguishes the Company from many of its peers. To present its operations in a more meaningful and organized way, management has included separate overviews within the Life and Property & Casualty sections of the MD&A. For further overview of Life profitability and analysis, see page 54. For further overview of Property & Casualty profitability and analysis, see page 76. CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES The preparation of financial statements, in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America ( U.S. GAAP ), requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates. The Company has identified the following estimates as critical in that they involve a higher degree of judgment and are subject to a significant degree of variability: property and casualty reserves, net of reinsurance; life estimated gross profits used in the valuation and amortization of assets and liabilities associated with variable annuity and other universal life-type contracts; living benefits required to be fair valued; valuation of investments and derivative instruments; evaluation of other-than-temporary impairments on available-for-sale securities; pension and other postretirement benefit obligations; and contingencies relating to corporate litigation and regulatory matters. In developing these estimates management makes subjective and complex judgments that are inherently uncertain and subject to material change as facts and circumstances develop. Although variability is inherent in these estimates, management believes the amounts provided are appropriate based upon the facts available upon compilation of the financial statements. Property and Casualty Reserves, Net of Reinsurance The Hartford establishes property and casualty reserves to provide for the estimated costs of paying claims under insurance policies written by the Company. These reserves include estimates for both claims that have been reported and those that have not yet been reported, and include estimates of all expenses associated with processing and settling these claims. Estimating the ultimate cost of future losses and loss adjustment expenses is an uncertain and complex process. This estimation process is based largely on the assumption that past developments are an appropriate predictor of future events and involves a variety of actuarial techniques that analyze experience, trends and other relevant factors. Reserve estimates can change over time because of unexpected changes in the external environment. Potential external factors include (1) changes in the inflation rate for goods and services related to covered damages such as medical care, hospital care, auto parts, wages and home repair, (2) changes in the general economic environment that could cause unanticipated changes in the claim frequency per unit insured, (3) changes in the litigation environment as evidenced by changes in claimant attorney representation in the claims negotiation and settlement process, (4) changes in the judicial environment regarding the interpretation of policy provisions relating to the determination of coverage and/or the amount of damages awarded for certain types of damages, (5) changes in the social environment regarding the general attitude of juries in the determination of liability and damages, (6) changes in the legislative environment regarding the definition of damages and (7) new types of injuries caused by new types of injurious exposure: past examples include breast implants, lead paint and construction defects. Reserve estimates can also change over time because of changes in internal company operations. Potential internal factors include (1) periodic changes in claims handling procedures, (2) growth in new lines of business where exposure and loss development patterns are not well established or (3) changes in the quality of risk selection in the underwriting process. In the case of assumed reinsurance, all of the above risks apply. In addition, changes in ceding company case reserving and reporting patterns can create additional factors that need to be considered in estimating the reserves. Due to the inherent complexity of the assumptions used, final claim settlements may vary significantly from the present estimates, particularly when those settlements may not occur until well into the future. Through both facultative and treaty reinsurance agreements, the Company cedes a share of the risks it has underwritten to other insurance companies. The Company net reserves for loss and loss adjustment expenses include anticipated recovery from reinsurers on unpaid claims. The estimated amount of the anticipated recovery, or reinsurance recoverable, is net of an allowance for uncollectible reinsurance. Reinsurance recoverables include an estimate of the amount of gross loss and loss adjustment expense reserves that may be ceded under the terms of the reinsurance agreements, including incurred but not reported unpaid losses. The Company calculates its ceded 33 Table of Contents reinsurance projection based on the terms of any applicable facultative and treaty reinsurance, including an estimate of how incurred but not reported losses will ultimately be ceded by reinsurance agreement. Accordingly, the Company estimate of reinsurance recoverables is subject to similar risks and uncertainties as the estimate of the gross reserve for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses. The Company provides an allowance for uncollectible reinsurance, reflecting management best estimate of reinsurance cessions that may be uncollectible in the future due to reinsurers unwillingness or inability to pay. The Company analyzes recent developments in commutation activity between reinsurers and cedants, recent trends in arbitration and litigation outcomes in disputes between reinsurers and cedants and the overall credit quality of the Company reinsurers. Where its contracts permit, the Company secures future claim obligations with various forms of collateral, including irrevocable letters of credit, secured trusts, funds held accounts and group-wide offsets. The allowance for uncollectible reinsurance was $404 as of December 31, 2007, including $267 related to Other Operations and $137 related to Ongoing Operations. Due to the inherent uncertainties as to collection and the length of time before reinsurance recoverables become due, it is possible that future adjustments to the Company reinsurance recoverables, net of the allowance, could be required, which could have a material adverse effect on the Company consolidated results of operations or cash flows in a particular quarter or annual period. The Hartford, like other insurance companies, categorizes and tracks its insurance reserves for its segments by line of business , such as property, auto physical damage, auto liability, commercial multi-peril package business, workers compensation, general liability professional liability and fidelity and surety. Furthermore, The Hartford regularly reviews the appropriateness of reserve levels at the line of business level, taking into consideration the variety of trends that impact the ultimate settlement of claims for the subsets of claims in each particular line of business. In addition, within the Other Operations segment, the Company has reserves for asbestos and environmental ( A&E ) claims. Adjustments to previously established reserves, which may be material, are reflected in the operating results of the period in which the adjustment is determined to be necessary. In the judgment of management, information currently available has been properly considered in the reserves established for losses and loss adjustment expenses. Incurred but not reported ( IBNR ) reserves represent the difference between the estimated ultimate cost of all claims and the actual reported loss and loss adjustment expenses ( reported losses ). Reported losses represent cumulative loss and loss adjustment expenses paid plus case reserves for outstanding reported claims. Company actuaries evaluate the total reserves (IBNR and case reserves) on an accident year basis. An accident year is the calendar year in which a loss is incurred, or, in the case of claims-made policies, the calendar year in which a loss is reported. The following table shows loss and loss adjustment expense reserves by line of business and by reporting segment as of December 31, 2007, net of reinsurance: Personal Small Middle Specialty Ongoing Other Total Lines Commercial Market Commercial Operations Operations P&C Reserve Line of Business Property $ 257 $ 5 $ 54 $ 39 $ 355 $ $ 355 Auto physical damage 32 6 7 11 56 56 Auto liability 1,636 286 285 119 2,326 2,326 Package business 1,088 843 134 2,065 2,065 Workers compensation 6 1,815 2,214 2,115 6,150 6,150 General liability 27 91 865 1,399 2,382 2,382 Professional liability 564 564 564 Fidelity and surety 181 181 181 Assumed reinsurance [1] 724 724 All other non-A&E 1,164 1,164 A&E 3 2 6 4 15 2,249 2,264 Total reserves-net 1,961 3,293 4,274 4,566 14,094 4,137 18,231 Reinsurance and other recoverables 81 177 413 2,317 2,988 934 3,922 Total reserves-gross $ 2,042 $ 3,470 $ 4,687 $ 6,883 $ 17,082 $ 5,071 $ 22,153 [1] These net loss and loss adjustment expense reserves relate to assumed reinsurance that was moved into Other Operations (formerly known as HartRe ). Reserving for non-A&E reserves within Ongoing and Other Operations How non-A&E reserves are set Reserves are set by line of business within the various reporting segments. As indicated in the above table, a single line of business may be written in one or more of the segments. Case reserves are established by a claims handler on each individual claim and are adjusted as new information becomes known during the course of handling the claim. Lines of business for which loss data (e.g., paid losses and case reserves) emerge (i.e., is reported) over a long period of time are referred to as long-tail lines of business. Lines of business for which loss data emerge more quickly are referred to as short-tail lines of business. Within the Company Ongoing Operations, the shortest-tail lines of business are property and auto physical damage. The longest tail lines of business within Ongoing Operations 34 Table of Contents include workers compensation, general liability, and professional liability. Assumed reinsurance, which is within Other Operations, is also long-tail business. For short-tail lines of business, emergence of paid loss and case reserves is credible and likely indicative of ultimate losses. For long-tail lines of business, emergence of paid losses and case reserves is less credible in the early periods and, accordingly, may not be indicative of ultimate losses. An expected loss ratio is used in initially recording the reserves for both short-tail and long-tail lines of business. This expected loss ratio is determined through a review of prior accident years loss ratios and expected changes to earned pricing, loss costs, mix of business, ceded reinsurance and other factors that are expected to impact the loss ratio for the current accident year. For short-tail lines, IBNR for the current accident year is initially recorded as the product of the expected loss ratio for the period, earned premium for the period and the proportion of losses expected to be reported in future calendar periods for the current accident period. For long-tailed lines, IBNR reserves for the current accident year are initially recorded as the product of the expected loss ratio for the period and the earned premium for the period, less reported losses for the period. Company reserving actuaries, who are independent of the business units, regularly review reserves for both current and prior accident years using the most current claim data. These reserve reviews incorporate a variety of actuarial methods and judgments and involve rigorous analysis. Most non-A&E reserves are reviewed fully each quarter, including loss reserves for property, auto physical damage, auto liability, package business, workers compensation, most general liability, professional liability and fidelity and surety. Other non-A&E reserves are reviewed semi-annually (twice per year) or annually. These include, but are not limited to, reserves for losses incurred before 1987, allocated loss adjustment expenses, assumed reinsurance, latent exposures such as construction defects, unallocated loss adjustment expense and all other non-A&E exposures within Other Operations. For reserves that are reviewed semi-annually and annually, management monitors the emergence of paid and reported losses in the intervening quarters to either confirm that its estimate of ultimate losses should not change or, if necessary, perform a reserve review to determine whether the reserve estimate should change. For most lines of business, a variety of actuarial methods are reviewed and the actuaries select methods and specific assumptions appropriate for each line of business based on the current circumstances affecting that line of business. These selections incorporate input, as judged by the reserving actuaries to be appropriate, from claims personnel, pricing actuaries and operating management on reported loss cost trends and other factors that could affect the reserve estimates. The output of the reserve reviews are reserve estimates that are referred to herein as the actuarial indication . The actuarial techniques or methods used primarily include paid and reported loss development, frequency / severity, expected loss ratio and Bornhuetter-Ferguson techniques. Within any one line of business, a variety of techniques are used. Within any one line of business, certain methods are generally given more influence in determining the actuarial indication. The methods that are given more influence vary within a line of business based primarily on the maturity of the accident year, the mix of business and the particular internal and external influences impacting the claims experience or the methods. The following is a discussion of the most common methods used; these methods are not used for every line of business or every accident year within a line of business. Paid Development method . Historical data, organized by accident period and calendar period, is used to develop paid loss development patterns, which are then applied to current paid losses by accident period to estimate ultimate losses. The paid development method is also used to estimate reserves for allocated loss adjustments expenses ( ALAE ). Paid development techniques do not use information about case reserves and, therefore, are not affected by changes in case reserving practices. Paid development techniques can, however, be significantly affected by changes in claim closure patterns. Paid development techniques for longer-tailed lines are generally less useful for more recent accident years since a low percentage of ultimate losses are paid to date in early periods of development and small changes in paid losses can have a large impact on estimated ultimate losses. Reported Development method. Historical data, organized by accident period and calendar period, is used to develop reported loss development patterns, which are then applied to current reported losses by accident period to estimate ultimate losses. The reported losses used in this analysis refer to cumulative paid losses plus case reserves and do not include IBNR. Compared to the paid development technique, the reported development technique has the advantage that a higher percentage of ultimate losses are reflected in reported losses than in cumulative paid losses. The reported development technique estimates only the unreported losses rather than the total unpaid losses. While the reported development technique takes advantage of information contained in the case reserves, estimates determined from this technique are affected by changes in case reserving practices. Both paid and reported development techniques assume that historical development patterns are predictive of future development patterns. Frequency / Severity methods . Historical data is used to develop claim count development patterns and those patterns are applied to the number of current reported claims to estimate ultimate claim counts. Estimated ultimate claim counts are multiplied by an estimated average severity (i.e., an average cost per claim) to calculate estimated ultimate losses. Average severity is estimated by fitting historical severity data to a trend line and making assumptions about how the current environment would affect claim severity. In making assumptions about the current environment, industry data is used where such data is available and appropriate. 35 Table of Contents The advantage of frequency / severity techniques is that frequency estimates are generally easier to predict and external information can be used to supplement internal data in making severity estimates. Expected Loss Ratio method . Loss ratios for prior accident years are used to determine the appropriate expected loss ratio for the current accident year after applying anticipated changes in rates, pricing and loss costs. The current accident year expected loss ratio is multiplied by earned premium to calculate estimated ultimate losses. Expected loss ratio techniques are useful for early periods of maturity on long-tailed lines of business, where very little paid or reported loss information is available. Bornhuetter-Ferguson method . This method is a combination of the expected loss ratio method and the reported development method, where the reported loss development method is given more weight as an accident year matures. Berquist-Sherman method . This method is used in cases where historical development patterns may be inappropriate for use in estimating ultimate losses of recent accident years. Under this method, the pattern of historical reported losses is adjusted for changes in case reserve adequacy and the pattern of historical paid losses is adjusted for changes in claim settlement rates. For all lines of business, variations of the above methods are used. Examples of variation within the paid and reported development methods include: The accident period used may vary (e.g., year, quarter, or month) The Company may analyze the data by coverage (e.g., bodily injury separate from property damage) There may be adjustments for unusual loss activity For ALAE, the Company uses patterns of the relationship between paid ALAE and paid losses. Examples of variation within the frequency /severity methods include: For one sub-set of professional liability business, management estimates frequency, not through historical claim count development, but through an analysis of the securities class actions filed and policy listings For some methods, management projects severity on only open claims In the commercial liability lines, the Company performs the frequency / severity technique only on claims over a certain size For ALAE, the Company analyzes ALAE on claims in suit and associated legal expenses separately from ALAE on other claims. For each line of business, certain methods are given more influence than other methods. The discussion below gives a general indication of which methods are preferred by line of business. Because the actuarial estimates are generated at a much finer level of detail than line of business (e.g., by distribution channel, coverage, accident period), this description should not be assumed to apply to each coverage and accident year within a line of business. Also, as circumstances change, the methods that are given more influence will change. For example, for Personal Lines auto liability claims, reported development techniques are currently given less emphasis in making estimates for recent accident years because case reserving practices have been changing in the recent past. If case reserving practices become more stable, reported development techniques may be given more weight. Property and Auto Physical Damage. These lines are fast-developing and paid and reported development techniques are used. The Company performs and relies primarily on reported development techniques and frequency/severity and Bornhuetter-Ferguson techniques for the most immature accident months. Auto Liability Personal Lines. For auto liability, and bodily injury in particular, the Company performs a greater number of techniques than it does for property and auto physical damage, including paid and reported development methods, frequency/severity approaches, and Berquist-Sherman techniques. The Company generally uses the reported development method for older accident years and the frequency/severity and Berquist-Sherman methods for more recent accident years. Recent periods are heavily influenced by changes in case reserve practices and changing disposal rates; the frequency/severity techniques are not affected as much by these changes and the Berquist-Sherman techniques specifically adjust for changes in case reserve adequacy and claim disposal rates. Auto Liability Commercial Lines, Package Business and Short-Tailed General Liability. As with Personal Lines auto liability, the Company performs a variety of techniques, including the paid and reported development methods and frequency / severity techniques. For older, more mature accident years, management finds that reported development techniques are best. For more recent accident years, management typically prefers frequency / severity techniques that allow it to make assumptions about the frequency of larger claims. Long-Tailed General Liability, Fidelity and Surety and Large Deductible Workers Compensation . For these very long-tailed lines of business, the Company generally relies on the expected loss ratio, Bornhuetter-Ferguson and reported development techniques. Management generally weights these techniques together, relying more heavily on the expected loss ratio method at early ages of development and more on the reported development method as an accident year matures. Workers Compensation . Workers compensation is the Company single largest reserve line of business and management does the largest amount of actuarial analysis on this line of business. Methods performed include paid and reported development, variations on expected loss ratio methods, and an in-depth analysis on the largest states. Paid development patterns are historically very stable in the Company workers compensation business, so paid techniques are preferred for older accident periods. For more recent periods, paid techniques are less predictive of the ultimate liability since such a low percentage of ultimate losses are paid in early periods of 36 Table of Contents development. Accordingly, for more recent accident periods, the Company generally relies more heavily on a state-by-state analysis and the expected loss ratio approach. Professional Liability. Reported and paid loss developments patterns for this line tend to be volatile. Therefore, the Company typically relies on frequency and severity techniques. Assumed Reinsurance and All Other within Other Operations. For these lines, management tends to rely on the reported development techniques. In assumed reinsurance, assumptions are influenced by information gained from claim and underwriting audits. Allocated Loss Adjustment Expenses (ALAE). For some lines of business (e.g., professional liability and assumed reinsurance), ALAE and losses are analyzed together. For most lines of business, however, ALAE is analyzed separately, using paid development and frequency / severity techniques. Unallocated Loss Adjustment Expense (ULAE). ULAE is analyzed separately from loss and ALAE. For most lines of business, incurred ULAE costs to be paid in the future are projected based on an expected cost per claim year and the anticipated claim closure pattern and the ratio of paid ULAE to paid loss. The final step in the reserve review process involves a comprehensive review by senior reserving actuaries who apply their judgment and, in concert with senior management, determine the appropriate level of reserves based on the various information that has been accumulated. Numerous factors are considered in this determination process including, but not limited to, the assessed reliability of key loss trends and assumptions that may be significantly influencing the current actuarial indications, the maturity of the accident year, pertinent trends observed over the recent past, the level of volatility within a particular line of business, and the improvement or deterioration of actuarial indications in the current period as compared to the prior periods. In general, changes are made more quickly to more mature accident years and less volatile lines of business. At year-end 2007, total recorded net reserves excluding asbestos and environmental and excluding the allowance for uncollectible reinsurance were 2.7% higher than the actuarial indication of the reserves. Annually, as part of the statutory reporting requirements, IBNR is allocated to accident year by statutory line of business. This work forms the basis for the loss development table and reserve re-estimates table shown in the Business section. During 2007, there were numerous changes to non-A&E reserve estimates. Among other loss developments in 2007, these changes included a $151 release of workers compensation reserves for accident years 2002 to 2006, a $49 release of general liability loss and loss adjustment expense reserves for accident years 2003 to 2006 and a $79 strengthening of workers compensation and general liability reserves for accident years more than 20 years old. See Reserves within the Property and Casualty MD&A for further discussion of reserve developments. Current trends contributing to reserve uncertainty The Hartford is a multi-line company in the property and casualty business. The Hartford is therefore subject to reserve uncertainty stemming from a number of conditions, including but not limited to those noted above, any of which could be material at any point in time for any segment. Certain issues may become more or less important over time as conditions change. As various market conditions develop, management must assess whether those conditions constitute a long-term trend that should result in a reserving action (i.e., increasing or decreasing the reserve). Within the commercial segments and the Other Operations segment, the Company has exposure to claims asserted for bodily injury as a result of long-term or continuous exposure to harmful products or substances. Examples include, but are not limited to, pharmaceutical products, silica and lead paint. The Company also has exposure to claims from construction defects, where property damage or bodily injury from negligent construction is alleged. The Company also has exposure to claims asserted against religious institutions and other organizations relating to molestation or abuse. Such exposures may involve potentially long latency periods and may implicate coverage in multiple policy periods. These factors make reserves for such claims more uncertain than other bodily injury or property damage claims. With regard to these exposures, the Company is monitoring trends in litigation, the external environment, the similarities to other mass torts and the potential impact on the Company reserves. In Personal Lines, reserving estimates are generally less variable than for the Company other property and casualty segments. This is largely due to the coverages having relatively shorter periods of loss emergence. Estimates, however, can still vary due to a number of factors, including interpretations of frequency and severity trends and their impact on recorded reserve levels. Severity trends can be impacted by changes in internal claim handling and case reserving practices in addition to changes in the external environment. These changes in claim practices increase the uncertainty in the interpretation of case reserve data, which increases the uncertainty in recorded reserve levels. In addition, the introduction of new products has lead to a different mix of business by type of insured than the Company experienced in the past. Beginning in 2004, the Company introduced its Dimensions auto and homeowners product for Agency business and beginning in 2007, the Company introduced its Next Generation Auto product for AARP customers. In general, the Company now has a lower proportion of preferred risks than in the past. Such a change in mix increases the uncertainty of the reserve projections, since historical data and reporting patterns may not be applicable to the new business. In both Small Commercial and Middle Market, workers compensation is the Company single biggest line of business and the line of business with the longest pattern of loss emergence. Reserve estimates for workers compensation are particularly sensitive to assumptions about medical inflation and the changing use of medical care procedures. In addition, changes in state legislative and regulatory environments impact the Company estimates. These changes increase the uncertainty in the application of development patterns. 37 Table of Contents In the Specialty Commercial segment, many lines of insurance, such as excess insurance and large deductible workers compensation insurance are long-tail lines of insurance. For long-tail lines, the period of time between the incidence of the insured loss and either the reporting of the claim to the insurer, the settlement of the claim, or the payment of the claim can be substantial, and in some cases, several years. As a result of this extended period of time for losses to emerge, reserve estimates for these lines are more uncertain (i.e., more variable) than reserve estimates for shorter-tail lines of insurance. Estimating required reserve levels for large deductible workers compensation insurance is further complicated by the uncertainty of whether losses that are attributable to the deductible amount will be paid by the insured; if such losses are not paid by the insured due to financial difficulties, the Company would be contractually liable. Another example of reserve variability relates to reserves for directors and officers insurance. There is potential volatility in the required level of reserves due to the continued uncertainty regarding the number and severity of class action suits, including uncertainty regarding the Company exposure to losses arising from the collapse of the sub-prime mortgage market. Additionally, the Company exposure to losses under directors and officers insurance policies is in excess layers, making estimates of loss more complex. Impact of changes in key assumptions on reserve volatility As stated above, the Company practice is to estimate reserves using a variety of methods, assumptions and data elements. Within its reserve estimation process for reserves other than asbestos and environmental, the Company does not derive statistical loss distributions or confidence levels around its reserve estimate and, as a result, does not have reserve range estimates to disclose. The reserve estimation process includes explicit assumptions about a number of factors in the internal and external environment. Across most lines of business, the most important assumptions are future loss development factors applied to paid or reported losses to date. For most lines, the reported loss development factor is most important. In workers compensation, paid loss development factors are also important. The trend in loss costs is also a key assumption, particularly in the most recent accident years, where loss development factors are less credible. The following discussion includes disclosure of possible variation from current estimates of loss reserves due to a change in certain key assumptions. Each of the impacts described below is estimated individually, without consideration for any correlation among key assumptions or among lines of business. Therefore, it would be inappropriate to take each of the amounts described below and add them together in an attempt to estimate volatility for the Company reserves in total. The estimated variation in reserves due to changes in key assumptions is a reasonable estimate of possible variation that may occur in the future, likely over a period of several calendar years. It is important to note that the variation discussed is not meant to be a worst-case scenario, and therefore, it is possible that future variation may be more than the amounts discussed below. Recorded reserves for workers compensation, net of reinsurance, are $6.2 billion in total for Ongoing Operations. The two most important assumptions for workers compensation reserves are loss development factors and loss cost trends, particularly medical cost inflation. Loss development patterns are dependent on medical cost inflation. Approximately half of the workers compensation net reserves are related to future medical costs. A review of National Council on Compensation Insurance ( NCCI ) data suggests that the annual growth in industry medical claim costs has varied from -2% to +12% since 1991. This data shows that medical inflation has been highly variable over the past decade. Across the entire workers compensation reserve base, a 1 point change in the annual medical inflation rate would change the estimated net reserve by $650, in either direction. Recorded reserves for auto liability, net of reinsurance, are $2.3 billion across all lines, $1.6 billion of which is in Personal Lines. Personal auto liability reserves are shorter-tailed than other lines of business (such as workers compensation) and, therefore, less volatile. However, the size of the reserve base means that future changes in estimates could be material to the Company results of operations in any given period. The key assumption for Personal Lines auto liability is the annual loss cost trend, particularly the severity trend component of loss costs. A review of Insurance Services Office ( ISO ) data suggests that annual growth in industry severity since 1999 has varied from +1% to +6%. The ISO data shows recent severity changes to be in the middle of this range. A 2.5 point change in assumed annual severity is within historical variation for the industry and for the Company. A 2.5 point change in assumed annual severity for the two most recent accident years would change the estimated net reserve need by $90, in either direction. Assumed annual severity for accident years prior to the two most recent accident years is likely to have minimal variability. Recorded reserves for general liability, net of reinsurance, are $2.4 billion across Small Commercial, Middle Market and Specialty Commercial. Reported loss development patterns are a key assumption for this line of business, particularly for more mature accident years. Historically, assumptions on reported loss development patterns have been impacted by, among other things, emergence of new types of claims (e.g., construction defect claims) or a shift in the mixture between smaller, more routine claims and larger, more complex claims. The Company has reviewed the historical variation in reported loss development patterns. If the reported loss development patterns change by 10%, the estimated net reserve need would change by $350, in either direction. A 10% change in reported loss development patterns is within historical variation, as measured by the variation around the average development factors as reported in statutory accident year reports. Similar to general liability, assumed casualty reinsurance is affected by reported loss development pattern assumptions. In addition to the items identified above that would affect both direct and reinsurance liability claim development patterns, there is also an impact to assumed reporting patterns for any changes in claim notification from ceding companies to the reinsurer. Recorded net reserves for HartRe assumed reinsurance business, excluding asbestos and environmental liabilities, within Other Operations were $724 as of December 31, 2007. If the reported loss development patterns underlying the Company net reserves for HartRe assumed casualty reinsurance change by 10%, the estimated net reserve need would change by $250, in either direction. A 10% change in reported loss 38 Table of Contents development patterns is within historical variation, as measured by the variation around the average development factors as reported in statutory accident year reports. Reserving for Asbestos and Environmental Claims within Other Operations How A&E reserves are set The Company continues to receive asbestos and environmental claims. Asbestos claims relate primarily to bodily injuries asserted by people who came in contact with asbestos or products containing asbestos. Environmental claims relate primarily to pollution and related clean-up costs. The Company wrote several different categories of insurance contracts that may cover asbestos and environmental claims. First, the Company wrote primary policies providing the first layer of coverage in an insured liability program. Second, the Company wrote excess policies providing higher layers of coverage for losses that exhaust the limits of underlying coverage. Third, the Company acted as a reinsurer assuming a portion of those risks assumed by other insurers writing primary, excess and reinsurance coverages. Fourth, subsidiaries of the Company participated in the London Market, writing both direct insurance and assumed reinsurance business. In establishing reserves for asbestos claims, the Company evaluates its insureds estimated liabilities for such claims using a ground-up approach. The Company considers a variety of factors, including the jurisdictions where underlying claims have been brought, past, pending and anticipated future claim activity, disease mix, past settlement values of similar claims, dismissal rates, allocated loss adjustment expense, and potential bankruptcy impact. Similarly, a ground-up exposure review approach is used to establish environmental reserves. The Company evaluation of its insureds estimated liabilities for environmental claims involves consideration of several factors, including historical values of similar claims, the number of sites involved, the insureds alleged activities at each site, the alleged environmental damage at each site, the respective shares of liability of potentially responsible parties at each site, the appropriateness and cost of remediation at each site, the nature of governmental enforcement activities at each site, and potential bankruptcy impact. Having evaluated its insureds probable liabilities for asbestos and/or environmental claims, the Company then evaluates its insureds insurance coverage programs for such claims. The Company considers its insureds total available insurance coverage, including the coverage issued by the Company. The Company also considers relevant judicial interpretations of policy language and applicable coverage defenses or determinations, if any. Evaluation of both the insureds estimated liabilities and the Company exposure to the insureds depends heavily on an analysis of the relevant legal issues and litigation environment. This analysis is conducted by the Company lawyers and is subject to applicable privileges. For both asbestos and environmental reserves, the Company also compares its historical direct net loss and expense paid and incurred experience, and net loss and expense paid and incurred experience year by year, to assess any emerging trends, fluctuations or characteristics suggested by the aggregate paid and incurred activity. Once the gross ultimate exposure for indemnity and allocated loss adjustment expense is determined for its insureds by each policy year, the Company calculates its ceded reinsurance projection based on any applicable facultative and treaty reinsurance and the Company experience with reinsurance collections. Uncertainties Regarding Adequacy of Asbestos and Environmental Reserves With regard to both environmental and particularly asbestos claims, significant uncertainty limits the ability of insurers and reinsurers to estimate the ultimate reserves necessary for unpaid losses and related expenses. Traditional actuarial reserving techniques cannot reasonably estimate the ultimate cost of these claims, particularly during periods where theories of law are in flux. The degree of variability of reserve estimates for these exposures is significantly greater than for other more traditional exposures. In particular, the Company believes there is a high degree of uncertainty inherent in the estimation of asbestos loss reserves. In the case of the reserves for asbestos exposures, factors contributing to the high degree of uncertainty include inadequate loss development patterns, plaintiffs expanding theories of liability, the risks inherent in major litigation, and inconsistent emerging legal doctrines. Furthermore, over time, insurers, including the Company, have experienced significant changes in the rate at which asbestos claims are brought, the claims experience of particular insureds, and the value of claims, making predictions of future exposure from past experience uncertain. Plaintiffs and insureds also have sought to use bankruptcy proceedings, including pre-packaged bankruptcies, to accelerate and increase loss payments by insurers. In addition, some policyholders have asserted new classes of claims for coverages to which an aggregate limit of liability may not apply. Further uncertainties include insolvencies of other carriers and unanticipated developments pertaining to the Company ability to recover reinsurance for asbestos and environmental claims. Management believes these issues are not likely to be resolved in the near future. In the case of the reserves for environmental exposures, factors contributing to the high degree of uncertainty include expanding theories of liability and damages; the risks inherent in major litigation; inconsistent decisions concerning the existence and scope of coverage for environmental claims; and uncertainty as to the monetary amount being sought by the claimant from the insured. It is also not possible to predict changes in the legal and legislative environment and their effect on the future development of asbestos and environmental claims. Although potential Federal asbestos-related legislation was considered by the Senate in 2006, it is uncertain 39 Table of Contents whether such legislation will be reconsidered or enacted in the future and, if enacted, what its effect would be on the Company aggregate asbestos liabilities. The reporting pattern for assumed reinsurance claims, including those related to asbestos and environmental claims, is much longer than for direct claims. In many instances, it takes months or years to determine that the policyholder own obligations have been met and how the reinsurance in question may apply to such claims. The delay in reporting reinsurance claims and exposures adds to the uncertainty of estimating the related reserves. Given the factors described above, the Company believes the actuarial tools and other techniques it employs to estimate the ultimate cost of claims for more traditional kinds of insurance exposure are less precise in estimating reserves for its asbestos and environmental exposures. For this reason, the Company relies on exposure-based analysis to estimate the ultimate costs of these claims and regularly evaluates new information in assessing its potential asbestos and environmental exposures. A number of factors affect the variability of estimates for asbestos and environmental reserves including assumptions with respect to the frequency of claims, the average severity of those claims settled with payment, the dismissal rate of claims with no payment and the expense to indemnity ratio. The uncertainty with respect to the underlying reserve assumptions for asbestos and environmental adds a greater degree of variability to these reserve estimates than reserve estimates for more traditional exposures. While this variability is reflected in part in the size of the range of reserves developed by the Company, that range may still not be indicative of the potential variance between the ultimate outcome and the recorded reserves. The recorded net reserves as of December 31, 2007 of $2.26 billion ($2.00 billion and $257 for asbestos and environmental, respectively) is within an estimated range, unadjusted for covariance, of $1.88 billion to $2.60 billion. The process of estimating asbestos and environmental reserves remains subject to a wide variety of uncertainties, which are detailed in Note 12 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. The Company believes that its current asbestos and environmental reserves are reasonable and appropriate. However, analyses of further developments could cause the Company to change its estimates and ranges of its asbestos and environmental reserves, and the effect of these changes could be material to the Company consolidated operating results, financial condition and liquidity. If there are significant developments that affect particular exposures, reinsurance arrangements or the financial condition of particular reinsurers, the Company will make adjustments to its reserves or to the amounts recoverable from its reinsurers. Total Property & Casualty Reserves, Net of Reinsurance In the opinion of management, based upon the known facts and current law, the reserves recorded for the Company property and casualty businesses at December 31, 2007 represent the Company best estimate of its ultimate liability for losses and loss adjustment expenses related to losses covered by policies written by the Company. However, because of the significant uncertainties surrounding reserves, and particularly asbestos exposures, it is possible that management estimate of the ultimate liabilities for these claims may change and that the required adjustment to recorded reserves could exceed the currently recorded reserves by an amount that could be material to the Company results of operations, financial condition and liquidity. 40 Table of Contents Life Estimated Gross Profits Used in the Valuation and Amortization of Assets and Liabilities Associated with Variable Annuity and Other Universal Life-Type Contracts Accounting Policy and Assumptions Life deferred policy acquisition costs asset and present value of future profits ( PVFP ) intangible asset (hereafter, referred to collectively as DAC ) related to investment contracts and universal life-type contracts (including variable annuities) are amortized in the same way, over the estimated life of the contracts acquired using the retrospective deposit method. Under the retrospective deposit method, acquisition costs are amortized in proportion to the present value of estimated gross profits ( EGPs ). EGPs are also used to amortize other assets and liabilities on the Company balance sheet, such as sales inducement assets and unearned revenue reserves ( URR ). Components of EGPs are used to determine reserves for guaranteed minimum death, income and universal life secondary guarantee benefits accounted for and collectively referred to as SOP 03-1 reserves . At December 31, 2007 and 2006, the carrying value of the Company Life DAC asset was $10.5 billion and $9.1 billion, respectively. At December 31, 2007 and 2006, the carrying value of the Company sales inducement asset was $467 and $404, respectively. At December 31, 2007 and 2006, the carrying value of the Company unearned revenue reserve was $1.2 billion and $842, respectively. At December 31, 2007 and 2006, the carrying value of the Company SOP 03-1 reserves were $590 and $517, respectively. The specific breakdown of the most significant balances by segment are as follows: Individual Variable Annuities Individual Variable Annuities U.S. Japan Individual Life December 31, December 31, December 31, December 31, December 31, December 31, 2007 2006 2007 2006 2007 2006 DAC $ 4,982 $ 4,420 $ 1,760 $ 1,430 $ 2,309 $ 2,013 Sales Inducements $ 390 $ 352 $ 8 $ 2 $ 20 $ 8 URR $ 124 $ 98 $ $ $ 816 $ 605 SOP 03-1 reserves $ 527 $ 475 $ 42 $ 35 $ 19 $ 7 For most contracts, the Company estimates gross profits over a 20 year horizon as estimated profits emerging subsequent to year 20 are immaterial. The Company uses other amortization bases for amortizing DAC, such as gross costs (net of reinsurance), as a replacement for EGPs when EGPs are expected to be negative for multiple years of the contract life. Actual gross profits, in a given reporting period, that vary from management initial estimates result in increases or decreases in the rate of amortization, commonly referred to as a true-up , which are recorded in the current period. The true-up recorded for the years ended December 31, 2007, 2006, and 2005 was an increase to amortization of $3, $41, and $18, respectively. Products sold in a particular year are aggregated into cohorts. Future gross profits for each cohort are projected over the estimated lives of the underlying contracts, and are, to a large extent, a function of future account value projections for individual variable annuity products and to a lesser extent for variable universal life products. The projection of future account values requires the use of certain assumptions. The assumptions considered to be important in the projection of future account value, and hence the EGPs, include separate account fund performance, which is impacted by separate account fund mix, less fees assessed against the contract holder account balance, surrender and lapse rates, interest margin, mortality, and hedging costs. The assumptions are developed as part of an annual process and are dependent upon the Company current best estimates of future events. The Company current separate account return assumption is approximately 8% (after fund fees, but before mortality and expense charges) for U.S. products and 5% (after fund fees, but before mortality and expense charges) in aggregate for all Japanese products, but varies from product to product. Beginning in 2007, the Company estimated gross profits using the mean of EGPs derived from a set of stochastic scenarios that have been calibrated to our estimated separate account return as compared to prior years where we used a single deterministic estimation. Estimating future gross profits is a complex process requiring considerable judgment and the forecasting of events well into the future. The estimation process, the underlying assumptions and the resulting EGPs, are evaluated regularly. During the third quarter of 2007 and the fourth quarter of 2006, the Company refined its estimation process for DAC amortization and completed a comprehensive study of assumptions. The Company plans to complete a comprehensive assumption study and refine its estimate of future gross profits during the third quarter of each successive year. Upon completion of an assumption study, the Company revises its assumptions to reflect its current best estimate, thereby changing its estimate of projected account values and the related EGPs in the DAC, sales inducement and unearned revenue reserve amortization models as well as SOP 03-1 reserving models. The DAC asset as well as the sales inducement asset, unearned revenue reserves and SOP 03-1 reserves are adjusted with an offsetting benefit or charge to income to reflect such changes in the period of the revision, a process known as unlocking . An unlock that results in an after-tax benefit generally occurs as a result of actual experience or future expectations of product profitability being favorable compared to previous estimates. An unlock that results in an after-tax charge generally occurs as a result of actual experience or future expectations of product profitability being unfavorable compared to previous estimates. In addition to when a comprehensive assumption study is completed, revisions to best estimate assumptions used to estimate future gross profits are necessary when the EGPs in the Company models fall outside of an independently determined reasonable range of EGPs. The Company performs a quantitative process each quarter to determine the reasonable range of EGPs. This process involves 41 Table of Contents the use of internally developed models, which run a large number of stochastically determined scenarios of separate account fund performance. Incorporated in each scenario are assumptions with respect to lapse rates, mortality and expenses, based on the Company most recent assumption study. These scenarios are run for the Company individual variable annuity businesses in the United States and Japan, the Company Retirement Plans businesses, and for the Company individual variable universal life business and are used to calculate statistically significant ranges of reasonable EGPs. The statistical ranges produced from the stochastic scenarios are compared to the present value of EGPs used in the Company models. If EGPs used in the Company models fall outside of the statistical ranges of reasonable EGPs, an unlock would be necessary. If EGPs used in the Company models fall inside of the statistical ranges of reasonable EGPs, the Company will not solely rely on the results of the quantitative analysis to determine the necessity of an unlock. In addition, the Company considers, on a quarterly basis, other qualitative factors such as market, product, regulatory and policyholder behavior trends and may also revise EGPs if those trends are expected to be significant and were not or could not be included in the statistically significant ranges of reasonable EGPs. As of January 31, 2008, separate account returns have been unfavorable in comparison to expectations from July 31, 2007 to January 31, 2008. Before an unlock was required in the U.S. or Japan, separate account returns would need to be approximately three times as unfavorable in comparison to expectations as they were at January 31, 2008. Unlock and Sensitivity Analysis During the third quarter of 2007 and the fourth quarter of 2006, the Company completed an annual, comprehensive study of assumptions underlying EGPs, resulting in an unlock . The study covered all assumptions, including mortality, lapses, expenses, hedging costs, and separate account returns, in substantially all product lines. The new best estimate assumptions were applied to the current in-force to project future gross profits. The after-tax impact on the Company assets and liabilities as a result of the unlock during the third quarter of 2007 was as follows: Death and DAC Unearned Income Sales Segment and Revenue Benefit Inducement After-tax (charge) benefit PVFP Reserves Reserves [1] Assets Total [2] Retail $ 180 $ (5 ) $ (4 ) $ 9 $ 180 Retirement Plans (9 ) (9 ) Institutional 1 1 Individual Life 24 (8 ) 16 International Japan 16 6 22 Corporate 3 3 Total $ 215 $ (13 ) $ 2 $ 9 $ 213 [1] As a result of the unlock, death benefit reserves, in Retail, decreased $4, pre-tax, offset by a decrease of $10, pre-tax, in reinsurance recoverables. [2] The following were the most significant contributors to the unlock amounts recorded during the third quarter of 2007: Actual separate account returns were above our aggregated estimated return. During the third quarter of 2007, the Company estimated gross profits using the mean of EGPs derived from a set of stochastic scenarios that have been calibrated to our estimated separate account return as compared to prior year where we used a single deterministic estimation. The impact of this change in estimation was a benefit of $13, after-tax, for Japan variable annuities and $20, after-tax, for U.S. variable annuities. As part of its continual enhancement to its assumption setting processes and in connection with its assumption study, the Company included dynamic lapse behavior assumptions. Dynamic lapses reflect that lapse behavior will be different depending upon market movements. The impact of this assumption change along with other base lapse rate changes was an approximate benefit of $40, after-tax, for U.S. variable annuities. As a result of the unlock in the third quarter of 2007, the Company expects an immaterial change to total Company DAC amortization in 2008. 42 Table of Contents The after-tax impact on the Company assets and liabilities as a result of the unlock during the fourth quarter of 2006 was as follows: Death and DAC Unearned Income Sales Segment and Revenue Benefit Inducement After-tax (charge) benefit PVFP Reserves Reserves [1] Assets Total Retail $ (116 ) $ 5 $ (10 ) $ 3 $ (118 ) Retirement Plans 20 20 Individual Life (49 ) 31 (18 ) International Japan 26 27 53 Corporate (13 ) (13 ) Total $ (132 ) $ 36 $ 17 $ 3 $ (76 ) [1] As a result of the unlock, death benefit reserves, in Retail, increased $294, pre-tax, offset by an increase of $279, pre-tax, in reinsurance recoverables. The Company performs sensitivity analyses with respect to the effect certain assumptions have on EGPs and the related DAC, sales inducement, unearned revenue reserve and SOP 03-1 reserve balances. Each of the sensitivities illustrated below are estimated individually, without consideration for any correlation among the key assumptions. Therefore, it would be inappropriate to take each of the sensitivity amounts below and add them together in an attempt to estimate volatility for the respective EGP-related balances in total. The following tables depict the estimated sensitivities for U.S. variable annuities and Japan variable annuities: U.S. Variable Annuities Effect on EGP-related (Increasing separate account returns and decreasing lapse rates generally result in balances if benefits. Decreasing separate account returns and increasing lapse rates generally unlocked result in charges.) (after-tax) [1] If actual separate account returns were 1% above or below our aggregated estimated return $ 15 $30 [3] If actual lapse rates were 1% above or below our estimated aggregate lapse rate $ 10 $25 [2] If we changed our future separate account return rate by 1% from our aggregated estimated future return $ 80 $100 If we changed our future lapse rate by 1% from our estimated aggregate future lapse rate $ 70 $90 [2] Japan Variable Annuities Effect on EGP-related (Increasing separate account returns and decreasing lapse rates generally result in balances if benefits. Decreasing separate account returns and increasing lapse rates generally unlocked result in charges.) (after-tax) [1] If actual separate account returns were 1% above or below our aggregated estimated return $ 1 $5 [4] If actual lapse rates were 1% above or below our estimated aggregate lapse rate $ 1 $5 [2] If we changed our future separate account return rate by 1% from our aggregated estimated future return $ 15 $25 If we changed our future lapse rate by 1% from our estimated aggregate future lapse rate $ 10 $20 [2] [1] These sensitivities are reflective of the results of our 2007 assumption studies. The Company EGP models assume that separate account returns are earned linearly and that lapses occur linearly (except for certain dynamic lapse features) throughout the year. Similarly, the sensitivities assume that differential separate account and lapse rates are linear and parallel and persist for one year from the date of our third quarter unlock, which reflects all in-force and account value data as of July 31, 2007, including the corresponding market levels, allocation of funds, policyholder behavior and actuarial assumptions at that same date. These sensitivities are not perfectly linear nor perfectly symmetrical for increases and decreases and are most accurate for small changes in assumptions. As such, extrapolating results over a wide range will decrease the accuracy of the sensitivities predictive ability. Sensitivity results are, in part, based on the current in-the-moneyness of various guarantees offered with the products. Future market conditions could significantly change the sensitivity results. [2] Sensitivity around lapses assumes lapses increase or decrease consistently across all cohort years and products. [3] The overall actual return generated by the U.S. variable annuity separate accounts is dependent on several factors, including the relative mix of the underlying sub-accounts among bond funds and equity funds as well as equity sector weightings and as a result of the large proportion of separate account assets invested in U.S. equity markets, the Company overall U.S. separate account fund performance has been reasonably correlated to the overall performance of the S&P 500 although no assurance can be provided that this correlation will continue in the future. [4] The overall actual return generated by the Japan variable annuity separate accounts is influenced by the variable annuity products offered in Japan as well as the wide variety of funds offered within the sub-accounts of those products. The actual return is also dependent upon the relative mix of the underlying sub-accounts among the funds. Unlike in the U.S., there is no global index or market that reasonably correlates with the overall Japan actual separate account fund performance. An unlock only revises EGPs to reflect current best estimate assumptions. The Company must also test the aggregate recoverability of the DAC and sales inducement assets by comparing the amounts deferred to the present value of total EGPs. In addition, the Company routinely stress tests its DAC and sales inducement assets for recoverability against severe declines in its separate account assets, which could occur if the equity markets experienced a significant sell-off, as the majority of policyholders funds in the separate accounts is invested in the equity market. As of December 31, 2007, the Company believed U.S. individual and Japan individual variable annuity 43 Table of Contents separate account assets could fall, through a combination of negative market returns, lapses and mortality, by at least 54% and 69%, respectively, before portions of its DAC and sales inducement assets would be unrecoverable. Living Benefits Required to be Fair Valued The Company offers certain variable annuity products with a guaranteed minimum withdrawal benefit ( GMWB ) rider. The Company also offers a guaranteed minimum accumulation benefit ( GMAB ) with a variable annuity product offered in Japan. As of December 31, 2007, the fair value of the GMWB liability is $715. As of December 31, 2007, the fair value of the GMAB is immaterial. The fair value of the GMWB is calculated based on actuarial and capital market assumptions related to the projected cash flows, including benefits and related contract charges, over the lives of the contracts, incorporating expectations concerning policyholder behavior such as lapses, fund selection, resets and withdrawal utilization. Because of the dynamic and complex nature of these cash flows, best estimate assumptions and a Monte Carlo stochastic process involving the generation of thousands of scenarios that assume risk neutral returns consistent with swap rates and a blend of observable implied index volatility levels are used. Estimating these cash flows involves numerous estimates and subjective judgments including those regarding expected market rates of return, market volatility, correlations of market index returns to funds, fund performance, discount rates and policyholder behavior. At each valuation date, the Company assumes expected returns based on risk-free rates as represented by the current LIBOR forward curve rates; forward market volatility assumptions for each underlying index based primarily on a blend of observed market implied volatility data; correlations of market returns across underlying indices based on actual observed market returns and relationships over the ten years preceding the valuation date; regression of fund returns to index returns based on the most recent three years actual results; and current risk-free spot rates as represented by the current LIBOR spot curve to determine the present value of expected future cash flows produced in the stochastic projection process. As GMWB obligations are relatively new in the market place, actual policyholder behavior experience is limited. As a result, estimates of future policyholder behavior are subjective and based on analogous internal and external data. In valuing the embedded derivative, the Company attributes to the derivative a portion of fees collected from the contract holder equal to the present value of future GMWB claims (the Attributed Fees ). Attributed Fees in dollars are determined at the inception of each quarterly cohort by setting the dollars equal to the present value of expected claims. The Attributed Fees, in basis points, are determined by dividing the Attributed Fees in dollars by the present value of account value. The Attributed Fees in basis points are locked-in for each quarterly cohort. Primarily as a result of capital market conditions over the past few years, Attributed Fees for each cohort have historically been significantly below our rider fees, which also vary by product. Capital markets conditions, in particular high equity index volatility and low interest rates, during the last two quarters of 2007, have increased the Attributed Fees for those cohorts to a level close to our rider fees. Capital market assumptions can significantly change the value of GMWB. For example, independent future decreases in equity market returns, future decreases in interest rates and future increases in equity index volatility will all have the effect of increasing the value of the GMWB embedded derivative liability as of December 31, 2007 resulting in a realized loss in net income. Furthermore, changes in policyholder behavior can also significantly change the value of the GMWB. For example, independent future increases in fund mix towards equity based funds vs. bond funds, future increases in withdrawals, future decreasing mortality, future increasing usage of the step-up feature and decreases in lapses will all have the effect of increasing the value of the GMWB embedded derivative liability as of December 31, 2007 resulting in a realized loss in net income. Independent changes in any one of these assumptions moving in the opposite direction will have the effect of decreasing the value of the GMWB embedded derivative liability as of December 31, 2007 resulting in a realized gain in net income. As markets change, mature and evolve and actual policyholder behavior emerges, management continually evaluates the appropriateness of its assumptions. In addition, management regularly evaluates the valuation model, incorporating emerging valuation techniques where appropriate, including drawing on the expertise of market participants and valuation experts. Upon adoption of Statement of Financial Accounting Standard No. 157, Fair Value Measurements , ( SFAS 157 ) the Company expects to revise many of the assumptions used to value GMWB. See Note 1 in Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for a discussion of SFAS 157. Valuation of Investments and Derivative Instruments The Hartford investments in fixed maturities, which include bonds, redeemable preferred stock and commercial paper; and certain equity securities, which include common and non-redeemable preferred stocks, are classified as available-for-sale and accordingly, are carried at fair value with the after-tax difference from cost or amortized cost, as adjusted for the effect of deducting the life and pension policyholders share of the immediate participation guaranteed contracts; and certain life and annuity deferred policy acquisition costs and reserve adjustments, reflected in stockholders equity as a component of AOCI. The equity investments associated with the variable annuity products offered in Japan are recorded at fair value and are classified as trading with changes in fair value recorded in net investment income. Policy loans are carried at outstanding balance, which approximates fair value. Mortgage loans on real estate are recorded at the outstanding principal balance adjusted for amortization of premiums or discounts and net of valuation allowances, if any. Short-term investments are carried at amortized cost, which approximates fair value. Other investments primarily consist of limited partnership and other alternative investments and derivatives instruments. Limited partnerships are reported at their carrying value with the change in carrying value accounted for under the equity method and accordingly the Company share of earnings are included in net investment income. Derivatives instruments are carried at fair value. 44 Table of Contents Valuation of Fixed Maturities The fair value for fixed maturity securities is largely determined by one of three primary pricing methods: third party pricing service market prices, independent broker quotations or pricing matrices. Security pricing is applied using a hierarchy or waterfall approach whereby prices are first sought from third party pricing services with the remaining unpriced securities submitted to independent brokers for prices or lastly priced via a pricing matrix. Typical inputs used by these three pricing methods include, but are not limited to, reported trades, benchmark yields, issuer spreads, bids, offers, and/or estimated cash flows and prepayments speeds. Based on the typical trading volumes and the lack of quoted market prices for fixed maturities, third party pricing services will normally derive the security prices through recent reported trades for identical or similar securities making adjustments through the reporting date based upon available market observable information as outlined above. If there are no recent reported trades, the third party pricing services and brokers may use matrix or model processes to develop a security price where future cash flow expectations are developed based upon collateral performance and discounted at an estimated market rate. Included in the asset-backed securities ( ABS ), collaterized mortgage obligations ( CMOs ), and mortgage-backed securities ( MBS ) pricing are estimates of the rate of future prepayments of principal over the remaining life of the securities. Such estimates are derived based on the characteristics of the underlying structure and prepayment speeds previously experienced at the interest rate levels projected for the underlying collateral. Actual prepayment experience may vary from these estimates. Prices from third party pricing services are often unavailable for securities that are rarely traded or are traded only in privately negotiated transactions. As a result, certain of the Company securities are priced via independent broker quotations which utilize inputs that may be difficult to corroborate with observable market based data. A pricing matrix is used to price securities for which the Company is unable to obtain either a price from a third party pricing service or an independent broker quotation. The pricing matrix begins with current spread levels to determine the market price for the security. The credit spreads, as assigned by a nationally recognized rating agency, incorporate the issuer credit rating and a risk premium, if warranted, due to the issuer industry and the security time to maturity. The issuer-specific yield adjustments, which can be positive or negative, are updated twice annually, as of June 30 and December 31, by an independent third party source and are intended to adjust security prices for issuer-specific factors. The matrix-priced securities at December 31, 2007 and 2006 primarily consisted of non-144A private placements and have an average duration of 4.7 and 5.1 years, respectively. The Company assigns a credit rating to these securities based upon an internal analysis of the issuer financial strength. The Company performs a monthly analysis on the prices received from third parties to assess if the prices represent a reasonable estimate of the fair value. This process involves quantitative and qualitative analysis and is overseen by investment and accounting professionals. Examples of procedures performed include, but are not limited to, initial and on-going review of third party pricing services methodologies, review of pricing statistics and trends, back testing recent trades, and monitoring of trading volumes. As a result of this analysis, if the Company determines there is a more appropriate fair value based upon available market data, the price received from the third party is adjusted accordingly. The following table presents the fair value of fixed maturity securities by pricing source as of December 31, 2007 and 2006. 2007 2006 Percentage Percentage of Total of Total Fair Value Fair Value Fair Value Fair Value Priced via third party pricing services $ 66,771 83.4 % $ 69,023 87.3 % Priced via independent broker quotations 7,561 9.4 % 4,309 5.4 % Priced via matrices 5,426 6.8 % 5,605 7.1 % Priced via other methods 297 0.4 % 137 0.2 % Total $ 80,055 100.0 % $ 79,074 100.0 % The fair value of a financial instrument is the amount at which the instrument could be exchanged in a current transaction between knowledgeable, unrelated willing parties using inputs, including assumptions and estimates, a market participant would utilize. As such, the estimated fair value of a financial instrument may differ significantly from the amount that could be realized if the security was sold immediately. 45 Table of Contents Valuation of Derivative Instruments Derivative instruments are recognized on the consolidated balance sheets at fair value. As of December 31, 2007 and 2006, approximately 89% and 84% of derivatives, respectively, based upon notional values, were priced by valuation models, which utilize independent market data, while the remaining 11% and 16%, respectively, were priced by broker quotations. The derivatives are valued using mid-market level inputs that are predominantly observable in the market place. Inputs used to value derivatives include, but are not limited to, interest swap rates, foreign currency forward and spot rates, credit spreads, interest and equity volatility and equity index levels. The Company performs a monthly analysis on the derivative valuation which includes both quantitative and qualitative analysis. Examples of procedures performed include, but are not limited to, review of pricing statistics and trends, back testing recent trades, analyzing changes in the market environment and monitoring trading volume. This discussion on derivative pricing excludes the GMWB rider and associated reinsurance contracts as well as the embedded derivatives associated with the GMAB product, which are discussed in the preceding paragraphs under Living Benefits Required to be Fair Valued section. Evaluation of Other-Than-Temporary Impairments on Available-for-Sale Securities One of the significant estimates related to available-for-sale securities is the evaluation of investments for other-than-temporary impairments. If a decline in the fair value of an available-for-sale security is judged to be other-than-temporary, a charge is recorded in net realized capital losses equal to the difference between the fair value and cost or amortized cost basis of the security. In addition, for securities expected to be sold, an other-than-temporary impairment charge is recognized if the Company does not expect the fair value of a security to recover to cost or amortized cost prior to the expected date of sale. The fair value of the other-than-temporarily impaired investment becomes its new cost basis. For fixed maturities, the Company accretes the new cost basis to par or to the estimated future value over the expected remaining life of the security by adjusting the security yields. The evaluation of impairments is a quantitative and qualitative process, which is subject to risks and uncertainties and is intended to determine whether declines in the fair value of investments should be recognized in current period earnings. The risks and uncertainties include changes in general economic conditions, the issuer financial condition or near term recovery prospects, the effects of changes in interest rates or credit spreads and the recovery period. The Company has a security monitoring process overseen by a committee of investment and accounting professionals ( the committee ) that identifies securities that, due to certain characteristics, as described below, are subjected to an enhanced analysis on a quarterly basis. Based on this evaluation, for the year ended December 31, 2007, the Company concluded $483 of unrealized losses were other-than-temporarily impaired and as of December 31, 2007, the Company unrealized losses for fixed maturity and available-for-sale equity securities of $2.8 billion, were temporarily impaired. Securities not subject to Emerging Issues Task Force ( EITF ) Issue No. 99-20, Recognition of Interest Income and Impairment on Purchased Beneficial Interests and Beneficial Interests That Continued to Be Held by a Transferor in Securitized Financial Assets ( non-EITF Issue No. 99-20 securities ) that are in an unrealized loss position, are reviewed at least quarterly to determine if an other-than-temporary impairment is present based on certain quantitative and qualitative factors. The primary factors considered in evaluating whether a decline in value for non-EITF Issue No. 99-20 securities is other-than-temporary include: (a) the length of time and the extent to which the fair value has been or is expected to be less than cost or amortized cost, (b) the financial condition, credit rating and near-term prospects of the issuer, (c) whether the debtor is current on contractually obligated interest and principal payments and (d) the intent and ability of the Company to retain the investment for a period of time sufficient to allow for recovery. For certain securitized financial assets with contractual cash flows including ABS, EITF Issue No. 99-20 requires the Company to periodically update its best estimate of cash flows over the life of the security. If the fair value of a securitized financial asset is less than its cost or amortized cost and there has been a decrease in the present value of the estimated cash flows since the last revised estimate, considering both timing and amount, an other-than-temporary impairment charge is recognized. The Company also considers its intent and ability to retain a temporarily depressed security until recovery. Estimating future cash flows is a quantitative and qualitative process that incorporates information received from third party sources along with certain internal assumptions and judgments regarding the future performance of the underlying collateral. In addition, projections of expected future cash flows may change based upon new information regarding the performance of the underlying collateral. Each quarter, during this analysis, the Company asserts its intent and ability to retain until recovery those securities judged to be temporarily impaired. Once identified, these securities are systematically restricted from trading unless approved by the committee. The committee will only authorize the sale of these securities based on predefined criteria that relate to events that could not have been foreseen. Examples of the criteria include, but are not limited to, the deterioration in the issuer creditworthiness, a change in regulatory requirements or a major business combination or major disposition. Pension and Other Postretirement Benefit Obligations The Company maintains a U.S. qualified defined benefit pension plan (the Plan ) that covers substantially all employees, as well as unfunded excess plans to provide benefits in excess of amounts permitted to be paid to participants of the Plan under the provisions of the Internal Revenue Code. The Company has also entered into individual retirement agreements with certain retired directors providing for unfunded supplemental pension benefits. In addition, the Company provides certain health care and life insurance benefits for eligible retired employees. The Company maintains international plans which represent an immaterial percentage of total pension assets, liabilities and expense and, for reporting purposes, are combined with domestic plans. 46 Table of Contents Pursuant to accounting principles related to the Company pension and other postretirement obligations to employees under its various benefit plans, the Company is required to make a significant number of assumptions in order to calculate the related liabilities and expenses each period. The two economic assumptions that have the most impact on pension and other postretirement expense are the discount rate and the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets. In determining the discount rate assumption, the Company utilizes a discounted cash flow analysis of the Company pension and other postretirement obligations, currently available market and industry data and consultation with its plan actuaries. The yield curve utilized in the cash flow analysis is comprised of bonds rated Aa or higher with maturities primarily between zero and thirty years. Based on all available information, it was determined that 6.25% was the appropriate discount rate as of December 31, 2007 to calculate the Company benefit liability. Accordingly, the 6.25% discount rate will also be used to determine the Company 2008 pension and other postretirement expense. At December 31, 2006, the discount rate was 5.75%. The Company determines the expected long-term rate of return assumption based on an analysis of the Plan portfolio historical compound rates of return since 1979 (the earliest date for which comparable portfolio data is available) and over rolling 5 year and 10 year periods, balanced along with future long-term return expectations that generally anticipate an investment mix of 60% fixed income securities, 20% equity securities and 20% alternative assets. The Company selected these periods, as well as shorter durations, to assess the portfolio volatility, duration and total returns as they relate to pension obligation characteristics, which are influenced by the Company workforce demographics. In addition, the Company also applies market return assumptions, utilized in Life DAC analysis, to an investment mix that generally anticipates 60% fixed income securities, 20% equity securities and 20% alternative assets to derive an expected long-term rate of return. Based upon this analysis, the portfolio historical rates of return and management outlook with respect to market returns and the planned asset mix, management adjusted the long-term rate of return assumption to 7.3% as of December 31, 2007. This assumption is used to determine the Company 2008 expense. The long-term rate of return assumption at December 31, 2006 was 8.0%. To illustrate the impact of these assumptions on annual pension and other postretirement expense for 2008 and going forward, a 25 basis point change in the discount rate will increase/decrease pension and other postretirement expense by approximately $16 and a 25 basis point change in the long-term asset return assumption will increase/decrease pension and other postretirement expense by approximately $9. Contingencies Relating to Corporate Litigation and Regulatory Matters Management follows the requirements of SFAS No. 5 Accounting for Contingencies . This statement requires management to evaluate each contingent matter separately. A loss is recorded if probable and reasonably estimable. Management establishes reserves for these contingencies at its best estimate , or, if no one number within the range of possible losses is more probable than any other, the Company records an estimated reserve at the low end of the range of losses. The Company has a quarterly monitoring process involving legal and accounting professionals. Legal personnel first identify outstanding corporate litigation and regulatory matters posing a reasonable possibility of loss. These matters are then jointly reviewed by accounting and legal personnel to evaluate the facts and changes since the last review in order to determine if a provision for loss should be recorded or adjusted, the amount that should be recorded, and the appropriate disclosure. The outcomes of certain contingencies currently being evaluated by the Company, which relate to corporate litigation and regulatory matters, are inherently difficult to predict, and the reserves that have been established for the estimated settlement amounts are subject to significant changes. In view of the uncertainties regarding the outcome of these matters, as well as the tax-deductibility of payments, it is possible that the ultimate cost to the Company of these matters could exceed the reserve by an amount that would have a material adverse effect on the Company consolidated results of operations or cash flows in a particular quarterly or annual period. 47 Table of Contents CONSOLIDATED RESULTS OF OPERATIONS For the Years Ended December 31, Operating Summary 2007 2006 2005 Earned premiums $ 15,619 $ 15,023 $ 14,359 Fee income 5,436 4,739 4,012 Net investment income Securities available-for-sale and other 5,214 4,691 4,384 Equity securities held for trading [1] 145 1,824 3,847 Total net investment income 5,359 6,515 8,231 Other revenues 496 474 464 Net realized capital gains (losses) (994 ) (251 ) 17 Total revenues 25,916 26,500 27,083 Benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses [1] 14,064 15,042 16,776 Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs and present value of future profits 2,989 3,558 3,169 Insurance operating costs and expenses 3,894 3,252 3,227 Interest expense 263 277 252 Other expenses 701 769 674 Total benefits, losses and expenses 21,911 22,898 24,098 Income before income taxes 4,005 3,602 2,985 Income tax expense 1,056 857 711 Net income $ 2,949 $ 2,745 $ 2,274 [1] Includes investment income and mark-to-market effects of equity securities held for trading supporting the international variable annuity business, which are classified in net investment income with corresponding amounts credited to policyholders within benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses. Net Income (Loss) by Operation and Life Segment 2007 2006 2005 Life Retail $ 812 $ 536 $ 595 Retirement Plans 61 101 82 Institutional 17 78 115 Individual Life 182 150 173 Group Benefits 315 298 266 International 223 231 75 Other (52 ) 47 (102 ) Total Life 1,558 1,441 1,204 Property & Casualty Ongoing Operations 1,477 1,554 1,165 Other Operations 30 (35 ) 71 Total Property & Casualty 1,507 1,519 1,236 Corporate (116 ) (215 ) (166 ) Net income $ 2,949 $ 2,745 $ 2,274 Ongoing Operations Underwriting Results by Segment 2007 2006 2005 Personal Lines $ 322 $ 429 $ 460 Small Commercial 508 422 232 Middle Market 144 207 163 Specialty Commercial (5 ) 53 (164 ) Total Ongoing Operations $ 969 $ 1,111 $ 691 48 Table of Contents Operating Results Year ended December 31, 2007 compared to the year ended December 31, 2006 Net income increased primarily due to increases in Life of $117 for the year ended December 31, 2007 compared to the year ended December 31, 2006. Additionally, Property & Casualty net income decreased $12 for the year ended December 31, 2007 compared to the year ended December 31, 2006. Also included in the year ended December 31, 2007 is an increase in reserve for regulatory matters of $30, after-tax, of which $21 and $9 relates to Life and Property & Casualty, respectively. The increase in Life net income was due to the following: The DAC unlock benefit of $210 recorded in the third quarter of 2007. Increased income on asset growth in the variable annuity, mutual fund, retirement and institutional businesses. Increased net investment income, primarily due to strong partnership income. Partially offsetting the increase in Life net income were the following: Increased non-deferrable individual annuity asset based commissions. Unfavorable mortality in Individual Life. Increased DAC amortization in Group Benefits due to the adoption of Statement of Position 05-1, Accounting by Insurance Enterprises for Deferred Acquisition Costs in Connection with Modifications or Exchanges of Insurance Contracts ( SOP 05-1 ). During the first quarter of 2006, the Company achieved favorable settlements in several cases brought against the Company by policyholders regarding their purchase of broad-based leveraged corporate owned life insurance ( leveraged COLI ) policies in the early to mid-1990s and therefore, released a reserve for these matters of $34, after-tax. Realized losses increased for the year ended December 31, 2007 as compared to the comparable prior year periods primarily due to net losses on GMWB derivatives and impairments. Property & Casualty net income decreased by $12 for the year ended December 31, 2007. Ongoing Operations net income decreased by $77 for the year while Other Operations improved its results by $65, primarily due to a reduction in unfavorable loss reserve development. Ongoing Operations net income decreased by $77, primarily due to a $92 after-tax decrease in underwriting results and a change from net realized capital gains of $29, after-tax, in 2006 to net realized capital losses of $104, after-tax, in 2007. The decrease in underwriting results and the change to net realized capital losses was partially offset by a $150 after-tax increase in net investment income. The decrease in underwriting results was primarily driven by an increase in the loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development and an increase in insurance and operating costs and dividends, partially offset by a reduction in prior accident year reserves for workers compensation business. Other Operations reported net income of $30 in 2007 compared to a net loss of $35 in 2006. The improvement in results was primarily due to a decrease in unfavorable prior accident year reserve development, partially offset by a change from net realized gains in 2006 to net realized losses in 2007 and a decrease in net investment income. Year ended December 31, 2006 compared to the year ended December 31, 2005 Net income increased primarily due to increases in Property & Casualty of $283 and in Life of $237 for the year ended December 31, 2006 compared to the year ended December 31, 2005. Property & Casualty net income increased $283, as a result of a $389 increase in Ongoing Operations net income, partially offset by a decrease in Other Operations results from net income of $71 in 2005 to a net loss of $35 in 2006. Ongoing Operations net income increased due to increases in underwriting results and net investment income, partially offset by a decrease in net realized capital gains. The increase in Ongoing Operations underwriting results was principally due to lower current accident year catastrophe losses, lower insurance operating costs and expenses due to a change in estimated Florida Citizens assessments, a change to net favorable prior accident year loss development and the effect of catastrophe treaty reinstatement premium recorded as a reduction of earned premium in 2005. The net loss in Other Operations was primarily a result of prior year reserve development of $243, pre-tax, recorded in 2006, resulting from the agreement with Equitas and the Company evaluation of the reinsurance recoverables and allowance for uncollectible reinsurance associated with older, long-term casualty liabilities. Life net income increased $237 primarily due to growth in assets under management resulting from market growth and strong sales along with higher earned premiums. Also contributing to Life increased net income were the following: During 2006, the Company achieved favorable settlements in several cases brought against the Company by policyholders regarding their purchase of broad-based leveraged corporate owned life insurance policies in the early to mid-1990s. The Company reduced its estimate of the ultimate cost of these cases in 2006. This reserve reduction resulted in an after-tax benefit of $34. A charge of $102, after-tax, recorded in 2005 in Life to reserve for investigations related to market timing by the SEC and New York Attorney General Office, directed brokerage by the SEC and single premium group annuities by the New York Attorney General Office and the Connecticut Attorney General Office. 49 Table of Contents During 2005, the Company recorded an after-tax expense of $46, related to the termination of a provision of an agreement with a mutual fund distribution partner of the Company retail mutual funds. Partially offsetting the increase in Life net income was a $63, after-tax, charge related to the unlock. See Unlock and Sensitivity Analysis within the Critical Accounting Estimates section of the MD&A for further information on the unlock. Net Realized Capital Gains and Losses See Investment Results in the Investments section and the Realized Capital Gains and Losses by Segment table within the Life section of the MD&A. Income Taxes The effective tax rate for 2007, 2006 and 2005 was 26%, 24% and 24%, respectively. The principal causes of the difference between the effective rate and the U.S. statutory rate of 35% for 2007, 2006 and 2005 were tax-exempt interest earned on invested assets and the separate account dividends received deduction ( DRD ). Income taxes paid in 2007, 2006 and 2005 were $451, $179 and $447, respectively. For additional information, see Note 13 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. The separate account DRD is estimated for the current year using information from the prior year-end, adjusted for current year equity market performance. The estimated DRD is generally updated in the third quarter for the provision-to-filed-return adjustments, and in the fourth quarter based on current year ultimate mutual fund distributions and fee income from the Company variable insurance products. The actual current year DRD can vary from estimates based on, but not limited to, changes in eligible dividends received by the mutual funds, amounts of distributions from these mutual funds, amounts of short-term capital gains at the mutual fund level and the Company taxable income before the DRD. The Company recorded benefits of $155, $174 and $184 related to the separate account DRD in the years ended December 31, 2007, December 31, 2006 and December 31, 2005, respectively. The 2007 benefit included a tax of $1 related to a true-up of the prior year tax return, the 2006 benefit included a benefit of $6 related to true-ups of prior years tax returns and the 2005 benefit included a benefit of $3 related to a true-up of the prior year tax return. In Revenue Ruling 2007-61, issued on September 25, 2007, the IRS announced its intention to issue regulations with respect to certain computational aspects of DRD on separate account assets held in connection with variable annuity contracts. Revenue Ruling 2007-61 suspended Revenue Ruling 2007-54, issued in August 2007 that purported to change accepted industry and IRS interpretations of the statutes governing these computational questions. Any regulations that the IRS ultimately proposes for issuance in this area will be subject to public notice and comment, at which time insurance companies and other members of the public will have the opportunity to raise legal and practical questions about the content, scope and application of such regulations. As a result, the ultimate timing and substance of any such regulations are unknown, but they could result in the elimination of some or all of the separate account DRD tax benefit that the Company receives. Management believes that it is highly likely that any such regulations would apply prospectively only. The Company receives a foreign tax credit ( FTC ) against its U.S. tax liability for foreign taxes paid by the Company including payments from its separate account assets. The separate account FTC is estimated for the current year using information from the most recent filed return, adjusted for the change in the allocation of separate account investments to the international equity markets during the current year. The actual current year FTC can vary from the estimates due to actual FTCs passed through by the mutual funds. The Company recorded benefits of $11 and $17 related to separate account FTC in the years ended December 31, 2007 and December 31, 2006, respectively. These amounts included benefits related to true-ups of prior years tax returns of $0 and $7 in 2007 and 2006, respectively. The Company unrecognized tax benefits increased by $68 during 2007 as a result of tax positions taken on the Company 2006 tax return and expected to be taken on its 2007 tax return, bringing the total unrecognized tax benefits to $76 as of December 31, 2007. This entire amount, if it were recognized, would affect the effective tax rate. 50 Table of Contents Earnings Per Common Share The following table represents earnings per common share data for the past three years: 2007 2006 2005 Basic earnings per share $ 9.32 $ 8.89 $ 7.63 Diluted earnings per share $ 9.24 $ 8.69 $ 7.44 Weighted average common shares outstanding (basic) 316.3 308.8 298.0 Weighted average common shares outstanding and dilutive potential common shares (diluted) 319.1 315.9 305.6 Outlooks The Hartford provides projections and other forward-looking information in the Outlook sections within MD&A. The Outlook sections contain many forward-looking statements, particularly relating to the Company future financial performance. These forward-looking statements are estimates based on information currently available to the Company, are made pursuant to the safe harbor provisions of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 and are subject to the precautionary statements set forth in the introduction to MD&A above. Actual results are likely to differ materially from those forecast by the Company, depending on the outcome of various factors, including, but not limited to, those set forth in each Outlook section and in Item 1A, Risk Factors. Outlook Life Management believes the market for retirement products continues to expand as individuals increasingly save and plan for retirement. Demographic trends suggest that as the baby boom generation matures, a significant portion of the United States population will allocate a greater percentage of their disposable incomes to saving for their retirement years due to uncertainty surrounding the Social Security system and increases in average life expectancy. Competition continues to be strong in the variable annuities market as the focus on guaranteed lifetime income has caused most major variable annuity writers to upgrade their suite of living benefits. The company is committed to maintaining a competitive variable annuity product line and intends to refresh its suite of living benefits in May 2008. The retail mutual fund business has seen a substantial increase in net sales and assets over the past year as a result of focused wholesaling efforts as well as strong investment performance. Net sales can vary significantly depending on market conditions. As this business continues to evolve, success will be driven by diversifying net sales across the mutual fund platform, delivering superior investment performance and creating new investment solutions for current and future mutual fund shareholders. The future profitability of the Retirement Plans segment will depend on Life ability to increase assets under management across all businesses, achieve scale in areas with a high degree of fixed costs and maintain its investment spread earnings on the general account products sold largely in the 403(b)/457 business. During December 2007, the Company announced three acquisitions. Disciplined expense management will continue to be a focus; however, as Life looks to expand its reach in these markets, additional investments in service and technology will occur. The Institutional Investment Products ( IIP ) markets are highly competitive from a pricing perspective, and a small number of cases often account for a significant portion of deposits, therefore the Company may not be able to sustain the level of assets under management growth attained in 2007. The Company success depends in part on the level of credited interest rates and the Company credit rating. The focus of the PPLI business is variable PPLI products to fund non-qualified benefits or other post employment benefit liabilities. PPLI has experienced a surge in marketplace activity due to COLI Best Practices enacted as part of the Pension Protection Act of 2006. This act has clarified the prior legislative uncertainty relating to insurable interest under COLI policies, potentially increasing future demand in corporate owned life insurance. The market served by PPLI continues to be subject to extensive legal and regulatory scrutiny that can affect this business. Individual Life continues to expand its core distribution model of sales through financial advisors and banks, while also pursuing growth opportunities through other distribution sources such as life brokerage. In its core channels, the Company is looking to broaden its sales system and internal wholesaling, take advantage of cross selling opportunities and extend its penetration in the private wealth management services areas. Variable universal life mix remained strong during the year ended December 31, 2007. Future sales will be driven by the Company management of current distribution relationships and development of new sources of distribution while offering competitive and innovative new products and product features. Individual Life accepts and maintains, for risk management purposes, up to $10 in risk per any one life. Individual Life uses reinsurance where appropriate to mitigate earnings volatility; however, death claim experience may lead to periodic short-term earnings volatility. Individual Life continues to face uncertainty surrounding estate tax legislation, aggressive competition from other life insurance providers, reduced availability and higher price of reinsurance, and the current regulatory environment related to reserving for universal life products with no-lapse guarantees. These risks may have a negative impact on Individual Life future earnings. 51 Table of Contents Management is committed to selling competitively priced Group Benefits products that meet the Company internal rate of return guidelines and as a result, sales may fluctuate based on the competitive pricing environment in the marketplace. In 2007, the Company generated premium growth due to the increased scale of the group life and disability operations. However, fully insured on-going sales, excluding buyouts declined primarily due to fewer large national account sales, and the small case competitive environment remained intense. In addition, there was an anticipated reduction in association life sales from an unusually high prior year period. The Company also completed a renewal rights transaction associated with its medical stop loss business during the second quarter of 2007. The Company anticipates relatively stable loss ratios and expense ratios based on underlying trends in the in-force business and disciplined new business and renewal underwriting. Despite the current market conditions, including rising medical costs, the changing regulatory environment and cost containment pressure on employers, the Company continues to leverage its strength in claim practices risk management, service and distribution, enabling the Company to capitalize on market opportunities. Additionally, employees continue to look to the workplace for a broader and ever expanding array of insurance products. As employers design benefit strategies to attract and retain employees, while attempting to control their benefit costs, management believes that the need for the Company products will continue to expand. This combined with the significant number of employees who currently do not have coverage or adequate levels of coverage, creates opportunities for our products and services. Management continues to be optimistic about growth potential of the retirement savings market in Japan. Several trends such as an aging population, longer life expectancies and declining birth rate leading to a smaller number of younger workers to support each retiree have resulted in greater need for an individual to plan and adequately fund retirement savings. Competition has continued to increase in the Japanese market as the most significant competition the result of the strengthening of domestic competitors. This competition has resulted in changes in key distribution relationships that have negatively impacted current year deposits and could potentially impact future deposits. Deposits in 2007 were also negatively impacted by new financial regulations and laws that affect distribution. The Company continues to focus its efforts on strengthening our distribution relationships and improving our wholesaling and servicing efforts. In addition, the Company continues to evaluate product designs that meet customers needs while maintaining prudent risk management. In February 2007, Life introduced a new variable annuity product called 3 Win to complement its existing variable annuity product offerings in Japan. The new product has been favorably received by the market with the new product accounting for 42% of Japan sales for the year ended December 31, 2007. The success of the Company enhanced product offerings, including those to be launched in 2008, will ultimately be based on customer acceptance in an increasingly competitive environment. 52 Table of Contents Property & Casualty In 2008, management expects written premium growth to be flat to 3% higher, primarily driven by an increase in Personal Lines and Small Commercial, partially offset by an expected decline in Middle Market. The Personal Lines segment is expected to deliver written premium growth of 2% to 5% in 2008, including growth from both AARP and Agency. The Company expects personal auto written premium to increase 3% to 6% and homeowners written premium to be flat to 3% higher. Management expects that growth from Agency business will be largely driven by appointing more agents and increasing the flow of new business from recently appointed agents and growth in AARP business will be largely driven by continued direct marketing to AARP members and an expansion of underwriting appetite through the continued roll-out of the Next Gen Auto product. Within Small Commercial, management expects written premium in 2008 to be flat to 3% higher, primarily driven by increasing the flow of new business from agents, selectively expanding its underwriting appetite, refining pricing models and upgrading product features. Management expects that 2008 written premium for Middle Market will be 1% to 4% lower as the Company takes a disciplined approach to evaluating and pricing risks in the face of declines in written pricing. Contributing to the expected decline in Middle Market written premium is the effect of state-mandated rate reductions in workers compensation and increased competition in specific geographic markets and lines. Within Specialty Commercial, management expects written premium to be flat to 3% higher, primarily driven by an increase in professional liability, fidelity and surety written premium, partially offset by a decrease in property written premium. Market conditions in the commercial lines industry continue to be soft with written pricing likely to decline further in 2008, more so on the larger accounts. While carriers in the personal lines industry will continue to compete on price, management expects that pricing will firm a bit in 2008 as combined ratios have risen in the past couple of years and eroded profitability. For the Company, written pricing in 2007 was flat in auto and increased in homeowners. Written pricing increases in homeowners were due largely to higher insured property values and higher insurance-to-value. Written pricing declined in the Company Small Commercial and Middle Market segments during 2007 with the largest written pricing decreases on commercial auto, marine and Middle Market workers compensation insurance. Excluding catastrophes and prior accident year development, underwriting margins will likely continue to decline in 2008 due to an increase in non-catastrophe property loss costs in some lines of business, a decrease in earned pricing and an increase in insurance operating costs and expenses, partially offset by a slightly lower expected loss and loss adjustment expense ratio on workers compensation business and a decrease in policyholder dividends. Management expects that an increase in non-catastrophe property claim severity will be partially offset by favorable frequency. Reflecting favorable trends in workers compensation loss costs in recent accident years, management expects a slightly lower loss and loss adjustment expense ratio for workers compensation claims in the 2008 accident year, although the improvement, if any, depends on continued favorable frequency. Due to the earned pricing and loss cost trends, management expects that, in 2008, the loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development will increase in Personal Lines and Specialty Commercial, remain relatively flat in Middle Market and may decrease slightly in Small Commercial. Current accident year catastrophe losses in 2007, at 1.7 percent of Ongoing Operations earned premium, were lower than the long-term historical average. While catastrophe losses vary significantly from year to year and are unpredictable, management has assumed that catastrophe losses in 2008 will be closer to 3% to 3.5% of earned premium. Despite a mild hurricane season and a relatively low level of catastrophe losses in 2007, the Company will continue to manage its exposure to catastrophe losses through the ongoing assessment of its risk, disciplined underwriting and the use of reinsurance and other risk transfer alternatives, as appropriate. As of January 1, 2008, the Company retention under its principal property catastrophe reinsurance program remained at $250 per catastrophe event. With the January 1, 2008 renewal, the cost of the company principal property catastrophe reinsurance program decreased modestly. The expense ratio is expected to increase in 2008, in part, due to a lower expected earned premium in Middle Market, an increase in the cost of sales and service operations and investments in technology to support future growth. The policyholder dividend ratio was unusually high in 2007 due to the accrual of $25 in dividends due to certain workers compensation policyholders as a result of underwriting profits. (See the Property and Casualty MD&A section for further discussion.) Driven primarily by an expected increase in loss costs and underwriting expenses, the Company expects an Ongoing Operations combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development of between 90.0 and 93.0, compared to 90.5 in 2007. Likewise, Property & Casualty operating cash flow is expected to be less favorable than in 2007, although still very positive. Management expects a modest increase in net investment income in 2008 primarily driven by net underwriting cash inflows, as the high level of partnership and hedge fund income recorded in 2007 is not expected to recur in 2008 and the effect of net underwriting cash inflows will likely be partially offset by a lower investment yield. Based upon current market forward interest rate expectations and moderating partnership income towards the end of 2007, management expects the after-tax investment yield for Property & Casualty to be about 4.0% in 2008, a decline from the after-tax yield of 4.4% in 2007. The Other Operations segment will continue to manage the discontinued operations of the Company as well as claims (and associated reserves) related to asbestos, environmental and other exposures. The Company will continue to review various components of all of its reserves on a regular basis. 53 Table of Contents LIFE Executive Overview Life provides retail and institutional investment products such as variable and fixed annuities, mutual funds, PPLI, and retirement plan services, individual life insurance and group benefit products, such as group life and group disability insurance. In 2007, Life changed its reporting for realized gains and losses, as well as credit risk charges previously allocated between Life Other and each of Life reporting segments. All segment data for prior reporting periods have been adjusted to reflect the current segment reporting. Retail offers individual variable and fixed market value adjusted ( MVA ) annuities, retail mutual funds, 529 college savings plans. Canadian and offshore investment products. Retirement Plans offers retirement plan products and services to corporations and municipalities under Section 401(k), 403(b) and 457 plans. Institutional primarily offers institutional investment products ( IIP ), including stable value products (which includes investor notes) and institutional annuities (primarily terminal funding cases), as well as variable Private Placement Life Insurance ( PPLI ) owned by corporations and high net worth individuals. Institutional also offers mutual funds to institutional investors. Furthermore, Institutional offers additional individual products including structured settlements, consumer notes and single premium immediate annuities and longevity assurance. Individual Life sells a variety of life insurance products, including variable universal life, universal life, interest sensitive whole life and term life. Group Benefits provides individual members of employer groups, associations, affinity groups and financial institutions with group life, accident and disability coverage, along with other products and services, including voluntary benefits and group retiree health. International, which has operations located in Japan, Brazil, Ireland and the United Kingdom, provides investments, retirement savings and other insurance and savings products to individuals and groups outside the United States and Canada. Life includes in an Other category its leveraged PPLI product line of business; corporate items not directly allocated to any of its reporting segments; inter-segment eliminations and the mark-to-market adjustment for the International variable annuity assets that are classified as equity securities held for trading reported in net investment income and the related change in interest credited reported as a component of benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses since these items are not considered by the Company chief operating decision maker in evaluating the International results of operations. Life charges direct operating expenses to the appropriate segment and allocates the majority of indirect expenses to the segments based on an intercompany expense arrangement. Inter-segment revenues primarily occur between Life Other category and the reporting segments. These amounts primarily include interest income on allocated surplus and interest charges on excess separate account surplus. Life derives its revenues principally from: (a) fee income, including asset management fees, on separate account and mutual fund assets and mortality and expense fees, as well as cost of insurance charges; (b) net investment income on general account assets; (c) fully insured premiums; and (d) certain other fees. Asset management fees and mortality and expense fees are primarily generated from separate account assets, which are deposited with Life through the sale of variable annuity and variable universal life products and from mutual funds. Cost of insurance charges are assessed on the net amount at risk for investment-oriented life insurance products. Premium revenues are derived primarily from the sale of group life, group disability and individual term insurance products. Life expenses essentially consist of interest credited to policyholders on general account liabilities, insurance benefits provided, amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs, expenses related to selling and servicing the various products offered by the Company, dividends to policyholders, and other general business expenses. Life profitability in its variable annuity, mutual fund and, to a lesser extent, variable universal life businesses, depends largely on the amount of the contract holder account value or assets under management on which it earns fees and the level of fees charged. Changes in account value or assets under management are driven by two main factors: net flows, which measure the success of the Company asset gathering and retention efforts, and the market return of the funds, which is heavily influenced by the return realized in the equity markets. Net flows are comprised of new sales and other deposits less surrenders, death benefits, policy charges and annuitizations of investment type contracts, such as variable annuity contracts. In the mutual fund business, net flows are known as net sales. Net sales are comprised of new sales less redemptions by mutual fund customers. Life uses the average daily value of the S&P 500 Index as an indicator for evaluating market returns of the underlying account portfolios in the United States. Relative profitability of variable products is highly correlated to the growth in account values or assets under management since these products generally earn fee income on a daily basis. An immediate significant downturn in the financial markets could result in a charge against deferred acquisition costs. See the Critical Accounting Estimates section of the MD&A for further information on DAC unlocks. The profitability of Life fixed annuities and other spread-based products depends largely on its ability to earn target spreads between earned investment rates on its general account assets and interest credited to policyholders. Profitability is also influenced by operating expense management including the benefits of economies of scale in the administration of its United States variable annuity businesses in particular. In addition, the size and persistency of gross profits from these businesses is an important driver of earnings as it affects the rate of amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs. 54 Table of Contents Life profitability in its individual life insurance and group benefits businesses depends largely on the size of its in-force block, the adequacy of product pricing and underwriting discipline, actual mortality and morbidity experience, and the efficiency of its claims and expense management. Performance Measures Fee Income Fee income is largely driven from amounts collected as a result of contractually defined percentages of assets under management on investment type contracts. These fees are generally collected on a daily basis. For individual life insurance products, fees are contractually defined as percentages based on levels of insurance, age, premiums and deposits collected and contract holder value. Life insurance fees are generally collected on a monthly basis. Therefore, the growth in assets under management either through positive net flows or net sales, or favorable equity market performance will have a favorable impact on fee income. Conversely, either negative net flows or net sales, or unfavorable equity market performance will reduce fee income generated from investment type contracts. As of and for the years ended December 31, Product/Key Indicator Information 2007 2006 2005 Retail U.S. Individual Variable Annuities Account value, beginning of period $ 114,365 $ 105,314 $ 99,617 Net flows (2,733 ) (3,150 ) (881 ) Change in market value and other 7,439 12,201 6,578 Account value, end of period $ 119,071 $ 114,365 $ 105,314 Retail Mutual Funds Assets under management, beginning of period $ 38,536 $ 29,063 $ 25,240 Net sales 5,545 5,659 1,335 Change in market value and other 4,302 3,814 2,488 Assets under management, end of period $ 48,383 $ 38,536 $ 29,063 Retirement Plans Account value, beginning of period $ 23,575 $ 19,317 $ 16,493 Net flows 1,669 2,545 1,618 Change in market value and other 1,850 1,713 1,206 Account value, end of period $ 27,094 $ 23,575 $ 19,317 Individual Life Variable universal life account value, end of period $ 7,284 $ 6,637 $ 5,902 Total life insurance in-force 179,483 164,227 150,801 International Japan Annuities Account value, beginning of period $ 31,343 $ 26,104 $ 14,631 Net flows 4,525 4,393 10,857 Change in market value, currency translation and other 1,769 846 616 Account value, end of period $ 37,637 $ 31,343 $ 26,104 S&P 500 Index Year end closing value 1,468 1,418 1,248 Daily average value 1,477 1,310 1,208 Year ended December 31, 2007 compared to year ended December 31, 2006 Increases in Retail U.S. individual variable annuity account values as of December 31, 2007 can be primarily attributed to market growth during the year and improved net flows due to an increase in sales. In addition to strong positive net flows, market appreciation and diversified sales growth during the year contributed to Retail mutual funds assets under management growth. Retirement Plans account values increased for the year ended December 31, 2007 due to positive net flows driven by ongoing contributions and market appreciation during the year. Individual Life variable universal life account values increased primarily due to market appreciation and positive net flows. Life insurance in-force increased from the prior periods due to business growth. International Japan annuity account values continue to grow as a result of positive net flows and a strengthening of the yen versus the dollar offset by a decline in market performance throughout the year. 55 Table of Contents Year ended December 31, 2006 compared to year ended December 31, 2005 The increase in Retail U.S. individual variable annuity account values can be attributed primarily to market growth during 2006. Net flows for the Retail U.S. individual variable annuity business were negative and have worsened from prior year levels resulting from higher surrenders outpacing increased deposits due primarily to increased competition in the living benefit market. Mutual fund net sales increased substantially over the prior year as a result of focused wholesaling efforts and favorable fund and equity market performance. The increase in Retirement Plans account values is due to positive net flows over the past year due to higher deposits and market appreciation. Individual Life variable universal life account value increased due primarily to premiums, deposits and market appreciation. Life insurance in-force increased from December 31, 2005 due to business growth. International Japan annuity account values as of December 31, 2006 were higher as a result of positive net flows and fund performance, offset by the effects of currency translation. Japan net flows have decreased from the prior year due to increased competition. Net Investment Spread Management evaluates performance of certain products based on net investment spread. These products include those that have insignificant mortality risk, such as fixed annuities, certain general account universal life contracts and certain institutional contracts. Net investment spread is determined by taking the difference between the earned rate and the related crediting rates on average assets under management. The net investment spreads shown below are for the total portfolio of relevant contracts in each segment and reflect business written at different times. When pricing products, the Company considers current investment yields and not the portfolio average. Net investment spread can be volatile period over period, which can have a significant positive or negative effect on the operating results of each segment. The volatile nature of net investment spread is driven primarily by prepayment premiums on securities and earnings on partnership investments. Net investment spread is calculated as a percentage of general account assets and expressed in basis points ( bps ): For the years ended December 31, 2007 2006 2005 Retail Individual Annuity 181.1 bps 160.3 bps 160.4 bps Retirement Plans 161.0 bps 146.0 bps 149.2 bps Institutional (GIC s, Funding Agreements, Funding Agreement Backed Notes and Consumer Notes) 124.0 bps 82.0 bps 60.0 bps Individual Life 136.7 bps 124.7 bps 123.3 bps Year ended December 31, 2007 compared to year ended December 31, 2006 Retail individual annuity, Retirement Plans, Institutional and Individual Life net investment spreads increased primarily due to a higher allocation of investments in higher yield/higher risk investment classes, including limited partnerships and alternative investments and relative strong performance of this asset class in 2007. Year ended December 31, 2006 compared to year ended December 31, 2005 Net investment spreads were virtually unchanged in 2006 as compared to 2005 with the exception of Institutional where increased partnership income increased spread from 2005 to 2006. Premiums As discussed above, traditional insurance type products, such as those sold by Group Benefits, collect premiums from policyholders in exchange for financial protection for the policy holder from a specified insurable loss, such as death or disability. These premiums together with net investment income earned from the overall investment strategy are used to pay the contractual obligations under these insurance contracts. Two major factors, new sales and persistency, impact premium growth. Sales can increase or decrease in a given year based on a number of factors, including but not limited to, customer demand for the Company product offerings, pricing competition, distribution channels and the Company reputation and ratings. A majority of sales correspond with the open enrollment periods of employers benefits, typically January 1 or July 1. Persistency is the percentage of insurance policies remaining in-force from year to year as measured by premiums. For the years ended December 31, Group Benefits 2007 2006 2005 Total premiums and other considerations $ 4,301 $ 4,149 $ 3,811 Fully insured ongoing sales (excluding buyouts) 770 861 779 Persistency 87 % 87 % 87 % Earned premiums and other considerations include $27, $12 and $27 in buyout premiums for the years ended December 31, 2007, 2006 and 2005, respectively. The increase in premiums and other considerations for Group Benefits in 2007 compared to 2006 was driven by growth in the block of business. The increase in premiums and other considerations for Group Benefits in 2006 compared to 2005 was driven by a sales growth of 11%. Fully insured ongoing sales, excluding buyouts, declined in 2007 from 2006 primarily due to fewer large national account sales, and the small case competitive environment remained intense. The Company also completed a renewal rights arrangement 56 Table of Contents associated with its medical stop loss business during the second quarter of 2007 eliminating new sales related to this business. In addition, there was an anticipated decrease in association life sales from an unusually high comparable prior year period. The increase in 2006 from 2005 was primarily due to strong national account and association life sales. Expenses There are three major categories for expenses. The first major category of expenses is benefits and losses. These include the costs of mortality and morbidity, particularly in the group benefits business, and mortality in the individual life businesses, as well as other contractholder benefits to policyholders. In addition, traditional insurance type products generally use a loss ratio which is expressed as the amount of benefits incurred during a particular period divided by total premiums and other considerations, as a key indicator of underwriting performance. Since Group Benefits occasionally buys a block of claims for a stated premium amount, the Company excludes this buyout from the loss ratio used for evaluating the underwriting results of the business as buyouts may distort the loss ratio. The second major category is insurance operating costs and expenses, which is commonly expressed in a ratio of a revenue measure depending on the type of business. The third category is the amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs and the present value of future profits, which is typically expressed as a percentage of pre-tax income before the cost of this amortization (an approximation of actual gross profits). The individual annuity business within Retail accounts for the majority of the amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs and present value of future profits for Life. For the years ended December 31, Retail 2007 2006 2005 General insurance expense ratio (individual annuity) 17.9 bps 17.2 bps 17.9 bps DAC amortization ratio (individual annuity) 25.5 % 65.3 % 51.1 % DAC amortization ratio (individual annuity) excluding DAC unlock [1] 47.9 % 52.4 % 51.1 % Insurance expenses, net of deferrals $ 1,221 $ 994 $ 867 Individual Life Death benefits $ 298 $ 251 $ 241 Insurance expenses, net of deferrals $ 193 $ 179 $ 166 Group Benefits Total benefits and losses $ 3,109 $ 3,002 $ 2,794 Loss ratio (excluding buyout premiums) 72.1 % 72.3 % 73.1 % Insurance expenses, net of deferrals $ 1,131 $ 1,101 $ 1,022 Expense ratio (excluding buyout premiums) 27.9 % 27.6 % 27.8 % International Japan General insurance expense ratio 48.4 bps 49.1 bps 68.2 bps DAC amortization ratio 35.3 % 30.2 % 45.5 % DAC amortization ratio excluding DAC unlock [1] 40.0 % 40.7 % 45.5 % Insurance expenses, net of deferrals $ 192 $ 160 $ 148 [1] See Unlock and Sensitivity Analysis in the Critical Accounting Estimates section of the MD&A Year ended December 31, 2007 compared to year ended December 31, 2006 Retail individual annuity general insurance expense ratio increased in 2007 primarily due to higher service and technology costs. The Retail DAC amortization ratio (individual annuity) excluding DAC unlock declined in 2007, primarily due to the unlock charge recorded in 2006. DAC unlock charges generally have the effect of reducing future DAC amortization rates. Retail expects the DAC amortization ratio to be between 41% and 46% until the next unlock in 2008. Retail insurance expenses, net of deferrals, increased due to increasing trail commissions on growing variable annuity assets as well as increasing non-deferrable commissions on strong mutual fund deposits. Individual Life death benefits increased in 2007 primarily due to a larger life insurance in-force and unfavorable mortality. Group Benefits expense ratio, excluding buyouts, increased in 2007 primarily due to higher DAC amortization. International Japan general insurance expense ratio declined in 2007 as Japan further leveraged the existing infrastructure as it attains economies of scale. Year ended December 31, 2006 compared to year ended December 31, 2005 Retail individual annuity asset growth in 2006 decreased it expense ratio to a level lower than prior years. Individual Life death benefits increased 4% in 2006 primarily due to a larger insurance in-force. Individual Life insurance expenses, net of deferrals increased 8% for 2006 consistent with the growth of life insurance in-force. The Group Benefits loss ratio, excluding buyouts, for 2006 decreased due to favorable mortality experience, partially offset by unfavorable morbidity experience. Loss ratios experience volatility in period over period comparisons due to fluctuations in mortality and morbidity experience. International Japan expense ratio declined in 2006 as Japan further leveraged the existing infrastructure as it attains economies of scale. 57 Table of Contents Profitability Management evaluates the rates of return various businesses can provide as an input in determining where additional capital should be invested to increase net income and shareholder returns. Specifically, because of the importance of its individual annuity products, the Company uses the return on assets for the individual annuity business for evaluating profitability. In Group Benefits and Individual Life, after-tax margin is a key indicator of overall profitability. Ratios 2007 2006 2005 Retail Individual annuity return on assets ( ROA ) 58.9 bps 39.9 bps 51.9 bps Effect of net realized gains (losses), net of tax and DAC on ROA [1] (13.3) bps (7.4) bps (2.2) bps Effect of DAC unlock on ROA [2] 15.6 bps (6.0) bps ROA excluding realized gains (losses) and DAC unlock 56.6 bps 53.3 bps 54.1 bps Retirement Plans Retirement Plans return on assets ( ROA ) 22.9 bps 44.7 bps 42.7 bps Effect of net realized gains (losses), net of tax and DAC on ROA [1] (10.5) bps (3.1) bps 3.1 bps Effect of DAC unlock on ROA [2] (3.4) bps 8.9 bps ROA excluding realized gains (losses) and DAC unlock 36.8 bps 38.9 bps 39.6 bps Institutional Institutional return on assets ( ROA ) 3.0 bps 16.6 bps 28.4 bps Effect of net realized gains (losses), net of tax and DAC on ROA [1] (21.5) bps (5.1) bps 5.7 bps Effect of DAC unlock on ROA [2] 0.2 bps ROA excluding realized gains (losses) and DAC unlock 24.3 bps 21.7 bps 22.7 bps Individual Life After-tax margin 16.0 % 13.3 % 15.9 % Effect of net realized gains (losses), net of tax and DAC on after-tax margin [1] (1.3 %) (1.5 %) 1.0 % Effect of DAC unlock on after-tax margin [2] 1.4 % (1.6 %) After-tax margin excluding realized gains (losses) and DAC unlock 15.9 % 16.4 % 14.9 % Group Benefits After-tax margin (excluding buyouts) 6.7 % 6.6 % 6.4 % Effect of net realized gains (losses), net of tax on after-tax margin (excluding buyouts) [1] (0.4 %) (0.1 %) (0.1 %) After-tax margin (excluding buyouts) excluding realized gains (losses) 7.1 % 6.7 % 6.5 % International Japan International Japan return on assets ( ROA ) 73.4 bps 87.7 bps 49.6 bps Effect of net realized gains (losses) excluding net periodic settlements, net of tax and DAC on ROA [1] [3] (8.1) bps (5.6) bps (9.3) bps Effect of DAC unlock on ROA [2] 6.4 bps 18.5 bps ROA excluding realized gains (losses) and DAC unlock 75.1 bps 74.8 bps 58.9 bps [1] See Realized Capital Gains and Losses by Segment table within the Life Section of the MD&A. [2] See Unlock and Sensitivity Analysis within the Critical Accounting Estimates section of the MD&A. [3] Included in net realized gain (losses) are amounts that represent the net periodic accruals on currency rate swaps used in the risk management of Japan fixed annuity products. Year ended December 31, 2007 compared to year ended December 31, 2006 The increase in Retail individual annuity ROA, excluding realized gain (losses) and DAC unlock, was primarily due to increased net investment income on allocated capital and an increase in partnership income. This was partially offset by an increase in the effective tax rate as a result of revisions in the estimates of the separate account DRD and FTC. The decrease in Retirement Plan ROA, excluding realized gains (losses) and DAC unlock, was primarily due to a shift in product mix resulting in lower fees as a percent of assets. The increase in Institutional ROA, excluding realized gains (losses) and DAC unlock, is primarily due to an increase in partnership income and increased net investment income on allocated capital. Individual Life decrease in after-tax margin, excluding realized gains (losses) and DAC unlock, is primarily due to unfavorable mortality experience in 2007 compared to 2006. 58 Table of Contents The increase in the Group Benefits after-tax margin, excluding buyouts, excluding realized gains (losses), was due to an improvement in the loss ratio, partially offset by higher DAC amortization. Year ended December 31, 2006 compared to year ended December 31, 2005 The decrease in Retail individual annuity ROA, excluding realized gain (losses) and DAC unlock, was primarily due to an increase in trail commissions in 2006. The decrease in Retirement Plan ROA, excluding realized gains (losses) and DAC unlock, was primarily due to higher maintenance expenses in 2006. The decrease in Institutional ROA, excluding realized gains (losses) and DAC unlock, is primarily due to higher maintenance expense in 2006. Individual Life after-tax margin, excluding realized gains (losses) and DAC unlock, increased primarily due to favorable mortality experience in 2006 compared to 2005 as well as favorable revisions to DAC estimates reflected in the first half of 2006. The improvement in the Group Benefits after-tax margin, excluding realized gains (losses) and DAC unlock, for 2006 was primarily due to an improvement in the loss ratio, including the release of certain life reserves, partially offset by higher income tax expense. International ROA, excluding realized gains (losses) and DAC unlock, increased significantly in 2006 primarily due to the leveraging of its existing infrastructure through disciplined expense management. Life Operating Summary 2007 2006 2005 Earned premiums $ 5,123 $ 4,590 $ 4,203 Fee income 5,420 4,726 4,000 Net investment income Securities available-for-sale and other 3,497 3,184 2,998 Equity securities held for trading [1] 145 1,824 3,847 Total net investment income 3,642 5,008 6,845 Net realized capital losses (819 ) (260 ) (25 ) Total revenues 13,366 14,064 15,023 Benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses [1] 7,147 8,040 9,809 Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs and present value of future profits 884 1,452 1,172 Insurance operating costs and other expenses 3,230 2,708 2,522 Total benefits, losses and expenses 11,261 12,200 13,503 Income before income taxes 2,105 1,864 1,520 Income tax expense 547 423 316 Net income $ 1,558 $ 1,441 $ 1,204 [1] Includes investment income and mark-to-market effects of equity securities held for trading supporting the international variable annuity business, which are classified in net investment income with corresponding amounts credited to policyholders within benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses. Year ended December 31, 2007 compared to the year ended December 31, 2006 The increase in Life net income was due to the following: The DAC unlock benefit of $210 recorded in the third quarter of 2007. Increased income on asset growth in the variable annuity, mutual fund, retirement and institutional businesses. Increased net investment income, primarily due to strong partnership income. Partially offsetting the increase in Life net income were the following: Increased non-deferrable individual annuity asset based commissions. Unfavorable mortality in Individual Life. Increased DAC amortization in Group Benefits due to the adoption of SOP 05-1. During the first quarter of 2006, the Company achieved favorable settlements in several cases brought against the Company by policyholders regarding their purchase of broad-based leveraged corporate owned life insurance ( leveraged COLI ) policies in the early to mid-1990s and therefore, released a reserve for these matters of $34, after-tax. Realized losses increased for the year ended December 31, 2007 as compared to the comparable prior year periods primarily due to net losses on GMWB derivatives and impairments. Year ended December 31, 2006 compared to the year ended December 31, 2005 Net income increased primarily due to growth in assets under management resulting from market growth and sales, along with higher earned premiums in Group Benefits. The increase in net investment income was primarily due to income earned on higher average invested assets base, an increase in interest rates and a change in asset mix (e.g. greater investment in mortgage loans and limited partnerships). The increase in average invested assets base, as compared to the prior year, was primarily due to positive operating cash flows, investment contract sales such as retail and institutional notes, and universal life-type product sales. 59 Table of Contents Net realized capital losses were larger in the year ended December 31, 2006 compared to 2005 primarily due to rising interest rates. Components of the increased realized losses included increased other than temporary impairments (see the Other-Than-Temporary Impairments discussion within Investment Results for more information on the increase in impairments), losses on non-qualifying derivatives and net losses on sales of investments. During 2006, the Company achieved favorable settlements in several cases brought against the Company by policyholders regarding their purchase of broad-based leveraged corporate owned life insurance ( leveraged COLI ) policies in the early to mid-1990s. The Company ceased offering this product in 1996. Based on the favorable outcome of these cases, together with the Company current assessment of the few remaining leveraged COLI cases, the Company reduced its estimate of the ultimate cost of these cases during 2006. This reserve reduction, recorded in insurance operating costs and other expenses, resulted in an after-tax benefit of $34. During 2005, the Company recorded an after-tax expense of $46, related to the termination of a provision of an agreement with a mutual fund distribution partner of the Company retail mutual funds. Life recorded an after-tax charge of $102 in 2005 to establish reserves for regulatory matters for investigations related to market timing by the SEC and New York Attorney General Office, directed brokerage by the SEC, and single premium group annuities by the New York Attorney General Office and the Connecticut Attorney General Office. 60 Table of Contents Realized Capital Gains and Losses by Segment Life includes net realized capital gains and losses in each reporting segment. Following is a summary of the types of realized gains and losses by segment: Net realized gains (losses) for the year ended December 31, 2007 Japanese Periodic net fixed coupon Total annuity settlements U.S. GMWB gains/losses, Gains/losses contract on credit derivatives, Other, net of tax on sales, net Impairments hedges, net derivatives/Japan net net Total and DAC Retail $ 17 $ (87 ) $ $ 1 $ (277 ) $ (35 ) $ (381 ) $ (169 ) Retirement Plans (11 ) (22 ) (8 ) (41 ) (28 ) Institutional 13 (148 ) 3 (56 ) (188 ) (121 ) Individual Life 7 (21 ) (14 ) (28 ) (15 ) Group Benefits 8 (19 ) (19 ) (30 ) (18 ) International (48 ) 18 (68 ) (18 ) (116 ) (64 ) Other 11 (13 ) 24 (57 ) (35 ) (31 ) Total $ 45 $ (358 ) $ 18 $ (40 ) $ (277 ) $ (207 ) $ (819 ) $ (446 ) Net realized gains (losses) for the year ended December 31, 2006 Japanese fixed Periodic net Total annuity coupon settlements U.S. GMWB gains/losses, Gains/losses contract on credit derivatives, Other, net of tax on sales, net Impairments hedges, net derivatives/Japan net net Total and DAC Retail $ (44 ) $ (6 ) $ $ 3 $ (26 ) $ (14 ) $ (87 ) $ (90 ) Retirement Plans (9 ) (6 ) (1 ) (16 ) (7 ) Institutional 23 (32 ) 1 (29 ) (37 ) (24 ) Individual Life (1 ) (18 ) (1 ) (5 ) (25 ) (17 ) Group Benefits (6 ) (3 ) 1 (5 ) (13 ) (8 ) International (4 ) (2 ) (17 ) (63 ) (2 ) (88 ) (47 ) Other (1 ) (9 ) 11 5 6 5 Total $ (42 ) $ (76 ) $ (17 ) $ (48 ) $ (26 ) $ (51 ) $ (260 ) $ (188 ) Net realized gains (losses) for the year ended December 31, 2005 Japanese fixed Periodic net Total annuity coupon settlements U.S. GMWB gains/losses, Gains/losses contract on credit derivatives, Other, net of tax on sales, net Impairments hedges, net derivatives/Japan net net Total and DAC Retail $ 50 $ (15 ) $ $ 1 $ (46 ) $ (28 ) $ (38 ) $ (24 ) Retirement Plans 19 (3 ) (2 ) 14 6 Institutional 23 (7 ) 1 19 36 23 Individual Life 14 (4 ) 7 17 11 Group Benefits (2 ) (8 ) (10 ) (7 ) International (13 ) (36 ) (34 ) 19 (64 ) (37 ) Other 1 19 20 14 Total $ 92 $ (37 ) $ (36 ) $ (32 ) $ (46 ) $ 34 $ (25 ) $ (14 ) 61 Table of Contents Year ended December 31, 2007 compared to the year ended December 31, 2006 Net realized capital losses increased in 2007 as compared to 2006 were primarily due to higher losses on impairments, GMWB derivatives, and other net losses, partially offset by higher net gains on sale of investments. A more expanded discussion of these components is as follows: Across all lines of business, impairments increased $282 in 2007 primarily due to an increase in credit related other than temporary impairments taken on ABS securities backed by subprime residential mortgage loans and securities in the financial services and building sectors. For further discussion, see the Other-Than-Temporary Impairments discussion within Investment section of the MD&A. Retail losses on GMWB rider embedded derivatives increased $251 primarily due to liability model assumption updates and modeling refinements made in 2007, including those for dynamic lapse behavior and correlations of market returns across underlying indices, as well as those to reflect newly reliable market inputs for volatility. Across all lines of business, Other net losses increased $156 in 2007 primarily resulted from the change in value of non-qualifying derivatives due to fluctuations in credit spreads, interest rates, and equity markets. The increase in net losses in 2007 compared to the prior year was primarily due to changes in value associated with credit derivatives due to credit spreads widening. Credit spreads widened primarily due to the deterioration in the US housing market, tightened lending conditions, reduction of risk appetite as well as increased likelihood of a U.S. recession. For further discussion, see the Capital Market Risk Management section of the MD&A. The net gains on sales resulted primarily from changes in credit spreads, foreign currency exchanges rates and interest rates from the date of purchase. For further discussion of gross gains and losses, see Investment Results in the Investments section of the MD&A. Year ended December 31, 2006 compared to the year ended December 31, 2005 Net realized capital losses increased in 2006 as compared to 2005 primarily as a result of a higher interest rate environment. The components that drove the increase in net losses during the year ended December 31, 2006 included net losses on sales of fixed maturity securities, other-than-temporary impairments, periodic net coupon settlements and losses in Other, net, partially offset by a decrease in losses associated with GMWB derivatives. A more expanded discussion of these components is as follows: Retail losses decreased $20 on GMWB derivatives, primarily driven by a more significant impact from liability model refinements and assumption updates in 2005 as compared to 2006. For further discussion of the GMWB rider valuation assumption, see the Capital Markets Risk Management section of the MD&A under Market Risk-Life . International losses on periodic net coupons from currency swaps increased $29 primarily due to increased fixed annuity assets. Other net losses were primarily driven from the change in value of non-qualifying derivatives due to fluctuations in interest rates and foreign currency exchange rates. These losses were partially offset by a pre-tax benefit of $25 received from the WorldCom security settlement. Across all lines of business, other-than-temporary impairments were primarily recorded on corporate fixed maturities. For further discussion, see the Other-Than-Temporary Impairments section within the Investments section of the MD&A. The net losses on sales were derived by fixed maturities for the year ended December 31, 2006 and were primarily the result of rising interest rates from the date of security purchase and, to a lesser extent, credit spread widening on certain issuers that were sold. For further discussion of gross gains and losses, see Investment Results in the Investments section of the MD&A. A description of each segment as well as an analysis of the operating results summarized above is included on the following pages. 62 Table of Contents RETAIL Operating Summary 2007 2006 2005 Fee income and other $ 3,117 $ 2,695 $ 2,324 Earned premiums (62 ) (86 ) (52 ) Net investment income 801 839 933 Net realized capital losses (381 ) (87 ) (38 ) Total revenues 3,475 3,361 3,167 Benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses 820 819 895 Insurance operating costs and other expenses 1,221 994 867 Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs and present value of future profits 406 973 740 Total benefits, losses and expenses 2,447 2,786 2,502 Income before income taxes 1,028 575 665 Income tax expense 216 39 70 Net income $ 812 $ 536 $ 595 Assets Under Management 2007 2006 2005 Individual variable annuity account values $ 119,071 $ 114,365 $ 105,314 Individual fixed annuity and other account values 10,243 9,937 10,222 Other retail products account values 677 525 336 Total account values [1] 129,991 124,827 115,872 Retail mutual fund assets under management 48,383 38,536 29,063 Other mutual fund assets under management 2,113 1,489 1,004 Total mutual fund assets under management 50,496 40,025 30,067 Total assets under management $ 180,487 $ 164,852 $ 145,939 [1] Includes policyholders balances for investment contracts and reserve for future policy benefits for insurance contracts. Retail focuses on the savings and retirement needs of the growing number of individuals who are preparing for retirement, or have already retired, through the sale of individual variable and fixed annuities, mutual funds and other investment products. Life is both a large writer and seller of individual variable annuities and a top seller of individual variable annuities throughout banks in the United States. Year ended December 31, 2007 compared to the year ended December 31, 2006 Net income in Retail increased for the year ended December 31, 2007, primarily driven by lower amortization of DAC resulting from the unlock benefit in the third quarter of 2007, fee income growth in the variable annuity and mutual fund businesses, partially offset by increased non-deferrable individual annuity asset based commissions and mutual fund commissions In addition, realized capital losses increased $294 for the year ended December 31, 2007 as compared to the prior year period. For further discussion, see Realized Capital Gains and Losses by Segment table under Life Operating Section of the MD&A. A more expanded discussion of income growth is presented below: Fee income increased for the year ended December 31, 2007 primarily as a result of growth in variable annuity average account values. The year-over-year increase in average variable annuity account values can be attributed to market appreciation of $7.4 billion during the year. Variable annuities had net outflows of $2.7 billion in 2007. Net outflows were driven by surrender activity due to the aging of the variable annuity inforce block of business and increased sales competition, particularly competition related to guaranteed living benefits. Mutual fund fee income increased 23% for the year ended December 31, 2007 due to increased assets under management driven by net sales of $5.5 billion and market appreciation of $4.4 billion during 2007. Net investment income has declined for the year ended December 31, 2007 due to a decrease in variable annuity fixed option account values of 11% or $635. The decrease in these account values can be attributed to a combination of transfers into separate accounts and surrender activity. Offsetting this decrease in net investment income was an increase in the returns on partnership income of $14 for the year ended December 31, 2007. Insurance operating costs and other expenses increased for the year ended December 31, 2007. These increases were principally driven by mutual fund commission increases of $75 for the year ended December 31, 2007 due to growth in deposits of 29%. In addition, non-deferrable variable annuity asset based commissions increased $67 for the year ended December 31, 2007 due to a 4% growth in assets under management, as well as an increase in the number of contracts reaching anniversaries when trail commission payments begin. Lower amortization of DAC resulted from the unlock benefit during the third quarter of 2007 as compared to an unlock expense during the fourth quarter of 2006. For further discussion, see Unlock and Sensitivity Analysis in the Critical Accounting Estimates section of the MD&A. 63 Table of Contents The effective tax rate increased from 7% to 21% for the year ended December 31, 2007 from the prior year due to an increase in income before income taxes and revisions in the estimates of the separate account DRD which resulted in an incremental tax of $17, and foreign tax credits. Year ended December 31, 2006 compared to the year ended December 31, 2005 Net income in the Retail segment for the year ended December 31, 2006 decreased primarily due to higher amortization of DAC resulting from the unlock expense during the fourth quarter of 2006. In addition, realized capital losses increased $49 for the year ended December 31, 2006 as compared to the prior year period. For further discussion, see Realized Capital Gains and Losses by Segment table under Life Operating Section of the MD&A. Offsetting these losses was improved fee income driven by higher assets under management resulting primarily from market growth. The following other factors contributed to the change in income: The increase in fee income in the variable annuity business for the year ended December 31, 2006 was mainly a result of growth in average account values. The year-over-year increase in average variable annuity account values can be attributed to market appreciation of $12.2 billion during 2006. Variable annuities had net outflows of $3.2 billion for the year ended December 31, 2006 compared to net outflows of $881 for the year ended December 31, 2005. Net outflows from additional surrender activity were due to increased deposits competition, particularly from competitors offering variable annuity products with guaranteed living benefits. Mutual fund fee income increased 26% for the year ended December 31, 2006 due to increased assets under management driven by market appreciation of $3.9 billion and net deposits of $5.7 billion during the year. This increase was primarily attributable to focused wholesaling efforts. Despite stable general account investment spread during the year, net investment income has steadily declined for the year ended December 31, 2006 due to variable annuity transfers from the fixed account to the separate account combined with surrenders in the fixed MVA contracts. Despite these outflows, a more favorable interest rate environment during 2006 has resulted in increased deposits and a lower surrender rate due to fewer contracts up for renewal for the year ended December 31, 2006 resulting in a decrease in net outflows of $1.3 billion compared to the prior year. Benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses have decreased for the year ended December 31, 2006 due to a decline in interest credited as a result of fixed annuity outflows which decreased fixed annuity account values. Insurance operating costs and other expenses increased for the year ended December 31, 2006 primarily due to an increase in mutual fund commissions due to significant growth in deposits. In addition, variable annuity asset based commissions increased due to 9% growth in assets under management, as well as an increase in the number of contracts reaching anniversaries when trail commission payments begin. During 2005, the Company recorded an after-tax expense of $46, for the termination of a provision of an agreement with a distribution partner of the Company retail mutual funds. Higher amortization of DAC resulted from the unlock during the fourth quarter of 2006. For further discussion, see Unlock and Sensitivity Analysis in the Critical Accounting Estimates section of the MD&A. The effective tax rate declined due to separate account DRD and foreign tax credit true-up benefits recorded in 2006. Outlook Management believes the market for retirement products continues to expand as individuals increasingly save and plan for retirement. Demographic trends suggest that as the baby boom generation matures, a significant portion of the United States population will allocate a greater percentage of their disposable incomes to saving for their retirement years due to uncertainty surrounding the Social Security system and increases in average life expectancy. Competition continues to be strong in the variable annuities market as the focus on guaranteed lifetime income has caused most major variable annuity writers to upgrade their suite of living benefits. The company is committed to maintaining a competitive variable annuity product line and intends to refresh its suite of living benefits in May 2008. The retail mutual fund business has seen a substantial increase in net sales and assets over the past year as a result of focused wholesaling efforts as well as strong investment performance. Net sales can vary significantly depending on market conditions. As this business continues to evolve, success will be driven by diversifying net sales across the mutual fund platform, delivering superior investment performance and creating new investment solutions for current and future mutual fund shareholders. Management current full year projections for 2008 are as follows: Variable annuity sales of $12.0 billion to $13.0 billion Fixed annuity sales of $750 to $1.25 billion Retail mutual fund sales of $13.5 billion to $15.5 billion Variable annuity outflows of $4.2 billion to $5.2 billion Fixed annuity outflows of $0 to $500 Retail mutual fund net sales of $4.0 billion to $6.0 billion 64 Table of Contents RETIREMENT PLANS Operating Summary 2007 2006 2005 Fee income and other $ 238 $ 193 $ 152 Earned premiums 4 19 10 Net investment income 355 326 311 Net realized capital gains (losses) (41 ) (16 ) 14 Total revenues 556 522 487 Benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses 249 250 231 Insurance operating costs and other expenses 170 136 117 Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs 58 (4 ) 30 Total benefits, losses and expenses 477 382 378 Income before income taxes 79 140 109 Income tax expense 18 39 27 Net income $ 61 $ 101 $ 82 Assets Under Management 2007 2006 2005 403(b)/457 account values $ 12,363 $ 11,540 $ 10,475 401(k) account values 14,731 12,035 8,842 Total account values [1] 27,094 23,575 19,317 403(b)/457 mutual fund assets under management [2] 26 163 401(k) mutual fund assets under management 1,428 1,140 947 Total mutual fund assets under management 1,454 1,140 1,110 Total assets under management $ 28,548 $ 24,715 $ 20,427 [1] Includes policyholder balances for investment contracts and reserves for future policy benefits for insurance contracts. [2] In 2006, 403(b)/457 mutual fund assets declined to zero due to remaining business being transferred to the Institutional segment. In 2007, Life began selling mutual fund based products in the 403(b) market. The Retirement Plans segment primarily offers customized wealth creation and financial protection for corporate and government employers through its two business units, 403(b)/457 and 401(k). Year ended December 31, 2007 compared to the year ended December 31, 2006 Net income in Retirement Plans decreased for the year ended December 31, 2007 due to higher amortization of DAC as a result of the unlock expense in the third quarter of 2007, partially offset by a growth in fee income. In addition, realized capital losses increased $25 for the year ended December 31, 2007 as compared to the prior year period. For further discussion, see Realized Capital Gains and Losses by Segment table under Life Operating Section of the MD&A. The following other factors contributed to the changes in income: Fee income increased for the year ended December 31, 2007 primarily due to an increase in 401(k) average account values. This growth in 401(k) business is primarily driven by positive net flows of $1.8 billion over the past four quarters resulting from strong sales and increased ongoing deposits. Market appreciation contributed an additional $888 to assets under management over the past year. Net investment income increased for the year ended December 31, 2007 for 403(b)/457 business due to growth in general account assets along with an increase in return on partnership investments. Insurance operating costs and other expenses increased for the year ended December 31, 2007, primarily attributable to greater assets under management aging beyond their first year resulting in higher trail commissions. Also contributing to higher insurance operating costs for the year ended December 31, 2007 were higher service and technology costs. Benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses and earned premiums decreased for the year ended December 31, 2007 primarily due to a large case annuitization in the 401(k) business of $12 which occurred in the first quarter of 2006. This decrease was partially offset by an increase in interest credited resulting from the growth in general account assets. Higher amortization of DAC resulted from the unlock expense in the third quarter of 2007 as compared to an unlock benefit in the fourth quarter of 2006. For further discussion, see Unlock and Sensitivity Analysis in the Critical Accounting Estimates section of the MD&A. 65 Table of Contents Year ended December 31, 2006 compared to the year ended December 31, 2005 Net income in the Retirement Plans segment for the year ended December 31, 2006 increased primarily due to improved fee income combined with lower amortization of DAC resulting from the unlock during the fourth quarter of 2006. In addition, realized capital losses increased $30 for the year ended December 31, 2006 as compared to the prior year period. For further discussion, see Realized Capital Gains and Losses by Segment table under Life Operating Section of the MD&A. A more expanded discussion of income growth can be found below: Fee income for 401(k) increased 34%, or $37 for the year ended December 31, 2006 compared to the prior year due to the growth in average account values. This growth is primarily driven by positive net flows of $2.0 billion during the year resulting from strong deposits. Total 401(k) annuity deposits and net flows increased by 22% and 16%, respectively, over the prior year. The increase in average account values can also be attributed to market appreciation of $1.1 billion during the year. General account net investment spread remained stable for the year ended December 31, 2006 compared to the prior year. Overall, net investment income and the associated interest credited within benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses each increased as a result of the growth in general account assets under management. Additionally, benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses increased for the year ended December 31, 2006 compared to the prior year due to a large case annuitization in the 401(k) business which also resulted in a corresponding increase in earned premiums of $12. Insurance operating costs and other expenses increased for the year ended December 31, 2006 primarily driven by the 401(k) business. The additional costs can be attributed to greater assets under management resulting in higher trail commissions and maintenance expenses. Lower amortization of DAC resulted from an unlock benefit in the fourth quarter of 2006. For further discussion, see Unlock and Sensitivity Analysis in the Critical Accounting Estimates section of the MD&A. Outlook The future profitability of this segment will depend on Life ability to increase assets under management across all businesses, achieve scale in areas with a high degree of fixed costs and maintain its investment spread earnings on the general account products sold largely in the 403(b)/457 business. As the baby boom generation approaches retirement, management believes these individuals, as well as younger individuals, will contribute more of their income to retirement plans due to the uncertainty of the Social Security system and the increase in average life expectancy. In 2007, Life has begun selling mutual fund based products in the 401(k) market that will increase Life ability to grow assets under management in the medium size 401(k) market. Life has also begun selling mutual fund based products in the 403(b) market as we look to grow assets in a highly competitive environment primarily targeted at health and education workers. Disciplined expense management will continue to be a focus; however, as Life looks to expand its reach in these markets, additional investments in service and technology will occur. In December 2007, the Company announced three acquisitions. The acquisition of part of the defined contribution recordkeeping business of Princeton Retirement Group will give Life a foothold in the business of providing recordkeeping services to large financial firms which offer defined contribution plans to their clients. The acquisition of Sun Life Retirement Services, Inc. will add $17 billion in Retirement Plan assets across 6,000 plans and will provide new service locations in Boston, Massachusetts and Phoenix, Arizona. The acquisition of TopNoggin LLC., which closed in January 2008, provides web-based technology to address data management, administration and benefit calculations. These acquisitions, including the two which have not closed but are expected to close in the first quarter of 2008, will increase scale in the Retirement Plans segment and grow its offering to serve additional markets, customers and types of retirement plans across the defined contribution and defined benefit spectrum. Management current full-year projections for 2008 are as follows: Deposits of $6.5 billion to $7.5 billion Net flows of $1.5 billion to $2.5 billion 66 Table of Contents INSTITUTIONAL Operating Summary 2007 2006 2005 Fee income and other $ 251 $ 125 $ 120 Earned premiums 987 607 504 Net investment income 1,241 1,003 802 Net realized capital gains (losses) (188 ) (37 ) 36 Total revenues 2,291 1,698 1,462 Benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses 2,074 1,484 1,212 Insurance operating costs and expenses 185 78 56 Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs and present value of future profits 23 32 32 Total benefits, losses and expenses 2,282 1,594 1,300 Income before income taxes 9 104 162 Income tax expense (benefit) (8 ) 26 47 Net income $ 17 $ 78 $ 115 Assets Under Management 2007 2006 2005 Institutional account values [1] [3] $ 25,103 $ 22,214 $ 17,917 Private Placement Life Insurance account values [3] 32,792 26,131 23,836 Mutual fund assets under management [2] 3,581 2,567 1,528 Total assets under management $ 61,476 $ 50,912 $ 43,281 [1] Institutional investment product account values include transfers from Retirement Plans and Retail of $763 during 2006. [2] Mutual fund assets under management include transfers from the Retirement Plans segment of $178 during 2006. [3] Includes policyholder balances for investment contracts and reserves for future policy benefits for insurance contracts. Institutional primarily offers customized wealth creation and financial protection for institutions, corporate and high net worth individuals through its two business units: IIP and PPLI. Year ended December 31, 2007 compared to the year ended December 31, 2006 Net income in Institutional decreased for the year ended December 31, 2007 primarily due to increased realized capital losses of $151 as compared to the prior year period. For further discussion, see Realized Capital Gains and Losses by Segment table under Life Operating Section of the MD&A. Offsetting the impact of realized capital losses, Institutional net income increased driven by higher assets under management in both IIP and PPLI, combined with increased returns on general account assets, primarily due to strong partnership income. The following other factors contributed to the changes in income: Fee income increased for the year ended December 31, 2007 primarily driven by higher Mutual Fund and PPLI assets under management due to net flows and change in market appreciation of $5.8 billion and $2.1 billion, respectively, during the year. In addition, PPLI collects front-end loads, recorded in fee income, to subsidize premium tax payments. Premium taxes are recorded as an expense in insurance operating costs and other expenses. During the year ended December 31, 2007, PPLI had deposits of $5.2 billion, which resulted in an increase in fee income due to front-end loads of $107 offset by a corresponding increase in insurance operating costs and other expenses. Earned premiums increased for the year ended December 31, 2007 primarily as a result of increased structured settlement life contingent sales, and one large terminal funding life contingent case sold in the third quarter. This increase in earned premiums was offset by a corresponding increase in benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses. General account net investment spread is the main driver of net income for IIP. An increase in spread income for the year ended December 31, 2007, was driven principally by higher assets under management in IIP resulting from positive net flows of $1.5 billion during the year. Net flows for IIP were favorable primarily as a result of the Company funding agreement backed Investor Notes program. Investor Notes deposits for the year ended December 31, 2007 were $1.5 billion. General account net investment spread also increased for the year ended December 31, 2007 due to improved returns on partnership investments. For the year ended December 31, 2007 and 2006, partnership income was $32 and $15, after-tax, respectively. The change in income taxes for the year ended December 31, 2007 over the prior year was due to a decrease in income before income taxes primarily driven by the increase in realized capital losses. Year ended December 31, 2006 compared to the year ended December 31, 2005 Net income in Institutional decreased for the year ended December 31, 2006 compared to the prior year driven by realized capital loss increases of $73 for the year ended December 31, 2006 as compared to the prior year period. For further discussion, see Realized Capital Gains and Losses by Segment table under Life Operating Section of the MD&A. The following other factors contributed to the changes in income: Net investment income increased in Institutional driven by positive net flows of $2.2 billion during the year, which resulted in higher assets under management. Net flows for IIP were strong primarily as a result of the Company funding agreement backed 67 Table of Contents Investor Notes program. Investor Note deposits for the years ended December 31, 2006 and 2005 were $2.3 billion and $2.0 billion, respectively. General account spread is one of the main drivers of net income for the Institutional line of business. The increase in spread income in 2006 was driven by higher assets under management as noted above, combined with improved partnership income. For the year ended December 31, 2006 and 2005, income from partnership investments was $15 and $6 after-tax, respectively. Earned premiums increased as a result of two large terminal funding cases that were sold during 2006. This increase in earned premiums was offset by a corresponding increase in benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses. PPLI net income increased compared to prior year primarily due to asset growth in the variable business combined with increased tax benefits. IIP operating expenses increased in the year ended December 31, 2006 due to higher costs related to the launch of new retirement products targeting the baby boom generation in 2006. Outlook The future net income of this segment will depend on Institutional ability to increase assets under management across all businesses. For Institutional products specifically, maintenance of investment spreads and business mix are also key contributors to income. These products are highly competitive from a pricing perspective, and a small number of cases often account for a significant portion of deposits. Therefore, the Company may not be able to sustain the level of assets under management growth attained in 2007. Hartford Income Notes and other structured notes products provide the Company with continued opportunity for future growth. These products provide access to both a multi-billion dollar retail market, and a nearly trillion dollar institutional market. These markets are highly competitive and the Company success depends in part on the level of credited interest rates and the Company credit rating. As the baby boom generation approaches retirement, management believes these individuals will seek investment and insurance vehicles that will give them steady streams of income throughout retirement. IIP has launched new products in 2006 and 2007 to provide solutions that deal specifically with longevity risk. Longevity risk is defined as the likelihood of an individual outliving their assets. IIP is also designing innovative solutions to corporations defined benefit liabilities. The focus of PPLI is variable products used primarily to fund non-qualified benefits or other post employment benefit liabilities. PPLI has experienced a surge in marketplace activity due to COLI Best Practices enacted as part of the Pension Protection Act of 2006. This act has clarified the prior legislative uncertainty relating to insurable interest under COLI policies, potentially increasing future demand in corporate owned life insurance. During 2007, the Company had over $5 billion in deposits. Sales activity of this magnitude may not repeat in 2008. The market served by PPLI continues to be subject to extensive legal and regulatory scrutiny that can affect this business. Management current full year projections for 2008 are as follows: Deposits (including mutual funds) of $7.0 billion to $8.5 billion Net flows (excluding mutual funds) of $3.25 billion to $4.75 billion 68 Table of Contents INDIVIDUAL LIFE Operating Summary 2007 2006 2005 Fee income and other $ 870 $ 885 $ 801 Earned premiums (62 ) (53 ) (33 ) Net investment income 359 324 305 Net realized capital gains (losses) (28 ) (25 ) 17 Total revenues 1,139 1,131 1,090 Benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses 562 497 469 Insurance operating costs and other expenses 193 179 166 Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs and present value of future profits 121 243 206 Total benefits, losses and expenses 876 919 841 Income before income taxes 263 212 249 Income tax expense 81 62 76 Net income $ 182 $ 150 $ 173 Account Values 2007 2006 2005 Variable universal life insurance $ 7,284 $ 6,637 $ 5,902 Universal life/interest sensitive whole life 4,388 4,035 3,696 Modified guaranteed life and other 677 699 716 Total account values $ 12,349 $ 11,371 $ 10,314 Life Insurance In-force Variable universal life insurance $ 77,566 $ 73,770 $ 71,365 Universal life/interest sensitive whole life 48,636 45,230 41,714 Modified guaranteed life and other 53,281 45,227 37,722 Total life insurance in-force $ 179,483 $ 164,227 $ 150,801 Individual Life provides life insurance solutions to a wide array of business intermediaries to solve the wealth protection, accumulation and transfer needs of their affluent, emerging affluent and small business insurance clients. Year ended December 31, 2007 compared to the year ended December 31, 2006 Net income increased for the year ended December 31, 2007, driven primarily by the unlock benefit in the third quarter of 2007 as compared to an unlock expense in the fourth quarter of 2006 partially offset by unfavorable mortality in 2007. The year ended December 31, 2006 also included favorable revisions to prior period DAC estimates of $7, after-tax. A more expanded discussion of income growth is presented below: Fee income and other decreased for the year ended December 31, 2007 primarily due to the impacts of the 2007 and 2006 unlocks. For further discussion, see Unlock and Sensitivity Analysis in the Critical Accounting Estimates section of the MD&A. Offsetting the impacts of the 2007 and 2006 unlocks, fee income increased for the year ended December 31, 2007. Cost of insurance charges, the largest component of fee income, increased $35 primarily driven by growth in variable universal and universal life insurance account value. Variable fee income increased consistent with the growth in variable universal life insurance account value. Earned premiums, which include premiums for ceded reinsurance, decreased primarily due to increased ceded reinsurance premiums for the year ended December 31, 2007. Net investment income increased for the year ended December 31, 2007 substantially consistent with growth in general account account values. Individual Life earned additional net investment income throughout 2007 associated with higher returns from partnership investments. Benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses increased due to life insurance in-force growth and unfavorable mortality for the year ended December 31, 2007 compared to the corresponding 2006 period. Insurance operating costs and other expenses increased for the year ended December 31, 2007 substantially consistent with life insurance in-force growth. Lower amortization of DAC resulted from the unlock benefit in the third quarter of 2007 as compared to an unlock expense in the fourth quarter of 2006. For further discussion, see Unlock and Sensitivity Analysis in the Critical Accounting Estimates section of the MD&A. 69 Table of Contents Year ended December 31, 2006 compared to the year ended December 31, 2005 Net income in Individual Life for 2006 decreased due to the unlock expense in the fourth quarter of 2006. In addition, realized capital losses increased $42 for the year ended December 31, 2006 as compared to the prior year period. For further discussion, see Realized Capital Gains and Losses by Segment table under Life Operating Section of the MD&A. Offsetting these losses, net income increased primarily due to growth in life insurance and account values, and favorable mortality experience in 2006 compared to 2005 as well as $7 of after-tax, favorable revisions to prior year net DAC estimates reflected in the first half of 2006. The following other factors contributed to the changes in income: Cost of insurance charges, the largest component of fee income, increased $30 for the year ended December 31, 2006, driven by growth in the variable universal and universal life insurance in-force. Variable fee income increased, consistent with the growth in the variable universal life insurance account value. Other fee income, another component of total fee income, increased primarily due to additional amortization of deferred revenues associated with the unlock. Earned premiums, which include premiums for ceded reinsurance, decreased primarily due to increased ceded reinsurance premiums for the year ended December 31, 2006. Net investment income increased primarily due to increased general account assets from sales growth. Benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses increased for 2006 consistent with the growth in account values and life insurance in-force, and also reflect favorable mortality experience in 2006 compared to 2005. Insurance operating costs and other expenses increased for the year ended December 31, 2006 consistent with the growth of life insurance in-force. Amortization of DAC for the year ended December 31, 2006 increased related to the unlock expense, partially offset by revisions to prior year estimates. Excluding the impacts of the unlock expense and revisions, the amortization of DAC decreased for the year ended December 31, 2006, consistently with the mix of products and the level and mix of product profitability. For further discussion, see Unlock and Sensitivity Analysis in the Critical Accounting Estimates section of the MD&A. Outlook Individual Life operates in a mature and competitive marketplace with customers desiring products with guarantees and distribution requiring highly trained insurance professionals. Individual Life continues to expand its core distribution model of sales through financial advisors and banks, while also pursuing growth opportunities through other distribution sources such as life brokerage. In its core channels, the Company is looking to broaden its sales system and internal wholesaling, take advantage of cross selling opportunities and extend its penetration in the private wealth management services areas. The Company is committed to maintaining a competitive product portfolio and intends to refresh its variable universal and universal life insurance products in 2008. Sales results for the year ended December 31, 2007 were strong across core distribution channels, including wirehouses/regional broker dealers and banks. The variable universal life mix remains strong at 45% of total sales for 2007. Future sales will be driven by the Company management of current distribution relationships and development of new sources of distribution while offering competitive and innovative new products and product features. Individual Life accepts and maintains, for risk management purposes, up to $10 in risk on any one life. Individual Life uses reinsurance where appropriate to mitigate earnings volatility; however, death claim experience may lead to periodic short-term earnings volatility. Effective November 1, 2007, Individual Life reinsured the policy liability related to statutory reserves in universal life with secondary guarantees to a captive reinsurance subsidiary. These reserves are calculated under prevailing statutory reserving requirements as promulgated under Actuarial Guideline 38, The Application of the Valuation of Life Insurance Policies Model Regulation . An unaffiliated standby third party letter of credit supports a portion of the statutory reserves that have been ceded to this subsidiary. The transaction released approximately $300 of statutory capital previously supporting our universal life products with secondary guarantees. The release of this capital from Individual Life will result in a decline in net investment income and increased expenses in future periods for Individual Life. The released capital is available to the Company for general corporate purposes. As its business grows, from time to time, Individual Life will evaluate the need for an additional capital structure. Individual Life continues to face uncertainty surrounding estate tax legislation, aggressive competition from other life insurance providers, reduced availability and higher price of reinsurance, and the current regulatory environment related to reserving for universal life products with no-lapse guarantees. These risks may have a negative impact on Individual Life future earnings. Management current full year life insurance in-force projection for 2008 is an increase of 8% to 9%. 70 Table of Contents GROUP BENEFITS Operating Summary 2007 2006 2005 Earned premiums and other $ 4,301 $ 4,149 $ 3,811 Net investment income 465 415 398 Net realized capital losses (30 ) (13 ) (10 ) Total revenues 4,736 4,551 4,199 Benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses 3,109 3,002 2,794 Insurance operating costs and other expenses 1,131 1,101 1,022 Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs 62 41 31 Total benefits, losses and expenses 4,302 4,144 3,847 Income before income taxes 434 407 352 Income tax expense 119 109 86 Net income $ 315 $ 298 $ 266 Earned Premiums and Other 2007 2006 2005 Fully insured ongoing premiums $ 4,239 $ 4,100 $ 3,747 Buyout premiums 27 12 27 Other 35 37 37 Total earned premiums and other $ 4,301 $ 4,149 $ 3,811 Ratios, excluding buyouts Loss ratio 72.1 % 72.3 % 73.1 % Loss ratio, excluding financial institutions 77.3 % 77.2 % 77.3 % Expense ratio 27.9 % 27.6 % 27.8 % Expense ratio, excluding financial institutions 23.0 % 22.9 % 24.0 % The Group Benefits segment provides employers, associations, affinity groups and financial institutions with group life, accident and disability coverage, along with other products and services, including voluntary benefits, and group retiree health. The Company also offers disability underwriting, administration, claims processing services and reinsurance to other insurers and self-funded employer plans. Group Benefits has a block of financial institution business that is experience rated. This business comprised approximately 9-10% of the segment 2007, 2006 and 2005 premiums and other considerations (excluding buyouts) respectively, and, on average, 4% to 5% of the segment 2007, 2006 and 2005 net income. Year ended December 31, 2007 compared to the year ended December 31, 2006 Net income increased in Group Benefits for the year ended December 31, 2007, primarily due to higher earned premiums, higher net investment income, a gain on a renewal rights transaction associated with the Company medical stop loss business and a change in assumptions underlying the valuation of long term disability claims incurred in 2007. Partially offsetting the higher net income was increased DAC amortization due to the adoption of SOP 05-1. In addition, realized capital losses increased $17 for the year ended December 31, 2007 as compared to the prior year period. For further discussion, see Realized Capital Gains and Losses by Segment table under Life Operating Section of the MD&A. A more expanded discussion of income growth is presented below: Premiums and other considerations increased largely due to business growth driven by new sales and persistency over the last twelve months. Net investment income increased due to a higher invested asset base and increased interest income on allocated surplus. The segment loss ratio (defined as benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses as a percentage of premiums and other considerations excluding buyouts) for the year ended December 31, 2007, decreased slightly. Loss ratios experience volatility in period over period comparisons due to fluctuation in mortality and morbidity experience. Additionally there was a change in assumptions underlying the valuation of long term disability claims incurred in 2007. The segment expense ratio, excluding buyouts, for the year ended December 31, 2007, increased primarily due to higher DAC amortization resulting from a shorter amortization period following the adoption of SOP 05-1. 71 Table of Contents Year ended December 31, 2006 compared to the year ended December 31, 2005 Net income increased for the year ended December 31, 2006, primarily due to higher earned premiums and a lower expense ratio excluding the financial institution business. The results for the year ended December 31, 2006 included a net benefit of $11 resulting from the completion of life reserve studies during the fourth quarter. The results for the year ended December 31, 2005 included a non-recurring tax benefit of $9 related to the CNA Acquisition. A more expanded discussion of income growth is presented below: Earned premiums increased driven by year-to-date sales (excluding buyouts) growth of 11%, particularly in group life insurance. The loss ratio (defined as benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses as a percentage of premiums and other considerations excluding buyouts) was 72.3% for the year ended December 31, 2006, down from 73.1% in the prior year period. For the year ended December 31, 2006, the loss ratio excluding financial institutions was 77.2% as compared to 77.3% in the prior year period. The expense ratio was 27.6% for the year ended December 31, 2006 as compared to 27.8% in the prior year period. Excluding financial institutions, the expense ratio for the year ended December 31, 2006 was 22.9%, down from 24.0% in the prior year period. The decline in expense ratio excluding financial institutions for the year ended December 31, 2006 was due to growth in premiums outpacing growth in expenses. Outlook Management is committed to selling competitively priced products that meet the Company internal rate of return guidelines and as a result, sales may fluctuate based on the competitive pricing environment in the marketplace. In 2007, the Company generated premium growth due to the increased scale of the group life and disability operations. However, fully insured on-going sales, excluding buyouts declined primarily due to fewer large national account sales, and the small case competitive environment remained intense. In addition, there was an anticipated reduction in association life sales from an unusually high prior year period. The Company also completed a renewal rights transaction associated with its medical stop loss business during the second quarter of 2007. The Company anticipates relatively stable loss ratios and expense ratios based on underlying trends in the in-force business and disciplined new business and renewal underwriting. Despite the current market conditions, including rising medical costs, the changing regulatory environment and cost containment pressure on employers, the Company continues to leverage its strength in claim practices risk management, service and distribution, enabling the Company to capitalize on market opportunities. Additionally, employees continue to look to the workplace for a broader and ever expanding array of insurance products. As employers design benefit strategies to attract and retain employees, while attempting to control their benefit costs, management believes that the need for the Company products will continue to expand. This, combined with the significant number of employees who currently do not have coverage or adequate levels of coverage, creates opportunities for our products and services. Management current full year projections for 2008 are as follows: Fully insured ongoing premiums (excluding buyout premiums and premium equivalents) of $4.25 billion to $4.35 billion Loss ratio (excluding buyout premiums) between 71% and 74% Expense ratio (excluding buyout premiums) between 27% and 29% 72 Table of Contents INTERNATIONAL Operating Summary 2007 2006 2005 Fee income and other $ 832 $ 701 $ 483 Net investment income 131 123 75 Net realized capital losses (116 ) (88 ) (64 ) Total revenues 847 736 494 Benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses 32 3 42 Insurance operating costs and other expenses 246 208 188 Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs and present value of future profits 214 167 133 Total benefits, losses and expenses 492 378 363 Income before income taxes 355 358 131 Income tax expense 132 127 56 Net income $ 223 $ 231 $ 75 Assets Under Management 2007 2006 2005 Japan variable annuity account values $ 35,793 $ 29,653 $ 24,641 Japan MVA fixed annuity account values 1,844 1,690 1,463 Total Japan assets under management $ 37,637 $ 31,343 $ 26,104 International, with operations in Japan, Brazil, Ireland and the United Kingdom, focuses on the savings and retirement needs of the growing number of individuals outside the United States who are preparing for retirement, or have already retired, through the sale of variable annuities, fixed annuities and other insurance and savings products. The Company Japan operation is the largest component of the International segment. Year ended December 31, 2007 compared to the year ended December 31, 2006 Net income decreased for the year ended December 31, 2007 due to a lower unlock benefit in 2007 compared with 2006 and an increase in realized capital losses of $28 for the year ended December 31, 2007 as compared to the prior year period. Losses were partially offset by increased fee income driven by growth in assets under management. For further discussion, see Realized Capital Gains and Losses by Segment table under Life Operating Section of the MD&A. The following other factors contributed to the change in income: Fee income increased for the year ended December 31, 2007 primarily due to growth in Japan variable annuity assets under management. As of December 31, 2007, Japan variable annuity assets under management were $35.8 billion, an increase of $6.1 billion or 21% from the prior year period. The increase in assets under management was driven by positive net flows of $4.5 billion, partially offset by unfavorable market performance of $620, which includes the impact of foreign currency movements on the Japanese customer foreign assets and a $2.3 billion increase due to foreign currency exchange translation as the yen strengthened compared to the U.S. dollar. The increase in benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses for the year ended December 31, 2007 over the prior year period was due to the unlock benefit in the fourth quarter of 2006 exceeding the unlock benefit in the third quarter of 2007. For further discussion, see Unlock and Sensitivity Analysis in the Critical Accounting Estimates section of the MD&A. Insurance operating costs and other expenses increased for the year ended December 31, 2007 due to the growth in the Japan operation. Higher amortization of DAC resulted primarily from a decrease in the 2007 unlock benefit compared with the prior year period, as well as overall growth of operations. For further discussion, see Unlock and Sensitivity Analysis in the Critical Accounting Estimates section of the MD&A. Year ended December 31, 2006 compared to the year ended December 31, 2005 Net income in International increased for the year ended December 31, 2006, principally driven by higher fee income in Japan, which was derived from an increase in average assets under management. In addition, realized capital losses increased $24 for the year ended December 31, 2006 as compared to the prior year period. For further discussion, see Realized Capital Gains and Losses by Segment table under Life Operating Section of the MD&A. A more expanded discussion of earnings growth can be found below: Fee income increased $218 or 45%, for the year ended December 31, 2006. As of December 31, 2006, Japan variable annuity assets under management were $29.7 billion, a 20% increase from the prior year period. The increase in average assets under management was driven by positive net flows of $4.2 billion and market appreciation of $1.2 billion during the year. The amount of variable annuity deposits has declined for the year ended December 31, 2006 by 46%, compared to the prior year periods primarily due to increased competition and changes in key distribution relationships. Also contributing to the higher fee income was increased surrender activity as some customers surrendered policies in order to lock in favorable market appreciation in their account balances. Surrender fees increased by $19, or 53% from the prior year. The decrease in benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses by 93% over prior year can be attributed to the unlock of the GMDB/GMIB reserve of $27 after-tax. 73 Table of Contents Contributing to the increase in net income for the year ended December 31, 2006 was a cumulative tax benefit of $9, that resulted from a change in the effective tax rate on Japan earnings resulting from a change in management intent under Accounting Principles Board Opinion No. 23 Accounting for Income Taxes . The increase in fixed annuity assets under management can be attributed to positive net flows of $224 during the year. Partially offsetting the positive earnings drivers discussed above were the following items: DAC amortization was higher due to higher actual gross profits consistent with growth in the Japan operation, off set by an unlock benefit. For further discussion, see Unlock and Sensitivity Analysis in the Critical Accounting Estimates section of the MD&A. Insurance operating costs and other expenses increased for the year ended December 31, 2006 by 11%. These increases are due to higher maintenance costs and non-deferred asset-based commissions resulting from the growth in the Japan operation. Outlook Management continues to be optimistic about the growth potential of the retirement savings market in Japan. Several trends, such as an aging population, longer life expectancies and declining birth rates leading to a smaller number of younger workers to support each retiree, have resulted in greater need for an individual to plan and adequately fund retirement savings. Profitability depends on the account values of our customers, which are affected by equity, bond and currency markets. Periods of favorable market performance will increase assets under management and thus increase fee income earned on those assets. In addition, higher account value levels will generally reduce certain costs for individual annuities to the Company, such as guaranteed minimum death benefits ( GMDB ) guaranteed minimum income benefits ( GMIB ) and guaranteed minimum accumulation benefits (GMAB). Prudent expense management is also an important component of product profitability. On September 30, 2007, the Financial Services Agency in Japan implemented a new law, the Financial Instruments Exchange Law ( FIEL ). FIEL is designed to strengthen the protection of Japanese consumers who buy financial products such as stocks, bonds, mutual funds, variable annuities, fixed annuities with market value adjustments and some types of bank deposits. As a result, financial institutions in Japan have implemented extensive customer assessments which must occur prior to recommending securities and other financial products, including annuities. In the short term, FIEL is lengthening the sales cycle as the marketplace adapts to the new sales practices. However, in the long term, the Company believes FIEL will result in more suitable sales practices and, together with the country demographics, will provide enhanced opportunities for a broader product set to meet future consumer needs. Competition has continued to increase in the Japanese market from both domestic and foreign insurers. This increase in competition could potentially impact future deposit levels. The Company continues to focus its efforts on strengthening our distribution relationships and improving our wholesaling and servicing efforts. In addition, the Company continues to evaluate product designs that meet customers needs while maintaining prudent risk management. In February 2007, the Company successfully launched a new variable annuity product called 3 Win to complement its existing variable annuity product offerings. The new product has been favorably received by the market with the new product accounting for 42% of Japan sales for the year ended December 31, 2007. The success of the Company enhanced product offerings will ultimately be based on customer acceptance in an increasingly competitive environment. Management full year projections for Japan in 2008 are as follows (using 110/$1 exchange rate for 2008): Variable annuity deposits of 550 billion to 770 billion ($5.0 billion to $7.0 billion) Variable annuity net flows of 275 billion to 500 billion ($2.5 billion to $4.5 billion) 74 Table of Contents OTHER Operating Summary 2007 2006 2005 Fee income and other $ 67 $ 81 $ 83 Net investment income Securities available-for-sale and other 145 154 174 Equity securities held for trading [1] 145 1,824 3,847 Total net investment income 290 1,978 4,021 Net realized capital gains (losses) (35 ) 6 20 Total revenues 322 2,065 4,124 Benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses [1] 301 1,985 4,166 Insurance operating costs and other expenses 84 12 106 Total benefits, losses and expenses 385 1,997 4,272 Income (loss) before income taxes (63 ) 68 (148 ) Income tax expense (benefit) (11 ) 21 (46 ) Net income (loss) $ (52 ) $ 47 $ (102 ) [1] Includes investment income and mark-to-market effects of equity securities held for trading supporting the international variable annuity business, which are classified in net investment income with corresponding amounts credited to policyholders within benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses. Life includes in Other its leveraged PPLI product line of business; corporate items not directly allocated to any of its reporting segments; inter-segment eliminations and the mark-to-mark adjustment for the International variable annuity assets that are classified as equity securities held for trading reported in net investment income and the related change in interest credited reported as a component of benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses since these items are not considered by the Company chief operating decision maker in evaluating the International results of operations. Net investment income includes the mark-to-market adjustment for equity securities held for trading which decreased primarily due to decreased fund performance of Japan variable annuities. This decrease in net investment income is offset by a decrease in benefit, losses and loss adjustment expenses which reflects the interest credited on the Japan account balance liability. Year ended December 31, 2007 compared to the year ended December 31, 2006 During the first quarter of 2006, the Company achieved favorable settlements in several cases brought against the Company by policyholders regarding their purchase of broad-based leveraged corporate owned life insurance ( leveraged COLI ) policies in the early to mid-1990s. The Company ceased offering this product in 1996. Based on the favorable outcome of these cases, together with the Company current assessment of the few remaining leveraged COLI cases, the Company reduced its estimate of the ultimate cost of these cases as of June 30, 2006. This reserve reduction, recorded in insurance operating costs and other expenses, resulted in an after-tax benefit of $34. Also contributing to the increase in insurance operating costs and other expenses was $18, after-tax, of interest charged by Corporate on the amount of capital held by the Life operations in excess of the amount needed to support the capital requirements of the Life Operations for the year ended December 31, 2007. The Company recorded a reserve in the second quarter of 2007 for market regulatory matters of $21, after-tax. During the year, the Company recorded an insurance recovery of $9, after-tax, against the litigation costs associated with the regulatory matters. Refer to Realized Capital Gains and Losses by Segment table under Life Operating section of the MD&A. Year ended December 31, 2006 compared to the year ended December 31, 2005 The change in Other net income was due to the following: Life recorded an after-tax charge of $102 for the year ended December 31, 2005 to establish reserves for regulatory matters for investigations related to market timing by the SEC and New York Attorney General Office, directed brokerage by the SEC, and single premium group annuities by the New York Attorney General Office and the Connecticut Attorney General Office. During 2006, the Company achieved favorable settlements in several cases brought against the Company by policyholders regarding their purchase of broad-based leveraged corporate owned life insurance ( leveraged COLI ) policies in the early to mid-1990s. The Company ceased offering this product in 1996. Based on the favorable outcome of these cases, together with the Company current assessment of the few remaining leveraged COLI cases, the Company reduced its estimate of the ultimate cost of these cases during 2006. This reserve reduction, recorded in insurance operating costs and other expenses, resulted in an after-tax benefit of $34. Also contributing to the insurance operating costs and other expenses decreases for the year ended December 31, 2006 was a lower level of dividends to leveraged COLI policyholders. During 2005, the Company recorded a charge of $18, after-tax, related to the settlement of certain annuity contracts. 75 Table of Contents PROPERTY & CASUALTY Executive Overview Property & Casualty is organized into five reporting segments: the underwriting segments of Personal Lines, Small Commercial, Middle Market and Specialty Commercial (collectively Ongoing Operations ); and the Other Operations segment. In 2007, Property & Casualty changed its reporting segments to reflect the current manner by which its chief operating decision maker views and manages the business. All segment data for prior reporting periods have been adjusted to reflect the current segment reporting. Property & Casualty provides a number of coverages, as well as insurance related services, to businesses throughout the United States, including workers compensation, property, automobile, liability, umbrella, specialty casualty, marine, livestock, fidelity, surety, professional liability and directors and officers liability coverages. Property & Casualty also provides automobile, homeowners and home-based business coverage to individuals throughout the United States as well as insurance-related services to businesses. Property & Casualty derives its revenues principally from premiums earned for insurance coverages provided to insureds, investment income, and, to a lesser extent, from fees earned for services provided to third parties and net realized capital gains and losses. Premiums charged for insurance coverages are earned principally on a pro rata basis over the terms of the related policies in-force. Service fees principally include revenues from third party claims administration services provided by Specialty Risk Services and revenues from member contact center services provided through the AARP Health program. Total Property & Casualty Financial Highlights Earned Premiums Earned premium growth is an objective for Personal Lines, Small Commercial and Middle Market. Earned premium growth is not a specific objective for Specialty Commercial since Specialty Commercial is comprised of transactional businesses where premium writings may fluctuate based on the segment view of perceived market opportunity. Written premiums are earned over the policy term, which is six months for certain Personal Lines auto business and 12 months for substantially all of the remainder of the Company business. Written pricing, new business growth and premium renewal retention are factors that contribute to growth in written and earned premium. Written premiums [1] 2007 2006 2005 Personal Lines $ 3,947 $ 3,877 $ 3,676 Small Commercial 2,747 2,728 2,545 Middle Market 2,257 2,445 2,445 Specialty Commercial 1,484 1,608 1,817 Other Operations 5 4 4 Total $ 10,440 $ 10,662 $ 10,487 Earned premiums [1] Personal Lines $ 3,889 $ 3,760 $ 3,610 Small Commercial 2,736 2,652 2,421 Middle Market 2,351 2,454 2,355 Specialty Commercial 1,515 1,562 1,766 Other Operations 5 5 4 Total $ 10,496 $ 10,433 $ 10,156 [1] The difference between written premiums and earned premiums is attributable to the change in unearned premium reserve. Year ended December 31, 2007 compared to the year ended December 31, 2006 Earned Premiums Total Property & Casualty earned premiums increased by $63 due to an increase in Personal Lines and Small Commercial, partially offset by a decrease in Middle Market and Specialty Commercial. In Personal Lines, earned premium grew by $129, or 3%, primarily due to an increase in AARP and Agency earned premiums. AARP earned premium grew primarily due to an increase in the size of the AARP target market, the effect of direct marketing programs and the effect of cross selling homeowners insurance to insureds who have auto policies. Agency earned premium grew as a result of an increase in the number of agency appointments and further refinement of the Dimensions class plans. Partially offsetting this growth was the effect of the sale of the Omni non-standard auto business in the fourth quarter of 2006 which accounted for $127 of earned premium in 2006. Excluding Omni, Personal Lines earned premiums grew $251, or 7%, for the year ended December 31, 2007. In Small Commercial, earned premiums increased $84, or 3%, primarily due to new business premiums outpacing non-renewals for workers compensation business over the last six months of 2006 and the first six months of 2007. 76 Table of Contents Middle Market earned premium decreased by $103, or 4%, driven by decreases in all lines, including commercial auto, general liability, workers compensation and property. Earned premium decreases were driven by declines in earned pricing and premium renewal retention in all lines and a decline in new business premiums in all lines except workers compensation. Specialty Commercial earned premium decreased by $47, or 3%, primarily driven by a decrease in casualty and property and a decrease in earned premiums assumed under inter-segment arrangements, partially offset by an increase in professional liability, fidelity and surety. Year ended December 31, 2006 compared to the year ended December 31, 2005 Total Property & Casualty earned premiums grew $277, or 3%, due primarily to growth in Personal Lines, Small Commercial and Middle Market, partially offset by a decrease in Specialty Commercial. Contributing to the growth in earned premium was a $73 reduction of earned premium in 2005 due to catastrophe treaty reinstatement premium payable to reinsurers as a result of losses from hurricanes Katrina, Rita and Wilma, including $31 in Personal Lines, $7 in Small Commercial, $8 in Middle Market and $27 in Specialty Commercial. Before catastrophe treaty reinstatement premium, Ongoing Operations earned premium grew $203, or 2%, for 2006. For the year ended December 31, 2006, earned premiums grew $231, or 10%, in Small Commercial, $150, or 4%, in Personal Lines and $99, or 4%, in Middle Market. Apart from the effect of catastrophe treaty reinstatement premium in 2005, the growth was primarily driven by new business premium outpacing non-renewals over the last six months of 2005 and the full year of 2006 and the effect of earned pricing increases in homeowners, partially offset by the effect of higher property catastrophe treaty reinsurance costs and earned pricing decreases in Middle Market. Specialty Commercial earned premiums decreased by $204, or 12%, primarily driven by a decrease in casualty, property and other earned premiums, partially offset by an increase in professional liability, fidelity and surety. Casualty earned premiums decreased by $217, primarily because of the non-renewal of a single captive insurance program. The decrease in property earned premium was primarily due to a decline in new business, an increase in catastrophe treaty reinsurance costs and a strategic decision not to renew certain accounts with properties in catastrophe-prone areas. Net income 2007 2006 2005 Underwriting results $ 759 $ 745 $ 465 Net servicing and other income [1] 52 53 49 Net investment income 1,687 1,486 1,365 Other expenses (249 ) (223 ) (203 ) Net realized capital gains (losses) (172 ) 9 44 Income before income taxes 2,077 2,070 1,720 Income tax expense (570 ) (551 ) (484 ) Net income $ 1,507 $ 1,519 $ 1,236 [1] Net of expenses related to service business. Year ended December 31, 2007 compared to the year ended December 31, 2006 Net income decreased by $12, or 1%, for the year ended December 31, 2007, driven by the following changes: Income before Net income tax income 2006 $ 2,070 $ 1,519 Excluding Omni, a decrease in Ongoing Operations current accident year underwriting results before catastrophes (267 ) (174 ) A change to net realized capital losses (181 ) (158 ) An increase in net investment income 201 139 A decrease in Other Operations net unfavorable prior accident year reserve development 167 110 An increase in net favorable prior accident year reserve development in Ongoing Operations 81 52 An increase in other expenses (26 ) (17 ) Benefit from a tax true-up 20 An increase in current accident year underwriting results due to the sale of the Omni non-standard auto business, which generated a current accident year underwriting loss before catastrophes in 2006 22 14 A decrease in current accident year catastrophe losses 22 14 Other changes, net (12 ) (12 ) Net change in income for 2007 7 (12 ) 2007 $ 2,077 $ 1,507 77 Table of Contents Excluding Omni, the $267 decrease in Ongoing Operations current accident year underwriting results before catastrophes was primarily due to an increase in the loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development and an increase in insurance and operating costs and dividends. The increase in the loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development was primarily due to increased severity on Personal Lines auto liability claims, increased frequency on Personal Lines auto property damage claims and, to a lesser extent, increased severity on Personal Lines homeowners claims and a higher loss and loss adjustment expense ratio for both Small Commercial package business and Middle Market workers compensation claims. The change to net realized capital losses during 2007 was primarily due to an increase in credit-related impairments and decreases in the fair value of non-qualifying derivatives attributable to changes in value associated with credit derivatives due to credit spreads widening. Credit-related impairments in 2007 primarily consisted of impairments of asset-backed securities backed by sub-prime residential mortgage loans and impairments of corporate securities in the financial services and homebuilders sectors. (See the Other-Than-Temporary Impairments discussion within Investment Results for more information on the impairments recorded in 2007). Primarily driving the $201 increase in net investment income was a higher average invested asset base and income earned from a higher portfolio yield. The increase in the average invested asset base contributing to the increase in investment income was primarily due to positive operating cash flows, partially offset by the return of capital to Corporate. Contributing to the increase in net investment income was an increase in income from limited partnerships and other alternative investments, driven by a higher yield on these investments and shifting a greater allocation of investments to these asset classes. The $167 decrease in net unfavorable prior accident year development in Other Operations was primarily due to a $243 charge in 2006 to recognize the effect of the Equitas agreement and strengthening of the allowance for uncollectible reinsurance, partially offset by a $99 strengthening of reserves in 2007, primarily related to an adverse arbitration decision. See the Other Operations segment discussion of the MD&A for further information of the prior accident year reserve development in each year. The $81 increase in net favorable prior accident year development in Ongoing Operations was primarily due to $151 release of workers compensation loss and loss adjustment expenses reserves in 2007, partially offset by an $83 net release of prior accident year hurricane reserves in 2006. Refer to the Reserves section of the MD&A for further discussion. The $26 increase in other expenses was primarily due to $49 of interest charged by Corporate on the amount of capital held by the Property & Casualty operation in excess of the amount needed to support the capital requirements of the Property & Casualty operation, partially offset by a reduction in the estimated cost of legal settlements in 2007. Year ended December 31, 2006 compared to the year ended December 31, 2005 Net income increased $283 for the year ended December 31, 2006, primarily due to: Income before Net income tax income 2005 $ 1,720 $ 1,236 A decrease in current accident year catastrophe losses 152 99 An increase in Other Operations net unfavorable prior accident year reserve development (148 ) (96 ) An increase in net investment income 121 91 A $41 reduction of estimated Citizens assessments in 2006 related to the 2005 hurricanes compared to a charge of $64 for Citizens assessments in 2005 related to the 2005 and 2004 hurricanes 105 68 A change to $64 of net favorable prior accident year reserve development in Ongoing Operations 100 65 An increase in current accident year underwriting results due to catastrophe treaty reinstatement premium recorded as a reduction of earned premium in 2005 73 47 Gain from the sale of Omni, including income tax benefit of $49 (24 ) 25 An increase in other expenses, primarily due to lower bad debt expense in 2005 (20 ) (13 ) Excluding the gain from the sale of Omni, a decrease in net realized capital gains from $44 in 2005 to $33 in 2006 (11 ) (8 ) Excluding the change in Citizens assessments and catastrophe treaty reinstatement premium, a decrease in Ongoing Operations current accident year underwriting results before catastrophes (10 ) (7 ) Other changes, net 12 12 Net increase in income for 2006 350 283 2006 $ 2,070 $ 1,519 The $152 decrease in current accident year catastrophe losses was largely due to $264 of losses in 2005 related to hurricanes Katrina, Rita and Wilma, partially offset by an increase in non-hurricane catastrophe losses in 2006. The $148 increase in net unfavorable prior accident year development in Other Operations was primarily due to a $243 reduction of reinsurance recoverables in 2006 resulting from an agreement with Equitas and the Company evaluation of the reinsurance recoverables and allowance for uncollectible reinsurance associated with older, long-term casualty liabilities. 78 Table of Contents Primarily driving the $121 increase in net investment income was a larger investment base due to increased cash flows from underwriting as well as an increase in interest rates and a change in asset mix (i.e., a greater share of investments in mortgage loans and limited partnerships). The change to $64 of net favorable prior accident year development in 2006 for Ongoing Operations was primarily due to an $83 release of prior accident year hurricane reserves and a $58 release of allocated loss adjustment expense reserves for workers compensation and package business, partially offset by reserve strengthenings in Specialty Commercial. See the Reserves section for a discussion of prior accident year reserve development. Net realized capital gains decreased by $35 in total, primarily due to a $24, pre-tax, realized capital loss from the sale of Omni, an increase in other-than-temporary-impairments and losses on the sale of fixed maturity investments, partially offset by an increase in income from other sources. Excluding the change in Citizens assessments and catastrophe treaty reinstatement premium, Ongoing Operations current accident year underwriting results before catastrophes were down $10 from 2005 to 2006. The current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes of 62.4 for Ongoing Operations was relatively flat from 2005 to 2006 as a lower current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio for workers compensation business in Small Commercial was largely offset by an increase in non-catastrophe property loss costs in Middle Market and Personal Lines homeowners. Key Performance Ratios and Measures The Company considers several measures and ratios to be the key performance indicators for the property and casualty underwriting businesses. The following table and the segment discussions for the years ended December 31, 2007, 2006 and 2005 include various ratios and measures of profitability. Management believes that these ratios and measures are useful in understanding the underlying trends in The Hartford property and casualty insurance underwriting business. However, these key performance indicators should only be used in conjunction with, and not in lieu of, underwriting income for the underwriting segments of Personal Lines, Small Commercial, Middle Market and Specialty Commercial and net income for the Property & Casualty business as a whole, Ongoing Operations and Other Operations. These ratios and measures may not be comparable to other performance measures used by the Company competitors. Ongoing Operations earned premium growth 2007 2006 2005 Personal Lines 3 % 4 % 5 % Small Commercial 3 % 10 % 17 % Middle Market (4 %) 4 % 6 % Specialty Commercial (3 %) (12 %) 2 % Ongoing Operations 1 % 3 % 7 % Ongoing Operations combined ratio Combined ratio before catastrophes and prior year development 90.5 88.0 89.4 Catastrophe ratio Current year 1.7 1.9 3.5 Prior years 0.1 (0.7 ) 0.1 Total catastrophe ratio 1.8 1.2 3.6 Non-catastrophe prior year development (1.5 ) 0.1 0.2 Combined ratio 90.8 89.3 93.2 Other Operations net income (loss) $ 30 $ (35 ) $ 71 Total Property & Casualty measures of net investment income Investment yield, after-tax 4.4 % 4.1 % 4.1 % Average annual invested assets at cost $ 29,760 $ 27,324 $ 25,148 Year ended December 31, 2007 compared to the year ended December 31, 2006 Ongoing Operations earned premium growth Within Personal Lines, the decrease in the earned premium growth rate from 2006 to 2007 was due to the Company exit from the Omni non-standard auto business. Omni, which was sold in the fourth quarter of 2006, accounted for $127 of earned premium in 2006. Excluding Omni, the Personal Lines earned premium growth rate was 7% in both 2006 and 2007. In 2007, an increase in the growth rate of AARP earned premium was offset by the effect of a decrease in the growth rate of Agency earned premium. Within Small Commercial, the decrease in the earned premium growth rate was primarily attributable to a decrease in new business written premium and premium renewal retention over the last six months of 2006 and the first six months of 2007. Also contributing to the lower growth rate was a decrease in earned pricing. Within Middle Market, the change from an increase in earned premium in 2006 to a decrease in earned premium in 2007 was primarily attributable to earned pricing decreases, a decrease in new business written premium over the last six months of 2006 and the first six months of 2007 and a decrease in premium renewal retention over the first six months of 2007. 79 Table of Contents The rate of decline in Specialty Commercial earned premium slowed in 2007, primarily due to a lower earned premium decrease in casualty and property, partially offset by a lower earned premium increase in professional liability, fidelity and surety. Casualty earned premium experienced a larger decrease in 2006, primarily because of a decrease in 2006 earned premium from a single captive insured program that expired in 2005. Earned premium decreases in property were larger in 2006 than in 2007 as a result of a strategic decision in 2006 not to renew certain accounts with properties in catastrophe-prone areas. The growth rate in professional liability, fidelity and surety earned premium slowed in 2007 due to a decrease in earned pricing and a decline in new business growth and premium renewal retention. Ongoing Operations combined ratio For the year ended December 31, 2007, the Ongoing Operations combined ratio increased 1.5 points, to 90.8, due to a 2.5 point increase in the combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development, partially offset by a 0.8 point improvement in prior accident year reserve development and the effect of the sale of Omni in the fourth quarter of 2006. Omni had a higher combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development than other business written by the Company. The increase in the combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development, from 88.0 to 90.5, was primarily due to a 1.4 point increase in the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes and, to a lesser extent, an increase in the expense ratio. The increase in the loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development was primarily due to increased severity on Personal Lines auto liability claims, increased frequency on Personal Lines auto property damage claims and, to a lesser extent, increased severity on Personal Lines homeowners claims and a higher loss and loss adjustment expense ratio for both Small Commercial package business and Middle Market workers compensation claims. Contributing to the increase in the expense ratio was the effect of a $41 reduction of estimated Florida Citizens assessments in 2006 related to the 2005 Florida hurricanes. The catastrophe ratio increased, primarily due to the effect of net favorable reserve development of prior accident year catastrophe losses in 2006. In 2006, the Company recognized $83 of net reserve releases related to the 2005 and 2004 hurricanes. Net non-catastrophe prior accident year reserve development was slightly unfavorable in 2006, but favorable in 2007. Favorable reserve development in 2007 was largely attributable to the release of reserves for workers compensation claims, primarily related to accident years 2002 to 2006. See the Reserves section for a discussion of prior accident year reserve development for Ongoing Operations in 2007. Other Operations net income (loss) Other Operations reported net income of $30 in 2007 compared to a net loss of $35 in 2006. The improvement in results was primarily due to a decrease in unfavorable prior accident year reserve development, partially offset by a change from net realized gains in 2006 to net realized losses in 2007 and a decrease in net investment income. See the Other Operations segment MD&A for further discussion. Investment yield and average invested assets In 2007, the after-tax investment yield increased due to a higher yield on limited partnerships, hedge funds and mortgage loans as well as due to a change in asset mix, including shifting a greater share of investments to these asset classes. The average annual invested assets at cost increased as a result of positive operating cash flows and an increase in collateral held from increased securities lending activities. Year ended December 31, 2006 compared to the year ended December 31, 2005 Ongoing Operations earned premium growth The lower growth rate in Personal Lines was primarily due to unfavorable changes in earned pricing and the effect of higher property catastrophe treaty reinsurance costs. Partially offsetting the lower growth rate was the effect of $31 of catastrophe treaty reinstatement premium recorded as a reduction of earned premium in 2005 and an increase in new business written premium in auto and homeowners. During 2006, there was a decline in earned pricing increases in homeowners and a change from slight earned pricing increases for auto in 2005 to flat earned pricing for auto in 2006. The lower growth rate in Small Commercial was primarily attributable to a decrease in new business written premium, lower earned pricing increases and higher property catastrophe treaty reinsurance costs. The lower growth rate in Middle Market was primarily attributable to a decrease in new business written premium in the first six months of 2006, larger earned pricing decreases and higher property catastrophe treaty reinsurance costs. The decline in Specialty Commercial earned premium in 2006 primarily resulted from the non-renewal of a single captive insurance program within specialty casualty that accounted for $241 of earned premium in 2005 and a decrease in specialty property earned premium, partially offset by the effect of $26 of catastrophe treaty reinstatement premium recorded as a reduction of earned premium in 2005 and a higher growth rate in professional liability, fidelity and surety business. Ongoing Operations combined ratio For 2006, the combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development decreased by 1.4 points, to 88.0, driven largely by the effect of $73 of catastrophe treaty reinstatement premium recorded as a reduction of earned premium in 2005 and an 80 Table of Contents improvement in the expense ratio. Before the effect of reinstatement premium in 2005, the combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development decreased by 0.7 points, primarily due to a 0.8 point decrease in the expense ratio and a lower current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio for workers compensation business in Small Commercial, partially offset by an increase in non-catastrophe property loss costs in Middle Market and Personal Lines homeowners. The decrease in the expense ratio was primarily driven by a reduction of $41 for Citizens assessments in 2006 and a charge of $64 for Citizens assessments in 2005. The decrease in the current accident year catastrophe ratio for 2006 was primarily due to $264 of net losses incurred in 2005 for hurricanes Katrina, Rita and Wilma, partially offset by an increase in non-hurricane catastrophe losses. Catastrophe losses for 2006 included tornadoes and hail storms in the Midwest and windstorms in Texas and on the East coast. Prior accident year catastrophe reserves were reduced by $70 in 2006, primarily due to $83 of favorable development related to the 2005 and 2004 hurricanes. Net prior accident year development for non-catastrophe claims was not significant as reserve strengthenings were largely offset by reserve releases. See the Reserves section for a discussion of prior accident year reserve development for Ongoing Operations in 2006. Other Operations net income (loss) Other Operations reported a net loss of $35 for 2006 compared to net income of $71 for 2005. The change from net income to a net loss was primarily due to a $148 increase in unfavorable prior accident year development and a $22 decrease in net investment income, partially offset by a change to an income tax benefit in 2006 as a result of a pre-tax loss in 2006. The $148 increase in prior accident year development was primarily due to a $243 reduction in net reinsurance recoverables as a result of the agreement with Equitas and the Company evaluation of the reinsurance recoverables and allowance for uncollectible reinsurance associated with older, long-term casualty liabilities. Partially offsetting the increase in prior accident year development in 2006 was $85 of unfavorable reserve development for assumed reinsurance in 2005. The $22 decrease in net investment income was primarily due to lower invested assets as a result of loss and loss adjustment expense payments and the reallocation of capital from Other Operations to Ongoing Operations. Investment yield and average invested assets The after-tax investment yield remained flat at 4.1% from 2005 to 2006. An increase in the yield on investments in fixed maturities was offset by a decrease in the yield on limited partnerships. The average annual invested assets at cost increased as a result of net underwriting cash inflows and investment income. How Property & Casualty seeks to earn income Net income is a measure of profit or loss used in evaluating the performance of Total Property & Casualty and the Ongoing Operations and Other Operations segments. Within Ongoing Operations, the underwriting segments of Personal Lines, Small Commercial, Middle Market and Specialty Commercial are evaluated by The Hartford management primarily based upon underwriting results. Underwriting results within Ongoing Operations are influenced significantly by earned premium growth and the adequacy of the Company pricing. Underwriting profitability over time is also greatly influenced by the Company underwriting discipline, which seeks to manage exposure to loss through favorable risk selection and diversification, its management of claims, its use of reinsurance and its ability to manage its expense ratio which it accomplishes through economies of scale and its management of acquisition costs and other underwriting expenses. Pricing adequacy depends on a number of factors, including the ability to obtain regulatory approval for rate changes, proper evaluation of underwriting risks, the ability to project future loss cost frequency and severity based on historical loss experience adjusted for known trends, the Company response to rate actions taken by competitors, and expectations about regulatory and legal developments and expense levels. Property & Casualty seeks to price its insurance policies such that insurance premiums and future net investment income earned on premiums received will cover underwriting expenses and the ultimate cost of paying claims reported on the policies and provide for a profit margin. For many of its insurance products, Property & Casualty is required to obtain approval for its premium rates from state insurance departments. In setting its pricing, Property & Casualty assumes an expected level of losses from natural or man-made catastrophes that will cover the Company exposure to catastrophes over the long-term. In most years, however, Property & Casualty actual losses from catastrophes will be more or less than that assumed in its pricing due to the significant volatility of catastrophe losses. ISO defines a catastrophe loss as an event that causes $25 or more in industry insured property losses and affects a significant number of property and casualty policyholders and insurers. Given the lag in the period from when claims are incurred to when they are reported and paid, final claim settlements may vary from current estimates of incurred losses and loss expenses, particularly when those payments may not occur until well into the future. Reserves for lines of business with a longer lag (or tail ) in reporting are more difficult to estimate. Reserve estimates for longer tail lines are initially set based on loss and loss expense ratio assumptions estimated when the business was priced and are adjusted as the paid and reported claims develop, indicating that the ultimate loss and loss expense ratio will differ from the initial assumptions. Adjustments to previously established loss and loss expense reserves, if any, are reflected in underwriting results in the period in which the adjustment is determined to be necessary. 81 Table of Contents The investment return, or yield, on Property & Casualty invested assets is an important element of the Company earnings since insurance products are priced with the assumption that premiums received can be invested for a period of time before loss and loss adjustment expenses are paid. For longer tail lines, such as workers compensation and general liability, claims are paid over several years and, therefore, the premiums received for these lines of business can generate significant investment income. Due to the emphasis on preservation of capital and the need to maintain sufficient liquidity to satisfy claim obligations, the vast majority of Property & Casualty invested assets have been held in fixed maturities, including, among other asset classes, corporate bonds, municipal bonds, government debt, short-term debt, mortgage-backed securities and asset-backed securities. Through its Other Operations segment, Property & Casualty is responsible for managing operations of The Hartford that have discontinued writing new or renewal business as well as managing the claims related to asbestos and environmental exposures. Definitions of key ratios and measures Written and earned premiums Written premium is a statutory accounting financial measure which represents the amount of premiums charged for policies issued, net of reinsurance, during a fiscal period. Earned premium is a U.S. GAAP and statutory measure. Premiums are considered earned and are included in the financial results on a pro rata basis over the policy period. Management believes that written premium is a performance measure that is useful to investors as it reflects current trends in the Company sale of property and casualty insurance products. Written and earned premium are recorded net of ceded reinsurance premium. Reinstatement premiums Reinstatement premium represents additional ceded premium paid for the reinstatement of the amount of reinsurance coverage that was reduced as a result of a reinsurance loss payment. Policies in-force Policies in-force represent the number of policies with coverage in effect as of the end of the period. The number of policies in-force is a growth measure used for Personal Lines, Small Commercial and Middle Market and is affected by both new business growth and premium renewal retention. Written pricing increase (decrease) Written pricing increase (decrease) over the comparable period of the prior year includes the impact of rate filings, the impact of changes in the value of the rating bases and individual risk pricing decisions. A number of factors impact written pricing increases (decreases) including expected loss costs as projected by the Company pricing actuaries, rate filings approved by state regulators, risk selection decisions made by the Company underwriters and marketplace competition. Written pricing changes reflect the property and casualty insurance market cycle. Prices tend to increase for a particular line of business when insurance carriers have incurred significant losses in that line of business in the recent past or the industry as a whole commits less of its capital to writing exposures in that line of business. Prices tend to decrease when recent loss experience has been favorable or when competition among insurance carriers increases. Earned pricing increase (decrease) Written premiums are earned over the policy term, which is six months for certain Personal Lines auto business and 12 months for substantially all of the remainder of the Company business. Because the Company earns premiums over the 6 to 12 month term of the policies, earned pricing increases (decreases) lag written pricing increases (decreases) by 6 to 12 months. Premium renewal retention Premium renewal retention represents the ratio of net written premium in the current period that is not derived from new business divided by total net written premium of the prior period. Accordingly, premium renewal retention includes the effect of written pricing changes on renewed business. In addition, the renewal retention rate is affected by a number of other factors, including the percentage of renewal policy quotes accepted and decisions by the Company to non-renew policies because of specific policy underwriting concerns or because of a decision to reduce premium writings in certain lines of business or states. Premium renewal retention is also affected by advertising and rate actions taken by competitors. Loss and loss adjustment expense ratio The loss and loss adjustment expense ratio is a measure of the cost of claims incurred in the calendar year divided by earned premium and includes losses incurred for both the current and prior accident years. Among other factors, the loss and loss adjustment expense ratio needed for the Company to achieve its targeted return on equity fluctuates from year to year based on changes in the expected investment yield over the claim settlement period, the timing of expected claim settlements and the targeted returns set by management based on the competitive environment. The loss and loss adjustment expense ratio is affected by claim frequency and claim severity, particularly for shorter-tail property lines of business, where the emergence of claim frequency and severity is credible and likely indicative of ultimate losses. Claim frequency represents the percentage change in the average number of reported claims per unit of exposure in the current accident year compared to that of the previous accident year. Claim severity represents the percentage change in the estimated average cost per claim in the current 82 Table of Contents accident year compared to that of the previous accident year. As one of the factors used to determine pricing, the Company practice is to first make an overall assumption about claim frequency and severity for a given line of business and then, as part of the ratemaking process, adjust the assumption as appropriate for the particular state, product or coverage. Current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes The current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes is a measure of the cost of non-catastrophe claims incurred in the current accident year divided by earned premiums. Management believes that the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes is a performance measure that is useful to investors as it removes the impact of volatile and unpredictable catastrophe losses and prior accident year reserve development. Current accident year catastrophe ratio The current accident year catastrophe ratio represents the ratio of catastrophe losses (net of reinsurance) to earned premiums for catastrophe claims incurred during the current accident year. A catastrophe is an event that causes $25 or more in industry insured property losses and affects a significant number of property and casualty policyholders and insurers. The catastrophe ratio includes the effect of catastrophe losses, but does not include the effect of reinstatement premiums. Prior accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio The prior year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio represents the increase (decrease) in the estimated cost of settling catastrophe and non-catastrophe claims incurred in prior accident years as recorded in the current calendar year divided by earned premiums. Expense ratio The expense ratio is the ratio of underwriting expenses, excluding bad debt expense, to earned premiums. Underwriting expenses include the amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs and insurance operating costs and expenses. Deferred policy acquisition costs include commissions, taxes, licenses and fees and other underwriting expenses and are amortized over the policy term. Policyholder dividend ratio The policyholder dividend ratio is the ratio of policyholder dividends to earned premium. Combined ratio The combined ratio is the sum of the loss and loss adjustment expense ratio, the expense ratio and the policyholder dividend ratio. This ratio is a relative measurement that describes the related cost of losses and expenses for every $100 of earned premiums. A combined ratio below 100.0 demonstrates underwriting profit; a combined ratio above 100.0 demonstrates underwriting losses. Catastrophe ratio The catastrophe ratio (a component of the loss and loss adjustment expense ratio) represents the ratio of catastrophe losses (net of reinsurance) to earned premiums. By their nature, catastrophe losses vary dramatically from year to year. Based on the mix and geographic dispersion of premium written and estimates derived from various catastrophe loss models, the Company expected catastrophe ratio over the long-term is 3.0 to 3.5 points. See Risk Management Strategy below for a discussion of the Company catastrophe risk management program that serves to mitigate the Company net exposure to catastrophe losses. The catastrophe ratio includes the effect of catastrophe losses, but does not include the effect of reinstatement premiums. Combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development The combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development represents the combined ratio for the current accident year, excluding the impact of catastrophes. The Company believes this ratio is an important measure of the trend in profitability since it removes the impact of volatile and unpredictable catastrophe losses and prior accident year reserve development. Underwriting results Underwriting results is a before-tax measure that represents earned premiums less incurred losses, loss adjustment expenses and underwriting expenses. The Hartford believes that underwriting results provides investors with a valuable measure of before-tax profitability derived from underwriting activities, which are managed separately from the Company investing activities. Underwriting results is also presented for Ongoing Operations and Other Operations. A reconciliation of underwriting results to net income for Ongoing Operations and Other Operations is set forth in their respective discussions herein. Investment yield The investment yield, or return, on the Company invested assets primarily includes interest income on fixed maturity investments. Based upon the fair value of Property & Casualty investments as of December 31, 2007 and 2006, approximately 89% and 91%, respectively, of invested assets were held in fixed maturities. A number of factors affect the yield on fixed maturity investments, including fluctuations in interest rates and the level of prepayments. The Company also invests in equity securities, mortgage loans and limited partnership arrangements. 83 Table of Contents Property & Casualty insurance business has been written by a number of writing companies that, under a pooling arrangement, participate in the Hartford Fire Insurance Pool, the lead company of which is the Hartford Fire Insurance Company ( Hartford Fire ). Property & Casualty maintains one portfolio of invested assets for all business written by the Hartford Fire Insurance Pool companies, including business reported in both the Ongoing Operations and Other Operations segments. Separate investment portfolios are maintained within Other Operations for the runoff of international assumed reinsurance claims and for the runoff business of Heritage Holdings, Inc., including its subsidiaries, Excess Insurance Company Ltd., First State Insurance Company and Heritage Reinsurance Company, Ltd. Within the Hartford Fire Insurance Pool, invested assets are attributed to Ongoing Operations and Other Operations pursuant to the Company capital attribution process. The Hartford attributes capital to each line of business or segment using an internally-developed, risk-based capital attribution methodology that incorporates management assessment of the relative risks within each line of business or segment, as well as the capital requirements of external parties, such as regulators and rating agencies. Net investment income earned on the Hartford Fire invested asset portfolio is allocated between Ongoing Operations and Other Operations based on the allocation of invested assets to each segment and the expected investment yields earned by each segment. Net investment income earned on the separate portfolios within Other Operations is recorded entirely within Other Operations. Based on the Company method of allocating net investment income for the Hartford Fire Insurance Pool and the net investment income earned by Other Operations on its separate investment portfolios, in 2007, the after-tax investment yield for Ongoing Operations was 4.6% and the after-tax investment yield for Other Operations was 3.3%. Net realized capital gains (losses) When fixed maturity or equity investments are sold, any gain or loss is reported in net realized capital gains (losses). Individual securities may be sold for a variety of reasons, including a decision to change the Company asset allocation in response to market conditions and the need to liquidate funds to meet large claim settlements. Accordingly, net realized capital gains (losses) for any particular period are not predictable and can vary significantly. In addition, net realized capital gains (losses) include other-than-temporary impairments in the fair value of investments, changes in the fair value of non-qualifying derivatives and hedge ineffectiveness on qualifying derivative instruments. Refer to the Investment section of MD&A for further discussion of net investment income and net realized capital gains (losses). Reserves Reserving for property and casualty losses is an estimation process. As additional experience and other relevant claim data become available, reserve levels are adjusted accordingly. Such adjustments of reserves related to claims incurred in prior years are a natural occurrence in the loss reserving process and are referred to as reserve development . Reserve development that increases previous estimates of ultimate cost is called reserve strengthening . Reserve development that decreases previous estimates of ultimate cost is called reserve releases . Reserve development can influence the comparability of year over year underwriting results and is set forth in the paragraphs and tables that follow. The prior accident year development (pts.) in the following table represents the ratio of reserve development to earned premiums. For a detailed discussion of the Company reserve policies, see Notes 1, 11 and 12 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements and the Critical Accounting Estimates section of the MD&A. Based on the results of the quarterly reserve review process, the Company determines the appropriate reserve adjustments, if any, to record. Recorded reserve estimates are changed after consideration of numerous factors, including but not limited to, the magnitude of the difference between the actuarial indication and the recorded reserves, improvement or deterioration of actuarial indications in the period, the maturity of the accident year, trends observed over the recent past and the level of volatility within a particular line of business. In general, changes are made more quickly to more mature accident years and less volatile lines of business. For information regarding reserving for asbestos and environmental claims within Other Operations, refer to the Other Operations segment discussion. As part of its quarterly reserve review process, the Company is closely monitoring reported loss development in certain lines where the recent emergence of paid losses and case reserves could indicate a trend that may eventually lead the Company to change its estimate of ultimate losses in those lines. If, and when, the emergence of reported losses is determined to be a trend that changes the Company estimate of ultimate losses, prior accident year reserves would be adjusted in the period the change in estimate is made. For example, the Company has experienced favorable emergence of reported workers compensation claims for recent accident years and, during 2007, released workers compensation reserves in Small Commercial for the 2002 to 2006 accident years by $151. If reported losses on workers compensation claims for recent accident years continue to emerge favorably, reserves could be reduced further. During 2007, the Company experienced favorable emergence of losses on professional liability claims for recent accident years and, during the fourth quarter of 2007, released professional liability reserves by $15, largely due to a decrease in the estimated cost to settle claims under errors and omissions policies in the 2005 accident year. In addition, reported losses for claims under directors and officers insurance policies are emerging favorably to initial expectations although it is too early to tell if this trend will be sustained. Up until the fourth quarter of 2007, there had been a decrease in the number of shareholders class action suits under directors and officers insurance policies. Any continued favorable emergence of claims under errors and omissions policies or directors and officers insurance policies could lead the Company to reduce reserves for these liabilities in future quarters. 84 Table of Contents The Company expects to perform its regular reviews of asbestos liabilities in the second quarter of 2008, Other Operations reinsurance recoverables and the allowance for uncollectible reinsurance in the second quarter of 2008 and environmental liabilities in the third quarter of 2008. If there are significant developments that affect particular exposures, reinsurance arrangements or the financial conditions of particular reinsurers, the Company will make adjustments to its reserves, or the portion of liabilities it expects to cede to reinsurers. A rollforward of liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses by segment for Property & Casualty for the year ended December 31, 2007 follows: For the year ended December 31, 2007 Personal Small Middle Specialty Ongoing Other Total Lines Commercial Market Commercial Operations Operations P&C Beginning liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses-gross $ 1,959 $ 3,421 $ 4,517 $ 6,378 $ 16,275 $ 5,716 $ 21,991 Reinsurance and other recoverables 134 214 477 2,262 3,087 1,300 4,387 Beginning liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses-net 1,825 3,207 4,040 4,116 13,188 4,416 17,604 Provision for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses Current accident year before catastrophes 2,576 1,594 1,523 999 6,692 6,692 Current accident year catastrophes 125 28 15 9 177 177 Prior accident years (4 ) (209 ) (14 ) 82 (145 ) 193 48 Total provision for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses 2,697 1,413 1,524 1,090 6,724 193 6,917 Payments (2,503 ) (1,222 ) (1,204 ) (764 ) (5,693 ) (597 ) (6,290 ) Reallocation of reserves for unallocated loss adjustment expenses [1] (58 ) (105 ) (86 ) 124 (125 ) 125 Ending liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses-net 1,961 3,293 4,274 4,566 14,094 4,137 18,231 Reinsurance and other recoverables 81 177 413 2,317 2,988 934 3,922 Ending liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses-gross $ 2,042 $ 3,470 $ 4,687 $ 6,883 $ 17,082 $ 5,071 $ 22,153 Earned premiums $ 3,889 $ 2,736 $ 2,351 $ 1,515 $ 10,491 $ 5 $ 10,496 Loss and loss expense paid ratio [2] 64.4 44.7 51.3 50.3 54.3 Loss and loss expense incurred ratio 69.3 51.6 64.8 72.0 64.1 Prior accident year development (pts.) (0.1 ) (7.6 ) (0.6 ) 5.4 (1.4 ) [1] Prior to the second quarter of 2007, the Company evaluated the adequacy of the reserves for unallocated loss adjustment expenses on a company-wide basis. During the second quarter of 2007, the Company refined its analysis of the reserves at the segment level, resulting in the reallocation of reserves among segments, including a reallocation of reserves from Ongoing Operations to Other Operations. [2] The loss and loss expense paid ratio represents the ratio of paid loss and loss adjustment expenses to earned premiums. 85 Table of Contents Prior accident year development recorded in 2007 Included within prior accident year development for the year ended December 31, 2007 were the following reserve strengthenings (releases). Personal Small Middle Specialty Ongoing Other Total Lines Commercial Market Commercial Operations Operations P&C Release of workers compensation loss and loss adjustment expense reserves, primarily for accident years 2002 to 2006 $ $ (151 ) $ $ $ (151 ) $ $ (151 ) Release of general liability loss and loss adjustment expense reserves for accident years 2003 to 2006 (49 ) (49 ) (49 ) Release of workers compensation loss reserves for accident years 1987 to 2000 (33 ) (33 ) (33 ) Release of loss reserves for package business for accident years 2003 to 2006 (30 ) (30 ) (30 ) Release of reserves for surety business for accident years 2003 to 2006 (22 ) (22 ) (22 ) Release of commercial auto liability reserves for accident years 2003 and 2004 (18 ) (18 ) (18 ) Release of reserves on Personal Lines auto liability claims for accident years 2002 to 2006 (16 ) (16 ) (16 ) Release of reserves on errors & omissions policies for accident year 2005 (15 ) (15 ) (15 ) Strengthening of workers compensation loss and loss adjustment expense reserves for accident years 1987 to 2001 47 47 47 Strengthening of workers compensation reserves for accident years 1973 & prior 40 40 40 Strengthening of general liability reserves for accident years more than 20 years old 14 25 39 39 Strengthening of general liability reserves primarily related to accident years 1987 to 1997 34 34 34 Strengthening or reserves primarily as a result of an adverse arbitration decision 99 99 Strengthening of environmental reserves 25 25 Other reserve re-estimates, net [1] 12 5 (1 ) 13 29 69 98 Total prior accident year development for the year ended December 31, 2007 $ (4 ) $ (209 ) $ (14 ) $ 82 $ (145 ) $ 193 $ 48 [1] Includes reserve discount accretion of $31, including $6 in Small Commercial, $8 in Middle Market, $11 in Specialty Commercial and $6 in Other Operations. 86 Table of Contents During the year ended December 31, 2007, the Company re-estimates of prior accident year reserves included the following significant reserve changes. Ongoing Operations Released Small Commercial workers compensation reserves by $151, primarily related to accident years 2002 to 2006. This reserve release is a continuation of favorable developments first recognized in 2005 and 2006. The workers compensation reserve releases in 2007 resulted from a determination that workers compensation losses continue to develop even more favorably from prior expectations due to the California and Florida legal reforms and underwriting actions as well as cost reduction initiatives first instituted in 2003. In particular, the state legal reforms and underwriting actions have resulted in lower than expected medical claim severity. In addition, the Company determined that paid losses related to workers compensation policies sold through payroll service providers were emerging favorably, leading to a release of reserves for the 2003 to 2006 accident years. The $151 reserve release represented 9% of the Company net reserves for Small Commercial workers compensation claims as of December 31, 2006. Released reserves for Middle Market general liability claims related to the 2003 to 2006 accident years by $49. Beginning in the third quarter of 2007, the Company observed that reported losses for high hazard and umbrella general liability claims for the 2003 to 2006 accident years were emerging favorably and this caused management to reduce its estimate of the cost of future reported claims for these accident years, resulting in a reserve release in the third and fourth quarter of 2007. This reserve development is unrelated to the reserve strengthening in 2005 and 2006 of other Middle Market general liability claims which developed unfavorably due to higher than anticipated loss payments beyond four years of development. The $49 reserve release represented 6% of the Company net reserves for Middle Market general liability claims as of December 31, 2006. Released Small Commercial workers compensation reserves related to accident years 2000 and prior by $33. The severity of workers compensation medical claims for these accident years has emerged favorably to previous expectations. As the continued development of these claims has resulted in a sustained favorable trend, management released reserves in the fourth quarter of 2007. The $33 reserve release represented 2% of the Company net reserves for Small Commercial workers compensation claims as of December 31, 2006. Recorded a $30 net release of reserves for Small Commercial package business related to the 2003 to 2006 accident years. Reserve reviews completed during 2007 identified that the frequency of reported liability claims on Small Commercial package business policies for these accident years was lower than the previously expected frequency. In addition, reported loss costs on property coverages have emerged favorably for the 2006 accident year. In recognition of these trends, in the second and fourth quarter of 2007, management reduced reserves by a total of $30. The $30 reserve release represented 3% of the Company net reserves for Small Commercial package business claims as of December 31, 2006. Released reserves for commercial surety business by $22 for accident years 2003 to 2006. Reported losses for commercial surety business have been emerging favorably resulting in the Company lowering its estimate of ultimate unpaid losses during the third quarter of 2007. The $22 reserve release represented 14% of the Company net reserves for fidelity and surety claims as of December 31, 2006. Released Middle Market commercial auto liability reserves by $18 for accident years 2003 and 2004. Since the first quarter of 2007, reported losses for commercial auto liability claims in these accident years have emerged favorably although management did not determine that this was a verifiable trend until the third quarter of 2007 when it released the reserves. The $18 reserve release represented 6% of the Company net reserves for Middle Market auto liability claims as of December 31, 2006. Released reserves for Personal Lines auto liability claims for accident years 2002 to 2006 by $16. This reserve release was a continuation of trends first observed in 2006. During the first quarter of 2006, the Company released auto liability reserves related to the 2005 accident year due to frequency emerging favorable to initial expectations. During the second quarter of 2006, the Company observed that loss cost severity on auto liability claims for the 2004 accident year was emerging favorable to initial expectations and released reserves to recognize this trend. For each of the 2002 to 2006 accident years, the Company has continued to observe favorable trends in reported severity and, in the fourth quarter of 2007, the Company released an additional $16 in reserves. The $16 reserve release represented 1% of the Company net reserves for Personal Lines auto liability claims as of December 31, 2006. Released reserves for errors and omissions claims for accident year 2005 by $15. During the fourth quarter of 2007, the Company updated its analysis of certain professional liability claims and the new analysis showed that claims under errors and omissions policies were emerging favorable to initial expectations, resulting in this reserve release. The $15 reserve release represented 3% of the Company net reserves for professional liability claims as of December 31, 2006. Strengthened Specialty Commercial workers compensation reserves by $47, primarily related to accident years 1987 to 2001. Management has been observing larger than expected increases in loss cost severity, particularly on high deductible and excess policies. The $47 reserve strengthening represented 2% of the Company net reserves for Specialty Commercial workers compensation claims as of December 31, 2006. Strengthened Middle Market workers compensation reserves by $40 for accident years 1973 and prior, primarily driven by a reduction in reinsurance recoverables from the commutation of certain reinsurance treaties. Due to the commutations, within the past two years, net paid losses on these claims have begun to emerge unfavorably to initial expectations and, during 2007, the Company determined that this trend in higher paid losses would ultimately result in unpaid losses settling for more than management previous estimates. The $40 reserve strengthening represented 2% of net reserves for Middle Market workers compensation claims as of December 31, 2006. 87 Table of Contents Strengthened general liability reserves by $39 for accident years more than 20 years old. The Company has experienced an increase in defense costs for certain mass tort claims and, during 2007, the Company determined that the increase in defense costs was a sustained trend that resulted in an increase in reserves. The $39 reserve strengthening represented 2% of the Company net reserves for general liability claims as of December 31, 2006. Strengthened reserves for Specialty Commercial general and products liability claims by $34, primarily related to the 1987 to 1997 accident years. Reported losses on general and products liability claims have been emerging unfavorably to previous expectations and loss adjustment expenses have been higher than expected on late emerging claims. The $34 reserve strengthening represented 3% of the Company net reserves for Specialty Commercial general liability claims as of December 31, 2006. Also during 2007, the Company refined its processes for allocating IBNR reserves by accident year, resulting in a reclassification of $347 of IBNR reserves from the 2003 to 2006 accident years to the 2002 and prior accident years. This reclassification of reserves by accident year had no effect on total recorded reserves within any segment or on total recorded reserves for any line of business within a segment. Other Operations During the second quarter of 2007, an arbitration panel found that a Hartford subsidiary, established as a captive reinsurance company in the 1970s by The Hartford former parent, ITT Corporation ( ITT ), had additional obligations to ITT primary insurance carrier under ITT captive insurance program, which ended in 1993. When ITT spun off The Hartford in 1995, the former captive became a Hartford subsidiary. The arbitration concerned whether certain claims could be presented to the former captive in a different manner than ITT primary insurance carrier historically had presented them. The Company recorded a charge of $99 principally as a result of this adverse arbitration decision. The Company completed its environmental reserve evaluation and increased its environmental reserves by $25. As part of this evaluation, the Company reviewed all of its open direct domestic insurance accounts exposed to environmental liability as well as assumed reinsurance accounts and its London Market exposures for both direct and assumed reinsurance. The Company found estimates for individual cases changed based upon the particular circumstances of each account. These changes were case specific and not as a result of any underlying change in the current environment. A rollforward of liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses by segment for Property & Casualty for the year ended December 31, 2006 follows: For the year ended December 31, 2006 Personal Small Middle Specialty Ongoing Other Total Lines Commercial Market Commercial Operations Operations P&C Beginning liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses-gross $ 2,152 $ 3,023 $ 4,172 $ 6,073 $ 15,420 $ 6,846 $ 22,266 Reinsurance and other recoverables 385 192 565 2,306 3,448 1,955 5,403 Beginning liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses-net 1,767 2,831 3,607 3,767 11,972 4,891 16,863 Provision for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses Current accident year before catastrophes 2,396 1,509 1,533 1,069 6,507 6,507 Current accident year catastrophes 120 34 36 9 199 199 Prior years (38 ) (75 ) 15 34 (64 ) 360 296 Total provision for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses 2,478 1,468 1,584 1,112 6,642 360 7,002 Payments (2,309 ) (1,092 ) (1,151 ) (763 ) (5,315 ) (835 ) (6,150 ) Net reserves of Omni business sold (111 ) (111 ) (111 ) Ending liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses-net 1,825 3,207 4,040 4,116 13,188 4,416 17,604 Reinsurance and other recoverables 134 214 477 2,262 3,087 1,300 4,387 Ending liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses-gross $ 1,959 $ 3,421 $ 4,517 $ 6,378 $ 16,275 $ 5,716 $ 21,991 Earned premiums $ 3,760 $ 2,652 $ 2,454 $ 1,562 $ 10,428 $ 5 $ 10,433 Loss and loss expense paid ratio [1] 61.4 41.1 47.1 48.6 51.0 Loss and loss expense incurred ratio 65.9 55.3 64.7 71.1 63.7 Prior accident year development (pts.) (1.0 ) (2.8 ) 0.6 2.3 (0.6 ) [1] The loss and loss expense paid ratio represents the ratio of paid loss and loss adjustment expenses to earned premiums. 88 Table of Contents Prior accident year development recorded in 2006 Included within prior accident year development for the year ended December 31, 2006 were the following reserve strengthenings (releases). Personal Small Middle Specialty Ongoing Other Total Lines Commercial Market Commercial Operations Operations P&C Net release of catastrophe loss reserves for 2004 and 2005 hurricanes $ (23 ) $ (22 ) $ (3 ) $ (35 ) $ (83 ) $ $ (83 ) Release of Personal Lines auto liability reserves for accident year 2005 (31 ) (31 ) (31 ) Strengthening of Personal Lines auto liability reserves for claims with exposure in excess of policy limits 30 30 30 Strengthening of general liability loss and loss adjustment expense reserves for accident years 1998 to 2005 20 20 20 Release of allocated loss adjustment expense reserves for workers compensation and package business for accident years 2003 to 2005 (33 ) (25 ) (58 ) (58 ) Release of Personal Lines auto liability reserves for accident year 2003 to 2005 (22 ) (22 ) (22 ) Strengthening of Specialty Commercial construction defect claim reserves for accident years 1997 and prior 10 35 45 45 Strengthening of Specialty Commercial workers compensation allocated loss adjustment expense reserves 20 20 20 Effect of Equitas agreement and strengthening of allowance for uncollectible reinsurance 243 243 Strengthening of environmental reserves 43 43 Other reserve re-estimates, net [1] 8 (20 ) 13 14 15 74 89 Total prior accident year development for the year ended December 31, 2006 $ (38 ) $ (75 ) $ 15 $ 34 $ (64 ) $ 360 $ 296 [1] Includes reserve discount accretion of $32, including $6 in Small Commercial, $8 in Middle Market, $11 in Specialty Commercial and $7 in Other Operations. During the year ended December 31, 2006, the Company re-estimates of prior accident year reserves included the following significant reserve changes. Ongoing Operations Released net reserves related to prior year hurricanes by a total of $83, including $57 for hurricanes Katrina and Rita in 2005 and $26 for hurricanes Charley, Frances and Jeanne in 2004. Initial reserve estimates for the 2005 and 2004 hurricanes were higher because of the difficulty claim adjusters had in accessing the most significantly impacted areas and initially higher estimates of the cost of building materials and contractors due to demand surge . As the reported claims have matured, the estimated settlement value of the claims has decreased from the initial estimates. The ultimate estimate for hurricane Katrina was increased in the first quarter of 2006 because of higher than expected claim reporting, particularly in Personal Lines. Net loss reserves within Specialty Commercial decreased, primarily because hurricane Katrina losses on specialty property business were reimbursable under a specialty property reinsurance treaty as well as under the Company principal property catastrophe reinsurance program. After the first quarter of 2006, Katrina new claim intake abated and settlement percentages increased, resulting in a reduction of reserves in the last nine months of 2006. In addition, the rate of newly reported compensable claims for Rita and the 2004 hurricanes was less than expected, resulting in a reduction of reserves for these hurricanes. Released Personal Lines auto liability reserves by $31 related to the fourth accident quarter of 2005 as a result of better than expected frequency trends. During the third and fourth quarter of 2005, the Company had reduced the 2005 accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio for Personal Lines auto liability claims related to the first three accident quarters of 2005. Favorable frequency for the fourth accident quarter of 2005 emerged during the fourth quarter of 2005. However, the Company did not release reserves at that time, since reserve indications at only three months of development were not reliable. The Company released reserves in 2006 after further development indicated that early indications of reduced frequency were representative of a real trend. The $31 reserve release represented 2% of the Company net reserves for Personal Lines auto liability claims as of December 31, 2005. Strengthened reserves for personal auto liability claims by $30 due to an increase in estimated severity on claims where the Company is exposed to losses in excess of policy limits. From the Company reserve review during the first quarter of 2006, the 89 Table of Contents Company determined that the facts and circumstances necessitated an increase in the reserve estimate. The $30 of reserve strengthening represented 2% of the Company net reserves for Personal Lines auto liability claims as of December 31, 2005. Strengthened Middle Market general liability loss and loss adjustment expense reserves by $20 for accident years 1998 to 2005, primarily as a result of increasing allocated loss adjustment expenses associated with closing older claims. The $20 of reserve strengthening represented 2% of the Company net reserves for general liability claims as of December 31, 2005. Released allocated loss adjustment expense reserves by $58 for accident years 2003 to 2005, primarily for workers compensation business and package business, as a result of cost reduction initiatives implemented by the Company to reduce allocated loss adjustment expenses for both legal and non-legal expenses. The Company began implementing cost reduction initiatives in late 2003. It was initially uncertain what effect those efforts would have on controlling allocated loss adjustment expenses. During 2004, favorable trends started to emerge, particularly on shorter-tailed auto liability claims, but it was not clear if these trends would be sustained. In early 2005, favorable trends continued and the Company analyzed claims involving legal expenses separate from claims that do not involve legal expenses. This analysis included a review of the trends in the number of claims involving legal expenses, the average expenses incurred and trends in legal expenses. During the second quarter of 2005, the Company released allocated loss adjustment expense reserves on shorter-tailed auto liability claims as the favorable trends on shorter-tailed business emerged more quickly and were determined to be reliable. During both the second and fourth quarter of 2006, the Company determined that the favorable development on package business and workers compensation business had become a verifiable trend and, accordingly, reserves were reduced. The $58 release represented 1% of total net reserves for workers compensation and package business as of December 31, 2005. Released Personal Lines auto liability reserves related to AARP and other affinity business by $22. AARP auto liability reserves for accident year 2004 were reduced as a result of favorable loss cost severity trends. AARP auto liability severity, as measured by reported data, began declining in 2005; however, the Company was uncertain whether this trend would prove persistent over time since paid loss data did not support a decline. During the second quarter of 2006, the Company determined that all the metrics supported a decline in severity estimates and, therefore, the Company released reserves. Auto liability reserves for other affinity business related to accident years 2003 to 2005 were reduced to recognize favorable developments in loss costs that have emerged. The $22 reserve release represented 1% of the Company net reserves for Personal Lines auto liability claims as of December 31, 2005. Strengthened construction defect claim reserves by $45 for accident years 1997 and prior as a result of an increase in claim severity trends. In 2004, two large construction defects claims were reported, but these were not viewed as an indication of an increase in the severity trend for all claims. In 2005, two additional large cases were reported. Management performed an expanded review of construction defects claims in the second quarter of 2006. Based on the expanded review and additional reported claim experience, management concluded that reported losses would likely continue at a higher level in the future and this resulted in strengthening the recorded reserves. The $35 of reserve strengthening in Specialty Commercial represented 4% of the Company net reserves for Specialty Commercial general liability claims as of December 31, 2005. The $10 of strengthening in Middle Market represented 1% of net reserves for Middle Market general liability claims as of December 31, 2005. Strengthened Specialty Commercial workers compensation allocated loss adjustment expense reserves by $20 for loss adjustment expense payments expected to emerge after 20 years of development. During 2005, the Company had done an in-depth study of loss payments expected to emerge after 20 years of development. At that time, it was believed that allocated loss adjustment expenses for a particular subset of business (primary policies on national accounts business) developed more quickly than allocated loss adjustment expenses for smaller insureds and that a similar reserve strengthening for national accounts business was not required. During the second quarter of 2006, the Company reserve review indicated that the development pattern for this business should be adjusted to be more consistent with that for smaller insureds. Because the Company has written very little of this business in recent years, the increase in reserves affects accident years 1995 and prior. The $20 of reserve strengthening represented 1% of the Company net reserves for Specialty Commercial workers compensation claims as of December 31, 2005. Other Operations Reduced the reinsurance recoverable asset associated with older, longer-term casualty liabilities by $243. The Company reviewed the reinsurance recoverables and allowance for uncollectible reinsurance associated with older, long-term casualty liabilities in the second quarter 2006. As a result of this study, and the outcome of an agreement that resolved, with minor exception, all of the Company ceded and assumed domestic reinsurance exposures with Equitas, Other Operations recorded prior accident year development of $243. Strengthened environmental reserves by $43 as a result of an environmental reserve evaluation completed in the third quarter of 2006. As part of this evaluation, the Company reviewed all of its domestic direct and assumed reinsurance accounts exposed to environmental liability. The Company also examined its London Market exposures for both direct insurance and assumed reinsurance. The Company found estimates for individual cases changed based upon the particular circumstances of each account, although the review found no underlying cause or change in the claim environment. The $43 of reserve strengthening represented 2% of the Company net reserves for asbestos and environmental claims as of December 31, 2005. 90 Table of Contents A rollforward of liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses by segment for Property & Casualty for the year ended December 31, 2005 follows: For the year ended December 31, 2005 Personal Small Middle Specialty Ongoing Other Total Lines Commercial Market Commercial Operations Operations P&C Beginning liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses-gross $ 2,000 $ 2,532 $ 3,638 $ 5,406 $ 13,576 $ 7,753 $ 21,329 Reinsurance and other recoverables 190 115 413 2,037 2,755 2,383 5,138 Beginning liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses-net 1,810 2,417 3,225 3,369 10,821 5,370 16,191 Provision for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses Current year before catastrophes 2,291 1,426 1,431 1,216 6,364 6,364 Current accident years 98 50 38 165 351 351 Prior years (95 ) (24 ) 52 103 36 212 248 Total provision for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses 2,294 1,452 1,521 1,484 6,751 212 6,963 Payments (2,337 ) (1,038 ) (1,139 ) (1,086 ) (5,600 ) (691 ) (6,291 ) Ending liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses-net 1,767 2,831 3,607 3,767 11,972 4,891 16,863 Reinsurance and other recoverables 385 192 565 2,306 3,448 1,955 5,403 Ending liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses-gross $ 2,152 $ 3,023 $ 4,172 $ 6,073 $ 15,420 $ 6,846 $ 22,266 Earned premiums $ 3,610 $ 2,421 $ 2,355 $ 1,766 $ 10,152 $ 4 $ 10,156 Loss and loss expense paid ratio [1] 64.7 42.9 48.3 61.6 55.1 Loss and loss expense incurred ratio 63.6 60.0 64.6 84.1 66.5 Prior accident year development (pts.) (2.6 ) (1.0 ) 2.2 5.8 0.4 [1] The loss and loss expense paid ratio represents the ratio of paid loss and loss adjustment expenses to earned premiums. Prior accident year development recorded in 2005 Included within prior accident year development for the year ended December 31, 2005 were the following reserve strengthenings (releases). Personal Small Middle Specialty Ongoing Other Total Lines Commercial Market Commercial Operations Operations P&C Strengthening of workers compensation reserves for claim payments expected to emerge after 20 years of development $ $ 15 $ 35 $ 70 $ 120 $ $ 120 Release of 2003 and 2004 accident year workers compensation reserves (37 ) (38 ) (75 ) (75 ) Release of reserves for allocated loss adjustment expenses (95 ) (23 ) (2 ) (120 ) (120 ) Strengthening of general liability reserves in Middle Market 40 40 40 Strengthening of reserves for 2004 hurricanes 9 20 4 33 33 Strengthening of assumed casualty reinsurance reserves 85 85 Strengthening of environmental reserves 37 37 Other reserve re-estimates, net [1] (9 ) 1 17 29 38 90 128 Total prior accident year development for the year ended December 31, 2005 $ (95 ) $ (24 ) $ 52 $ 103 $ 36 $ 212 $ 248 [1] Includes reserve discount accretion of $30, including $6 in Small Commercial, $7 in Middle Market, $10 in Specialty Commercial and $7 in Other Operations. During the year ended December 31, 2005, the Company re-estimates of prior accident year reserves included the following significant reserve changes. Ongoing Operations Strengthened workers compensation reserves for claim payments expected to emerge after 20 years of development by $120. For workers compensation claims involving permanent disability, it is particularly difficult to estimate how such claims will develop more than 20 years after the year the claims were incurred (known as the tail ). During 2005, the Company actuaries performed an actuarial study to re-estimate the required reserves for additional development beyond the 20th year following a claim being 91 Table of Contents incurred. This study involved gathering extensive historical data dating back over 50 years which could be used for making these estimates and incorporated modeling using actuarial techniques that have recently been developed within the actuarial profession. Based on the results of this analysis the Company changed its previous estimate and increased the percentage of ultimate claim costs expected to be paid after 20 years of development. As an example, within Small Commercial and Middle Market, this development percentage was increased from 8% to 9%. The $120 of reserve strengthening represented a change in estimate which was 3% of the Company net reserves for workers compensation claims as of December 31, 2004. Released reserves for workers compensation losses in Small Commercial and Middle Market by $75 related to accident years 2003 and 2004. The state of California instituted reforms to its workers compensation laws that began in 2003 and continued through 2005. In addition, in this same time frame, the Company was taking underwriting actions to improve workers compensation underwriting performance. Management recognized that the combination of the Company underwriting initiatives and the state of California changes could, over time, improve the Company workers compensation experience. Verification of this improvement as a probable outcome, however, would require sufficient supporting evidence. While there appeared to be some favorable trends emerging in late 2004 with respect to accident year 2003 and while early indications on accident year 2004 were favorable, senior reserving actuaries and senior management were uncertain that these favorable trends were real and would be sustained. In the third quarter of 2005, management concluded that sufficient evidence existed in the actuarial data and methods to support a release of reserves. The actuarial work was further supported by a review of underwriting metrics, supporting the effectiveness of the actions taken, and by discussions with claim handlers involved with the California workers compensation business. The $75 reserve release represented a change in estimate which was 2% of the Company net reserves for workers compensation claims as of December 31, 2004. Released prior accident year reserves for allocated loss adjustment expenses by $120, largely as the result of cost reduction initiatives implemented by the Company to reduce allocated loss adjustment expenses for both legal and non-legal expenses as well as improved actuarial techniques. The improved actuarial techniques included an analysis of claims involving legal expenses separate from claims that do not involve legal expenses. This analysis included a review of the trends in the number of claims involving legal expenses, the average expenses incurred and trends in legal expenses. The release of $95 in Personal Lines represented 5% of Personal Lines net reserves as of December 31, 2004. Strengthened general liability reserves within Middle Market by $40 for accident years 2000-2003 due to higher than anticipated loss payments beyond four years of development. The $40 reserve strengthening represented 2% of the Company net reserves for general liability claims as of December 31, 2004. Strengthened reserves for loss and loss adjustment expenses related to the third quarter 2004 hurricanes by a total of $33. The main drivers of the increase were late-reported claims for condominium assessments and increases in the costs of building materials and contracting services. Within the Specialty Commercial segment, there were other offsetting positive and negative adjustments to prior accident year reserves. The principal offsetting adjustments were a release of reserves for directors and officers insurance related to accident years 2003 and 2004 and strengthening of prior accident year reserves for contracts that provide auto financing gap coverage and auto lease residual value coverage; the release and offsetting strengthening were each approximately $80. Other Operations Strengthened assumed reinsurance reserves by $85, principally for accident years 1997 through 2001. In recent years, the Company has seen an increase in reported losses above previous expectations and this increase in reported losses contributed to the reserve re-estimates. Assumed reinsurance exposures are inherently less predictable than direct insurance exposures because the Company may not receive notice of a reinsurance claim until the underlying direct insurance claim is mature. The reserve strengthening of $85 represents 6% of the $1.3 billion of net assumed reinsurance reserves within Other Operations as of December 31, 2004. Strengthened environmental reserves by $37 as a result of an environmental reserve evaluation completed during the third quarter of 2005. While the review found no underlying cause or change in the claim environment, loss estimates for individual cases changed based upon the particular circumstances of each account. The $37 of reserve strengthening represented 1% of the Company net reserves for asbestos and environmental claims as of December 31, 2004. 92 Table of Contents Impact of Re-estimates As explained in connection with the Company discussion of Critical Accounting Estimates, the establishment of Property and Casualty reserves is an estimation process, using a variety of methods, assumptions and data elements. Ultimate losses may vary significantly from the current estimates. Many factors can contribute to these variations and the need to change the previous estimate of required reserve levels. Subsequent changes can generally be thought of as being the result of the emergence of additional facts that were not known or anticipated at the time of the prior reserve estimate and/or changes in interpretations of information and trends. The table below shows the range of annual reserve re-estimates experienced by The Hartford over the past three years. The amount of prior accident year development (as shown in the reserve rollforward) for a given calendar year is expressed as a percent of the beginning calendar year reserves, net of reinsurance. The percentage relationships presented are significantly influenced by the facts and circumstances of each particular year and by the fact that only the last three years are included in the range. Accordingly, these percentages are not intended to be a prediction of the range of possible future variability. See Impact of key assumptions on reserve volatility within Critical Accounting Estimates for further discussion of the potential for variability in recorded loss reserves. Small Middle Specialty Ongoing Other Total Personal Lines Commercial Market Commercial Operations Operations P&C Range of prior accident year development for the three years ended December 31, 2007 [1] [2] (5.2) (0.2 ) (6.5) (1.0 ) (0.3) 1.6 0.9 3.1 (1.1) 0.3 3.9 7.4 (0.6) 1.5 [1] Bracketed prior accident year development indicates favorable development. Unbracketed amounts represent unfavorable development. [2] Over the past ten years, reserve re-estimates for total Property & Casualty ranged from (1.3)% to 21.5%. Before the reserve strengthening for asbestos and environmental reserves, over the past ten years reserve re-estimates for total Property & Casualty ranged from (3.0)% to 1.6%. The potential variability of the Company Property & Casualty reserves would normally be expected to vary by segment and the types of loss exposures insured by those segments. Illustrative factors influencing the potential reserve variability for each of the segments are discussed under Critical Accounting Estimates. Risk Management Strategy The Hartford property and casualty operations have processes to manage risk to natural disasters, such as hurricanes and earthquakes, and other perils, such as terrorism. The Hartford risk management processes include, but are not limited to, disciplined underwriting protocols, exposure controls, sophisticated risk modeling, risk transfer, and capital management strategies. In managing risk, The Hartford management processes involve establishing underwriting guidelines for both individual risks, including individual policy limits, and in aggregate, including aggregate exposure limits by geographic zone and peril. The Company establishes risk limits and actively monitors the risk exposures as a percent of Property & Casualty statutory surplus. For natural catastrophe perils, the Company limits its estimated loss to natural catastrophes from a single 250-year event prior to reinsurance to less than 30% of statutory surplus of the Property & Casualty operations and its estimated loss to natural catastrophes from a single 250-year event after reinsurance to less than 15% of statutory surplus of the Property & Casualty operations. For terrorism, the Company monitors its exposure in major metropolitan areas to a single-site conventional terrorism attack scenario, and manages its potential estimated loss, including exposures resulting from the Company Group Life operations, to less than $800, which is approximately 5% of the combined statutory surplus of the Life and Property and Casualty operations as of December 31, 2007. Among the 251 locations specifically monitored by the Company, the largest estimated modeled loss arising from a single event is approximately $790. The Company monitors exposures monthly and employs both internally developed and vendor-licensed loss modeling tools as part of its risk management discipline. Use of Reinsurance In managing risk, The Hartford utilizes reinsurance to transfer risk to well-established and financially secure reinsurers. Reinsurance is used to manage aggregations of risk as well as specific risks based on accumulated property and casualty liabilities in certain geographic zones. All treaty purchases related to the Company property and casualty operations are administered by a centralized function to support a consistent strategy and ensure that the reinsurance activities are fully integrated into the organization risk management processes. A variety of traditional reinsurance products are used as part of the Company risk management strategy, including excess of loss occurrence-based products that protect property and workers compensation exposures, and individual risk or quota share arrangements, that protect specific classes or lines of business. There are no significant finite risk contracts in place and the statutory surplus benefit from all such prior year contracts is immaterial. Facultative reinsurance is also used to manage policy-specific risk exposures based on established underwriting guidelines. The Hartford also participates in governmentally administered reinsurance facilities such as the Florida Hurricane Catastrophe Fund ( FHCF ), the Terrorism Risk Insurance Program established under The Terrorism Risk Insurance Program Reauthorization Act of 2007 ( TRIPRA ) and other reinsurance programs relating to particular risks or specific lines of business. 93 Table of Contents The Company has several catastrophe reinsurance programs, including reinsurance treaties that cover property and workers compensation losses aggregating from single catastrophe events. The following table summarizes the primary catastrophe treaty reinsurance coverages that the Company has in place as of January 1, 2008: % of layer(s) Coverage Treaty term reinsured Per occurrence limit Retention Principal property catastrophe program covering property catastrophe losses from a single event 1/1/2008 to 1/1/2009 Varies by layer, but averages 89% across all layers Aggregates to $750 across all layers $ 250 Layer covering property catastrophe losses from a single wind or earthquake event affecting the northeast of the United States from Virginia to Maine 6/1/2007 to 6/1/2008 90 % 300 1,000 Property catastrophe losses from a single event on excess and surplus property business 1/1/2008 to 1/1/2009 95 % Aggregates to $280 across all layers 20 Property catastrophe losses from a single event on property business written with national accounts 7/1/2007 to 7/1/2008 91 % 160 15 Reinsurance with the Florida Hurricane Catastrophe Fund covering Florida Personal Lines property catastrophe losses from a single event 6/1/2007 to 6/1/2008 90 % 423 [1] 83 Workers compensation losses arising from a single catastrophe event 7/1/2007 to 7/1/2008 95 % 280 20 [1] The per occurrence limit on the FHCF treaty increased from $264 for the 6/1/2006 to 6/1/2007 treaty year to $423 for the 6/1/2007 to 6/1/2008 treaty year due to the Company election to purchase additional limits under the Temporary Increase in Coverage Limit (TCIL) statutory provision in excess of the coverage the Company is required to purchase from the FHCF. In addition to the property catastrophe reinsurance coverage described in the above table, the Company has other treaties and facultative reinsurance agreements that cover property catastrophe losses on an aggregate excess of loss and on a per risk basis. Property catastrophe losses incurred on property business written with national accounts is also reimbursable under the principal catastrophe reinsurance program, subject to the overall program limits and retention. In the aftermath of the 2004 and 2005 hurricane season, third-party catastrophe loss models for hurricane loss events were updated to incorporate medium-term forecasts of increased hurricane frequency and severity. The principal property catastrophe reinsurance program and other reinsurance programs include a provision to reinstate limits in the event that a catastrophe loss exhausts limits on one or more layers under the treaties. In addition to the reinsurance protection provided by The Hartford reinsurance program described above, the Company has fully collateralized reinsurance coverages from Foundation Re and Foundation Re II for losses sustained from qualifying hurricane and earthquake loss events and other qualifying catastrophe losses. Foundation Re and Foundation Re II are Cayman Islands reinsurance companies which financed the provision of the reinsurance through the issuance of catastrophe bonds. Under the terms of the treaties with Foundation Re and Foundation Re II, the Company is reimbursed for losses from natural disaster events using a customized industry index contract designed to replicate The Hartford own catastrophe losses, with a provision that the actual losses incurred by the Company for covered events, net of reinsurance recoveries, cannot be less than zero. 94 Table of Contents The following table summarizes the terms of the reinsurance treaties with Foundation Re and Foundation Re II that were in place as of January 1, 2008: Bond amount issued by Foundation Re or Covered perils Treaty term Covered losses Foundation Re II Hurricane loss events affecting the Gulf and Eastern Coast of the United States 11/17/2004 to 11/24/2008 45% of $400 in losses in excess of an index loss trigger equating to approximately $1.3 billion in Hartford losses $ 180 Hurricane and earthquake loss events which occur in the year following a large hurricane or earthquake event that has an estimated occurrence probability of 1-in-100 years 11/17/2004 to 1/6/2009 90% of $75 in losses in excess of an index loss trigger equating to approximately $125 in Hartford losses 68 Hurricane loss events affecting the Gulf and Eastern Coast of the United States and loss events arising from California, Pacific Northwest, and New Madrid earthquakes. 2/17/2006 to 2/24/2010 26% of $400 in losses in excess of an index loss trigger equating to approximately $1.3 billion in Hartford losses 105 Hurricane loss events affecting the Gulf and Eastern Coast of the United States 11/17/2006 to 11/26/2010 45% of $400 in losses in excess of an index loss trigger equating to approximately $1.85 billion in Hartford losses 180 Annual aggregate of hurricane, earthquake and tornado/hail events in the continuous continental United States that result in $100 and $29.5 billion in industry losses 11/17/2006 to 1/8/2009 45% of $150 in losses in excess of an index loss trigger equating to approximately $462 in annual aggregate Hartford losses 68 As of December 31, 2007, there have been no events that are expected to trigger a recovery under any of the reinsurance programs with Foundation Re or Foundation Re II and, accordingly, the Company has not recorded any recoveries from the associated reinsurance treaties. Estimated Catastrophe Exposures The Company uses third party models to estimate the potential loss resulting from various catastrophe events and the potential financial impact those events would have on the Company financial position and results of operations. The following table shows modeled loss estimates before expected reinsurance recoveries and after expected reinsurance recoveries. The loss estimates represent total property losses for hurricane events and property and workers compensation losses for earthquake events resulting from a single event. The estimates provided are based on 250-year return period loss estimates, which have a 0.4% likelihood of being exceeded in any single year. The net loss estimates assume that the Company would be able to recover all losses ceded to reinsurers under its reinsurance programs. There are various methodologies used in the industry to estimate the potential property and workers compensation losses that would arise from various catastrophe events and companies may use different models and assumptions in their estimates. Therefore, the Company estimates of gross and net losses arising from a 250-year hurricane or earthquake event may not be comparable to estimates provided by other companies. Furthermore, the Company estimates are subject to significant uncertainty and could vary materially from the actual losses that would arise from these events. 95 Table of Contents The Company modeled loss estimates are derived by averaging 21 modeled loss events representing a 250-year return period loss. For the peril of earthquake, the 21 events averaged to determine the modeled loss estimate include events occurring in the Northwestern, Northeastern, Southeastern and Midwestern regions of the United States with associated magnitudes ranging from 6.5 to 8.5 on the Richter scale. For the peril of hurricane, the 21 events averaged to determine the modeled loss estimate include category 3, 4 and 5 events in Florida as well as other Southeastern, Northeastern and Gulf region landfalls. Hurricane Earthquake Net of Net of Expected Expected Before Reinsurance Before Reinsurance Reinsurance Recoveries Reinsurance Recoveries Estimated 250-year probable maximum loss, before-tax $2,202 $683 $1,099 $286 Percentage of statutory surplus of the Property & Casualty operations as of December 31, 2007 8% 3% Terrorism For terrorism, private sector catastrophe reinsurance capacity is limited and generally unavailable for terrorism losses caused by nuclear, biological, chemical or radiological weapons attacks. As such, the Company principal reinsurance protection against large-scale terrorist attacks is the coverage currently provided through the Terrorism Risk Insurance Program Reauthorization Act (TRIPRA). On December 26, 2007, the President signed TRIPRA extending the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act of 2002 ( TRIA ) through the end of 2014. TRIPRA provides a backstop for insurance-related losses resulting from any act of terrorism certified by the Secretary of the Treasury, in concurrence with the Secretary of State and Attorney General, that result in industry losses in excess of $100. In addition, TRIPRA revised the TRIA definition of a certified act of terrorism by removing the requirement that an act be committed on behalf of any foreign person or foreign interest. As a result, domestic acts of terrorism can now be certified as acts of terrorism under the program, subject to the other requirements of TRIPRA. Under the program, in any one calendar year, the federal government would pay 85% of covered losses from a certified act of terrorism after an insurer losses exceed 20% of the company eligible direct commercial earned premiums of the prior calendar year, up to a combined annual aggregate limit for the federal government and all insurers of $100 billion. If an act of terrorism or acts of terrorism result in covered losses exceeding the $100 billion annual industry aggregate limit, a future Congress would be responsible for determining how additional losses in excess of $100 billion will be paid. Among other items, TRIPRA required that the President Working Group on Financial Markets ( PWG ) continue to perform an analysis regarding the long-term availability and affordability of insurance for terrorism risk. Among the findings detailed in the PWG initial report, released October 2, 2006, were that the high level of uncertainty associated with predicting the frequency of terrorist attacks, coupled with the unwillingness of some insurance policyholders to purchase insurance coverage, makes predicting long term development of the terrorism risk market difficult, and that there is likely little potential for future market development for nuclear, biological, chemical and radiological (NBCR) coverage. A September 2006 study by the U.S. Government Accountability Office on insuring NBCR terrorism risk similarly concluded that any market-driven expansion of coverage is highly unlikely in the foreseeable future. TRIPRA requires the Comptroller General to, among other things, study the availability and affordability of insurance coverage for losses caused by terrorist attacks involving nuclear, biological, chemical or radiological materials and issue a report by December, 2008. Florida Citizens Assessments Citizens Property Insurance Corporation in Florida ( Citizens ) provides property insurance to Florida homeowners and businesses that are unable to obtain insurance from other carriers, including for properties deemed to be high risk . Citizens maintains a Personal Lines account, a Commercial Lines account and a High Risk account. If Citizens incurs a deficit in any of these accounts, Citizens may impose a regular assessment on other insurance carriers in the state to fund the deficits, subject to certain restrictions and subject to approval by the Florida Office of Insurance Regulation. Carriers are then permitted to surcharge policyholders to recover the assessments over the next few years. Citizens may also opt to finance a portion of the deficits through issuing bonds and may impose emergency assessments on other insurance carriers to fund the bond repayments. Unlike with regular assessments, however, insurance carriers only serve as a collection agent for emergency assessments and are not required to remit surcharges for emergency assessments to Citizens until they collect surcharges from policyholders. Under generally accepted accounting principles, the Company is required to accrue for regular assessments in the period the assessments become probable and estimable and the obligating event has occurred. Surcharges to recover the amount of regular assessments may not be recorded as an asset until the related premium is written. Emergency assessments that may be levied by Citizens are not recorded in the income statement. 96 Table of Contents In the fourth quarter of 2005, the Company accrued an estimated $46 for regular assessments based on estimates of the deficits in each account at the time. In the second quarter of 2006, the Florida legislature approved the use of $715 of state tax revenues to partially offset the deficits in Citizens High Risk, Commercial Lines and Personal Lines accounts. During the second quarter of 2006, Citizens management also finalized its estimate of the 2004 and 2005 hurricane losses that would be used in calculating the deficits in each account. In the third quarter of 2006, the Board of Governors of Citizens approved a final assessment for the 2005 account year and the Company received the assessment notice during the fourth quarter of 2006. The estimates of the deficits in the Personal Lines account and Commercial Lines account were lower than previously anticipated by the Company. As a result of these changes in estimates, during 2006, the Company reduced its accrual for Citizens assessments by $41, from $46 to $5. The reduction in the amount of the estimated regular assessment also reduces the amount of surcharges that will be billed to policyholders to recoup the assessments in the future. Servicing of flood insurance The Company does not provide residential flood insurance under its insurance policies. However, the Company acts as an administrator for the Write Your Own flood program on behalf of the National Flood Insurance Program under FEMA, for which it earns a fee for collecting premiums and processing claims. Under the program, the Company services both personal lines and commercial lines flood insurance policies and does not assume any underwriting risk. Reinsurance Recoverables The following table shows the components of the gross and net reinsurance recoverable as of December 31, 2007 and 2006: Reinsurance Recoverable December 31, 2007 December 31, 2006 Paid loss and loss adjustment expenses $ 347 $ 460 Unpaid loss and loss adjustment expenses 3,788 4,417 Gross reinsurance recoverable 4,135 4,877 Less: allowance for uncollectible reinsurance (404 ) (412 ) Net reinsurance recoverable $ 3,731 $ 4,465 Reinsurance recoverables represent loss and loss adjustment expenses recoverable from a number of entities, including reinsurers and pools. As shown in the following table, a portion of the total gross reinsurance recoverable relates to the Company mandatory participation in various involuntary assigned risk pools and the value of annuity contracts held under structured settlement agreements. Reinsurance recoverables due from mandatory pools are backed by the financial strength of the property and casualty insurance industry. Annuities purchased from third party life insurers under structured settlements are recognized as reinsurance recoverables in cases where the Company has not obtained a release from the claimant. Of the remaining gross reinsurance recoverable as of December 31, 2007 and 2006, the following table shows the portion of recoverables due from companies rated by A.M. Best. Distribution of gross reinsurance recoverable December 31, 2007 December 31, 2006 Gross reinsurance recoverable $ 4,135 $ 4,877 Less: mandatory (assigned risk) pools and structured settlements (635 ) (673 ) Gross reinsurance recoverable excluding mandatory pools and structured settlements $ 3,500 $ 4,204 % of Total % of Total Rated A (Excellent) or better by A.M. Best [1] $ 2,614 74.7 % $ 3,050 72.5 % Other rated by A.M. Best 90 2.6 % 162 3.9 % Total rated companies 2,704 77.3 % 3,212 76.4 % Voluntary pools 195 5.6 % 223 5.3 % Captives 231 6.6 % 197 4.7 % Other not rated companies 370 10.5 % 572 13.6 % Total $ 3,500 100.0 % $ 4,204 100.0 % [1] Based on A.M. Best ratings as of December 31, 2007 and 2006, respectively. Where its contracts permit, the Company secures future claim obligations with various forms of collateral, including irrevocable letters of credit, secured trusts, funds held accounts and group wide offsets. As part of its reinsurance recoverable review, the Company analyzes recent developments in commutation activity between reinsurers and cedants, recent trends in arbitration and litigation outcomes in disputes between cedants and reinsurers and the overall credit quality of the Company reinsurers. Due to the inherent uncertainties as to collection and the length of time before such amounts will be due, it is possible that future adjustments to the Company reinsurance recoverables, net of the allowance, could be required, which could have a material adverse effect on the Company consolidated results of operations or cash flows in a particular quarterly or annual period. 97 Table of Contents Annually, the Company completes an evaluation of the reinsurance recoverable asset associated with older, long-term casualty liabilities reported in the Other Operations segment. As a result of this evaluation, the Company reduced its net reinsurance recoverable by $243 in 2006. See the Other Operations section of the MD&A for further discussion. Monitoring Reinsurer Security To manage the potential credit risk resulting from the use of reinsurance, management evaluates the credit standing, financial performance, management and operational quality of each potential reinsurer. Through that process, the Company maintains a list of reinsurers approved for participation on all treaty and facultative reinsurance placements. The Company approval designations reflect the differing credit exposure associated with various classes of business. Participation authorizations are categorized along property, short-tail casualty and long-tail casualty lines. In addition to defining participation eligibility, the Company regularly monitors each active reinsurer credit risk exposure in the aggregate and limits that exposure based upon independent credit rating levels. Unless otherwise specified, the following discussion speaks to changes for the year ended December 31, 2007 compared to the year ended December 31, 2006 and the year ended December 31, 2006 compared to the year ended December 31, 2005. 98 Table of Contents TOTAL PROPERTY & CASUALTY Operating Summary 2007 2006 2005 Earned premiums [1] $ 10,496 $ 10,433 $ 10,156 Net investment income 1,687 1,486 1,365 Other revenues [2] 496 473 463 Net realized capital gains (losses) (172 ) 9 44 Total revenues 12,507 12,401 12,028 Losses and loss adjustment expenses Current accident year before catastrophes 6,692 6,507 6,364 Current accident year catastrophes 177 199 351 Prior accident years [3] 48 296 248 Total losses and loss adjustment expenses 6,917 7,002 6,963 Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs 2,104 2,106 1,997 Insurance operating costs and expenses 716 580 731 Other expense 693 643 617 Total benefits, losses and expenses 10,430 10,331 10,308 Income before income taxes 2,077 2,070 1,720 Income tax expense 570 551 484 Net income [4] $ 1,507 $ 1,519 $ 1,236 Net Income (Loss) Ongoing Operations $ 1,477 $ 1,554 $ 1,165 Other Operations 30 (35 ) 71 Total Property & Casualty net income $ 1,507 $ 1,519 $ 1,236 [1] Includes reinstatement premiums related to hurricanes of $73 in 2005. [2] Primarily servicing revenue. [3] Net prior year incurred losses in 2006 includes the effect of reducing net reinsurance recoverables by $243 as a result of an agreement with Equitas and strengthening of the allowance for uncollectible reinsurance. [4] Includes net realized capital gains (losses), after tax, of $(112), $46 and $29 for the years ended December 31, 2007, 2006 and 2005, respectively. Year ended December 31, 2007 compared to the year ended December 31, 2006 Net income decreased by $12, or 1%, as a result of a $77 decrease in Ongoing Operations net income partially offset by a $65 increase in Other Operations results. Other Operations reported net income of $30 in 2007 compared to a net loss of $35 in 2006. See the Ongoing Operations and Other Operations segment MD&A discussions for an analysis of the underwriting results and investment performance driving the change in net income. Year ended December 31, 2006 compared to the year ended December 31, 2005 Net income increased by $283, or 23%, as a result of a $389 increase in Ongoing Operations net income, partially offset by a $106 decrease in Other Operations results. Other Operations reported a net loss of $35 in 2006 compared to net income of $71 in 2005. See the Ongoing Operations and Other Operations segment MD&A discussions for an analysis of the underwriting results and investment performance driving the change in net income. 99 Table of Contents ONGOING OPERATIONS Ongoing Operations includes the four underwriting segments of Personal Lines, Small Commercial, Middle Market and Specialty Commercial. Operating Summary Net income for Ongoing Operations includes underwriting results for each of its segments, income from servicing businesses, net investment income, other expenses and net realized capital gains (losses), net of related income taxes. Ongoing Operations 2007 2006 2005 Written premiums $ 10,435 $ 10,658 $ 10,483 Change in unearned premium reserve (56 ) 230 331 Earned premiums 10,491 10,428 10,152 Losses and loss adjustment expenses Current accident year before catastrophes 6,692 6,507 6,364 Current accident year catastrophes 177 199 351 Prior accident years (145 ) (64 ) 36 Total losses and loss adjustment expenses 6,724 6,642 6,751 Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs 2,104 2,106 2,000 Insurance operating costs and expenses 694 569 710 Underwriting results 969 1,111 691 Net servicing income [1] 52 53 49 Net investment income 1,439 1,225 1,082 Net realized capital gains (losses) (160 ) (17 ) 19 Other expenses (248 ) (222 ) (202 ) Income before income taxes 2,052 2,150 1,639 Income tax expense (575 ) (596 ) (474 ) Net income $ 1,477 $ 1,554 $ 1,165 Loss and loss adjustment expense ratio Current accident year before catastrophes 63.8 62.4 62.7 Current accident year catastrophes 1.7 1.9 3.5 Prior accident years (1.4 ) (0.6 ) 0.4 Total loss and loss adjustment expense ratio 64.1 63.7 66.5 Expense ratio 26.3 25.6 26.5 Policyholder dividend ratio 0.4 0.1 0.1 Combined ratio 90.8 89.3 93.2 Catastrophe ratio Current accident year 1.7 1.9 3.5 Prior accident years 0.1 (0.7 ) 0.1 Total catastrophe ratio 1.8 1.2 3.6 Combined ratio before catastrophes 89.0 88.1 89.6 Combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development 90.5 88.0 89.4 [1] Net of expenses related to service business. 100 Table of Contents Year ended December 31, 2007 compared to the year ended December 31, 2006 Net income Net income decreased by $77, or 5%, due primarily to a decrease in underwriting results and an increase in net realized capital losses, partially offset by an increase in net investment income. Underwriting results decreased by $142 Underwriting results decreased by $142, from $1,111 to $969, with a corresponding 1.5 point increase in the combined ratio, from 89.3 to 90.8, due to: Change in underwriting results Earned premiums Excluding Omni, a 2% increase in earned premium $ 185 Decrease in earned premium due to the sale of Omni in the fourth quarter of 2006 (122 ) Net increase in earned premiums 63 Losses and loss adjustment expenses Ratio change An increase in the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes, excluding Omni (176 ) Volume change Increase in current accident year loss and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes due to the increase in earned premium, excluding Omni (114 ) Sale of Omni Decrease in current accident year loss and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes as a result of the sale of Omni 105 Net increase in current accident year loss and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes (185 ) Catastrophes Decrease in current accident year catastrophe losses 22 Reserve changes Increase in net favorable prior accident year reserve development 81 Net increase in losses and loss adjustment expenses (82 ) Operating expenses Decrease in amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs 2 Increase in insurance operating costs and expenses (125 ) Net increase in operating expenses (123 ) Decrease in underwriting results from 2006 to 2007 $ (142 ) Sale of Omni The Company sold its Omni non-standard auto business in the fourth quarter of 2006. Omni accounted for an underwriting loss of $52 in 2006, including $127 of earned premiums, $140 of loss and loss adjustment expenses, $30 of amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs and $9 of insurance operating costs and expenses. Earned premium increased by $63 Ongoing Operations earned premium increased by $63, or 1%, to $10,491, driven by a 3% increase in both Personal Lines and Small Commercial, partially offset by a 4% decrease in Middle Market and a 3% decrease in Specialty Commercial. Excluding Omni, earned premium increased by $185, or 2%. Refer to the earned premium discussion in the Executive Overview section of the Property & Casualty MD&A for further discussion of the increase in earned premium. Losses and loss adjustment expenses increased by $82 Current accident year loss and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes increased by $185 Ongoing Operations current accident year loss and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes increased by $185 in 2007, to $6,692, due largely to an increase in the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio and an increase in earned premium, partially offset by a decrease due to the sale of Omni. Excluding Omni, the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes increased by 1.7 points, to 63.8, due to an increase in the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes of 3.3 points in Personal Lines, 1.4 points in Small Commercial and 2.2 points in Middle Market, partially offset by a decrease in the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes of 2.2 points in Specialty Commercial. 101 Table of Contents Personal Lines Excluding the effect of Omni, the 3.3 point increase in the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes in Personal Lines was primarily due to increased severity on auto liability claims, increased frequency on auto property damage claims and, to a lesser extent, increased severity on homeowners claims, partially offset by the effect of earned pricing increases in homeowners. Small Commercial The 1.4 point increase in the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes in Small Commercial was primarily due to a higher loss ratio and loss adjustment expense ratio for package business and commercial auto claims, partially offset by a lower loss and loss adjustment expense ratio for workers compensation claims. Middle Market The 2.2 point increase in the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes in Middle Market was primarily due to a higher loss and loss adjustment expense ratio for workers compensation, general liability and commercial auto claims driven, in part, by earned pricing decreases. For commercial auto, loss costs increased for both liability and property damage claims. Specialty Commercial The 2.2 point decrease in the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes in Specialty Commercial was primarily due to a lower loss and loss adjustment ratio on directors and officers insurance in professional liability, partially offset by a higher loss and loss adjustment expense ratio on casualty business. Current accident year catastrophes decreased by $22 Current accident year catastrophe losses decreased by $22, from $199, or 1.9 points, in 2006 to $177, or 1.7 points, in 2007. The largest catastrophe losses in 2007 were from wildfires in California, spring windstorms in the Southeast and Northeast, tornadoes and thunderstorms in the Midwest and a December ice storm in the Midwest. Catastrophes in 2006 included tornadoes and hail storms in the Midwest and windstorms in Texas and on the East coast. Increase in net favorable prior accident year reserve development by $81 Net favorable prior accident year reserve development increased from $64, or 0.6 points, in 2006 to $145, or 1.4 points, in 2007. Net favorable reserve development of $145 in 2007 included several changes in reserves, including a $151 release of workers compensation loss and loss adjustment expense reserves, primarily for accident years 2002 to 2006. Refer to the Reserves section of the MD&A for further discussion of the prior accident year reserve development in 2007. The $64 of net favorable prior accident year development in 2006 included several changes in reserves, including an $83 net release of prior accident year hurricane reserves. Refer to the Reserves section of the MD&A for further discussion of the prior accident year reserve development in 2006. Operating expenses increased by $123 The 0.7 point increase in the expense ratio and the 0.3 point increase in the policyholder dividend ratio was primarily due to an increase in insurance operating costs and expenses. Insurance operating costs and expenses increased by $125, partly because insurance operating costs and expenses in 2006 included the effect of a $41 reduction of estimated Citizens assessments related to the 2005 Florida hurricanes. Also contributing to the increase in insurance and operating costs and expenses was a $34 increase in policyholder dividends due largely to a $20 increase in the estimated amount of dividends payable to certain workers compensation policyholders due to underwriting profits. Apart from the effect of Citizens assessments and policyholder dividends, insurance operating costs and expenses increased by $50, primarily due to an increase in IT costs and an increase in non-deferrable salaries and benefits and other internal operating costs. Despite the increase in earned premium, amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs remained relatively flat from 2006 to 2007 due to the effect of the sale of Omni. Excluding the effect of Omni, amortization increased by $28, or 1%, primarily driven by the 2% growth in earned premiums excluding Omni. In 2006, Omni accounted for $127 of earned premiums and $30 of amortization. Net investment income increased by $214 Primarily driving the $214 increase in net investment income was a higher average invested asset base and income earned from a higher portfolio yield. The increase in the average invested asset base contributing to the increase in investment income was primarily due to positive operating cash flows, partially offset by the return of capital to Corporate. Contributing to the increase in net investment income was an increase in income from limited partnerships and other alternative investments, driven by a higher yield on these investments and shifting a greater allocation of investments to these asset classes. Net realized capital losses increased by $143 Net realized capital losses increased from $17 in 2006 to $160 in 2007, primarily due to an increase in credit-related impairments and decreases in the fair value of non-qualifying derivatives attributable to changes in value associated with credit derivatives due to credit spreads widening. Credit-related impairments in 2007 primarily consisted of impairments of asset-backed securities backed by sub-prime residential mortgage loans and impairments of corporate securities in the financial services and homebuilders sectors. (See the Other-Than-Temporary Impairments discussion within Investment Results for more information on the impairments recorded in 2007). 102 Table of Contents Other expenses increased by $26 Other expenses increased by $26, primarily due to $49 of interest charged by Corporate on the amount of capital held by the Property & Casualty operation in excess of the amount needed to support the capital requirements of the Property & Casualty operation, partially offset by a reduction in the estimated cost of legal settlements in 2007. Year ended December 31, 2006 compared to the year ended December 31, 2005 Net income Net income increased by $389, or 33%, due primarily to an increase in underwriting results and an increase in net investment income. Underwriting results increased by $420 Underwriting results increased by $420, from $691 to $1,111, with a corresponding 3.9 point decrease in the combined ratio, from 93.2 to 89.3, due to: Change in underwriting results Earned premiums An increase in earned premium, excluding a decrease in catastrophe treaty reinstatement premium $ 203 An increase in earned premium due to a decrease in catastrophe treaty reinstatement premium 73 Increase in earned premiums 276 Losses and loss adjustment expenses Volume change Increase in current accident year loss and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes due to the increase in earned premium (127 ) Ratio change Excluding the effect of catastrophe treaty reinstatement premium, an increase in the current accident year non-catastrophe loss and loss adjustment expense ratio (16 ) Total increase in current accident year loss and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes (143 ) Catastrophes Decrease in current accident year catastrophe losses 152 Reserve changes Change in net favorable prior accident year reserve development 100 Net decrease in losses and loss adjustment expenses 109 Operating expenses Increase in amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs (106 ) Decrease in insurance operating costs and expenses 141 Net decrease in operating expenses 35 Increase in underwriting results from 2005 to 2006 $ 420 Earned premium increased by $276 Ongoing Operations earned premium increased by $276, or 3%, to $10,428, in part due to $73 of catastrophe treaty reinstatement premium recorded as a reduction of earned premium in 2005. Apart from the effect of catastrophe treaty reinstatement premium in 2005, earned premium grew by $203, or 2%, driven by earned premium increases in Small Commercial, Personal Lines and Middle Market, partially offset by an earned premium decrease in Specialty Commercial. Refer to the earned premium discussion in the Executive Overview section of the Property & Casualty MD&A for further discussion of the increase in earned premium. 103 Table of Contents Losses and loss adjustment expenses decreased by $109 Current accident year loss and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes increased by $143 Ongoing Operations current accident year loss and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes increased by $143 in 2006, to $6,507, due largely to the increase in earned premium. Excluding the effect of catastrophe treaty reinstatement premium, the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes increased by 0.2 points, to 62.4, due to an increase in the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes of 0.9 points in Personal Lines, 2.1 points in Middle Market and 0.3 points in Specialty Commercial, largely offset by a decrease in the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes of 1.8 points in Small Commercial. Personal Lines Excluding the effect of catastrophe treaty reinstatement premium, the 0.9 point increase in the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes in Personal Lines was primarily due to an increase in non-catastrophe property loss costs for homeowners, primarily driven by an increase in claim severity, and an increase in the loss and loss adjustment expense ratio for auto liability claims, partially due to a shift to more Dimensions product business within Agency. Small Commercial Excluding the effect of catastrophe treaty reinstatement premium, the 1.8 point decrease in the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes in Small Commercial was primarily due to a lower loss and loss adjustment expense ratio on workers compensation business and a decrease in non-catastrophe property loss costs, partially offset by a shift to more workers compensation premium which has a higher loss and loss adjustment expense ratio than other business in the segment. Non-catastrophe property loss costs were favorable primarily due to favorable claim frequency. Middle Market Excluding the effect of catastrophe treaty reinstatement premium, the 2.1 point increase in the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes in Middle Market was primarily due to an increase in non-catastrophe property loss costs, the effect of earned pricing decreases and the effect of a shift to more workers compensation premium which has a higher loss and loss adjustment expense ratio than other business in the segment. The increase in non-catastrophe property loss costs was primarily due to increasing claim severity. Specialty Commercial Excluding the effect of catastrophe treaty reinstatement premium, the 0.3 point increase in the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes in Specialty Commercial was primarily due to a higher loss and loss adjustment expense ratio on casualty and professional liability business and the effect of an increase in the allocation to Specialty Commercial of premiums ceded under the Company principal property catastrophe reinsurance program, partially offset by lower non-catastrophe property loss costs. Current accident year catastrophes decreased by $152 Current accident year catastrophe losses decreased by $152, from $351, or 3.5 points, in 2005 to $199, or 1.9 points, in 2006. The decrease in current accident year catastrophe losses was primarily due to $264 of net losses incurred for hurricanes Katrina, Rita and Wilma in 2005, partially offset by an increase in non-hurricane related catastrophes in 2006. Catastrophe losses in 2006 included tornadoes and hail storms in the Midwest and windstorms in Texas and on the East coast. Change to net favorable prior accident year reserve development by $100 Prior accident year reserve development changed from net unfavorable development of $36, or 0.4 points, in 2005 to net favorable development of $64, or 0.6 points, in 2006. The $64 of net favorable prior accident year development in 2006 for Ongoing Operations was primarily due to an $83 release of prior accident year hurricane reserves and a $58 release of allocated loss adjustment expense reserves for workers compensation and package business, partially offset by reserve strengthenings in Specialty Commercial. Net unfavorable reserve development of $36 in 2005 included a $120 increase in workers compensation reserves related to reserves for claim payments expected to emerge after 20 years of development, a $40 strengthening of general liability reserves within Middle Market for accident years 2000 to 2003 due to higher than anticipated loss payments beyond four years of development and $33 of reserve strengthening related to the third quarter 2004 hurricanes. Partially offsetting the reserve increases in 2005 was a $95 reduction in prior accident year reserves for allocated loss adjustment expenses in Personal Lines, predominantly related to auto liability claims, and a $75 reduction in workers compensation reserves recorded related to accident years 2003 and 2004. See the Reserves section of the MD&A for further discussion of reserve development. 104 Table of Contents Operating expenses decreased by $35 The 0.9 point decrease in the expense ratio, to 25.6, was primarily due to a decrease in insurance operating costs and expenses. Insurance operating costs decreased by $141, largely because of a $41 decrease in estimated Citizens assessments in 2006 compared to a $64 increase in Citizens assessments in 2005. Almost all of the Citizens assessments were for assessments charged by the Citizens Property Insurance Corporation (Citizens) in Florida, a company established by the State of Florida to provide personal and commercial insurance to individuals and businesses in Florida who are in high risk areas of the state and are unable to obtain insurance through the private insurance markets. Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs increased by $106, due largely to the increase in earned premium. Net investment income increased by $143 The $143 increase in net investment income was primarily because of a larger investment base due to increased cash flows from underwriting and an increase in capital and invested assets attributed to Ongoing Operations as well as an increase in interest rates and a change in asset mix (i.e., a greater share of investments in mortgage loans and limited partnerships). A change from $19 of realized capital gains in 2005 to $17 of net realized capital losses in 2006 The $17 in net realized capital losses during 2006 included a $24 pre-tax realized capital loss from the sale of Omni, an increase in other-than-temporary-impairments and losses on the sale of fixed maturity investments, partially offset by an increase in income from other sources. (See the Other-Than-Temporary Impairments discussion within Investment Results for more information on the increase in impairments). Other expenses increased by $20 Other expenses increased by $20, primarily due to lower bad debt expense in 2005. 105 Table of Contents PERSONAL LINES Personal Lines provides automobile, homeowners and home-based business coverages to the members of AARP through a direct marketing operation and to individuals who prefer local agent involvement through a network of independent agents in the standard personal lines market ( Standard ). Up until the sale of the business on November 30, 2006, the Company also sold non-standard auto insurance through the Company Omni Insurance Group, Inc. ( Omni ) subsidiary. Personal Lines also operates a member contact center for health insurance products offered through the AARP Health program. The Hartford exclusive licensing arrangement with AARP continues until January 1, 2020 for automobile, homeowners and home-based business. The AARP Health program agreement continues through 2009. Written Premiums [1] 2007 2006 2005 Business Unit AARP $ 2,750 $ 2,580 $ 2,373 Agency 1,123 1,100 1,020 Other 74 197 283 Total $ 3,947 $ 3,877 $ 3,676 Product Line Automobile $ 2,848 $ 2,856 $ 2,753 Homeowners 1,099 1,021 923 Total $ 3,947 $ 3,877 $ 3,676 Earned Premiums [1] 2007 2006 2005 Business Unit AARP $ 2,681 $ 2,466 $ 2,296 Agency 1,123 1,068 997 Other 85 226 317 Total $ 3,889 $ 3,760 $ 3,610 Product Line Automobile $ 2,822 $ 2,792 $ 2,728 Homeowners 1,067 968 882 Total $ 3,889 $ 3,760 $ 3,610 [1] The difference between written premiums and earned premiums is attributable to the change in unearned premium reserve. Premium Measures 2007 2006 2005 Policies in-force at year end Automobile 2,349,402 2,276,165 2,222,689 Homeowners 1,481,542 1,440,399 1,365,585 Total policies in-force at year end 3,830,944 3,716,564 3,588,274 New business premium Automobile $ 424 $ 469 $ 426 Homeowners $ 140 $ 161 $ 131 Premium Renewal Retention Automobile 88 % 87 % 87 % Homeowners 96 % 94 % 94 % Written Pricing Increase (Decrease) Automobile (1 %) Homeowners 5 % 5 % 6 % Earned Pricing Increase (Decrease) Automobile (1 %) (1 %) 1 % Homeowners 6 % 5 % 7 % Earned Premiums Year ended December 31, 2007 compared to the year ended December 31, 2006 Earned premiums increased $129, or 3%, primarily due to earned premium growth in both AARP and Agency, partially offset by a reduction in Other earned premium. AARP earned premium grew $215, or 9%, reflecting growth in the size of the AARP target market, the effect of direct marketing programs and the effect of cross selling homeowners insurance to insureds who have auto policies. 106 Table of Contents Agency earned premium grew $55, or 5%, as a result of an increase in the number of agency appointments and further refinement of the Dimensions class plans first introduced in 2003. Dimensions allows Personal Lines to write a broader class of risks. The plan, which is available through the Company network of independent agents, was enhanced beginning in the third quarter of 2006 as Dimensions with Auto Packages and the enhanced plan is now offered in 34 states with four distinct package offerings as of December 31, 2007. Other earned premium decreased by $141, primarily due to the sale of Omni on November 30, 2006 and a strategic decision to reduce other affinity business. Omni accounted for earned premiums of $127 for the year ended December 31, 2006. The earned premium growth in AARP and Agency was primarily due to auto and homeowners new business written premium outpacing non-renewals over the last six months of 2006 and the first six months of 2007. Auto earned premium grew slightly, by $30, or 1%, for the year ended December 31, 2007, primarily due to new business outpacing non-renewals in AARP and Agency over the last six months of 2006 and the first six months of 2007, partially offset by the effect of the sale of Omni. Before considering the effect of the sale of Omni, auto earned premium grew $152, or 6%, for the year ended December 31, 2007. Homeowners earned premium grew $99, or 10%, primarily due to earned pricing increases and due to new business outpacing non-renewals in AARP business over the last six months of 2006 and the first six months of 2007 and new business outpacing non-renewals in Agency over the last three months of 2006 and the first six months of 2007. Consistent with the growth in earned premium, the number of policies in-force has increased in auto and homeowners. The growth in policies in-force does not correspond directly with the growth in earned premiums due to the effect of earned pricing changes and because policy in-force counts are as of a point in time rather than over a period of time. Omni accounted for $25 of new business written premium during the 2006 calendar year. Excluding Omni business, auto new business written premium decreased by $20, or 5%, to $424, for the year ended December 31, 2007. The decrease in auto new business premium was due to a decrease in AARP and Agency auto new business as a result of increased competition. Homeowners new business written premium decreased by $21, or 13%, primarily due to a decrease in Agency new business, partially offset by an increase in AARP new business. Premium renewal retention for auto increased from 87% to 88% for the year ended December 31, 2007, primarily due to the sale of the Omni non-standard auto business during 2006, which had a lower premium renewal retention than the Company standard auto business. Excluding Omni business, premium renewal retention decreased slightly, from 89% to 88%, as renewal retention remained flat in AARP and decreased in Agency. Premium renewal retention for homeowners increased from 94% to 96% for the year ended December 31, 2007, primarily due to an increase in retention of Agency business. The trend in earned pricing during 2007 was primarily a reflection of the written pricing changes in the last six months of 2006 and the first six months of 2007. Written pricing remained flat in auto primarily due to an extended period of favorable results factoring into the rate setting process. Homeowners written pricing continued to increase due largely to increases in insurance to value and an increase in the value of insured properties. Insurance to value is the ratio of the amount of insurance purchased to the value of the insured property. Year ended December 31, 2006 compared to the year ended December 31, 2005 Earned premiums for the Personal Lines segment increased $150, or 4%, due primarily to earned premium growth in both AARP and Agency business, partially offset by higher property catastrophe treaty reinsurance costs and a reduction in other earned premium. Also contributing to the increase in earned premiums was $31 of catastrophe treaty reinstatement premium payable to reinsurers recorded as a reduction of earned premium in 2005. Other earned premium consists of premium earned on non-standard auto business written by Omni and on business written through affinity partners other than AARP. AARP earned premium grew $170, or 7%, reflecting growth in the size of the AARP target market and the effect of direct marketing programs to increase premium writings of both auto and homeowners. Agency earned premium grew $71, or 7%, primarily as a result of an increase in the number of agency appointments and further refinement of the Dimensions class plans first introduced in 2003. Dimensions, which had been rolled out to 42 states for auto and 39 states for homeowners as of December 31, 2006, enables agents to generate a customized price for each policyholder, independent of the risks and rates of other members of the same household. The plan, which is available through the company network of independent agents, was enhanced beginning in the third quarter of 2006 as Dimensions with Auto Packages and the enhanced plan was offered in 29 states with four distinct package offerings as of the year ended December 31, 2006. Other earned premium decreased by $91, or 29%, because of a strategic decision to reduce other affinity business and limit non-standard writings to fewer geographic areas. On November 30, 2006, the Company sold Omni and exited the non-standard auto business. Refer to Note 20 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion. The earned premium growth in AARP and Agency was primarily due to new business written premium outpacing non-renewals over the last six months of 2005 and the full year of 2006 and to earned pricing increases in homeowners for both AARP and Agency. Auto earned premium grew $64, or 2%, primarily from new business outpacing non-renewals in both AARP and Agency over the last six months of 2005 and the year ended December 31, 2006, partially offset by a decline in other auto business. Before considering the decline in other auto business, auto earned premium grew $154, or 6%. Homeowners earned premium grew $86, or 10%, primarily due to new business outpacing non-renewals in both AARP and Agency business over the last six months of 2005 and the year ended December 31, 2006 and due to earned pricing increases. Consistent with the growth in earned premium, the number of policies in-force 107 Table of Contents has increased in auto and homeowners. The growth in policies in-force does not correspond directly with the growth in earned premiums due to the effect of earned pricing changes and because policy in-force counts are as of a point in time rather than over a period of time. Auto new business written premium increased by $43, or 10%, to $469 in 2006. The increase in new business written premium was primarily due to an increase in AARP and Agency new business, partially offset by a decrease in other new business. Growth in new business was particularly strong in AARP with a growth rate of 20% in 2006. Homeowners new business written premium increased by $30, or 23%, to $161 in 2006. The increase in homeowners new business written premium was due to an increase in both AARP and Agency new business. Premium renewal retention in 2006 for auto of 87% and for homeowners of 94% remained flat from the prior year. For auto, overall premium renewal retention was flat, despite a decrease in retention for Agency auto. For homeowners, an increase in retention of AARP business was offset by a decrease in retention of Agency business. Premium renewal retention for Agency auto decreased due to a shift to more six month policies that have a lower retention rate. The trend in earned pricing during 2006 was primarily a reflection of the written pricing changes in the last six months of 2005 and the first six months of 2006. Auto written pricing decreases are driven by an extended period of favorable results factoring into the rate setting process. Homeowners written pricing continues to increase moderately due to insurance to value increases. Personal Lines Underwriting Summary 2007 2006 2005 Written premiums $ 3,947 $ 3,877 $ 3,676 Change in unearned premium reserve 58 117 66 Earned premiums 3,889 3,760 3,610 Losses and loss adjustment expenses Current accident year before catastrophes 2,576 2,396 2,291 Current accident year catastrophes 125 120 98 Prior accident years (4 ) (38 ) (95 ) Total losses and loss adjustment expenses 2,697 2,478 2,294 Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs 617 622 581 Insurance operating costs and expenses 253 231 275 Underwriting results $ 322 $ 429 $ 460 Loss and loss adjustment expense ratio Current accident year before catastrophes 66.2 63.8 63.5 Current accident year catastrophes 3.2 3.2 2.7 Prior accident years (0.1 ) (1.0 ) (2.6 ) Total loss and loss adjustment expense ratio 69.3 65.9 63.6 Expense ratio 22.4 22.7 23.7 Combined ratio 91.7 88.6 87.3 Catastrophe ratio Current accident year 3.2 3.2 2.7 Prior accident years 0.2 (0.4 ) 0.2 Total catastrophe ratio 3.4 2.8 2.9 Combined ratio before catastrophes 88.3 85.8 84.4 Combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development 88.6 86.4 87.2 Other revenues [1] $ 141 $ 135 $ 121 [1] Represents servicing revenue Combined Ratios Automobile 96.2 93.6 90.7 Homeowners 79.8 74.0 76.6 Total 91.7 88.6 87.3 108 Table of Contents Underwriting Results and Ratios Year ended December 31, 2007 compared to the year ended December 31, 2006 Underwriting results decreased by $107, from $429 to $322, with a corresponding 3.1 point increase in the combined ratio, from 88.6 to 91.7, due to: Change in underwriting results Earned premiums Excluding Omni, a 7% increase in earned premium $ 251 Decrease in earned premium due to the sale of Omni in the fourth quarter of 2006 (122 ) Net increase in earned premiums 129 Losses and loss adjustment expenses Volume change Increase in current accident year loss and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes due to the increase in earned premiums, excluding Omni (160 ) Ratio change An increase in the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes, excluding Omni (125 ) Sale of Omni Decrease in current accident year loss and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes as a result of the sale of Omni 105 Net increase in current accident year loss and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes (180 ) Catastrophes Increase in current accident year catastrophe losses (5 ) Reserve changes A decrease in net favorable prior accident year reserve development (34 ) Net increase in losses and loss adjustment expenses (219 ) Operating expenses Decrease in amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs 5 Increase in insurance operating costs and expenses (22 ) Net increase in operating expenses (17 ) Decrease in underwriting results from 2006 to 2007 $ (107 ) Sale of Omni The Company sold its Omni non-standard auto business in the fourth quarter of 2006. Omni accounted for an underwriting loss of $52 in 2006, including $127 of earned premiums, $140 of loss and loss adjustment expenses, $30 of amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs and $9 of insurance operating costs and expenses. Earned premium increased by $129 Personal Lines earned premium increased by $129, or 3%, to $3,889, primarily driven by an increase in AARP and Agency earned premium, partially offset by a decrease of $122 due to the sale of Omni in 2006. Refer to the earned premium discussion for a description of the increase in earned premium. Losses and loss adjustment expenses increased by $219 Current accident year loss and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes increased by $180 Personal Lines current accident year loss and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes increased by $180 in 2007, to $2,576, due to an increase in earned premium and an increase in the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes, partially offset by a decrease due to the sale of Omni. Excluding the effect of Omni, the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes increased by 3.3 points, to 66.2. The increase was primarily due to a higher loss and loss adjustment expense ratio for auto liability claims, increased frequency on auto property damage claims and, to a lesser extent, increased severity on homeowners claims, partially offset by the effect of earned pricing increases in homeowners. The higher loss and loss adjustment expense ratio for auto liability claims was primarily driven by increased bodily injury severity. Current accident year catastrophes increased by $5 Current accident year catastrophe losses of $125, or 3.2 points, in 2007 were slightly higher than current accident year catastrophe losses of $120, or 3.2 points, in 2006. The largest catastrophe losses in 2007 were from wildfires in California, spring windstorms in the Southeast and Northeast, tornadoes and thunderstorms in the Midwest and a December ice storm in the Midwest. Catastrophes losses during 2006 included tornadoes and hail storms in the Midwest and windstorms in Texas and on the East coast. 109 Table of Contents Net favorable prior accident year reserve development decreased by $34 Net favorable prior accident year reserve development decreased from $38, or 1.0 point, in 2006 to $4, or 0.1 points, in 2007. Net favorable reserve development of $4 in 2007 included a $16 release of reserves for loss and allocated loss and loss adjustment expenses on Personal Lines auto liability claims for accident years 2002 to 2006. Net favorable prior accident year reserve development of $38 in 2006 included a $53 reduction in prior accident year reserves for auto liability claims related to accident years 2003 to 2005 and a $23 reduction in hurricane catastrophe reserves related to the 2004 and 2005 hurricanes, partially offset by a $30 increase in reserves for personal auto liability claims due to an increase in estimated severity on claims where the Company is exposed to losses in excess of policy limits. Operating expenses increased by $17 The expense ratio decreased by 0.3 points, to 22.4, in 2007, due largely to an increase in insurance operating costs and expenses. Omni accounted for $9 of insurance operating costs and expenses in 2006. Excluding Omni, insurance operating costs and expenses increased by $31, or 14%, primarily due to the effect of a $19 reduction of estimated Citizen assessments in 2006 related to 2005 Florida hurricanes. Also contributing to the increase in insurance and operating costs was an increase in AARP distribution costs and other insurance operating costs, partially offset by lower IT costs. Omni accounted for $30 of amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs in 2006. Excluding Omni, amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs increased by $25, or 4%, driven primarily by the increase in earned premium. Year ended December 31, 2006 compared to the year ended December 31, 2005 Underwriting results decreased by $31, from $460 to $429, with a corresponding 1.3 point increase in the combined ratio, from 87.3 to 88.6, due to: Change in underwriting results Earned premiums An increase in earned premium, excluding a decrease in catastrophe treaty reinstatement premium $ 119 An increase in earned premium due to a decrease in catastrophe treaty reinstatement premium 31 Increase in earned premiums 150 Losses and loss adjustment expenses Volume change Increase in current accident year loss and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes due to the increase in earned premium (75 ) Ratio change Excluding the effect of catastrophe treaty reinstatement premium, an increase in the current accident year non-catastrophe loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes (30 ) Total increase in current accident year loss and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes (105 ) Catastrophes Increase in current accident year catastrophe losses (22 ) Reserve changes Decrease in net favorable prior accident year reserve development (57 ) Increase in losses and loss adjustment expenses (184 ) Operating expenses Increase in amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs (41 ) Decrease in insurance operating costs and expenses 44 Net decrease in operating expenses 3 Decrease in underwriting results from 2005 to 2006 $ (31 ) Earned premium increased by $150 Personal Lines earned premium increased by $150, or 4%, to $3,760, in part due to $31 of catastrophe treaty reinstatement premium recorded as a reduction of earned premium in 2005. Refer to the earned premium discussion for a description of the increase in earned premium. Losses and loss adjustment expenses increased by $184 Current accident year loss and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes increased by $105 Personal Lines current accident year loss and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes increased by $105 in 2006, to $2,396, due to an increase in earned premium and an increase in the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes. Excluding the effect of catastrophe treaty reinstatement premium, the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes increased by 0.9 points, to 63.8, due to an increase in non-catastrophe property loss costs for homeowners, primarily driven by an increase in claim severity, and an increase in the loss and loss adjustment expense ratio for auto liability claims, partially due to a shift to more Dimensions product business within Agency. 110 Table of Contents Current accident year catastrophes increased by $22 Current accident year catastrophe losses increased by $22, from $98, or 2.7 points, in 2005 to $120, or 3.2 points, in 2006. Catastrophe losses increased principally due to losses in 2006 from tornados and hail storms in the Midwest and windstorms in Texas and on the East coast. Catastrophe losses in 2005 included $51 of losses from hurricanes Katrina, Rita and Wilma. Decrease in net favorable prior accident year reserve development by $57 Net favorable prior accident year reserve development decreased from $95, or 2.6 points, in 2005 to $38, or 1.0 point, in 2006. Net favorable prior accident year reserve development of $38 in 2006 included a $53 reduction in auto liability reserves and a $23 reduction in hurricane catastrophe reserves, including $10 related to hurricane Katrina in 2005 and $7 related to hurricane Charley in 2004, partially offset by a $30 increase in reserves for personal auto liability claims due to an increase in estimated severity on claims where the company is exposed to losses in excess of policy limits. The $53 reduction in auto liability reserves in 2006 included a $31 reduction in reserves for auto liability claims related to accident year 2005 as a result of better than expected frequency trends and a $22 reduction of reserves for AARP and other affinity auto liability claims related to accident years 2003 to 2005 as a result of better than expected severity trends. Net favorable prior accident year reserve development of $95 in 2005 included a $95 reduction in reserves for allocated loss adjustment expenses. Operating expenses decreased by $3 The expense ratio decreased by 1.0 point, to 22.7, in 2006, due primarily to a decrease in insurance operating costs and expenses. Insurance operating costs decreased by $44, largely because of a $19 decrease in estimated Citizens assessments in 2006 compared to a $30 increase in Citizens assessments in 2005. Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs increased by $41, due largely to the increase in earned premium. 111 Table of Contents Outlook Management expects the Personal Lines segment to deliver 2% to 5% written premium growth in 2008. Despite a decline in new business in the second half of 2007, in 2008, written premium growth of 3% to 6% in auto and flat to 3.0% in homeowners is expected to come from growth in both AARP and Agency. For AARP business, management expects to achieve its targeted written premium growth primarily through continued direct marketing to AARP members and an expansion of underwriting appetite through the continued roll-out of the Next Gen Auto product. Through improvements in technology, the Company seeks to increase AARP new business flow from the internet and increase the percentage of AARP new business submissions that can be quoted real-time. In addition to marketing directly to AARP members, the Company will increase its media spend to enhance brand awareness. For the Agency business in 2008, management expects to increase written premium by appointing more agents, increasing the flow of new business from recently appointed agents and improving its price competitiveness across a broader spectrum of risks. The Company will seek to increase the number of opportunities to quote on new business as more agencies use comparative raters to obtain quotes from multiple carriers. Margins for both auto and homeowners are under pressure as carriers have generally been willing to allow their combined ratios to increase in order to grow written premium. For auto, written pricing was flat for 2007 and did not keep pace with loss costs which increased due to a higher frequency of auto claims and a higher severity of bodily injury claims. While carriers in the personal lines industry will continue to compete on price, management expects that auto pricing will firm a bit in 2008 as combined ratios have risen in the past couple of years and eroded profitability. Throughout 2007, the Company increased its estimate of current accident year loss costs for auto liability claims, due primarily to higher than anticipated frequency on AARP and Agency business. In 2008, management expects claim frequency on auto claims to stabilize, but expects claim severity to increase, resulting in a moderately higher current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio on auto claims. For homeowners, written pricing increased 5% in 2007, primarily reflecting an increase in insurance to value and an increase in the value of insured properties. Non-catastrophe loss costs of homeowners claims increased in 2007 due to higher claim severity and management expects this trend to continue in 2008. For Personal Lines, the Company expects a 2008 combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development in the range of 88.5 to 91.5. The combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development was 88.6 in 2007. To help maintain profitability, the Company will seek to achieve greater economy of scale, enhance its products, improve its pricing structure and expand market access. To summarize, management outlook in Personal Lines for the 2008 full year is: Written premium growth of 2% to 5%, with auto written premium 3% to 6% higher and homeowners written premium flat to 3.0% higher A combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development of 88.5 to 91.5 112 Table of Contents SMALL COMMERCIAL Small Commercial provides standard commercial insurance coverage to small commercial businesses, primarily throughout the United States, with up to $5 in annual payroll, $15 in annual revenues or $15 in total property values. This segment offers workers compensation, property, automobile, liability and umbrella coverages. Premiums [1] 2007 2006 2005 Written premiums $ 2,747 $ 2,728 $ 2,545 Earned premiums $ 2,736 $ 2,652 $ 2,421 [1] The difference between written premiums and earned premiums is attributable to the change in unearned premium reserve. Premium Measures 2007 2006 2005 New business premium $ 481 $ 533 $ 581 Premium renewal retention 84 % 87 % 88 % Written pricing increase (decrease) (2 %) 1 % 2 % Earned pricing increase (decrease) (1 %) 1 % 3 % Policies in-force end of period 1,038,542 991,979 921,952 Earned Premiums Year ended December 31, 2007 compared to the year ended December 31, 2006 Earned premiums for the Small Commercial segment increased $84, or 3%, primarily due to new business premiums outpacing non-renewals for workers compensation business over the last six months of 2006 and the first six months of 2007. Premium renewal retention for Small Commercial decreased due, in part, to lower retention of larger accounts and a reduction in average premium per account. New business written premium for Small Commercial decreased by $52, or 10%, as increased competition led to a reduction in new business for workers compensation, package business and commercial auto. While the Company has focused on increasing new business from its agents and expanding writings in certain territories, actions taken by some of the Company competitors to increase market share and increase business appetite in certain classes of risks may be contributing to the Company lower new business growth. Also contributing to the decrease in new business premium is lower average premium per account partly due to writing more liability-only policies. As written premium is earned over the 12-month term of the policies, the earned pricing changes during 2007 are primarily a reflection of the written pricing changes over the last six months of 2006 and the first six months of 2007. Consistent with the increase in earned premium, the number of policies in-force has increased. The growth in policies in-force does not correspond directly with the change in earned premiums due to the effect of changes in earned pricing, changes in the average premium per policy and because policy in-force counts are as of a point in time rather than over a period of time. Year ended December 31, 2006 compared to the year ended December 31, 2005 Earned premiums for the Small Commercial segment increased $231, or 10%. The increase was primarily due to new business growth outpacing non-renewals over the last six months of 2005 and the full year of 2006, partially offset by the effect of higher property catastrophe treaty reinsurance costs. Premium renewal retention for Small Commercial decreased slightly for the year ended December 31, 2006, from 88% to 87%, primarily due to commercial auto business. New business written premium for Small Commercial decreased by $48, or 8%, for the year ended December 31, 2006, primarily due to lower production of new workers compensation, auto and package policies. Despite an increase in the number of appointed agents to expand writings in certain territories, actions taken by some of the Company competitors to increase commissions for workers compensation business may have contributed to the Company lower new business growth. As written premium is earned over the 12 month term of the policies, the unfavorable trend in earned pricing during 2006 was primarily a reflection of the written pricing changes over the last six months of 2005 and the first six months of 2006. Consistent with the increase in earned premium, the number of policies in-force has increased. The growth in policies in-force does not correspond directly with the change in earned premiums due to the effect of changes in earned pricing, changes in the average premium per policy and because policy in-force counts are as of a point in time rather than over a period of time. 113 Table of Contents Small Commercial Underwriting Summary 2007 2006 2005 Written premiums $ 2,747 $ 2,728 $ 2,545 Change in unearned premium reserve 11 76 124 Earned premiums 2,736 2,652 2,421 Losses and loss adjustment expenses Current accident year before catastrophes 1,594 1,509 1,426 Current accident year catastrophes 28 34 50 Prior accident years (209 ) (75 ) (24 ) Total losses and loss adjustment expenses 1,413 1,468 1,452 Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs 635 634 596 Insurance operating costs and expenses 180 128 141 Underwriting results $ 508 $ 422 $ 232 Loss and loss adjustment expense ratio Current accident year before catastrophes 58.3 56.9 58.9 Current accident year catastrophes 1.0 1.3 2.1 Prior accident years (7.6 ) (2.8 ) (1.0 ) Total loss and loss adjustment expense ratio 51.6 55.3 60.0 Expense ratio 29.2 28.5 30.2 Policyholder dividend ratio 0.6 0.2 0.2 Combined ratio 81.4 84.1 90.4 Catastrophe ratio Current accident year 1.0 1.3 2.1 Prior accident years 0.2 (0.7 ) 0.4 Total catastrophe ratio 1.2 0.6 2.5 Combined ratio before catastrophes 80.3 83.5 87.9 Combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development 88.0 85.6 89.3 Underwriting results and ratios Year ended December 31, 2007 compared to the year ended December 31, 2006 Underwriting results increased by $86, from $422 to $508, with a corresponding 2.7 point improvement in the combined ratio, from 84.1 to 81.4, due to: Change in underwriting results Increase in earned premiums $ 84 Losses and loss adjustment expenses Volume change Increase in current accident year loss and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes due to the increase in earned premium (47 ) Ratio change An increase in the current accident year non-catastrophe loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes (38 ) Net increase in current accident year loss and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes (85 ) Catastrophes Decrease in current accident year catastrophe losses 6 Reserve changes Increase in net favorable prior accident year reserve development 134 Net decrease in losses and loss adjustment expenses 55 Operating expenses Increase in amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs (1 ) Increase in insurance operating costs and expenses (52 ) Increase in operating expenses (53 ) Increase in underwriting results from 2006 to 2007 $ 86 114 Table of Contents Earned premium increased by $84 Small Commercial earned premium increased by $84, or 3%, to $2,736. Refer to the earned premium discussion for a description of the increase in earned premium. Losses and loss adjustment expenses decreased by $55 Current accident year loss and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes increased by $85 Small Commercial current accident year loss and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes increased by $85 in 2007, to $1,594, due to an increase in earned premium and a 1.4 point increase in the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes, to 58.3. The 1.4 point increase in the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes was primarily due to a higher loss ratio and loss adjustment expense ratio for package business and commercial auto claims, partially offset by a lower loss and loss adjustment expense ratio for workers compensation claims. The higher loss and loss adjustment expense ratio on package business was primarily driven by an increase in the number of individual large losses and the higher loss and loss adjustment expense ratio for auto claims was driven, in part, by earned pricing decreases. Expected loss and loss adjustment expenses on workers compensation claims for the 2007 accident year were lower as the assumed level of medical claim severity was not as high as it had been for the 2006 accident year. Current accident year catastrophes decreased by $6 Current accident year catastrophe losses in 2007 of $28, or 1.0 point, were moderately lower than current accident year catastrophes of $34, or 1.3 points, in 2006. The largest catastrophe losses in 2007 were from spring windstorms in the Southeast and Northeast, tornadoes and thunderstorms in the Midwest and wildfires in California. Catastrophes in 2006 included tornadoes and hail storms in the Midwest. Increase in net favorable prior accident year development by $134 Net favorable prior accident year reserve development increased from $75, or 2.8 points, in 2006 to $209, or 7.6 points, in 2007. Net favorable reserve development of $209 in 2007 included a $151 release of workers compensation loss and loss adjustment expense reserves for accident years 2002 to 2006, a $33 release of workers compensation loss reserves accident years 1987 to 2000 and a $30 release of loss reserves for package business for accident years 2003 to 2006. Net favorable reserve development of $75 in 2006 included a $33 reduction in allocated loss adjustment expense reserves, primarily for workers compensation and package business related to accident years 2003 to 2005, and a $22 reduction in prior accident year catastrophe reserves in 2006 related to hurricanes Katrina, Rita and Wilma in 2005 and hurricanes Charley, Frances and Jeanne in 2004. Operating expenses increased by $53 The 0.7 point increase in the expense ratio and the 0.4 point increase in the policyholder dividend ratio was primarily due to an increase in insurance operating costs and expenses. Insurance operating costs increased by $52 due to an increase in IT and other operating costs, a $10 decrease in estimated Citizens assessments in 2006 and a $10 increase in policyholder dividends in 2007. The increase in policyholder dividends in 2007 was largely attributable to a $10 increase in the estimated amount of dividends payable to certain workers compensation policyholders due to underwriting profits. Despite a 3% increase in earned premium, amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs was relatively flat from 2006 to 2007 due largely to an increase in non-deferrable salaries and benefits and other internal operating costs. 115 Table of Contents Year ended December 31, 2006 compared to the year ended December 31, 2005 Underwriting results increased by $190, from $232 to $422, with a corresponding 6.3 point decrease in the combined ratio, from 90.4 to 84.1, due to: Change in underwriting results Earned premiums An increase in earned premium, excluding a decrease in catastrophe treaty reinstatement premium $ 224 An increase in earned premium due to a decrease in catastrophe treaty reinstatement premium 7 Increase in earned premiums 231 Losses and loss adjustment expenses Volume change Increase in current accident year loss and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes due to the increase in earned premium (132 ) Ratio change Excluding the effect of catastrophe treaty reinstatement premium, a decrease in the current accident year non-catastrophe loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes 49 Net increase in current accident year loss and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes (83 ) Catastrophes Decrease in current accident year catastrophe losses 16 Reserve changes Increase in net favorable prior accident year reserve development 51 Net increase in losses and loss adjustment expenses (16 ) Operating expenses Increase in amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs (38 ) Decrease in insurance operating costs and expenses 13 Net increase in operating expenses (25 ) Increase in underwriting results from 2005 to 2006 $ 190 Earned premium increased by $231 Small Commercial earned premium increased by $231, or 10%, to $2,652. Refer to the earned premium discussion for a description of the increase in earned premium. Losses and loss adjustment expenses increased by $16 Current accident year loss and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes increased by $83 Small Commercial current accident year loss and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes increased by $83 in 2006, to $1,509, due to an increase in earned premium, partially offset by a decrease in the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes. Excluding the effect of catastrophe treaty reinstatement premium, the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes decreased by 1.8 points, to 56.9, due to a lower loss and loss adjustment expense ratio on workers compensation business and a decrease in non-catastrophe property loss costs, partially offset by a shift to more workers compensation premium which has a higher loss and loss adjustment expense ratio than other business in the segment. Non-catastrophe property loss costs were favorable primarily due to favorable claim frequency. Current accident year catastrophes decreased by $16 Current accident year catastrophe losses decreased by $16, from $50, or 2.1 points, in 2005 to $34, or 1.3 points, in 2006. Catastrophe losses in 2005 included catastrophe losses from hurricanes Katrina, Rita and Wilma. While hurricane losses were significantly lower in 2006, non-hurricane catastrophe losses increased significantly due, in large part, to tornadoes and hail storms in the Midwest. Increase in net favorable prior accident year development by $51 Net favorable prior accident year reserve development increased from $24, or 1.0 point, in 2005 to $75, or 2.8 points, in 2006. Net favorable reserve development of $75 in 2006 included a $33 reduction in allocated loss adjustment expense reserves, primarily for workers compensation and package business related to accident years 2003 to 2005, and a $22 reduction in prior accident year catastrophe reserves in 2006 related to hurricanes Katrina, Rita and Wilma in 2005 and hurricanes Charley, Frances and Jeanne in 2004. Net favorable reserve development of $24 in 2005 included a $23 reduction of reserves for allocated loss adjustment expenses and a $37 reduction in workers compensation reserves related to accident years 2003 and 2004, partially offset by a $15 increase in workers compensation reserves related to reserves for claim payments expected to emerge after 20 years of development and a $20 strengthening of reserves for the 2004 hurricanes. 116 Table of Contents Operating expenses increased by $25 The expense ratio decreased by 1.7 points, to 28.5, primarily due to a decrease in insurance operating costs and expenses. Insurance operating costs decreased by $13, largely because of a $10 decrease in estimated Citizens assessments in 2006 compared to a $16 increase in Citizens assessments in 2005. Partially offsetting the improvement due to changes in the Citizens assessments was an increase in IT and other insurance operating costs. Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs increased by $38, due largely to the increase in earned premium. Outlook Management expects written premium in 2008 to be flat to 3% higher than in 2007 as it seeks to increase the flow of new business from its agents. Small Commercial expects to increase written premium by selectively expanding its underwriting appetite, refining its pricing models and upgrading product features. In 2008, the Company expects to add a pricing tier for workers compensation business to provide more pricing flexibility and introduce an enhanced renewal pricing model for the Company Spectrum business owners package product. Despite a decline in new business in 2007, management expects new business will increase in 2008, driven by an increased flow of new business submissions from the larger producers. Including supplemental commissions, the Company has increased commissions paid to agents and expects that this will help it achieve its growth objectives in 2008. Through technology and process improvements, in 2008, the Company plans to improve efficiency and service levels in its underwriting centers and enhance the agent on-line experience. Average premium per policy is expected to continue to decline due to the sale of more liability-only policies, workers compensation rate reductions and a lower average premium on Next Generation Auto business. Written pricing has remained relatively flat for Small Commercial business as carriers have competed for new business through new product features and expanded coverage. In 2008, the Company will continue to focus on renewal retention, particularly in the mid-Western states, where competition has been particularly strong. Reflecting favorable trends in workers compensation loss costs in recent accident years, management expects a slightly lower loss and loss adjustment expense ratio for workers compensation claims in the 2008 accident year, although the improvement, if any, depends on continued favorable frequency. Loss costs are expected to continue to increase on non-catastrophe commercial auto property claims, reflecting a continuation of higher loss costs on commercial auto business in 2007. Based on anticipated trends in earned pricing and loss costs, the combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development is expected to be in the range of 86.0 to 89.0 in 2008. The combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development was 88.0 in 2007. To summarize, management outlook in Small Commercial for the 2008 full year is: Written premium flat to 3% higher A combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development of 86.0 to 89.0 117 Table of Contents MIDDLE MARKET Middle Market provides standard commercial insurance coverage to middle market commercial businesses, primarily throughout the United States, with greater than $5 in annual payroll, $15 in annual revenues or $15 in total property values. This segment offers workers compensation, property, automobile, liability, umbrella and marine coverages. Premiums [1] 2007 2006 2005 Written premiums $ 2,257 $ 2,445 $ 2,445 Earned premiums $ 2,351 $ 2,454 $ 2,355 [1] The difference between written premiums and earned premiums is attributable to the change in unearned premium reserve. Premium Measures 2007 2006 2005 New business premium $ 390 $ 462 $ 600 Premium renewal retention 77 % 82 % 81 % Written pricing increase (decrease) (5 %) (5 %) (5 %) Earned pricing increase (decrease) (5 %) (5 %) (3 %) Policies in-force as of end of period 80,377 78,747 77,350 Earned Premiums Year ended December 31, 2007 compared to the year ended December 31, 2006 Earned premiums for the Middle Market segment decreased by $103, or 4%. The decrease was primarily due to earned pricing decreases and a decrease in new business written premium and premium renewal retention over the last six months of 2006 and the first six months of 2007. The decrease in both new business written premium and premium renewal retention was primarily due to continued price competition and the effect of state-mandated rate reductions in workers compensation. Earned pricing and premium renewal retention decreased in all lines of business, including property, commercial auto, general liability, workers compensation and marine. New business written premium declined in all lines except workers compensation. As written premium is earned over the 12-month term of the policies, the earned pricing changes during 2007 were primarily a reflection of the written pricing changes over the last six months of 2006 and the first six months of 2007. Despite the decrease in earned premium, the number of policies in-force has increased. The growth in policies in-force does not correspond directly with the change in earned premiums due to a reduction in the average premium per policy and because policy in-force counts are as of a point in time rather than over a period of time. Year ended December 31, 2006 compared to the year ended December 31, 2005 Earned premiums for the Middle Market segment increased $99, or 4%. The increase was primarily due to new business growth outpacing non-renewals, predominately in workers compensation and marine insurance, over the last six months of 2005 and the full year 2006, partially offset by the effect of earned pricing decreases and higher property catastrophe treaty reinsurance costs. Premium renewal retention for Middle Market increased slightly for the year ended December 31, 2006, from 81% to 82%, primarily driven by workers compensation business. In response to increased competition, management has focused heavily on premium renewal retention. New business written premium for Middle Market decreased by $138, or 23%, for the year ended December 31, 2006, primarily due to increased competition for workers compensation business. As written premium is earned over the 12 month term of the policies, the decrease in earned pricing during 2006 was primarily a reflection of the written pricing decreases over the last six months of 2005 and the first six months of 2006. Consistent with the increase in earned premium the number of policies in-force has increased. The growth in policies in-force does not correspond directly with the change in earned premiums due to the effect of changes in earned pricing, changes in the average premium per policy and because policy in-force counts are as of a point in time rather than over a period of time. 118 Table of Contents Middle Market Underwriting Summary 2007 2006 2005 Written premiums $ 2,257 $ 2,445 $ 2,445 Change in unearned premium reserve (94 ) (9 ) 90 Earned premiums 2,351 2,454 2,355 Losses and loss adjustment expenses Current accident year before catastrophes 1,523 1,533 1,431 Current accident year catastrophes 15 36 38 Prior accident years (14 ) 15 52 Total losses and loss adjustment expenses 1,524 1,584 1,521 Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs 529 544 537 Insurance operating costs and expenses 154 119 134 Underwriting results $ 144 $ 207 $ 163 Loss and loss adjustment expense ratio Current accident year before catastrophes 64.8 62.6 60.7 Current accident year catastrophes 0.7 1.5 1.6 Prior accident years (0.6 ) 0.6 2.2 Total loss and loss adjustment expense ratio 64.8 64.7 64.6 Expense ratio 28.4 26.7 28.5 Policyholder dividend ratio 0.6 0.2 0.1 Combined ratio 93.9 91.6 93.2 Catastrophe ratio Current accident year 0.7 1.5 1.6 Prior accident years (0.1 ) (0.2 ) Total catastrophe ratio 0.5 1.5 1.4 Combined ratio before catastrophes 93.4 90.1 91.7 Combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development 93.8 89.5 89.3 Underwriting results and ratios Year ended December 31, 2007 compared to the year ended December 31, 2006 Underwriting results decreased by $63, from $207 to $144, with a corresponding 2.3 point increase in the combined ratio, from 91.6 to 93.9, due to: Change in underwriting results Decrease in earned premiums $ (103 ) Losses and loss adjustment expenses Volume change Decrease in current accident year loss and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes due to the decrease in earned premium 61 Ratio change An increase in the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes (51 ) Net decrease in current accident year loss and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes 10 Catastrophes Decrease in current accident year catastrophe losses 21 Reserve changes Change to net favorable prior accident year reserve development 29 Net decrease in losses and loss adjustment expenses 60 Operating expenses Decrease in amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs 15 Increase in insurance operating costs and expenses (35 ) Net increase in operating expenses (20 ) Decrease in underwriting results from 2006 to 2007 $ (63 ) 119 Table of Contents Earned premium decreased by $103 Middle Market earned premium decreased by $103, or 4%, to $2,351. Refer to the earned premium discussion for a description of the decrease in earned premium. Losses and loss adjustment expenses decreased by $60 Current accident year loss and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes decreased by $10 Middle Market current accident year loss and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes decreased by $10 in 2007, to $1,523, due to a decrease in earned premium, largely offset by the effect of an increase in the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes. Before catastrophes, the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio increased by 2.2 points, to 64.8, primarily due to a higher loss and loss adjustment expense ratio for workers compensation, general liability and commercial auto claims driven, in part, by earned pricing decreases. For commercial auto, loss costs increased for both liability and property damage claims. Current accident year catastrophes decreased by $21 Current accident year catastrophe losses decreased by $21, from $36, or 1.5 points, in 2006 to $15, or 0.7 points, in 2007. Compared to 2007, there were more severe catastrophes in 2006, including tornadoes and hail storms in the Midwest and windstorms in Texas and on the East coast. The largest catastrophe losses in 2007 were from spring windstorms in the Southeast and wildfires in California. Change to favorable prior accident year development by $29 Prior accident year reserve development changed from net unfavorable prior accident year reserve development of $15, or 0.6 points, in 2006 to net favorable prior accident year reserve development of $14, or 0.6 points, in 2007. Net favorable reserve development of $14 in 2007 included a $49 release of general liability loss and loss adjustment expense reserves for accident years 2003 to 2006 and an $18 release of commercial auto liability reserves for accident years 2003 and 2004, partially offset by a $40 strengthening of workers compensation reserves for accident years 1973 & prior and a $14 strengthening of general liability reserves for accident years more than 20 years old. Net unfavorable reserve development of $15 in 2006 consisted primarily of a $20 increase in general liability loss and loss adjustment expense reserves related to accident years 1998 to 2005 and a $10 increase in construction defect reserves, partially offset by a $25 reduction in allocated loss adjustment expense reserves for workers compensation business related to accident years 2003 to 2005. Operating expenses increased by $20 The 1.7 point increase in the expense ratio and the 0.4 point increase in the policyholder dividend ratio was primarily due to an increase in insurance operating costs and expenses and the decrease in earned premiums. Insurance operating costs and expenses increased by $35, partially due to the effect of a $12 reduction of estimated Citizens assessments related to the 2005 Florida hurricanes recorded in 2006. Also contributing to the increase in insurance operating costs and expenses was an increase in IT costs, an increase in non-deferrable salaries and benefits, and an $8 increase in policyholder dividends. The increase in policyholder dividends was largely due to an $8 increase in the estimated amount of dividends payable to certain workers compensation policyholders due to underwriting profits. Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs decreased by $15, due largely to the decrease in earned premium and corresponding decrease in acquisition costs. 120 Table of Contents Year ended December 31, 2006 compared to the year ended December 31, 2005 Underwriting results increased by $44, from $163 to $207, with a corresponding 1.6 point decrease in the combined ratio. Change in underwriting results Earned premiums An increase in earned premium, excluding a decrease in catastrophe treaty reinstatement premium $ 91 An increase in earned premium due to a decrease in catastrophe treaty reinstatement premium 8 Increase in earned premiums 99 Losses and loss adjustment expenses Volume change Increase in current accident year loss and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes due to the increase in earned premium (50 ) Ratio change Excluding the effect of catastrophe treaty reinstatement premium, an increase in the current accident year non-catastrophe loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes (52 ) Total increase in current accident year loss and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes (102 ) Catastrophes Decrease in current accident year catastrophe losses 2 Reserve changes Decrease in net unfavorable prior accident year reserve development 37 Net increase in losses and loss adjustment expenses (63 ) Operating expenses Increase in amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs (7 ) Decrease in insurance operating costs and expenses 15 Net decrease in operating expenses 8 Increase in underwriting results from 2005 to 2006 $ 44 Earned premium increased by $99 Middle Market earned premium increased by $99, or 4%, to $2,454. Refer to the earned premium discussion for a description of the increase in earned premium. Losses and loss adjustment expenses increased by $63 Current accident year loss and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes increased by $102 Middle Market current accident year loss and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes increased by $102 in 2006, to $1,533, due to an increase in earned premium and an increase in the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes. Excluding the effect of catastrophe treaty reinstatement premium, the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes increased by 2.1 points, to 62.6, primarily due to an increase in non-catastrophe property loss costs, the effect of earned pricing decreases and the effect of a shift to more workers compensation premium which has a higher loss and loss adjustment expense ratio than other business in the segment. The increase in non-catastrophe property loss costs was primarily due to increasing claim severity. Current accident year catastrophes decreased by $2 Current accident year catastrophe losses decreased by $2, from $38, or 1.6 points, in 2005 to $36, or 1.5 points, in 2006. Catastrophe losses in 2005 included catastrophe losses from hurricanes Katrina, Rita and Wilma. While hurricane losses were significantly lower in 2006, non-hurricane catastrophe losses increased significantly due, in large part, to tornadoes and hail storms in the Midwest and windstorms in Texas and on the East coast. Decrease in net unfavorable prior accident year development by $37 Net unfavorable prior accident year reserve development decreased from $52, or 2.2 points, in 2005 to $15, or 0.6 points, in 2006. Net unfavorable reserve development of $15 in 2006 consisted primarily of a $20 increase in general liability loss and loss adjustment expense reserves related to accident years 1998 to 2005 and a $10 increase in construction defect reserves, partially offset by a $25 reduction in allocated loss adjustment expense reserves for workers compensation business related to accident years 2003 to 2005. Net unfavorable reserve development of $52 in 2005 primarily included a $35 increase in workers compensation reserves related to reserves for claim payments expected to emerge after 20 years of development and a $40 strengthening of general liability reserves for accident years 2000 to 2003 due to higher than anticipated loss payments beyond four years of development. Partially offsetting the reserve increases in 2005 was a $38 reduction in workers compensation reserves related to accident years 2003 and 2004. 121 Table of Contents Operating expenses decreased by $8 The expense ratio decreased by 1.8 points, to 26.7, primarily due to a decrease in insurance operating costs and expenses. Insurance operating costs decreased by $15, largely because of a $12 decrease in estimated Citizens assessments in 2006 compared to a $17 increase in Citizens assessments in 2005 and a reduction in estimated contingent commissions. Partially offsetting the improvement due to changes in the Citizens assessments was an increase non-deferred operating expenses commensurate with the increase in earned premium. Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs increased by $7, due largely to the increase in earned premium. Outlook Management expects written premium to be 1% to 4% lower in 2008 as the Company takes a disciplined approach to evaluating and pricing risks in the face of declines in written pricing. Contributing to the expected decline in Middle Market written premium is the effect of state-mandated rate reductions in workers compensation and increased competition in specific geographic markets and lines. For both workers compensation and commercial auto products, the Company will improve the sophistication of its pricing models, resulting in an expanded underwriting appetite in selected industries and regions of the country. Targeting those agents and brokers with the greatest opportunity for writing new profitable business, management plans to offer key agents added value through agency service and sales support. Including supplemental commissions, the Company has increased commissions paid to agents and expects that this will help it achieve its growth objectives in 2008. Written pricing has been affected by increased competition for new business as evidenced by 5% written pricing decreases in 2007. Market conditions in the commercial lines industry continue to be soft with written pricing likely to decline further in 2008, more so on the larger accounts. The Hartford new business has been declining due to the increased competition and written pricing decreases; in 2008, the Company will continue to focus on protecting its renewals. Consistent with claims experience for the 2007 accident year, during 2008, management expects an increase in claim costs due to rising claim cost severity as an expected increase in severity will likely more than offset the effect of an expected reduction in claim frequency. Loss costs are expected to continue to increase across most lines of business in Middle Market, including on workers compensation claims and on non-catastrophe property claims covered under property, marine and commercial auto policies. Based on anticipated trends in earned pricing and loss costs, the combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development is expected to be in the range of 94.5 to 97.5 in 2008. The combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development was 93.8 in 2007. To summarize, management outlook in Middle Market for the 2008 full year is: Written premium 1% to 4% lower A combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development of 94.5 to 97.5 122 Table of Contents SPECIALTY COMMERCIAL Specialty Commercial offers a variety of customized insurance products and risk management services. The segment provides standard commercial insurance products including workers compensation, automobile and liability coverages to large-sized companies. Specialty Commercial also provides professional liability, fidelity and surety, specialty casualty and livestock coverages, as well as core property and excess and surplus lines coverages not normally written by standard lines insurers. Specialty Commercial provides other insurance products and services primarily to captive insurance companies, pools and self-insurance groups. In addition, Specialty Commercial provides third-party administrator services for claims administration, integrated benefits and loss control through Specialty Risk Services. Written Premiums [1] 2007 2006 2005 Property $ 180 $ 212 $ 211 Casualty 534 582 826 Professional liability, fidelity and surety 689 697 613 Other 81 117 167 Total $ 1,484 $ 1,608 $ 1,817 Earned Premiums [1] Property $ 202 $ 213 $ 245 Casualty 543 579 796 Professional liability, fidelity and surety 685 650 555 Other 85 120 170 Total $ 1,515 $ 1,562 $ 1,766 [1] The difference between written premiums and earned premiums is attributable to the change in unearned premium reserve. Earned Premiums Year ended December 31, 2007 compared to the year ended December 31, 2006 Earned premiums for the Specialty Commercial segment decreased by $47, or 3%, for the year ended December 31, 2007, primarily due to a decrease in casualty, property and other earned premiums, partially offset by an increase in professional liability, fidelity and surety earned premiums. Property earned premiums decreased by $11, or 5%, primarily due to lower premium renewal retention and the effect of an arrangement with Berkshire Hathaway to share premiums written under subscription policies. Under the arrangement with Berkshire Hathaway that commenced in the second quarter of 2007, a share of excess and surplus lines business that was previously written entirely by the Company is now being written in conjunction with Berkshire Hathaway under subscription policies, whereby both companies share, or participate, in the business written. The arrangement with Berkshire Hathaway enables the Company to offer its insureds larger policy limits and thereby enhance its competitive position in the marketplace. The decrease in earned premium was partially offset by the effect of earned pricing increases, new business growth, lower reinsurance costs and a decrease in reinstatement premium payable to reinsurers. Renewal retention has decreased in 2007, primarily due to increased competition on national account business as well as in the standard excess and surplus lines market. After experiencing significant rate increases throughout 2006 and smaller rate increases for the first six months of 2007, written pricing decreased in the last six months of the year. While new business decreased in the fourth quarter of 2007, new business increased for the full year, largely because the Company had significantly curtailed new business in 2006 in order to reduce catastrophe loss exposures in certain geographic areas. Casualty earned premiums decreased by $36, or 6%, for the year ended December 31, 2007, primarily because of a decline in new business written premium and lower premium renewal retention on business written through industry trade groups. Also contributing to the decrease in earned premiums was an increase in the estimated return premium due to insureds under retrospectively-rated policies. Professional liability, fidelity and surety earned premium grew $35, or 5%, for the year ended December 31, 2007 due to an increase in earned premiums in professional liability and surety business. The increase in earned premium from professional liability business was primarily due to a decrease in the portion of risks ceded to outside reinsurers and an increase in the mix of lower limit middle market professional liability premium, partially offset by the effect of earned pricing decreases and a decrease in new business written premium. A lower frequency of class action cases in the past couple of years has put downward pressure on rates during 2006 and 2007. The increase in earned premium from surety business was primarily due to an increase in public construction spending and construction costs, resulting in more bonded work programs for current clients and larger bond limits. Within the other category, earned premium decreased by $35, or 29%. The Other category of earned premiums includes premiums assumed under inter-segment arrangements. Beginning in the third quarter of 2006, the Company reduced the premiums assumed by Specialty Commercial under inter-segment arrangements covering certain liability claims. 123 Table of Contents Year ended December 31, 2006 compared to the year ended December 31, 2005 Earned premiums for the Specialty Commercial segment decreased by $204, or 12%, primarily due to decreases in casualty, property and other earned premiums, partially offset by an increase in professional liability, fidelity and surety earned premiums and the effect of $26 of catastrophe treaty reinstatement premium payable to reinsurers recorded as a reduction of earned premium in 2005. Property earned premium decreased by $32, or 13%, primarily due to a decrease in new business and renewals in the latter half of 2005 and the full year of 2006 as well as the effect of an increase in reinsurance costs for 2006 treaties and additional catastrophe reinsurance purchased in the fourth quarter of 2005. Partially offsetting the decrease in earned premiums was the non-recurrence of $34 of catastrophe treaty reinstatement premiums payable to reinsurers recorded as a reduction of earned premium in 2005 and double digit earned pricing increases during 2006. The reduction in new business and renewals reflects a decision to reduce catastrophe loss exposures in certain geographic areas and a determination that, despite rate increases, rates on some business opportunities were not adequate. Property business has experienced significant rate increases throughout 2006, reflecting a hardening of the market after the 2005 hurricanes. Casualty earned premiums decreased by $217, or 27%, primarily because of the non-renewal of a single captive insurance program and a decline in new business written premium growth. Partially offsetting the decrease was an increase in premium retention and the effect of renewing a single large deductible policy as a retrospectively rated policy which bears a higher premium. The single captive insurance program accounted for earned premium of $241 for the year ended December 31, 2005. Professional liability, fidelity and surety earned premium grew $95, or 17%, due primarily to a decrease in the portion of risks ceded to outside reinsurers, new business growth in commercial and contract surety business, earned pricing increases in contract surety business and new business growth in middle market and small commercial professional liability business, partially offset by earned pricing decreases in professional liability. The growth in commercial and contract surety was primarily driven by an increase in the number of fidelity and surety bonds issued to existing accounts. Within the other category, earned premium decreased by $50, or 29%. The other category of earned premiums includes premiums assumed and ceded under inter-segment arrangements and co-participations. Under an inter-segment arrangement, beginning in the first quarter of 2006, the Company allocated more of the premiums ceded under the principal property catastrophe reinsurance program to Specialty Commercial and less to Personal Lines, Small Commercial and Middle Market. In addition, beginning in the third quarter of 2006, the Company reduced the premiums assumed by Specialty Commercial under inter-segment arrangements covering certain liability claims. Specialty Commercial Underwriting Summary 2007 2006 2005 Written premiums $ 1,484 $ 1,608 $ 1,817 Change in unearned premium reserve (31 ) 46 51 Earned premiums 1,515 1,562 1,766 Losses and loss adjustment expenses Current accident year before catastrophes 999 1,069 1,216 Current accident year catastrophes 9 9 165 Prior accident years 82 34 103 Total losses and loss adjustment expenses 1,090 1,112 1,484 Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs 323 306 286 Insurance operating costs and expenses 107 91 160 Underwriting results $ (5 ) $ 53 $ (164 ) Loss and loss adjustment expense ratio Current accident year before catastrophes 66.0 68.2 68.9 Current accident year catastrophes 0.6 0.6 9.3 Prior accident years 5.4 2.3 5.8 Total loss and loss adjustment expense ratio 72.0 71.1 84.1 Expense ratio 27.5 25.7 24.6 Policyholder dividend ratio 0.9 (0.1 ) 0.5 Combined ratio 100.4 96.7 109.2 Catastrophe ratio Current accident year 0.6 0.6 9.3 Prior accident years 0.1 (2.5 ) 0.1 Total catastrophe ratio 0.7 (1.9 ) 9.5 Combined ratio before catastrophes 99.7 98.5 99.7 Combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development 94.4 93.8 94.1 Other revenues [1] $ 354 $ 337 $ 343 [1] Represents servicing revenue 124 Table of Contents Underwriting Results and Ratios Year ended December 31, 2007 compared to the year ended December 31, 2006 Underwriting results decreased by $58, with a corresponding 3.7 point increase in the combined ratio, to 100.4, due to: Change in underwriting results Decrease in earned premiums $ (47 ) Losses and loss adjustment expenses Volume change Decrease in current accident year loss and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes due to the decrease in earned premium 37 Ratio change Decrease in the current accident year non-catastrophe loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes 33 Total decrease in current accident year loss and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes 70 Reserve changes Increase in net unfavorable prior accident year reserve development (48 ) Net decrease in losses and loss adjustment expenses 22 Operating expenses Increase in amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs (17 ) Increase in insurance operating costs and expenses (16 ) Increase in operating expenses (33 ) Decrease in underwriting results from 2006 to 2007 $ (58 ) Earned premium decreased by $47 Specialty Commercial earned premium decreased by $47, or 3%, to $1,515. Refer to the earned premium discussion for a description of the decrease in earned premium. Losses and loss adjustment expenses decreased by $22 Current accident year loss and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes decreased by $70 Specialty Commercial current accident year loss and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes decreased by $70 in 2007 to $999, due to a decrease in earned premium and a 2.2 point decrease in the loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development, to 66.0. The decrease in the loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development was driven by a lower loss and loss adjustment ratio on directors and officers insurance in professional liability and a decrease in non-catastrophe property loss costs on property business, partially offset by a higher loss and loss adjustment expense ratio on casualty business. Increase in net unfavorable prior accident year development by $48 Net unfavorable prior accident year reserve development increased from $34, or 2.3 points, in 2006 to $82, or 5.4 points, in 2007. Net unfavorable prior accident year reserve development of $82 in 2007 consisted primarily of a $47 strengthening of workers compensation loss and loss adjustment expense reserves for accident years 1987 to 2001, a $34 strengthening of general liability reserves, primarily related to accident years 1987 to 1997 and a $25 strengthening of general liability reserves for accident years more than 20 years old. Partially offsetting the unfavorable reserve development in 2007 was a $22 release of reserves for surety business for accident years 2003 to 2006. Net unfavorable prior accident year reserve development of $34 in 2006 included a $35 strengthening of reserves for construction defects claims on casualty business for accident years 1997 and prior and a $20 strengthening of allocated loss adjustment expense reserves on workers compensation policies for claim payments expected to emerge after 20 years of development, partially offset by a $35 reduction in catastrophe reserves related to the 2005 hurricanes. Operating expenses increased by $33 Insurance operating costs and expenses increased by $16, primarily due to a $16 increase in policyholder dividends. The $16 increase in policyholder dividends was largely due to a $10 reduction in estimated policyholder dividends recorded in 2006 and a $7 increase in estimated policyholder dividends recorded in 2007. The $7 increase in dividends in 2007 was primarily driven by an increase in the estimated amount of dividends payable to certain workers compensation policyholders due to underwriting profits. Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs increased by $17, due largely to an increase in amortization for professional liability, fidelity and surety business driven largely by the increase in earned premiums for that business and a reduction in ceding commissions. The expense ratio increased by 1.8 points, to 27.5, due largely to the reduction in ceding commission on professional liability business and the decrease in earned premiums. 125 Table of Contents Year ended December 31, 2006 compared to the year ended December 31, 2005 Underwriting results improved by $217 Underwriting results improved by $217, with a corresponding 12.5 point decrease in the combined ratio, to 96.7, due to: Change in underwriting results Earned premiums A decrease in earned premium, excluding a decrease in catastrophe treaty reinstatement premium $ (231 ) An increase in earned premium due to a decrease in catastrophe treaty reinstatement premium 27 Net decrease in earned premiums (204 ) Losses and loss adjustment expenses Volume change Decrease in current accident year loss and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes due to the decrease in earned premium 152 Ratio change Excluding the effect of catastrophe treaty reinstatement premium, a slight increase in the current accident year non-catastrophe loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes (5 ) Net decrease in current accident year loss and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes 147 Catastrophes Decrease in current accident year catastrophe losses 156 Reserve changes Decrease in net unfavorable prior accident year reserve development 69 Decrease in losses and loss adjustment expenses 372 Operating expenses Increase in amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs (20 ) Decrease in insurance operating costs and expenses 69 Net decrease in operating expenses 49 Improvement in underwriting results from 2005 to 2006 $ 217 Earned premium decreased by $204 Specialty Commercial earned premium decreased by $204, or 12%, to $1,562. Refer to the earned premium discussion for a description of the decrease in earned premium. Losses and loss adjustment expenses decreased by $372 Current accident year loss and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes decreased by $147 Specialty Commercial current accident year loss and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes decreased by $147 in 2006, to $1,069, due almost entirely to a decreased in earned premium. Excluding the effect of catastrophe treaty reinstatement premium, the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes increased by 0.3 points, to 68.2, due to a higher loss and loss adjustment expense ratio on casualty and professional liability business and the effect of an increase in the allocation to Specialty Commercial of premiums ceded under the Company principal property catastrophe reinsurance program, partially offset by lower non-catastrophe property loss costs. Current accident year catastrophes decreased by $156 Current accident year catastrophe losses decreased by $156, from $165, or 9.3 points, in 2005 to $9, or 0.6 points, in 2006. Catastrophe losses in 2005 included losses for hurricanes Katrina, Rita and Wilma. Decrease in net unfavorable prior accident year development by $69 Net unfavorable prior accident year reserve development decreased from $103, or 5.8 points, in 2005 to $34, or 2.3 points, in 2006. Net unfavorable prior accident year reserve development of $34 in 2006 included a $35 strengthening of reserves for construction defects claims on casualty business for accident years 1997 and prior and a $20 strengthening of allocated loss adjustment expense reserves on workers compensation policies, partially offset by a $35 reduction in catastrophe reserves related to the 2005 hurricanes. The reduction in catastrophe reserves included a $28 reduction in net losses related to hurricane Katrina, despite a $24 increase in the gross loss estimate for hurricane Katrina. The decrease in net catastrophe loss reserves was primarily because hurricane Katrina losses on specialty property business were reimbursable under a specialty property reinsurance treaty covering national account business as well as under the Company principal property catastrophe reinsurance program. Under the provisions of an inter-segment reinsurance arrangement, a portion of the recoveries from the Company principal property catastrophe reinsurance program related to the reserve strengthening were allocated to Specialty Commercial. Net unfavorable prior accident year reserve development of $103 in 2005 included a $70 strengthening of workers compensation reserves for claim payments expected to emerge after 20 years of development. Reserve development in 2005 also included a release of reserves for directors and officers insurance related to accident years 2003 and 2004 and strengthening of prior accident year reserves 126 Table of Contents for contracts that provide auto financing gap coverage and auto lease residual value coverage; the release and offsetting strengthening were each approximately $80. Operating expenses decreased by $49 Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs increased by $20, due largely to lower ceding commissions on professional liability business. The decrease in earned premium on casualty business did not have a commensurate reduction in amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs because deferred acquisition cost amortization related to a single, non-renewed captive insurance program was not significant. Insurance operating costs decreased by $69, largely because of an increase in ceding commissions on captive business. The expense ratio increased 1.1 points, to 25.7, due largely to the decrease in earned premiums and lower ceding commissions on professional liability business, partially offset by an increase in ceding commissions on captive insurance business. Outlook In 2008, the Company expects written premium for the Specialty Commercial segment to be flat to 3% higher. For property business, the Company expects written premium to decrease, largely because of a planned reduction in specialty property business written with large, national accounts. Management expects written premium for its core excess and surplus lines property business to decrease moderately. Under an arrangement with Berkshire Hathaway that commenced in the second quarter of 2007, a share of core excess and surplus lines business that was previously written entirely by the Company is now being written in conjunction with Berkshire Hathaway under subscription policies, whereby both companies share, or participate, in the business written. The arrangement with Berkshire Hathaway enables the Company to offer its insureds larger policy limits and thereby enhance its competitive position in the marketplace. Management expects a modest increase in casualty written premium in 2007 due largely to an increase in new business while retaining its profitable renewals. Within the specialty casualty business, the Company will improve interaction with agents by reducing the number of internal touch points through the underwriting process and will realign the field office organization to better serve specialty construction accounts. Within professional liability, fidelity and surety, management expects an increase in written premium for 2008, primarily driven by increases in directors and officers insurance ( D&O ), errors and omissions insurance ( E&O ) and contract surety business. The Company will focus on D&O and E&O new business opportunities with both large and middle market private companies and seeks to grow its business in Europe through its new underwriting office in the United Kingdom. In addition, the Company will continue to cross-sell professional liability coverage to small businesses that purchase business owners package policies and capitalize on the increased demand for separate Side-A D&O insurance limits of liability that provide protection to individual directors and officers. In the face of written pricing decreases, the Company will maintain underwriting discipline when writing professional liability coverage for larger public companies. The increase in contract surety business will be driven, in part, by continued organic premium growth from the existing portfolio of accounts and by target marketing for new business opportunities. We will also seek to diversify our portfolio of commercial surety business, including a focus on growing our small bond book of business. Written premium growth could be lower than planned in any one or all of the Specialty Commercial businesses if written pricing is less favorable than anticipated and management determines that new and renewal business is not adequately priced. Written pricing has been decreasing in professional liability and property lines of business. Since 2006, competition has intensified for professional liability business, particularly for directors and officers insurance coverage. A lower frequency of class action cases in the past couple of years has put downward pressure on rates. Written pricing for property business began to decline in the second half of 2007, primarily due to price competition which has resulted in lower pricing in the standard core excess and surplus lines markets. The industry has increased its capacity and appetite to write business in catastrophe-prone markets and this has increased competition in those markets. As a percentage of earned premiums, management expects that loss and loss adjustment expenses will increase in 2008 for both professional liability business and property business with the increase driven primarily by lower earned pricing. Given the anticipated trends in pricing and loss costs in Specialty Commercial, management expects a combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development in the range of 96.0 to 99.0 for 2008. The combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development was 94.4 in 2007. To summarize, management outlook in Specialty Commercial for the 2008 full year is: Written premium flat to 3% higher A combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development of 96.0 to 99.0 127 Table of Contents OTHER OPERATIONS (INCLUDING ASBESTOS AND ENVIRONMENTAL CLAIMS) Operating Summary 2007 2006 2005 Written premiums $ 5 $ 4 $ 4 Change in unearned premium reserve (1 ) Earned premiums 5 5 4 Losses and loss adjustment expenses prior year 193 360 212 Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs (3 ) Insurance operating costs and expenses 22 11 21 Underwriting results (210 ) (366 ) (226 ) Net investment income 248 261 283 Net realized capital gains (losses) (12 ) 26 25 Other expenses (1 ) (1 ) (1 ) Income tax benefit (expense) 5 45 (10 ) Net income (loss) $ 30 $ (35 ) $ 71 The Other Operations segment includes operations that are under a single management structure, Heritage Holdings, which is responsible for two related activities. The first activity is the management of certain subsidiaries and operations of the Company that have discontinued writing new business. The second is the management of claims (and the associated reserves) related to asbestos, environmental and other exposures. The Other Operations book of business contains policies written from approximately the 1940s to 2003. The Company experience has been that this book of run-off business has, over time, produced significantly higher claims and losses than were contemplated at inception. Year ended December 31, 2007 compared to the year ended December 31, 2006 Other Operations reported net income of $30 in 2007 compared to a net loss of $35 in 2006, driven by the following: A $156 increase in underwriting results, primarily due to a $167 decrease in unfavorable prior year loss development. Reserve development in 2007 included $99 principally as a result of an adverse arbitration decision and $25 of environmental reserve strengthening. In 2006, reserve development included a $243 reduction in net reinsurance recoverables, $43 of environmental reserve strengthening and $12 of reserve strengthening for assumed reinsurance. A $13 decrease in net investment income, primarily as a result of a decrease in invested assets resulting from net losses and loss adjustment expenses paid. A change from $26 of net realized capital gains in 2006 to $12 of net realized capital losses in 2007, primarily due to an increase in credit-related impairments and decreases in the fair value of non-qualifying derivatives attributable to changes in value associated with credit derivatives due to credit spreads widening. A $40 decrease in income tax benefit, primarily as a result of a change from a pre-tax loss in 2006 to pre-tax income in 2007. Year ended December 31, 2006 compared to the year ended December 31, 2005 Other Operations reported a net loss of $35 in 2006 compared to net income of $71 in 2005, driven by the following: A $140 decrease in underwriting results, primarily due to a $148 increase in prior year loss development. Reserve development in 2006 included a $243 reduction in net reinsurance recoverables as a result of the agreement with Equitas and the Company evaluation of the reinsurance recoverables and allowance for uncollectible reinsurance associated with older, long-term casualty liabilities reported in the Other Operations segment, $43 of environmental reserve strengthening, and $12 of reserve strengthening for assumed reinsurance. In 2005, reserve development included $85 of reserve strengthening for assumed reinsurance, $37 of environmental reserve strengthening, and a $20 increase in the allowance for uncollectible reinsurance. A $22 decrease in net investment income, primarily as a result of a decrease in invested assets resulting from net loss and loss adjustment expenses paid. A change from an income tax expense of $10 in 2005 to an income tax benefit of $45 in 2006, as a result of a pre-tax loss in 2006. 128 Table of Contents Asbestos and Environmental Claims The Company continues to receive asbestos and environmental claims. Asbestos claims relate primarily to bodily injuries asserted by people who came in contact with asbestos or products containing asbestos. Environmental claims relate primarily to pollution and related clean-up costs. The Company wrote several different categories of insurance contracts that may cover asbestos and environmental claims. First, the Company wrote primary policies providing the first layer of coverage in an insured liability program. Second, the Company wrote excess policies providing higher layers of coverage for losses that exhaust the limits of underlying coverage. Third, the Company acted as a reinsurer assuming a portion of those risks assumed by other insurers writing primary, excess and reinsurance coverages. Fourth, subsidiaries of the Company participated in the London Market, writing both direct insurance and assumed reinsurance business. With regard to both environmental and particularly asbestos claims, significant uncertainty limits the ability of insurers and reinsurers to estimate the ultimate reserves necessary for unpaid losses and related expenses. Traditional actuarial reserving techniques cannot reasonably estimate the ultimate cost of these claims, particularly during periods where theories of law are in flux. The degree of variability of reserve estimates for these exposures is significantly greater than for other more traditional exposures. In particular, the Company believes there is a high degree of uncertainty inherent in the estimation of asbestos loss reserves. In the case of the reserves for asbestos exposures, factors contributing to the high degree of uncertainty include inadequate loss development patterns, plaintiffs expanding theories of liability, the risks inherent in major litigation, and inconsistent emerging legal doctrines. Furthermore, over time, insurers, including the Company, have experienced significant changes in the rate at which asbestos claims are brought, the claims experience of particular insureds, and the value of claims, making predictions of future exposure from past experience uncertain. Plaintiffs and insureds also have sought to use bankruptcy proceedings, including pre-packaged bankruptcies, to accelerate and increase loss payments by insurers. In addition, some policyholders have asserted new classes of claims for coverages to which an aggregate limit of liability may not apply. Further uncertainties include insolvencies of other carriers and unanticipated developments pertaining to the Company ability to recover reinsurance for asbestos and environmental claims. Management believes these issues are not likely to be resolved in the near future. In the case of the reserves for environmental exposures, factors contributing to the high degree of uncertainty include expanding theories of liability and damages; the risks inherent in major litigation; inconsistent decisions concerning the existence and scope of coverage for environmental claims; and uncertainty as to the monetary amount being sought by the claimant from the insured. It is also not possible to predict changes in the legal and legislative environment and their effect on the future development of asbestos and environmental claims. Although potential Federal asbestos-related legislation was considered by the Senate in 2006, it is uncertain whether such legislation will be reconsidered or enacted in the future and, if enacted, what its effect would be on the Company aggregate asbestos liabilities. The reporting pattern for assumed reinsurance claims, including those related to asbestos and environmental claims, is much longer than for direct claims. In many instances, it takes months or years to determine that the policyholder own obligations have been met and how the reinsurance in question may apply to such claims. The delay in reporting reinsurance claims and exposures adds to the uncertainty of estimating the related reserves. Given the factors described above, the Company believes the actuarial tools and other techniques it employs to estimate the ultimate cost of claims for more traditional kinds of insurance exposure are less precise in estimating reserves for its asbestos and environmental exposures. For this reason, the Company relies on exposure-based analysis to estimate the ultimate costs of these claims and regularly evaluates new information in assessing its potential asbestos and environmental exposures. 129 Table of Contents Reserve Activity Reserves and reserve activity in the Other Operations segment are categorized and reported as asbestos, environmental, or all other . The all other category of reserves covers a wide range of insurance and assumed reinsurance coverages, including, but not limited to, potential liability for construction defects, lead paint, silica, pharmaceutical products, molestation and other long-tail liabilities. In addition, within the all other category of reserves, Other Operations records its allowance for future reinsurer insolvencies and disputes that might affect reinsurance collectibility associated with asbestos, environmental, and other claims recoverable from reinsurers. The following table presents reserve activity, inclusive of estimates for both reported and incurred but not reported claims, net of reinsurance, for Other Operations, categorized by asbestos, environmental and all other claims, for the years ended December 31, 2007, 2006 and 2005. Other Operations Losses and Loss Adjustment Expenses Asbestos Environmental All Other [1][6] Total 2007 Beginning liability net [2] [3] $ 2,242 $ 316 $ 1,858 $ 4,416 Losses and loss adjustment expenses incurred 43 28 122 193 Losses and loss adjustment expenses paid (287 ) (93 ) (217 ) (597 ) Reallocation of reserves for unallocated loss adjustment expenses [4] 125 125 Ending liability net [2] [3] $ 1,998 [5] $ 251 $ 1,888 $ 4,137 2006 Beginning liability net [2] [3] $ 2,291 $ 360 $ 2,240 $ 4,891 Losses and loss adjustment expenses incurred 314 62 (16 ) 360 Losses and loss adjustment expenses paid (363 ) (106 ) (366 ) (835 ) Ending liability net [2] [3] $ 2,242 $ 316 $ 1,858 $ 4,416 2005 Beginning liability net [2] [3] $ 2,471 $ 385 $ 2,514 $ 5,370 Losses and loss adjustment expenses incurred 29 52 131 212 Losses and loss adjustment expenses paid (209 ) (77 ) (405 ) (691 ) Ending liability net [2] [3] $ 2,291 $ 360 $ 2,240 $ 4,891 [1] All Other includes unallocated loss adjustment expense reserves and the allowance for uncollectible reinsurance. [2] Excludes asbestos and environmental net liabilities reported in Ongoing Operations of $9 and $6, respectively, as of December 31, 2007, $9 and $6, respectively, as of December 31, 2006, and $10 and $6, respectively, as of December 31, 2005. Total net losses and loss adjustment expenses incurred in Ongoing Operations for the years ended December 31, 2007, 2006 and 2005 includes $10, $11 and $11, respectively, related to asbestos and environmental claims. Total net losses and loss adjustment expenses paid in Ongoing Operations for the years ended December 31, 2007, 2006 and 2005 includes $10, $12 and $17, respectively, related to asbestos and environmental claims. [3] Gross of reinsurance, asbestos and environmental reserves, including liabilities in Ongoing Operations, were $2,707 and $290, respectively, as of December 31, 2007, $3,242 and $362, respectively, as of December 31, 2006, and $3,845 and $432, respectively, as of December 31, 2005. [4] Prior to the second quarter of 2007, the Company evaluated the adequacy of the reserves for unallocated loss adjustment expenses on a company-wide basis. During the second quarter of 2007, the Company refined its analysis of the reserves at the segment level, resulting in the reallocation of reserves among segments, including a reallocation of reserves from Ongoing Operations to Other Operations. [5] The one year and average three year net paid amounts for asbestos claims, including Ongoing Operations, were $291 and $291, respectively, resulting in a one year net survival ratio of 6.9 and a three year net survival ratio of 6.9. Net survival ratio is the quotient of the net carried reserves divided by the average annual payment amount and is an indication of the number of years that the net carried reserve would last (i.e. survive) if the future annual claim payments were consistent with the calculated historical average. [6] The Company includes its allowance for uncollectible reinsurance in the All Other category of reserves. When the Company commutes a ceded reinsurance contract or settles a ceded reinsurance dispute, the portion of the allowance for uncollectible reinsurance attributable to that commutation or settlement, if any, is reclassified to the appropriate cause of loss. The Company has been evaluating and closely monitoring assumed reinsurance reserves in Other Operations. With the transfer of certain assumed reinsurance business into Other Operations, the segment has exposure related to more recent assumed casualty reinsurance reserves, particularly for the underwriting years 1997 through 2001. Assumed reinsurance exposures are inherently less predictable than direct insurance exposures because the Company may not receive notice of a reinsurance claim until the underlying direct insurance claim is mature. This causes a delay in the receipt of information from the ceding companies. In 2005 and 2006, the Company saw an increase in reported losses above previous expectations and this increase in reported losses contributed to reserve re-estimates. As a result of these unfavorable trends, for the years ended December 31, 2006 and 2005, the Company booked unfavorable reserve development of $12 and $85, respectively, related to assumed reinsurance. In the fourth quarter 2007, the Company completed an evaluation of certain of its non-asbestos and environmental reserves, including its assumed reinsurance liabilities. The evaluation indicated no significant change in the Company overall non-asbestos and environmental reserves. During the third quarters of 2007, 2006 and 2005, the Company completed its annual ground up environmental reserve evaluations. In each of these evaluations, the Company reviewed all of its open direct domestic insurance accounts exposed to environmental liability as well as assumed reinsurance accounts and its London Market exposures for both direct insurance and assumed reinsurance. In all three 130 Table of Contents years, the Company found estimates for individual cases changed based upon the particular circumstances of each account. These changes were case specific and not as a result of any underlying change in the current environment. The net effect of these changes resulted in $25, $43 and $37 increases in net environmental liabilities in 2007, 2006 and 2005, respectively. The Company currently expects to continue to perform an evaluation of its environmental liabilities annually. In reporting environmental results, the Company divides its gross exposure into Direct, which is subdivided further as: Accounts with future exposure greater than $2.5, Accounts with future exposure less than $2.5, and Other direct; Assumed Reinsurance; and London Market. The unallocated amounts in the Other direct category include an estimate of the necessary reserves for environmental claims related to direct insureds who have not previously tendered environmental claims to the Company. An account may move between categories from one evaluation to the next. For example, an account with future expected exposure of greater than $2.5 in one evaluation may be reevaluated due to changing conditions and re-categorized as less than $2.5 in a subsequent evaluation or vice versa. The following table displays gross environmental reserves and other statistics by category as of December 31, 2007. Summary of Gross Environmental Reserves As of December 31, 2007 Gross Environmental Reserves as of September 30, 2007 [1] Number of Accounts [2] Total Reserves Accounts with future exposure > $2.5 8 $ 38 Accounts with future exposure < $2.5 520 100 Other direct [3] 29 Total Direct 528 167 Assumed Reinsurance 87 London Market 47 Total gross environmental reserves as of September 30, 2007 [1] 301 Gross paid loss activity for the fourth quarter 2007 (12 ) Gross incurred loss activity for the fourth quarter 2007 1 Total gross environmental reserves as of December 31, 2007 [4] [5] $ 290 [1] Gross Environmental Reserves based on the third quarter 2007 environmental reserve study. [2] Number of accounts established as of June 2007. [3] Includes unallocated IBNR. [4] The one year gross paid amount for total environmental claims is $121, resulting in a one year gross survival ratio of 2.4. [5] The three year average gross paid amount for total environmental claims is $108, resulting in a three year gross survival ratio of 2.7. During the second quarter of 2007, an arbitration panel found that a Hartford subsidiary, established as a captive reinsurance company in the 1970s by The Hartford former parent, ITT, had additional obligations to ITT primary insurance carrier under ITT captive insurance program, which ended in 1993. When ITT spun-off The Hartford in 1995, the former captive became a Hartford subsidiary. The arbitration concerned whether certain claims could be presented to the former captive in a different manner than ITT primary insurance carrier historically had presented them. Principally as a result of this adverse arbitration decision, the Company recorded a charge of $99. During the second quarters of 2007, 2006 and 2005, the Company completed its annual evaluations of the collectibility of the reinsurance recoverables and the adequacy of the allowance for uncollectible reinsurance associated with older, long-term casualty liabilities reported in the Other Operations segment. The evaluation in the second quarter of 2007 resulted in no addition to the allowance for uncollectible reinsurance. In the second quarter of 2006, the Company entered into an agreement with Equitas and all Lloyd syndicates reinsured by Equitas (collectively, Equitas ) that resolved, with minor exception, all of the Company ceded and assumed domestic reinsurance exposures with Equitas, including all of the Company reinsurance recoveries from Equitas under the Blanket Casualty Treaty ( BCT ). As a result of the settlement with Equitas and the 2006 reinsurance recoverable evaluation, the Company reduced its net reinsurance recoverable by $243. As a result of the evaluation in the second quarter of 2005, the Company increased its allowance for uncollectible reinsurance by $20 to reflect deterioration in the credit ratings of certain reinsurers and the Company opinion as to the ability of certain reinsurers to pay claims in the future. In conducting these evaluations of reinsurance recoverables, the Company used its most recent detailed evaluations of ceded liabilities reported in the segment. The Company analyzed the overall credit quality of the Company reinsurers, recent trends in arbitration and litigation outcomes in disputes between cedants and reinsurers, and recent developments in commutation activity between reinsurers and cedants. In 2006 and 2007, the Company also considered the effect of the Equitas settlement on the collectibility of amounts due from other upper-layer reinsurers under the BCT. The allowance for uncollectible reinsurance reflects management current estimate of reinsurance cessions that may be uncollectible in the future due to reinsurers unwillingness or inability to pay. As of December 31, 2007, the allowance for uncollectible reinsurance for Other Operations totals $267. The Company currently expects to perform its regular comprehensive review of Other Operations reinsurance recoverables annually. Uncertainties regarding the factors that affect the allowance for uncollectible reinsurance could cause the Company to change its estimates, and the effect of these changes could be material to the Company consolidated results of operations or cash flows. 131 Table of Contents During the second quarters of 2007, 2006 and 2005, the Company completed its annual ground up asbestos reserve evaluations. As part of these evaluations, the Company reviewed all of its open direct domestic insurance accounts exposed to asbestos liability as well as assumed reinsurance accounts and its London Market exposures for both direct insurance and assumed reinsurance. These evaluations resulted in no addition to the Company net asbestos reserves. The Company currently expects to continue to perform an evaluation of its asbestos liabilities annually. The Company divides its gross asbestos exposures into Direct, Assumed Reinsurance and London Market. The Company further divides its direct asbestos exposures into the following categories: Major Asbestos Defendants (the Top 70 accounts in Tillinghast published Tiers 1 and 2 and Wellington accounts), which are subdivided further as: Structured Settlements, Wellington, Other Major Asbestos Defendants; Accounts with Future Expected Exposures greater than $2.5, Accounts with Future Expected Exposures less than $2.5 and Unallocated. Structured Settlements are those accounts where the Company has reached an agreement with the insured as to the amount and timing of the claim payments to be made to the insured. The Wellington subcategory includes insureds that entered into the Wellington Agreement dated June 19, 1985. The Wellington Agreement provided terms and conditions for how the signatory asbestos producers would access their coverage from the signatory insurers. The Other Major Asbestos Defendants subcategory represents insureds included in Tiers 1 and 2, as defined by Tillinghast that are not Wellington signatories and have not entered into structured settlements with The Hartford. The Tier 1 and 2 classifications are meant to capture the insureds for which there is expected to be significant exposure to asbestos claims. The Unallocated category includes an estimate of the reserves necessary for asbestos claims related to direct insureds that have not previously tendered asbestos claims to the Company and exposures related to liability claims that may not be subject to an aggregate limit under the applicable policies. An account may move between categories from one evaluation to the next. For example, an account with future expected exposure of greater than $2.5 in one evaluation may be reevaluated due to changing conditions and recategorized as less than $2.5 in a subsequent evaluation or vice versa. 132 Table of Contents The following table displays gross asbestos reserves and other statistics by policyholder category as of December 31, 2007 Summary of Gross Asbestos Reserves As of December 31, 2007 Number of All Time Total All Time Accounts [2] Paid [3] Reserves Ultimate [3] Gross Asbestos Reserves as of June 30, 2007 [1] Major asbestos defendants [5] Structured settlements (includes 3 Wellington accounts) 6 $ 260 $ 443 $ 703 Wellington (direct only) 30 858 75 933 Other major asbestos defendants 29 478 163 641 No known policies (includes 3 Wellington accounts) 5 Accounts with future exposure > $2.5 72 724 705 1,429 Accounts with future exposure < $2.5 1,077 443 130 573 Unallocated [6] 1,318 418 1,736 Total Direct 4,081 1,934 6,015 Assumed Reinsurance 1,003 552 1,555 London Market 547 381 928 Total as of June 30, 2007 [1] 5,631 2,867 8,498 Gross paid loss activity for the third quarter and fourth quarter 2007 167 (167 ) Gross incurred loss activity for the third quarter and fourth quarter 2007 7 7 Total as of December 31, 2007 [4] $ 5,798 $ 2,707 $ 8,505 [1] Gross Asbestos Reserves based on the second quarter 2007 asbestos reserve study. [2] An account may move between categories from one evaluation to the next. Reclassifications were made as a result of the reserve evaluation completed in the second quarter of 2007. [3] All Time Paid represents the total payments with respect to the indicated claim type that have already been made by the Company as of the indicated balance sheet date. All Time Ultimate represents the Company estimate, as of the indicated balance sheet date, of the total payments that are ultimately expected to be made to fully settle the indicated payment type. The amount is the sum of the amounts already paid (e.g. All Time Paid ) and the estimated future payments (e.g. the amount shown in the column labeled Total Reserves ). [4] Survival ratio is a commonly used industry ratio for comparing reserve levels between companies. While the method is commonly used, it is not a predictive technique. Survival ratios may vary over time for numerous reasons such as large payments due to the final resolution of certain asbestos liabilities, or reserve re-estimates. The survival ratio presented in the above table is computed by dividing the recorded reserves by the average of the past three years of payments. The ratio is the calculated number of years the recorded reserves would survive if future annual payments were equal to the average annual payments for the past three years. The 3-year gross survival ratio of 5.4 as December 31, 2007 is computed based on total paid losses of $1.506 billion for the period from January 1, 2005 to December 31, 2007. As of December 31, 2007, the one year gross paid amount for total asbestos claims is $397 resulting in a one year gross survival ratio of 6.8. [5] Includes 26 open accounts at June 30, 2007. Included 28 open accounts at June 30, 2006. [6] Includes closed accounts (exclusive of Major Asbestos Defendants) and unallocated IBNR. For paid and incurred losses and loss adjustment expenses reporting, the Company classifies its asbestos and environmental reserves into three categories: Direct, Assumed Domestic and London Market. Direct insurance includes primary and excess coverage. Assumed reinsurance includes both treaty reinsurance (covering broad categories of claims or blocks of business) and facultative reinsurance (covering specific risks or individual policies of primary or excess insurance companies). London Market business includes the business written by one or more of the Company subsidiaries in the United Kingdom, which are no longer active in the insurance or reinsurance business. Such business includes both direct insurance and assumed reinsurance. Of the three categories of claims (Direct, Assumed Domestic and London Market), direct policies tend to have the greatest factual development from which to estimate the Company exposures. Assumed reinsurance exposures are inherently less predictable than direct insurance exposures because the Company may not receive notice of a reinsurance claim until the underlying direct insurance claim is mature. This causes a delay in the receipt of information at the reinsurer level and adds to the uncertainty of estimating related reserves. London Market exposures are the most uncertain of the three categories of claims. As a participant in the London Market (comprised of both Lloyd of London and London Market companies), certain subsidiaries of the Company wrote business on a subscription basis, with those subsidiaries involvement being limited to a relatively small percentage of a total contract placement. Claims are reported, via a broker, to the lead underwriter and, once agreed to, are presented to the following markets for concurrence. This reporting and claim agreement process makes estimating liabilities for this business the most uncertain of the three categories of claims. 133 Table of Contents The following table sets forth, for the years ended December 31, 2007, 2006 and 2005, paid and incurred loss activity by the three categories of claims for asbestos and environmental. Paid and Incurred Losses and Loss Adjustment Expenses ( LAE ) Development Asbestos and Environmental Asbestos [1] Environmental [1] Paid Incurred Paid Incurred 2007 Losses & LAE Losses & LAE Losses & LAE Losses & LAE Gross Direct $ 251 $ (289 ) $ 90 $ 43 Assumed Domestic 112 72 16 London Market 31 76 8 Total 394 (141 ) 114 43 Ceded (107 ) 184 (21 ) (15 ) Net $ 287 $ 43 $ 93 $ 28 2006 Gross Direct $ 346 $ 5 $ 45 $ 57 Assumed Domestic 199 4 50 (25 ) London Market 66 9 3 Total 611 9 104 35 Ceded (248 ) 305 2 27 Net $ 363 $ 314 $ 106 $ 62 2005 Gross Direct $ 349 $ 10 $ 50 $ 14 Assumed Domestic 70 (4 ) 21 London Market 61 9 Total 480 6 80 14 Ceded (271 ) 23 (3 ) 38 Net $ 209 $ 29 $ 77 $ 52 [1] Excludes asbestos and environmental paid and incurred loss and LAE reported in Ongoing Operations. Total gross losses and LAE incurred in Ongoing Operations for the twelve months ended December 31, 2007, 2006, and 2005 includes $9, $10 and $17, respectively, related to asbestos and environmental claims. Total gross losses and LAE paid in Ongoing Operations for the twelve months ended December 31, 2007, 2006, and 2005 includes $10, $12 and $23, respectively, related to asbestos and environmental claims. A number of factors affect the variability of estimates for asbestos and environmental reserves including assumptions with respect to the frequency of claims, the average severity of those claims settled with payment, the dismissal rate of claims with no payment and the expense to indemnity ratio. The uncertainty with respect to the underlying reserve assumptions for asbestos and environmental adds a greater degree of variability to these reserve estimates than reserve estimates for more traditional exposures. While this variability is reflected in part in the size of the range of reserves developed by the Company, that range may still not be indicative of the potential variance between the ultimate outcome and the recorded reserves. The recorded net reserves as of December 31, 2007 of $2.26 billion ($2.00 billion and $257 for asbestos and environmental, respectively) is within an estimated range, unadjusted for covariance, of $1.88 billion to $2.60 billion. The process of estimating asbestos and environmental reserves remains subject to a wide variety of uncertainties, which are detailed in the Critical Accounting Estimates Property & Casualty Reserves, Net of Reinsurance section of Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations. The Company believes that its current asbestos and environmental reserves are reasonable and appropriate. However, analyses of further developments could cause the Company to change its estimates and ranges of its asbestos and environmental reserves, and the effect of these changes could be material to the Company consolidated operating results, financial condition and liquidity. If there are significant developments that affect particular exposures, reinsurance arrangements or the financial condition of particular reinsurers, the Company will make adjustments to its reserves or to the amounts recoverable from its reinsurers. Consistent with the Company long-standing reserving practices, the Company will continue to review and monitor its reserves in the Other Operations segment regularly and, where future developments indicate, make appropriate adjustments to the reserves. For a discussion of the Company reserving practices, please see the Critical Accounting Estimates Property & Casualty Reserves, Net of Reinsurance section of Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations. 134 Table of Contents Outlook The Other Operations segment will continue to manage the discontinued operations of the Company as well as claims (and associated reserves) related to asbestos, environmental and other exposures. The Company will continue to review various components of all of its reserves on a regular basis. The Company expects to perform its regular reviews of asbestos liabilities in the second quarter of 2008, Other Operations reinsurance recoverables and the allowance for uncollectible reinsurance in the second quarter 2008, and environmental liabilities in the third quarter of 2008. If there are significant developments that affect particular exposures, reinsurance arrangements or the financial condition of particular reinsurers, the Company will make adjustments to its reserves, or the portion of liabilities it expects to cede to reinsurers. 135 Table of Contents INVESTMENTS General The Hartford investment portfolios are primarily divided between Life and Property & Casualty. The investment portfolios of Life and Property & Casualty are managed by Hartford Investment Management Company ( HIMCO ), a wholly-owned subsidiary of The Hartford. HIMCO manages the portfolios to maximize economic value, while attempting to generate the income necessary to support the Company various product obligations, within internally established objectives, guidelines and risk tolerances. The portfolio objectives and guidelines are developed based upon the asset/liability profile, including duration, convexity and other characteristics within specified risk tolerances. The risk tolerances considered include, for example, asset and credit issuer allocation limits, maximum portfolio below investment grade ( BIG ) holdings and foreign currency exposure. The Company attempts to minimize adverse impacts to the portfolio and the Company results of operations due to changes in economic conditions through asset allocation limits, asset/liability duration matching and through the use of derivatives. For a further discussion of how the investment portfolio credit and market risks are assessed and managed, see the Investment Credit Risk and Capital Markets Risk Management sections of the MD&A. HIMCO security selection process is a multi-dimensional approach that combines independent internal credit research along with a macro-economic outlook of technical trends (e.g., interest rates, slope of the yield curve and credit spreads) and market pricing to identify valuation inefficiencies and relative value buying and selling opportunities. Security selection and monitoring are performed by asset class specialists working within dedicated portfolio management teams. HIMCO portfolio managers may sell securities (except those securities in an unrealized loss position for which the Company has indicated its intent and ability to hold until the price recovers) due to portfolio guidelines or market technicals or trends. For example, the Company may sell securities to manage risk, capture market valuation inefficiencies or relative value opportunities, to remain compliant with internal asset/liability duration matching guidelines, or to modify a portfolio duration to capitalize on interest rate levels or the yield curve slope. HIMCO believes that advantageously buying and selling securities within a disciplined framework, provides the greatest economic value for the Company over the long-term. Return on general account invested assets is an important element of The Hartford financial results. Significant fluctuations in the fixed income or equity markets could weaken the Company financial condition or its results of operations. Additionally, changes in market interest rates may impact the period of time over which certain investments, such as MBS, are repaid and whether certain investments are called by the issuers. Such changes may, in turn, impact the yield on these investments and also may result in re-investment of funds received from calls and prepayments at rates below the average portfolio yield. Net investment income and net realized capital gains (losses) accounted for approximately 17%, 24% and 30% of the Company consolidated revenues for the years ended December 31, 2007, 2006 and 2005, respectively. Net investment income, excluding net investment income from trading securities, and net realized capital gains and losses accounted for approximately 16%, 18% and 19%, for the years ended December 31, 2007, 2006 and 2005, respectively. The decrease in the percentage of consolidated revenues for 2007, as compared to the prior years, is primarily due to a smaller increase in the value of equity securities held for trading and an increase in realized capital losses. Fluctuations in interest rates affect the Company return on, and the fair value of, fixed maturity investments, which comprised approximately 61% and 66% of the fair value of its invested assets as of December 31, 2007 and 2006, respectively. Other events beyond the Company control, including changes in credit spreads, could also adversely impact the fair value of these investments. Additionally, a downgrade of an issuer credit rating or default of payment by an issuer could reduce the Company investment return. The Company invests in private placement securities, mortgage loans and limited partnerships and other alternative investments in order to further diversify its investment portfolio. These investment types comprised approximately 23% and 21% of the fair value of its invested assets as of December 31, 2007 and 2006, respectively. These security types are typically less liquid than direct investments in publicly traded fixed income or equity investments. However, generally these securities have higher yields to compensate for the liquidity risk. A decrease in the fair value of any investment that is deemed other-than-temporary would result in the Company recognition of a net realized capital loss in its financial results prior to the actual sale of the investment. Following the recognition of the other-than-temporary impairment for fixed maturities, the Company accretes the new cost basis to par or to estimated future value over the remaining life of the security based on future estimated cash flows by adjusting the security yields. For a further discussion of the evaluation of other-than-temporary impairments, see the Critical Accounting Estimates section of the MD&A under Evaluation of Other-Than-Temporary Impairments on Available-for-Sale Securities . 136 Table of Contents Life The primary investment objective of Life general account is to maximize economic value consistent with acceptable risk parameters, including the management of the interest rate sensitivity of invested assets, while generating sufficient after-tax income to support policyholder and corporate obligations, as discussed in the Capital Markets Risk Management section of the MD&A under Market Risk Life . The following table identifies the invested assets by type held in the general account as of December 31, 2007 and 2006. Composition of Invested Assets 2007 2006 Amount Percent Amount Percent Fixed maturities, available-for-sale, at fair value $ 52,542 52.6 % $ 52,081 58.2 % Equity securities, available-for-sale, at fair value 1,284 1.3 % 811 0.9 % Equity securities held for trading, at fair value 36,182 36.3 % 29,393 32.9 % Policy loans, at outstanding balance 2,061 2.1 % 2,051 2.3 % Mortgage loans, at amortized cost [1] 4,739 4.7 % 2,909 3.3 % Limited partnerships and other alternative investments [2] 1,306 1.3 % 794 0.9 % Short-term investments 1,158 1.2 % 1,092 1.2 % Other investments [3] 534 0.5 % 281 0.3 % Total investments $ 99,806 100.0 % $ 89,412 100.0 % [1] Consist of commercial and agricultural loans. [2] Includes real estate joint venture. [3] Primarily relates to derivative instruments. Total investments increased $10.4 billion since December 31, 2006 primarily as a result of equity securities held for trading, positive operating cash flows, and securities lending activities, partially offset by increased unrealized losses primarily due to a significant widening of credit spreads associated with fixed maturities. The fair value of fixed maturities declined as a percentage of total investments, excluding equity securities held for trading, due to the increase in unrealized losses and the decision to allocate a greater percentage of Life portfolio to mortgage loans and limited partnerships and other alternative investments. The increased allocation to limited partnerships and alternative investments and mortgage loans was made primarily due to the attractive risk/return profiles and diversification opportunities of these asset classes. Equity securities, held for trading, increased $6.8 billion since December 31, 2006, due to positive cash flow primarily generated from sales and deposits related to variable annuity products sold in Japan as well as foreign currency gains due to the appreciation of the Japanese yen in comparison to the U.S. dollar. Limited partnerships and other alternative investments increased by $512 during 2007. HIMCO believes investing in limited partnerships provides an opportunity to diversify its portfolio and earn above average returns over the long-term. However, significant price volatility can exist quarter to quarter. Prior to investing, HIMCO performs an extensive due diligence process which attempts to identify funds that have above average return potential and managers with proven track records for results, many of which utilize sophisticated risk management techniques. Due to capital requirements, HIMCO closely monitors the impact of these investments in relationship to the overall investment portfolio and the consolidated balance sheets. HIMCO does not expect investments in limited partnerships to exceed 3% of the fair value of each statutory legal entity investment portfolio excluding trading securities. The following table summarizes Life limited partnerships and other alternative investments as of December 31, 2007 and 2006. Composition of Limited Partnerships and Other Alternative Investments 2007 2006 Amount Percent Amount Percent Hedge funds [1] $ 506 38.7 % $ 397 50.0 % Private equity [2] 419 32.1 % 241 30.3 % Mortgage and real estate [3] 309 23.7 % 88 11.1 % Mezzanine debt [4] 72 5.5 % 68 8.6 % Total $ 1,306 100.0 % $ 794 100.0 % [1] Hedge funds include investments in funds of funds as well as direct funds. The hedge funds of funds invest in approximately 30 to 60 different hedge funds within a variety of investment styles. Examples of hedge fund strategies include long/short equity or credit, event driven strategies and structured credit. [2] Private equity funds consist of investments in funds whose assets typically consist of a diversified pool of investments in small non-public businesses with high growth potential. [3] Mortgage and real estate funds consist of investments in funds whose assets consist of mortgage loans, participations in mortgage loans, mezzanine loans or other notes which may be below investment grade credit quality as well as equity real estate. Also included is the investment in real estate joint ventures. [4] Mezzanine debt funds consist of investments in funds whose assets consist of subordinated debt that often times incorporates equity-based options such as warrants and a limited amount of direct equity investments. 137 Table of Contents Investment Results The following table summarizes Life net investment income. 2007 2006 2005 (Before-tax) Amount Yield [1] Amount Yield [1] Amount Yield [1] Fixed maturities [2] $ 3,114 5.9 % $ 2,860 5.8 % $ 2,659 5.7 % Equity securities, available-for-sale 86 7.0 % 56 7.3 % 40 5.8 % Mortgage loans 255 6.2 % 142 6.3 % 73 6.4 % Limited partnerships and other alternative investments 115 12.0 % 69 12.6 % 59 20.2 % Policy loans 135 6.5 % 142 6.9 % 144 6.8 % Other [3] (133 ) (22 ) 69 Investment expense (75 ) (63 ) (46 ) Total net investment income excluding equity securities held for trading $ 3,497 6.0 % $ 3,184 5.8 % $ 2,998 5.7 % Equity securities held for trading [4] 145 1,824 3,847 Total net investment income $ 3,642 $ 5,008 $ 6,845 [1] Yields calculated using investment income before investment expenses (excluding income related to equity securities held for trading) divided by the monthly weighted average invested assets at cost, amortized cost, or adjusted carrying value, as applicable excluding equity securities held for trading, collateral received associated with the securities lending program and consolidated variable interest entity minority interests. Included in the fixed maturity yield is Other income (loss) as it primarily relates to fixed maturities, see footnote [3] below. Included in the total net investment income yield is investment expense. [2] Includes net investment income on short-term bonds. [3] Primarily represents fees associated with securities lending activities. The income from securities lending activities is included within fixed maturities. Also included are derivatives that qualify for hedge accounting under SFAS 133. These derivatives hedge fixed maturities. [4] Includes investment income and mark-to-market effects of equity securities, held for trading. The following table summarizes Life net realized capital gains and losses results. (Before-tax) 2007 2006 2005 Gross gains on sale $ 213 $ 215 $ 346 Gross losses on sale (168 ) (257 ) (254 ) Impairments Credit related [1] (241 ) (10 ) (32 ) Other [2] (117 ) (66 ) (5 ) Total impairments (358 ) (76 ) (37 ) Japanese fixed annuity contract hedges, net [3] 18 (17 ) (36 ) Periodic net coupon settlements on credit derivatives/Japan (40 ) (48 ) (32 ) U.S. GMWB derivatives, net (277 ) (26 ) (46 ) Other, net [4] (207 ) (51 ) 34 Net realized capital losses, before-tax $ (819 ) $ (260 ) $ (25 ) [1] Relates to impairments for which the Company has current concerns regarding the issuers ability to pay future interest and principal amounts based upon the securities contractual terms or the depression in security value is primarily related to significant issuer specific or sector credit spread widening. [2] Primarily relates to impairments of securities that had declined in value primarily due to changes in interest rate or general or modest spread widening and for which the Company was uncertain of its intent to retain the investment for a period of time sufficient to allow recovery to cost or amortized cost. [3] Relates to the Japanese fixed annuity product (product and related derivative hedging instruments excluding periodic net coupon settlements). [4] Primarily consists of changes in fair value on non-qualifying derivatives and hedge ineffectiveness on qualifying derivative instruments and other investment gains. Year ended December 31, 2007 compared to the year ended December 31, 2006 Net investment income, excluding securities held for trading, increased $313, or 10%, for the year ended December 31, 2007, compared to the prior year period. The increase in net investment income was primarily due to a higher average invested asset base and a higher total portfolio yield. The increase in the average invested assets base as compared to the prior year, was primarily due to positive operating cash flows, investment contract sales such as retail and institutional notes, and universal life-type product sales. Limited partnerships and other alternative investments contributed to the increase in income compared to the prior year period, despite a lower yield, due to a greater allocation of investments to this asset class. While the limited partnership and other alternative investment yield continues to exceed the overall portfolio yield, it decreased for the current year ended compared to the prior year ended primarily due to the market performance of Life hedge fund investments largely due to disruptions in the credit market associated with structured securities. Also included in limited partnerships and other alternative assets was a decrease in value of $11 on a real estate joint venture due to the decline of the real estate market in which the property was located. Based upon market expectation of future interest rates 138 Table of Contents and a lower expected yield from limited partnership and other alternative investments, Life expects the average portfolio yield in 2008 to modestly decline compared to 2007 levels. The Company expects a lower yield from limited partnerships and other alternative investments primarily due to reduced liquidity and the wider credit spread environment. Net investment income on equity securities, held for trading, for the year ended December 31, 2007 were primarily attributed to a change in the value of the underlying investment funds supporting the Japanese variable annuity product due to market performance. Net realized capital losses were higher for the year ending December 31, 2007. The change in net gains and losses was primarily the result of higher net losses on impairments, GMWB derivatives, and other net losses offset by higher net gains on sale of investments. The circumstances giving rise to the changes in these components are as follows: See the Other-Than-Temporary Impairments section that follows for information on impairment losses. An increase in losses in 2007 compared to 2006 on GMWB rider embedded derivatives was primarily due to liability model assumption updates and modeling refinements made in 2007, including those for dynamic lapse behavior and correlations of market returns across underlying indices, as well as those to reflect newly reliable market inputs for volatility. For a further discussion of the GMWB rider valuation assumption, see the Capital Markets Risk management section of the MD&A under Market Risk Life . Other, net losses in both 2007 and 2006 primarily resulted from the change in value of non-qualifying derivatives due to fluctuations in credit spreads, interest rates, and equity markets. The increase in net losses in 2007 compared to the prior year was primarily due to changes in value associated with credit derivatives due to credit spreads widening. Credit spreads widened primarily due to the deterioration in the U.S. housing market, tightened lending conditions, the market flight to quality securities as well as increased likelihood of a U.S. recession. For further discussion, see the Capital Market Risk Management section of the MD&A. Gross gains on sales for the year ended December 31, 2007, were primarily within fixed maturities and were largely comprised of corporate securities. The sales were made to reallocate the portfolio to securities with more favorable risk-return profiles. The gains on sales were primarily the result of changes in credit spreads, foreign currency exchange rates, and interest rates from the date of purchase. Gross losses on sales for the year ended December 31, 2007, were predominantly within fixed maturities and were primarily corporate securities. No single security was sold at a loss in excess of $5 and an average loss as a percentage of the fixed maturity amortized cost of less than 3%, which, under the Company impairment policy was deemed to be depressed only to a minor extent. Year ended December 31, 2006 compared to the year ended December 31, 2005 Net investment income, excluding equity securities held for trading and policy loans, increased $188, or 7%, compared to the prior year period. The increase in net investment income was primarily due to income earned on a higher average invested assets base, an increase in interest rates and a change in asset mix (i.e., greater investment in mortgage loans and limited partnerships). The increase in the average invested assets base, as compared to the prior year, was primarily due to positive operating cash flows, investment contract sales such as retail and institutional notes, and universal life-type product sales. Net investment income on equity securities held for trading for the year ended December 31, 2006, can be primarily attributed to an increase in the value of the underlying investment funds supporting the Japanese variable annuity product generated by positive market performance. For 2006, the yield on average invested assets increased slightly over the prior year. An increase in the yield on fixed maturities was offset by a decrease in the yield on limited partnerships. Total net realized capital losses were higher in 2006 compared to 2005 primarily as a result of a higher interest rate environment. The components that drove the increase in net losses during the year ended December 31, 2006 included net losses on sales of fixed maturity securities, other-than-temporary impairments, and losses in Other, net, partially offset by a decrease in losses associated with GMWB derivatives. The circumstances giving rise to these components are as follows: The net losses on fixed maturity sales for the year ended December 31, 2006 were primarily the result of rising interest rates from the date of security purchase and, to a lesser extent, credit spread widening on certain issuers that were sold. For further discussion of gross gains and losses, see the following discussion below. Other, net losses were primarily driven from the change in value of non-qualifying derivatives due to fluctuations in interest rates and foreign currency exchange rates. These losses were partially offset by a before-tax benefit of $25 received from the WorldCom security settlement. See the Other-Than-Temporary Impairments section that follows for information on impairment losses. Gross gains on sales for the year ended December 31, 2006, were primarily within fixed maturities and were concentrated in U.S. government, corporate and foreign government securities. Certain sales were made to reposition the portfolio to a shorter duration due to the flatness of the yield curve and the lack of market compensation for longer duration assets. Also, certain sales were made as the Company continues to increase investments in mortgage loans and limited partnerships. The gains on sales were primarily the result of changes in interest rates and foreign currency exchange from the date of security purchase. Gross losses on sales for the year ended December 31, 2006, were primarily within fixed maturities and were concentrated in the corporate and commercial mortgage-backed securities ( CMBS ) sectors with no single security sold at a loss in excess of $6, and an 139 Table of Contents average loss as a percentage of the fixed maturity amortized cost of less than 3%, which, under the Company impairment policy was deemed to be depressed only to a minor extent. Separate Account Products Separate account products are those for which a separate investment and liability account is maintained on behalf of the policyholder. The Company separate accounts reflect accounts wherein the policyholder assumes substantially all the risk and reward. Investment objectives for separate accounts, which consist of the participants account balances, vary by fund account type, as outlined in the applicable fund prospectus or separate account plan of operations. Separate account products include variable annuities (except those sold in Japan), variable universal life insurance contracts, 401(K) and variable corporate owned life insurance. The assets and liabilities associated with variable annuity products sold in Japan do not meet the criteria to be recognized as a separate account because the assets are not legally insulated from the Company. Therefore, these assets are included with the Company general account assets. As of December 31, 2007 and 2006, the Company separate accounts totaled $199.9 billion and $180.5 billion, respectively. Property & Casualty The primary investment objective for Property & Casualty Ongoing Operations segment is to maximize economic value while generating sufficient after-tax income to meet policyholder and corporate obligations. For Property & Casualty Other Operations segment, the investment objective is to ensure the full and timely payment of all liabilities. Property & Casualty investment strategies are developed based on a variety of factors including business needs, regulatory requirements and tax considerations. The following table identifies the invested assets by type held as of December 31, 2007 and 2006. Composition of Invested Assets 2007 2006 Amount Percent Amount Percent Fixed maturities, available-for-sale, at fair value $ 27,205 88.8 % $ 26,734 91.3 % Equity securities, available-for-sale, at fair value 1,208 3.9 % 873 3.0 % Mortgage loans, at amortized cost [1] 671 2.2 % 409 1.4 % Limited partnerships and other alternative investments [2] 1,260 4.1 % 802 2.7 % Short-term investments 284 0.9 % 444 1.5 % Other investments 38 0.1 % 38 0.1 % Total investments $ 30,666 100.0 % $ 29,300 100.0 % [1] Consist of commercial and agricultural loans. [2] Includes hedge fund investments outside of limited partnerships and real estate joint ventures. Total investments increased $1.4 billion since December 31, 2006, primarily as the result of positive operating cash flows and securities lending activities, partially offset by increased unrealized losses primarily due to a significant widening of credit spreads associated with fixed maturities. The fair value of fixed maturities declined as a percentage of total investments due to the increase in unrealized losses and the decision to allocate a greater percentage of Property & Casualty portfolio to mortgage loans and limited partnerships and other alternative investments. The increased allocation to limited partnerships and other alternative investments, mortgage loans, and equity securities, available-for-sale was made primarily due to the attractive risk/return profiles and diversification opportunities of these asset classes. Limited partnerships and other alternative investments increased by $458 during 2007. HIMCO believes investing in limited partnerships provides an opportunity to diversify its portfolio and earn above average returns over the long-term. However, significant price volatility can exist quarter to quarter. Prior to investing, HIMCO performs an extensive due diligence process which attempts to identify funds that have above average return potential and managers with proven track records for results, many of which utilize sophisticated risk management techniques. Due to capital requirements, HIMCO closely monitors the impact of these investments in relationship to the investment portfolio and the overall consolidated balance sheets. HIMCO does not expect investments in limited partnerships to exceed 3% of the fair value of each statutory legal entity investment portfolio. 140 Table of Contents The following table summarizes Property & Casualty limited partnerships and other alternative investments as of December 31, 2007 and 2006. Composition of Limited Partnerships and Other Alternative Investments 2007 2006 Amount Percent Amount Percent Hedge funds [1] $ 728 57.8 % $ 508 63.3 % Private equity [2] 193 15.3 % 123 15.3 % Mortgage and real estate [3] 291 23.1 % 124 15.5 % Mezzanine debt [4] 48 3.8 % 47 5.9 % Total $ 1,260 100.0 % $ 802 100.0 % [1] Hedge funds include investments in funds of funds as well as direct funds. The hedge funds of funds invest in approximately 30 to 60 different hedge funds within a variety of investment styles. Examples of hedge fund strategies include long/short equity or credit, event driven strategies and structured credit. [2] Private equity funds consist of investments in funds whose assets typically consist of a diversified pool of investments in small non-public businesses with high growth potential. [3] Mortgage and real estate funds consist of investments in funds whose assets consist of mortgage loans, participations in mortgage loans, mezzanine loans or other notes which may be below investment grade credit quality as well as equity real estate. Also included is the investment in real estate joint venture. [4] Mezzanine debt funds consist of investments in funds whose assets consist of subordinated debt that often times incorporates equity-based options such as warrants and a limited amount of direct equity investments. Investment Results The following table below summarizes Property & Casualty net investment income. 2007 2006 2005 (Before-tax) Amount Yield [1] Amount Yield [1] Amount Yield [1] Fixed maturities [2] $ 1,511 5.7 % $ 1,386 5.5 % $ 1,280 5.5 % Equity securities, available-for-sale 50 6.0 % 35 5.5 % 18 4.0 % Mortgage loans 38 6.2 % 16 5.6 % 11 5.6 % Limited partnerships and other alternative investments 140 14.5 % 64 9.9 % 63 13.0 % Other [3] (27 ) 9 10 Investment expense (25 ) (24 ) (17 ) Net investment income, before-tax $ 1,687 5.9 % $ 1,486 5.5 % $ 1,365 5.5 % Net investment income, after-tax [4] $ 1,246 4.4 % $ 1,107 4.1 % $ 1,016 4.1 % [1] Yields calculated using investment income before investment expenses divided by the monthly weighted average invested assets at cost, amortized cost, or adjusted carrying value, as applicable, and collateral received associated with the securities lending program. Included in the fixed maturity yield is Other income (loss) as it primarily relates to fixed maturities, see footnote [3] below. Included in the total net investment income yield is investment expense. [2] Includes net investment income on short-term bonds. [3] Primarily represents fees associated with securities lending activities. The income from securities lending activities is included within fixed maturities. Also included are derivatives that qualify for hedge accounting under SFAS 133. These derivatives hedge fixed maturities. [4] Due to significant holdings in tax-exempt investments, after-tax net investment income and yield are also included. 141 Table of Contents The following table summarizes Property & Casualty net realized capital gains and losses results. 2007 2006 2005 Gross gains on sale $ 159 $ 205 $ 163 Gross losses on sale (121 ) (164 ) (110 ) Impairments Credit related [1] (63 ) (9 ) Other [2] (62 ) (45 ) (1 ) Total impairments (125 ) (45 ) (10 ) Periodic net coupon settlements on credit derivatives 15 4 Other, net [3] (100 ) 9 1 Net realized capital gains (losses), before-tax $ (172 ) $ 9 $ 44 [1] Relates to impairments for which the Company has current concerns regarding the issuers ability to pay future interest and principal amounts based upon the securities contractual terms or the depression in security value is primarily related to significant issuer specific or sector credit spread widening. [2] Primarily relates to impairments of securities that had declined in value primarily due to changes in interest rate or general or modest spread widening and for which the Company was uncertain of its intent to retain the investment for a period of time sufficient to allow recovery to cost or amortized cost. [3] Primarily consists of changes in fair value on non-qualifying derivatives, hedge ineffectiveness on qualifying derivative instruments and other investment gains. Year ended December 31, 2007 compared to the year ended December 31, 2006 Before-tax net investment income increased $201, or 14%, and after-tax net investment income increased $139, or 13%, compared to the prior year period. The increase in net investment income was primarily due to a higher average invested asset base and a higher portfolio yield. The increase in the average invested asset base as compared to the prior year period, was primarily due to positive operating cash flows. Limited partnerships and other alternative investments contributed to the increase in income compared to the prior year period due to a higher portfolio yield and greater allocation of investments to this asset class. Based upon market expectation of future interest rates and a lower expected yield from limited partnership and other alternative investments, Property and Casualty expects the average portfolio yield in 2008 to modestly decline compared to 2007 levels. The Company expects a lower yield from limited partnerships and other alternative investments primarily due to reduced liquidity and the wider credit spread environment. Net realized capital losses resulted for the year ended December 31, 2007 compared to net realized capital gains in the prior year period primarily due to Other, net losses and other-than-temporary impairments. Other, net losses in 2007 primarily resulted from the change in value associated with credit derivatives due to credit spreads widening. Credit spreads widened primarily due to the deterioration in the U.S. housing market, tightened lending conditions, the market flight to quality securities as well as increased likelihood of a U.S. recession. For further discussion, see the Capital Market Risk Management section of the MD&A. See the other-than-temporary impairments section below for information on impairment losses. Gross gains on sales for the year ended December 31, 2007, were primarily within fixed maturities and were largely comprised of corporate securities. The sales were made to reallocate the portfolio to securities with more favorable risk-return profiles. The gains on sales were primarily the result of changes in credit spreads, foreign currency exchange rates, and interest rates from the date of purchase. Gross losses on sales for the year ended December 31, 2007, were predominantly within fixed maturities and were primarily corporate securities. No single security was sold at a loss in excess of $4 and an average loss as a percentage of the fixed maturity amortized cost of less than 3%, which, under the Company impairment policy was deemed to be depressed only to a minor extent. Year ended December 31, 2006 compared to the year ended December 31, 2005 Before-tax net investment income increased $121, or 9%, and after-tax net investment income increased $91, or 9%, compared to the prior year. The increase in net investment income was primarily due to income earned on a higher average invested assets base, an increase in interest rates and a change in asset mix (i.e., greater investment in mortgage loans and limited partnerships). The increase in the average invested assets base, as compared to the prior year, can be attributed to positive operating cash flows. For 2006, the yield on average invested assets was consistent with the prior year. An increase in the yield on fixed maturities was offset by a decrease in the yield on limited partnerships. The decrease in net realized capital gains was primarily due to an increase in other-than-temporary impairments and losses on the sale of fixed maturity investments. For further discussion of gross gains and losses on fixed maturity investments and other-than-temporary impairments, see below. Gross gains on the sale of fixed maturities for the year ended December 31, 2006 were concentrated in the corporate, foreign government and municipal sectors. Certain sales were made to reposition the portfolio to a shorter duration due to the flatness of the yield curve and the lack of market compensation for longer duration assets. Also, certain sales were made as the Company continues to reposition the portfolio to higher quality fixed maturity investments and increase investments in mortgage loans and limited partnerships. The gains on sales were primarily the result of changes in interest rates from the date of purchase. 142 Table of Contents Gross losses on the sale of fixed maturities for the year ended December 31, 2006 were concentrated in the corporate and CMBS sectors with no single security sold at a loss in excess of $4, and an average loss as a percentage of the fixed maturity amortized cost of less than 3%, which, under the Company impairment policy was deemed to be depressed only to a minor extent. Corporate The investment objective of Corporate is to raise capital through financing activities to support the Life and Property & Casualty operations of the Company and to maintain sufficient funds to support the cost of those financing activities including the payment of interest for The Hartford Financial Services Group, Inc. ( HFSG ) issued debt and dividends to shareholders of The Hartford common stock. As of December 31, 2007 and 2006, Corporate held $308 and $259, respectively, of fixed maturity investments, $160 and $145, respectively, of short-term investments and $103 and $55, respectively, of equity securities. As of December 31, 2007, a put option agreement with a fair value of $43 was included in Other invested assets. For further discussion of this position, see Note 14 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Variable Interest Entities ( VIE ) In the normal course of business, the Company becomes involved with variable interest entities primarily as a collateral manager and through normal investment activities. The Company involvement includes providing investment management and administrative services, and holding ownership or other investment interests in the entities. The following table summarizes the total assets, liabilities and maximum exposure to loss relating to VIEs for which the Company has concluded it is the primary beneficiary. Accordingly, the results of operations and financial position of these VIEs are included along with the corresponding minority interest liabilities in the accompanying consolidated financial statements. December 31, 2007 December 31, 2006 Maximum Maximum Carrying Exposure to Carrying Exposure to Value [1] Liability [2] Loss [3] Value [1] Liability [2] Loss [3] Collateralized loan obligations ( CLOs ) and other funds [4] $ 359 $ 118 $ 258 $ 296 $ 99 $ 189 Limited partnerships 309 47 220 103 5 85 Other investments [5] 146 166 Total [6] $ 814 $ 165 $ 644 $ 399 $ 104 $ 274 [1] The carrying value of CLOs and other funds and Other investments is equal to fair value. Limited partnerships are accounted for under the equity method. [2] Creditors have no recourse against the Company in the event of default by the VIE. [3] The maximum exposure to loss does not include changes in fair value or the Company proportionate shares of earnings associated with limited partnerships accounted for under the equity method. The Company maximum exposure to loss as of December 31, 2007 and 2006 based on the carrying value was $649 and $295, respectively. The Company maximum exposure to loss as of December 31, 2007 and 2006 based on the Company initial co-investment or amortized cost basis was $644 and $274, respectively. [4] The Company provides collateral management services and earns a fee associated with these structures. [5] Other investments include investment structures that are backed by preferred securities. [6] As of December 31, 2007 and 2006, the Company had relationships with seven and four VIEs, respectively, where the Company was the primary beneficiary. In addition to the VIEs described above, as of December 31, 2007 and 2006, the Company held variable interests in five and three VIEs, respectively, where the Company is not the primary beneficiary and as a result, these are not consolidated by the Company. As of December 31, 2007, these VIEs included two collateralized bond obligations and two CLOs which are managed by HIMCO, as well as the Company contingent capital facility. For further discussion of the contingent capital facility, see the Capital Resources and Liquidity section of the MD&A. These investments have been held by the Company for a period of one to four years. The maximum exposure to loss consisting of the Company investments based on the amortized cost of the non-consolidated VIEs was approximately $150 and $20 as of December 31, 2007 and 2006, respectively. For the year ended December 31, 2007 the Company recognized $5 of the maximum exposure to loss representing an other-than-temporary impairment recorded as a realized capital loss. HIMCO is the collateral manager for four market value CLOs (included in the VIE discussion above) that invest in senior secured bank loans through total return swaps. For two of the CLOs, the Company has determined it is the primary beneficiary and accordingly consolidates the transactions. The maximum exposure to loss for these two consolidated CLOs, which is included in the Collateral loan obligations and other funds line in the table above, is $107 of which the Company has recognized a realized capital loss of $26. The Company is not the primary beneficiary for the remaining two CLOs, but maintains a significant involvement in the transactions. The maximum exposure to loss for these remaining two CLOs, included in the $150 in the preceding paragraph, is $37. The CLOs have triggers that allow the total return swap counterparty to terminate the transactions if the fair value of the aggregate referenced bank loan portfolio declines below a stated level. Due to the bank loan valuation declines in the first quarter of 2008, the CLO termination triggers were breached. The Company expects these transactions will be terminated in the first quarter of 2008 with a realized capital loss, which the Company estimates could be between $75-$115, before-tax. 143 Table of Contents Other-Than-Temporary Impairments The Company has a security monitoring process overseen by a committee of investment and accounting professionals that, on a quarterly basis, identifies securities that could potentially be other-than-temporarily impaired. When a security is deemed to be other-than-temporarily impaired, its cost or amortized cost is written down to current market value and a realized loss is recorded in the Company consolidated statements of operations. For fixed maturities, the Company accretes the new cost basis to par or to the estimated future value over the expected remaining life of the security by adjusting the security yield. For further discussion regarding the Company other-than-temporary impairment policy, see Evaluation of Other-Than-Temporary Impairments on Available-for-Sale Securities included in the Critical Accounting Estimates section of the MD&A and Note 1 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. The Company categorizes impairments as credit related and other. The Company characterizes an impairment as credit related if it has current concerns regarding the issuers ability to pay future interest and principal amounts based upon the securities contractual terms or the depression in the security value is primarily related to significant issuer specific or sector credit spread widening. Company management uses average credit related impairment amounts, net of recoveries, within Life and Property & Casualty product pricing assumptions. The other-than-temporary impairments recorded in Other are primarily related to securities that had declined in value primarily due to changes in interest rate or general or modest spread widening and for which the Company was uncertain of its intent to retain the investment for a period of time sufficient to allow recovery to cost or amortized cost. The following table identifies the Company other-than-temporary impairments by type. 2007 2006 2005 ABS Sub-prime residential mortgages $ 212 $ 1 $ 1 Other 19 7 4 CMBS/CMOs 18 2 1 Corporate 165 103 32 Foreign government/Government agency 13 Equity 56 8 9 Total other-than-temporary impairments $ 483 $ 121 $ 47 Credit related $ 304 $ 10 $ 41 Other 179 111 6 Total other-than-temporary impairments $ 483 $ 121 $ 47 The following discussion provides an analysis of significant other-than-temporary impairments recognized during 2007, 2006 and 2005, the related circumstances giving rise to the other-than-temporary impairments and the potential impact such circumstances may have on other material investments held. 2007 For the year ended December 31, 2007, the other-than-temporary impairments reported as Credit related primarily consisted of ABS securities backed by sub-prime residential mortgage loans rated A and below in the 2006 and 2007 vintage years. Other credit related impairments were primarily in the financial services and home builders sectors. For the majority of the credit related impairments recognized during the year, the Company expects to recover principal and interest substantially greater than what the market price indicates. These impairments were included in credit related because of the extensive credit spread widening and were recognized due to the Company uncertainty of its intent to retain the investments for a period of time sufficient to allow recovery to amortized cost. The other-than-temporary impairments reported in Other were recorded on securities that had declined in value for which the Company was uncertain of its intent to retain the investments for a period of time sufficient to for allow recovery to amortized cost. Prior to the other-than-temporary impairments, these securities had an average market value as a percentage of amortized cost of 83%. Future other-than-temporary impairments will depend primarily on economic fundamentals, political stability, issuer and/or collateral performance and future movements in interest rates and credit spreads. If the economic fundamentals continue to soften, other-than-temporary impairments for 2008 could be similar to or exceed 2007 levels. For further discussions on fundamentals related to sub-prime residential mortgage-backed securities, consumer receivable backed investments, commercial mortgage-backed securities, and corporate securities in the financial services sector, see the Investment Credit Risk section. For further discussion of risk factors associated with portfolio sectors with significant unrealized loss positions, see the risk factor commentary under the Consolidated Total Available-for-Sale Securities with Unrealized Loss Greater than Six Months by Type table in the Investment Credit Risk section that follows. 2006 For the year ended December 31, 2006, other-than-temporary impairments were primarily recorded on corporate fixed maturities. Other than a $16 impairment on a single issuer in the utilities sector, there were no other significant other-than-temporary impairments (i.e., $15 or greater) recorded on any single security or issuer. 144 Table of Contents The other-than-temporary impairments reported as Credit related were primarily ABS related to investments backed by aircraft lease receivables. Impairments resulted from higher than expected maintenance expenses. 2005 For the year ended December 31, 2005, other-than-temporary impairments recorded on corporate securities. Approximately $15 recorded on corporate securities related to three Canadian paper companies. These companies operations suffered from high energy prices and falling demand, in part due to the appreciation of the Canadian dollar in comparison to the U.S. dollar. Also included in the corporate securities was $9 recorded on securities related to two major automotive manufacturers. The market values of these securities had fallen due to a downward adjustment in earnings and cash flow guidance primarily due to sluggish sales, rising employee and retiree benefit costs and an increased debt service burden. Other-than-temporary impairments recorded on equity securities had sustained a decline in market value for an extended period of time as a result of issuer credit spread widening. During 2005 there were no significant other-than-temporary impairments (i.e., $15 or greater) recorded on any single security or issuer. INVESTMENT CREDIT RISK The Company has established investment credit policies that focus on the credit quality of obligors and counterparties, limit credit concentrations, encourage diversification and require frequent creditworthiness reviews. Investment activity, including setting of policy and defining acceptable risk levels, is subject to regular review and approval by senior management and by The Hartford Board of Directors. The Company invests primarily in securities which are rated investment grade and has established exposure limits, diversification standards and review procedures for all credit risks including borrower, issuer and counterparty. Creditworthiness of specific obligors is determined by consideration of external determinants of creditworthiness, typically ratings assigned by nationally recognized ratings agencies and is supplemented by an internal credit evaluation. Obligor, asset sector and industry concentrations are subject to established Company limits and are monitored on a regular basis. The Company is not exposed to any credit concentration risk of a single issuer greater than 10% of the Company stockholders equity other than U.S. government and certain U.S. government agencies. For further discussion of concentration of credit risk, see the Concentration of Credit Risk section in Note 4 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Derivative Instruments The Company derivative counterparty exposure policy establishes market-based credit limits, favors long-term financial stability and creditworthiness and typically requires credit enhancement/credit risk reducing agreements. Credit risk is measured as the amount owed to the Company based on current market conditions and potential payment obligations between the Company and its counterparties. Credit exposures are generally quantified daily, netted by counterparty for each legal entity of the Company, and collateral is pledged to and held by, or on behalf of, the Company to the extent the current value of derivatives exceeds the exposure policy thresholds which do not exceed $10. The Company also minimizes the credit risk in derivative instruments by entering into transactions with high quality counterparties rated A2/A or better, which are monitored by the Company internal compliance unit and reviewed frequently by senior management. In addition, the compliance unit monitors counterparty credit exposure on a monthly basis to ensure compliance with Company policies and statutory limitations. The Company also maintains a policy of requiring that derivative contracts, other than exchange traded contracts, currency forward contracts, and certain embedded derivatives, be governed by an International Swaps and Derivatives Association Master Agreement which is structured by legal entity and by counterparty and permits right of offset. To date, the Company has not incurred any losses on derivative instruments due to counterparty nonperformance. In addition to counterparty credit risk, the Company enters into credit derivative instruments to manage credit exposure which includes assuming credit risk from and reducing credit risk to a single entity, referenced index, or asset pool. Credit derivatives used by the Company include credit default swaps, credit index swaps, and total return swaps. The Company purchases credit protection through credit default swaps to economically hedge and manage credit risk of certain fixed maturity investments across multiple sectors of the investment portfolio. As of December 31, 2007, the notional and fair value of these credit default swaps was $5.2 billion and $81, respectively. The average credit quality of the economically hedged securities was BBB+. 145 Table of Contents The following table presents the notional, fair value, derivative credit risk, and underlying referenced asset average credit ratings for credit derivatives in which the Company is assuming credit risk as of December 31, 2007. December 31, 2007 Underlying Referenced Asset(s) Notional Average Credit Average Amount Fair Value Risk Exposure Type Credit Rating Credit default swaps [1] Investment grade risk exposure $ 2,263 $ (135 ) AA Corporate Credit BBB+ Below investment grade risk exposure [2] 594 (281 ) CCC+ Corporate Credit BBB- Credit index swaps 1,456 (29 ) AAA Lehman CMBS Index AAA Total return swaps 850 (41 ) NR to A Bank Loans B Total $ 5,163 $ (486 ) [1] Includes $2.0 billion, as of December 31, 2007, of a standard market index of diversified portfolios of corporate issuers referenced through credit default swaps. These swaps are subsequently valued based upon the observable standard market index. [2] The fair value includes cash payments received at the inception of certain contracts of $201. The net loss for the year ended December 31, 2007, was $92, before-tax. Credit default swaps involve a transfer of credit risk of one or many referenced entities from one party to another in exchange for periodic payments. The party that purchases credit protection will make a payment based on an agreed upon rate and notional amount. The second party, who assumes credit exposure, will typically only make a payment if there is a credit event and such payment will be equal to the notional value of the swap contract less the value of the referenced security issuer debt obligation. A credit event is generally defined as default on contractually obligated interest or principal payments or bankruptcy of the referenced entity. These swaps replicate the credit spread component of fixed maturities and are an efficient means to manage credit exposure without directly investing in the cash market investments. The credit default swaps in which the Company assumes credit risk reference investment grade single corporate issuers, baskets of up to five corporate issuers and diversified portfolios of corporate issuers. The diversified portfolios of corporate issuers are established within sector concentration limits and are typically divided into tranches which possess different credit ratings ranging from AAA through the CCC rated first loss position. The credit index swaps assume the credit risk of a referenced AAA rated tranche of a commercial mortgage security index. The credit index swap contracts pay or receive amounts based upon changes in the referenced index and are typically six months in duration. In February 2008, the credit index swaps were closed and resulted in an additional $109, before-tax, net realized capital loss which will be recorded in the first quarter 2008. The Company total return swaps assume the credit risk of a referenced portfolio of bank loans. Total return swaps involve the periodic exchange of payments with other parties, at specified intervals, calculated using the agreed upon index and notional principal amounts. The party assuming the credit risk receives periodic coupon payments plus changes in value of a referenced asset, portfolio or index while paying the other counterparty a fixed or floating cash flow unrelated to the referenced credit(s) or index. Typically, the net payments exchanged associated with total return swaps have similar economic characteristics to fixed maturities. 146 Table of Contents Fixed Maturities The following table identifies fixed maturity securities by type on a consolidated basis as of December 31, 2007 and 2006. Consolidated Fixed Maturities by Type 2007 2006 Percent Percent of Total of Total Amortized Unrealized Unrealized Fair Fair Amortized Unrealized Unrealized Fair Fair Cost Gains Losses Value Value Cost Gains Losses Value Value ABS Auto $ 692 $ $ (16 ) $ 676 0.9 % $ 740 $ 1 $ (4 ) $ 737 0.9 % Collateralized debt obligations ( CDOs ) [1] 2,633 1 (118 ) 2,516 3.1 % 957 6 (1 ) 962 1.2 % Credit cards 957 3 (22 ) 938 1.2 % 1,205 8 (3 ) 1,210 1.5 % Residential mortgage backed ( RMBS ) [2] 2,999 10 (343 ) 2,666 3.3 % 2,805 12 (9 ) 2,808 3.6 % Student loan 786 1 (40 ) 747 0.9 % 805 5 810 1.0 % Other 1,448 18 (94 ) 1,372 1.7 % 1,175 22 (33 ) 1,164 1.5 % CMBS Bonds 13,641 126 (421 ) 13,346 16.7 % 13,336 155 (116 ) 13,375 16.9 % Commercial real estate ( CRE ) CDOs 2,243 1 (390 ) 1,854 2.3 % 1,596 2 (10 ) 1,588 2.0 % Interest only ( IOs ) 1,741 117 (27 ) 1,831 2.3 % 1,884 75 (22 ) 1,937 2.5 % CMOs Agency backed 1,191 32 (4 ) 1,219 1.5 % 1,184 17 (8 ) 1,193 1.5 % Non-agency backed [3] 525 4 (3 ) 526 0.7 % 116 (1 ) 115 0.2 % Corporate Basic industry 2,508 61 (34 ) 2,535 3.2 % 2,801 83 (32 ) 2,852 3.6 % Capital goods 2,194 86 (26 ) 2,254 2.8 % 2,568 111 (20 ) 2,659 3.4 % Consumer cyclical 3,011 87 (60 ) 3,038 3.8 % 3,279 94 (34 ) 3,339 4.2 % Consumer non-cyclical 3,008 89 (37 ) 3,060 3.8 % 3,465 84 (47 ) 3,502 4.4 % Energy 1,595 71 (12 ) 1,654 2.1 % 1,779 73 (21 ) 1,831 2.3 % Financial services 11,934 230 (568 ) 11,596 14.4 % 10,276 307 (78 ) 10,505 13.3 % Technology and communications 3,763 181 (40 ) 3,904 4.9 % 4,136 191 (44 ) 4,283 5.4 % Transportation 401 12 (13 ) 400 0.5 % 730 17 (10 ) 737 0.9 % Utilities 4,500 181 (104 ) 4,577 5.7 % 4,588 195 (66 ) 4,717 6.0 % Other 1,204 24 (48 ) 1,180 1.5 % 1,447 38 (19 ) 1,466 1.9 % Government/Government agencies Foreign 999 59 (5 ) 1,053 1.3 % 1,213 87 (6 ) 1,294 1.6 % United States 836 22 (3 ) 855 1.1 % 848 5 (7 ) 846 1.1 % MBS 2,757 26 (20 ) 2,763 3.5 % 2,742 5 (45 ) 2,702 3.4 % Municipal Taxable 1,376 33 (23 ) 1,386 1.7 % 1,342 25 (23 ) 1,344 1.7 % Tax-exempt 11,776 394 (67 ) 12,103 15.1 % 10,555 511 (4 ) 11,062 14.0 % Redeemable preferred stock 6 6 36 36 Total fixed maturities $ 80,724 $ 1,869 $ (2,538 ) $ 80,055 100.0 % $ 77,608 $ 2,129 $ (663 ) $ 79,074 100.0 % [1] Includes securities with an amortized cost and fair value of $16 and $15, respectively, as of December 31, 2007, and $59 and $61, respectively, as of December 31, 2006, that contain a below-prime residential mortgage loan component. Typically these CDOs are also backed by assets other than below-prime loans. [2] Includes securities with an amortized cost and fair value of $40 and $37, respectively, as of December 31, 2007, and $21 as of December 31, 2006, which were backed by pools of loans issued to prime borrowers. Includes securities with an amortized cost and fair value of $96 and $87, respectively, as of December 31, 2007, and $27 as of December 31, 2006, which were backed by pools of loans issued to Alt-A borrowers. [3] Includes securities with an amortized cost and fair value of $270 as of December 31, 2007, and $72 as of December 31, 2006, which were backed by pools of loans issued to Alt-A borrowers. The Company fixed maturity net unrealized gain/loss position decreased $2.1 billion from a net unrealized gain position as of December 31, 2006 to a net unrealized loss position as of December 31, 2007. The decrease was primarily due to credit spread widening, partially offset by a decrease in interest rates and other-than-temporary impairments taken during the year. Credit spreads widened primarily due to the deterioration of the sub-prime mortgage market and liquidity disruptions, impacting the overall credit market. As of December 31, 2007, investment sector allocations as a percentage of total fixed maturities have not significantly changed since December 31, 2006 except investments in ABS CDOs, financial services in corporate sector and municipal securities. The increase in 147 Table of Contents ABS CDOs was primarily related to the investment of the cash collateral received from securities lending programs into AAA rated CLOs that have underlying bank loan collateral. The increases in the financial services and municipal securities were due to the sectors attractive risk/return profiles. The majority of the increase in the financial services sector occurred during the first nine months of the year. Deterioration in the U.S. housing market, tightened lending conditions and the market flight to quality securities as well as the increased likelihood of a U.S. recession has caused credit spreads to widened considerably. The sectors most significantly impacted include residential and commercial mortgage backed investments, and other structured products, including consumer loan backed investments and lenders and monoline insurers. The follows sections illustrate the Company holdings and provides commentary of the sectors identified above. The remaining structured investment products other than ABS sub-prime and consumer loans and CMBS primarily relate to ABS CDOs supported by senior secured bank loans. As of December 31, 2007, these CLOs represent 99% of ABS CDO holdings with approximately 80% rated AAA. 148 Table of Contents Sub-prime Residential Mortgage Loans The Company has exposure to sub-prime and Alt-A residential mortgage backed securities included in the Consolidated Fixed Maturities by Type table above. Sub-prime mortgage lending is the origination of residential mortgage loans to customers with weak credit profiles. Alt-A mortgage lending is the origination of residential mortgage loans to customers who have credit ratings above sub-prime but do not conform to government-sponsored enterprise standards. Both of these categories are considered to be below-prime. The Company is not an originator of below-prime mortgages. The slowing U.S. housing market, greater use of affordability mortgage products, and relaxed underwriting standards for some originators of below-prime loans has recently led to higher delinquency and loss rates, especially within the 2007 and 2006 vintage years. These factors have caused a pull-back in market liquidity and repricing of risk, which has led to an increase in unrealized losses from December 31, 2006 to December 31, 2007. The Company expects delinquency and loss rates in the sub-prime mortgage sector to continue to increase in the near term. The Company has performed cash flow analysis on its sub-prime holdings stressing multiple variables, including prepayment speeds, default rates, and loss severity. Based on this analysis and the Company expectation of future loan performance, other than certain credit related impairments recorded in the current year, future payments are expected to be received in accordance with the contractual terms of the securities. For a discussion on credit related impairments, see Other-Than-Temporary Impairments section included in the Investment Results section of the MD&A. The following table presents the Company exposure to ABS supported by sub-prime mortgage loans by credit quality and vintage year, including direct investments in CDOs that contain a sub-prime loan component, included in the RMBS and CDO line in the table above. Sub-Prime Residential Mortgage Loans [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] December 31, 2007 AAA AA A BBB BB and Below Total Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Cost Value Cost Value Cost Value Cost Value Cost Value Cost Value 2003 & Prior $ 93 $ 92 $ 213 $ 199 $ 113 $ 94 $ 8 $ 7 $ 7 $ 7 $ 434 $ 399 2004 133 131 358 324 2 2 2 1 495 458 2005 113 107 796 713 8 5 10 3 33 23 960 851 2006 457 413 67 55 2 3 3 2 8 2 537 475 2007 280 241 71 39 56 47 21 20 25 27 453 374 Total $ 1,076 $ 984 $ 1,505 $ 1,330 $ 181 $ 151 $ 44 $ 33 $ 73 $ 59 $ 2,879 $ 2,557 Credit protection [6] 32.7% 47.3% 21.1% 19.6% 17.1% 39.8% December 31, 2006 AAA AA A BBB BB and Below Total Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Cost Value Cost Value Cost Value Cost Value Cost Value Cost Value 2003 & Prior $ 130 $ 131 $ 300 $ 302 $ 211 $ 211 $ 15 $ 15 $ 5 $ 8 $ 661 $ 667 2004 279 279 411 412 3 3 11 11 704 705 2005 171 171 807 810 55 49 1,033 1,030 2006 361 361 45 46 4 4 3 3 5 5 418 419 Total $ 941 $ 942 $ 1,563 $ 1,570 $ 218 $ 218 $ 29 $ 29 $ 65 $ 62 $ 2,816 $ 2,821 [1] The vintage year represents the year the underlying loans in the pool were originated. [2] Securities backed by Alt-A residential mortgages, including CMOs, have an amortized cost and fair value of $366 and $357, respectively, as of December 31, 2007, and $99 as of December 31, 2006. These amounts are not included in the table. [3] The Company exposure to second lien residential mortgages is composed primarily of loans to prime and Alt-A borrowers, of which approximately half were wrapped by monoline insurers. These securities are included in the table above and have an amortized cost and fair value of $260 and $217, respectively, as of December 31, 2007 and $160 and $161, respectively, as of December 31, 2006. [4] As of December 31, 2007, the weighted average life of the sub-prime residential mortgage portfolio was 3.3 years. [5] Approximately 80% of the portfolio is backed by adjustable rate mortgages. [6] Represents the current weighted average percentage, excluding wrapped securities, of the capital structure subordinated to the Company investment holding that is available to absorb losses before the security incurs the first dollar loss of principal. 149 Table of Contents Commercial Mortgage Loans Commercial real estate market cash flow fundamentals have been solid with mortgage delinquencies near all time lows. Recently, however, commercial real estate rents and property values have begun to soften. The following tables represent the Company exposure to CMBS bonds and commercial real estate CDOs by credit quality and vintage year. CMBS Bonds [1] December 31, 2007 AAA AA A BBB BB and Below Total Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Cost Value Cost Value Cost Value Cost Value Cost Value Cost Value 2003 & Prior $ 2,666 $ 2,702 $ 495 $ 502 $ 289 $ 292 $ 30 $ 32 $ 46 $ 49 $ 3,526 $ 3,577 2004 709 708 89 87 130 128 23 21 951 944 2005 1,280 1,258 479 454 404 389 85 76 24 21 2,272 2,198 2006 2,975 2,910 415 395 763 739 456 400 24 22 4,633 4,466 2007 1,365 1,342 461 431 240 220 190 165 3 3 2,259 2,161 Total $ 8,995 $ 8,920 $ 1,939 $ 1,869 $ 1,826 $ 1,768 $ 784 $ 694 $ 97 $ 95 $ 13,641 $ 13,346 Credit protection 23.8% 16.4% 13.6% 6.8% 3.7% 20.6% December 31, 2006 AAA AA A BBB BB and Below Total Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Cost Value Cost Value Cost Value Cost Value Cost Value Cost Value 2003 & Prior $ 3,435 $ 3,463 $ 617 $ 623 $ 525 $ 529 $ 91 $ 96 $ 53 $ 65 $ 4,721 $ 4,776 2004 882 867 103 100 129 127 27 27 1,141 1,121 2005 1,473 1,457 694 687 555 551 237 237 5 5 2,964 2,937 2006 2,471 2,489 462 465 1,046 1,055 496 497 35 35 4,510 4,541 Total $ 8,261 $ 8,276 $ 1,876 $ 1,875 $ 2,255 $ 2,262 $ 851 $ 857 $ 93 $ 105 $ 13,336 $ 13,375 [1] The vintage year represents the year the pool of loans was originated. CMBS CRE CDOs [1] [2] December 31, 2007 AAA AA A BBB Total Amortized Amortized Amortized Amortized Amortized Cost Fair Value Cost Fair Value Cost Fair Value Cost Fair Value Cost Fair Value 2003 & Prior $ 361 $ 288 $ 119 $ 95 $ 44 $ 36 $ 8 $ 6 $ 532 $ 425 2004 97 77 32 25 12 9 2 2 143 113 2005 120 99 30 24 10 8 2 1 162 132 2006 521 472 136 112 222 160 51 40 930 784 2007 251 219 121 100 81 64 23 17 476 400 Total $ 1,350 $ 1,155 $ 438 $ 356 $ 369 $ 277 $ 86 $ 66 $ 2,243 $ 1,854 Credit protection 31.5% 27.1% 16.7% 10.4% 27.5% December 31, 2006 AAA AA A BBB Total Amortized Amortized Amortized Amortized Amortized Cost Fair Value Cost Fair Value Cost Fair Value Cost Fair Value Cost Fair Value 2003 & Prior $ 324 $ 320 $ 106 $ 105 $ 40 $ 40 $ 6 $ 6 $ 476 $ 471 2004 86 86 28 28 11 11 2 2 127 127 2005 111 111 28 28 9 9 1 1 149 149 2006 539 537 97 96 154 154 54 54 844 841 Total $ 1,060 $ 1,054 $ 259 $ 257 $ 214 $ 214 $ 63 $ 63 $ 1,596 $ 1,588 [1] The vintage year represents the year the underlying loans in the pool were originated. [2] Approximately 50% of the underlying CMBS CRE CDO collateral are seasoned, below investment grade securities. However, the Company primarily invests in the AAA tranche of the CDO capital structure. 150 Table of Contents In addition to commercial mortgage-backed securities, the company has whole loan commercial real estate investments. The carrying value of these investments was $5.4 billion and $3.3 billion as of December 31, 2007 and 2006, respectively. The Company mortgage loans are collateralized by a variety of commercial and agricultural properties. The mortgage loans are geographically dispersed throughout the United States and by property type. At December 31, 2007 and 2006, the Company held no impaired, restructured, delinquent or in-process-of-foreclosure mortgage loans and accordingly had no valuation allowance for mortgage loans at December 31, 2007 and 2006. The following table presents commercial mortgage loans by region and property type. Commercial Mortgage Loans on Real Estate by Region December 31, 2007 December 31, 2006 Percent of Percent of Carrying Value Total Carrying Value Total East North Central $ 120 2.2 % $ 135 4.1 % East South Central 9 0.2 % 10 0.3 % Middle Atlantic 674 12.4 % 598 18.0 % Mountain 200 3.7 % 88 2.6 % New England 404 7.5 % 212 6.4 % Pacific 1,200 22.2 % 669 20.2 % South Atlantic 1,104 20.4 % 766 23.1 % West North Central 32 0.6 % 6 0.2 % West South Central 286 5.3 % 113 3.4 % Other [1] 1,381 25.5 % 721 21.7 % Total $ 5,410 100.0 % $ 3,318 100.0 % [1] Includes multi-regional properties. Commercial Mortgage Loans on Real Estate by Property Type December 31, 2007 December 31, 2006 Percent of Percent of Carrying Value Total Carrying Value Total Industrial $ 649 12.0 % $ 479 14.5 % Lodging 524 9.7 % 510 15.4 % Agricultural 362 6.7 % 94 2.8 % Multifamily 991 18.3 % 300 9.0 % Office 1,929 35.6 % 1,358 40.9 % Retail 806 14.9 % 419 12.6 % Other 149 2.8 % 158 4.8 % Total $ 5,410 100.0 % $ 3,318 100.0 % 151 Table of Contents Consumer Loans There are a growing number of concerns with consumer loans, including rising delinquency and default rates spurred on by the softening economy and higher unemployment rates. The Company expects delinquencies and losses on consumer loans to modestly rise in 2008, primarily associated with sub-prime borrowers. However, the Company does not expect its ABS consumer loan holdings to face credit concerns, as the quality and credit enhancement of the securities is sufficient to absorb a significantly higher level of defaults than are currently anticipated. The following table presents the Company exposure to ABS consumer loans by credit quality. ABS Consumer Loans December 31, 2007 AAA AA A BBB BB and Below Total Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Cost Value Cost Value Cost Value Cost Value Cost Value Cost Value Credit card [1] $ 166 $ 166 $ 19 $ 19 $ 162 $ 162 $ 610 $ 591 $ $ $ 957 $ 938 Auto [2] 274 270 27 27 151 148 198 192 42 39 692 676 Student loan [3] 313 297 333 317 140 133 786 747 Total $ 753 $ 733 $ 379 $ 363 $ 453 $ 443 $ 808 $ 783 $ 42 $ 39 $ 2,435 $ 2,361 December 31, 2006 AAA AA A BBB BB and Below Total Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Cost Value Cost Value Cost Value Cost Value Cost Value Cost Value Credit card [1] $ 203 $ 202 $ 45 $ 45 $ 249 $ 252 $ 708 $ 711 $ $ $ 1,205 $ 1,210 Auto [2] 193 193 82 81 175 174 270 269 20 20 740 737 Student loan [3] 365 366 253 255 166 168 21 21 805 810 Total $ 761 $ 761 $ 380 $ 381 $ 590 $ 594 $ 999 $ 1,001 $ 20 $ 20 $ 2,750 $ 2,757 [1] Approximately 13% of the securities were issued by lenders that lend primarily to sub-prime borrowers. [2] The AAA rated securities include monoline insured securities with an amortized cost and fair value of $49 at December 31, 2007 and $45 at December 31, 2006. Additionally, approximately 11% of the auto consumer loan-backed securities were issued by lenders whose primary business is to sub-prime borrowers. [3] The AAA rated securities include monoline insured securities with an amortized cost and fair value of $102 and $93, respectively, at December 31, 2007 and $102 at December 31, 2006. Additionally, approximately half of the student loan-backed exposure is guaranteed by the Federal Family Education Loan Program, with the remainder comprised of loans to prime-borrowers. Monoline Insured Securities Monoline insurers guarantee the timely payment of principal and interest of certain securities. Municipalities will often purchase monoline insurance to wrap a security issuance in order to benefit from better market execution. As of December 31, 2007, the fair value of the Company total monoline insured securities was $8.7 billion, with the fair value of the insured municipal securities totaling $7.8 billion. At December 31, 2007, the overall credit quality of the municipal bond portfolio, including the benefits of monoline insurance, was AA+ and excluding monoline insurance, the overall credit quality dropped to AA-. In addition to the insured municipal securities, as of December 31, 2007 the Company has other insured securities with an amortized cost and fair value of $790 and $721, respectively. These securities include the below prime mortgage-backed securities and other consumer loan receivables discussed above and corporate securities. The Company also has direct investments in monoline insurers with a fair value of approximately $140 as of December 31, 2007. Mortgage Lenders Mortgage lenders are typically corporate securities within the financial services sector. Mortgage lenders and other financial service companies were forced to recapitalize to solidify balance sheets and financial position resulting from the significant sub-prime mortgage write-downs. The Company has favored broad based diversified financial institutions and has limited its holdings in entities that primarily write residential mortgage loans. As of December 31, 2007, the Company has approximately $374 and $348 of amortized cost and fair value, respectively, of securities for which the issuers primary business was residential mortgage lending. For further discussion of risk factors associated with sectors with significant unrealized loss positions, see the sector risk factor commentary under the Consolidated Total Available-for-Sale Securities with Unrealized Loss Greater than Six Months by Type table in this section of the MD&A. 152 Table of Contents The following table identifies fixed maturities by credit quality on a consolidated basis as of December 31, 2007 and 2006. The ratings referenced below are based on the ratings of a nationally recognized rating organization or, if not rated, assigned based on the Company internal analysis of such securities. Consolidated Fixed Maturities by Credit Quality 2007 2006 Percent of Percent of Amortized Total Fair Amortized Total Fair Cost Fair Value Value Cost Fair Value Value AAA $ 28,547 $ 28,318 35.4 % $ 23,216 $ 23,629 29.9 % AA 11,326 10,999 13.7 % 10,107 10,298 13.0 % A 16,999 17,030 21.3 % 17,696 18,251 23.1 % BBB 15,093 14,974 18.7 % 17,402 17,655 22.3 % United States Government/Government agencies 5,165 5,229 6.5 % 5,529 5,507 7.0 % BB & below 3,594 3,505 4.4 % 3,658 3,734 4.7 % Total fixed maturities $ 80,724 $ 80,055 100.0 % $ 77,608 $ 79,074 100.0 % The following table presents the Company unrealized loss aging for total fixed maturity and equity securities classified as available-for-sale on a consolidated basis, as of December 31, 2007 and 2006, by length of time the security was in an unrealized loss position. Consolidated Unrealized Loss Aging of Total Available-for-Sale Securities 2007 2006 Amortized Fair Unrealized Amortized Fair Unrealized Cost Value Loss Cost Value Loss Three months or less $ 10,879 $ 10,445 $ (434 ) $ 12,601 $ 12,500 $ (101 ) Greater than three months to six months 11,857 10,954 (903 ) 1,261 1,242 (19 ) Greater than six months to nine months 10,086 9,354 (732 ) 1,239 1,210 (29 ) Greater than nine months to twelve months 2,756 2,545 (211 ) 1,992 1,959 (33 ) Greater than twelve months 10,563 10,071 (492 ) 15,402 14,911 (491 ) Total $ 46,141 $ 43,369 $ (2,772 ) $ 32,495 $ 31,822 $ (673 ) The increase in the unrealized loss amount since December 31, 2006, is primarily the result of credit spread widening, offset in part by a decrease in interest rates and other-than-temporary impairments. As of December 31, 2007, and December 31, 2006, fixed maturities represented $2,538, or 92%, and $663, or 99%, respectively, of the Company total unrealized loss associated with securities classified as available-for-sale. The Company held no securities of a single issuer that were at an unrealized loss position in excess of 2% and 5%, respectively, of the total unrealized loss amount as of December 31, 2007 and 2006. 153 Table of Contents Consolidated Total Available-for-Sale Securities with Unrealized Loss Greater Than Six Months by Type 2007 2006 Percent of Percent of Total Total Amortized Fair Unrealized Unrealized Amortized Fair Unrealized Unrealized Cost Value Loss Loss Cost Value Loss Loss ABS Aircraft lease receivables $ 99 $ 79 $ (20 ) 1.4 % $ 107 $ 79 $ (28 ) 5.1 % CDOs 514 490 (24 ) 1.7 % 133 129 (4 ) 0.7 % RMBS 781 677 (104 ) 7.2 % 224 216 (8 ) 1.4 % Other ABS 865 814 (51 ) 3.6 % 715 704 (11 ) 2.0 % CMBS Bonds 5,926 5,679 (247 ) 17.2 % 3,987 3,887 (100 ) 18.1 % CRE CDOs 1,279 1,010 (269 ) 18.8 % 252 247 (5 ) 0.9 % IOs 287 272 (15 ) 1.0 % 443 429 (14 ) 2.5 % Corporate Basic industry 625 604 (21 ) 1.5 % 859 834 (25 ) 4.5 % Consumer cyclical 682 651 (31 ) 2.2 % 752 724 (28 ) 5.1 % Consumer non-cyclical 881 854 (27 ) 1.9 % 1,106 1,068 (38 ) 6.9 % Financial services 4,002 3,670 (332 ) 23.1 % 2,749 2,689 (60 ) 10.8 % Technology and communications 611 590 (21 ) 1.5 % 912 877 (35 ) 6.3 % Transportation 140 132 (8 ) 0.6 % 225 216 (9 ) 1.6 % Utilities 1,555 1,477 (78 ) 5.4 % 1,384 1,331 (53 ) 9.6 % Other 1,311 1,258 (53 ) 3.7 % 1,454 1,404 (50 ) 9.1 % MBS 1,051 1,031 (20 ) 1.4 % 1,793 1,748 (45 ) 8.1 % Municipals 2,026 1,965 (61 ) 4.2 % 490 473 (17 ) 3.1 % Other securities 770 717 (53 ) 3.6 % 1,048 1,025 (23 ) 4.2 % Total $ 23,405 $ 21,970 $ (1,435 ) 100.0 % $ 18,633 $ 18,080 $ (553 ) 100.0 % The increase in total unrealized losses greater than six months since December 31, 2006 primarily resulted from credit spread widening, offset in part by the decreases in interest rates and other-than-temporary impairments. The sectors with the most significant concentration of unrealized losses were CMBS and corporate fixed maturities most significantly within the financial services sector. The Company current view of risk factors relative to these fixed maturity types is as follows: CMBS As of December 31, 2007, the Company held approximately 720 different securities that had been in an unrealized loss position for greater than six months. Approximately 50 securities were priced at or less than 80% of amortized cost as of December 31, 2007, however the price depressions primarily occurred during the fourth quarter and pertained to securities rated AA and above. The recent price depression resulted from widening credit spreads primarily due to tightened lending conditions and the market flight to quality securities. See the Commercial Mortgage Loans commentary and tables above. Future changes in fair value of these securities are primarily dependent upon sector fundamentals, credit spread movements, and changes in interest rates. Financial services As of December 31, 2007, the Company held approximately 230 different securities in the financial services sector that were in an unrealized loss position for greater than six months. Substantially all of these securities are rated investment grade securities, most of which are priced at, or greater than, 90% of amortized cost as of December 31, 2007. The increase in unrealized losses was primarily due to the recent credit spread widening stemming from concerns over risks in the sub-prime mortgage and leveraged finance markets and the associated impact of issuer credit losses, earnings volatility, and access to liquidity for companies involved in those markets as well as the financial sector as a whole. Future changes in fair value of these securities are primarily dependent on the extent of future issuer credit losses, return of liquidity, and changes in general market conditions, including interest rates and credit spread movements. RMBS As of December 31, 2007, the Company held approximately 100 different securities that had been in an unrealized loss position for greater than six months, of which 80% were rated AA and above. The remaining securities primarily consist of securities from vintage years 2005 and prior. Fundamentals impacting the RMBS market, as discussed in the Sub-prime Residential Mortgage Loans section above have caused a pull-back in market liquidity and repricing of risk. Future changes in fair value of these securities are primarily dependent upon sector fundamentals and credit spread movements. As part of the Company ongoing security monitoring process by a committee of investment and accounting professionals, the Company has reviewed its investment portfolio and concluded that there were no additional other-than-temporary impairments as of December 31, 2007 and 2006. Due to the issuers continued satisfaction of the securities obligations in accordance with their contractual terms and the expectation that they will continue to do so, management intent and ability to hold these securities to recovery, as well as the evaluation of the fundamentals of the issuers financial condition and other objective evidence, the Company believes that the prices of the securities in the sectors identified above were temporarily depressed. 154 Table of Contents The evaluation for other-than-temporary impairments is a quantitative and qualitative process, which is subject to risks and uncertainties in the determination of whether declines in the fair value of investments are other-than-temporary. The risks and uncertainties include changes in general economic conditions, the issuer financial condition or near term recovery prospects and the effects of changes in interest rates and credit spreads. In addition, for securitized financial assets with contractual cash flows (e.g., ABS and CMBS), projections of expected future cash flows may change based upon new information regarding the performance of the underlying collateral. As of December 31, 2007 and 2006, management expectation of the discounted future cash flows on these securities was in excess of the associated securities amortized cost. For a further discussion, see Evaluation of Other-Than-Temporary Impairments on Available-for-Sale Securities included in the Critical Accounting Estimates section of the MD&A and Other-Than-Temporary Impairments on Available-for-Sale Securities section in Note 1 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. CAPITAL MARKETS RISK MANAGEMENT The Hartford has a disciplined approach to managing risks associated with its capital markets and asset/liability management activities. Investment portfolio management is organized to focus investment management expertise on the specific classes of investments, while asset/liability management is the responsibility of a dedicated risk management unit supporting Life and Property & Casualty operations. Derivative instruments are utilized in compliance with established Company policy and regulatory requirements and are monitored internally and reviewed by senior management. During 2007, the deterioration in the U.S. housing market, tightened lending conditions, the market flight to quality securities as well as increased likelihood of a U.S. recession contributed to substantial spread widening in credit derivatives and structured credit products. Market Risk The Hartford is exposed to market risk, primarily relating to the market price and/or cash flow variability associated with changes in interest rates, credit spreads including issuer defaults, equity prices or market indices, and foreign currency exchange rates. The Hartford is also exposed to credit and counterparty repayment risk. Interest Rate Risk The Company exposure to interest rate risk relates to the market price and/or cash flow variability associated with the changes in market interest rates. The Company manages its exposure to interest rate risk through asset allocation limits, asset/liability duration matching and through the use of derivatives. The Company analyzes interest rate risk using various models including parametric models and cash flow simulation of the liabilities and the supporting investments, including derivative instruments under various market scenarios. Measures the Company uses to quantify its exposure to interest rate risk inherent in its invested assets and interest rate sensitive liabilities include duration and key rate duration. Duration is the weighted average term-to-maturity of a security cash flows, and is used to approximate the percentage change in the price of a security for a 100 basis point change in market interest rates. For example, a duration of 5 means the price of the security will change by approximately 5% for a 1% change in interest rates. The key rate duration analysis considers the expected future cash flows of assets and liabilities assuming non-parallel interest rate movements. To calculate duration, projections of asset and liability cash flows are discounted to a present value using interest rate assumptions. These cash flows are then revalued at alternative interest rate levels to determine the percentage change in fair value due to an incremental change in rates. Cash flows from corporate obligations are assumed to be consistent with the contractual payment streams on a yield to worst basis. The primary assumptions used in calculating cash flow projections include expected asset payment streams taking into account prepayment speeds, issuer call options and contract holder behavior. ABS, CMOs, and MBS are modeled based on estimates of the rate of future prepayments of principal over the remaining life of the securities. These estimates are developed using prepayment speeds provided in broker consensus data. Such estimates are derived from prepayment speeds previously experienced at the interest rate levels projected for the underlying collateral. Actual prepayment experience may vary from these estimates. The Company is also exposed to interest rate risk based upon the discount rate assumption associated with the Company pension and other postretirement benefit obligations. The discount rate assumption is based upon an interest rate yield curve comprised of bonds rated Aa or higher with maturities primarily between zero and thirty years. For further discussion of interest rate risk associated with the benefit obligations, see the Critical Accounting Estimates section of the MD&A under Pension and Other Postretirement Benefit Obligations and Note 17 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. As interest rates decline, certain securities such as MBS and CMO as well as other mortgage loans backed securities are more susceptible to paydowns and prepayments. During such periods, the Company generally will not be able to reinvest the proceeds at comparable yields, however in 2007, in general, increases in credit spreads off-set lower interest rates. Lower interest rates will also likely result in lower net investment income increased hedging cost associated with variable annuities and, if declines are sustained for a long period of time, it may subject the Company to reinvestment risks, higher pension costs expense and possibly reduced profit margins associated with guaranteed crediting rates on certain Life products. Conversely, the fair value of the investment portfolio will increase when interest rates decline and the Company interest expense will be lower on its variable rate debt obligations. The Company believes that an increase in interest rates from the current levels is generally a favorable development for the Company. Rate increases are expected to provide additional net investment income, increase sales of fixed rate Life investment products, reduce the cost of the variable annuity hedging program, limit the potential risk of margin erosion due to minimum guaranteed crediting rates in certain Life products and, if sustained, could reduce the Company prospective pension expense. Conversely, a rise in interest rates will reduce the fair value of the investment portfolio, increase interest expense on the Company variable rate debt obligations and, if 155 Table of Contents long-term interest rates rise dramatically within a six to twelve month time period, certain Life businesses may be exposed to disintermediation risk. Disintermediation risk refers to the risk that policyholders will surrender their contracts in a rising interest rate environment requiring the Company to liquidate assets in an unrealized loss position. In conjunction with the interest rate risk measurement and management techniques, certain of Life fixed income product offerings have market value adjustment provisions at contract surrender. Since the Company matches, and actively manages its assets and liabilities, an interest environment with an inverted yield curve (i.e. short-term interest rates are higher than intermediate-term or long-term interest rates) does not significantly impact the Company profits or operations. As noted above, the absolute level of interest rates is more significant than the shape of the yield curve. Credit Risk The Company is exposed to credit risk within our investment portfolio and through derivative counterparties. Credit risk relates to the uncertainty of an obligor continued ability to make timely payments in accordance with the contractual terms of the instrument or contract. The Company manages credit risk through established investment credit policies which address quality of obligors and counterparties, credit concentration limits, diversification requirements and acceptable risk levels under expected and stressed scenarios. These policies are regularly reviewed and approved by senior management and by the Company Board of Directors. Derivative counterparty credit risk is measured as the amount owed to the Company based upon current market conditions and potential payment obligations between the Company and its counterparties. Credit exposures are generally quantified daily, netted by counterparty for each legal entity of the Company and collateral is pledged to and held by, or on behalf of, the Company to the extent the current value of derivative instruments exceeds the exposure policy thresholds which do not exceed $10. The Company also minimizes the credit risk in derivative instruments by entering into transactions with high quality counterparties rated A2/A or better. In addition to counterparty credit risk, the Company enters into credit derivative instruments, including credit default, index and total return swaps, in which the Company assumes credit risk from or reduces credit risk to a single entity, referenced index, or asset pool, in exchange for periodic payments. For further information on credit derivatives, see the Investment Credit Risk section. The Company is also exposed to credit spread risk related to security market price and cash flows associated with changes in credit spreads. Credit spreads widening will reduce the fair value of the investment portfolio and will increase net investment income on new purchases. This will also result in losses associated with credit based non-qualifying derivatives where the Company assumes credit exposure. If issuer credit spreads increase significantly or for an extended period of time, it would likely result in higher other-than-temporary impairments. Credit spreads tightening will reduce net investment income associated with new purchases of fixed maturities and increase the fair value of the investment portfolio. Equity Risk The Company does not have significant equity risk exposure from invested assets. The Company primary exposure to equity risk relates to the potential for lower earnings associated with certain of the Life businesses such as variable annuities where fee income is earned based upon the fair value of the assets under management. In addition, Life offers certain guaranteed benefits, primarily associated with variable annuity products, which increases the Company potential benefit exposure as the equity markets decline. For a further discussion, see Life Equity Risk in this section of the MD&A. The Company is also subject to equity risk based upon the assets that support its pension plans. The asset allocation mix is reviewed on a periodic basis. In order to minimize risk, the pension plans maintain a listing of permissible and prohibited investments. In addition, the pension plans have certain concentration limits and investment quality requirements imposed on permissible investment options. For further discussion of equity risk associated with the pension plans, see the Critical Accounting Estimates section of the MD&A under Pension and Other Postretirement Benefit Obligations and Note 17 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Foreign Currency Exchange Risk The Company foreign currency exchange risk is related to non U.S. dollar denominated investments, which primarily consist of fixed maturity investments, the investment in and net income of the Japanese Life operation, and non-U.S. dollar denominated liability contracts, including its GMDB, GMAB, and GMIB benefits associated with its Japanese variable annuities, and a yen denominated individual fixed annuity product. A portion of the Company foreign currency exposure is mitigated through the use of derivatives. Derivative Instruments The Company utilizes a variety of derivative instruments, including swaps, caps, floors, forwards, futures and options through one of four Company-approved objectives: to hedge risk arising from interest rate, equity market, credit spread including issuer default, price or currency exchange rate risk or volatility; to manage liquidity; to control transaction costs; or to enter into replication transactions. Interest rate, volatility, dividend, credit default and index swaps involve the periodic exchange of cash flows with other parties, at specified intervals, calculated using agreed upon rates or other financial variables and notional principal amounts. Generally, no cash or principal payments are exchanged at the inception of the contract. Typically, at the time a swap is entered into, the cash flow streams exchanged by the counterparties are equal in value. 156 Table of Contents Interest rate cap and floor contracts entitle the purchaser to receive from the issuer at specified dates, the amount, if any, by which a specified market rate exceeds the cap strike interest rate or falls below the floor strike interest rate, applied to a notional principal amount. A premium payment is made by the purchaser of the contract at its inception and no principal payments are exchanged. Forward contracts are customized commitments to either purchase or sell designated financial instruments, at a future date, for a specified price and may be settled in cash or through delivery of the underlying instrument. Financial futures are standardized commitments to either purchase or sell designated financial instruments, at a future date, for a specified price and may be settled in cash or through delivery of the underlying instrument. Futures contracts trade on organized exchanges. Margin requirements for futures are met by pledging securities, and changes in the futures contract values are settled daily in cash. Option contracts grant the purchaser, for a premium payment, the right to either purchase from or sell to the issuer a financial instrument at a specified price, within a specified period or on a stated date. Foreign currency swaps exchange an initial principal amount in two currencies, agreeing to re-exchange the currencies at a future date, at an agreed upon exchange rate. There may also be a periodic exchange of payments at specified intervals calculated using the agreed upon rates and exchanged principal amounts. Derivative activities are monitored by an internal compliance unit and reviewed frequently by senior management. The notional amounts of derivative contracts represent the basis upon which pay or receive amounts are calculated and are not reflective of credit risk. Notional amounts pertaining to derivative instruments used in the management of market risk, excluding the credit derivatives as discussed in the Investment Credit Risk section, at December 31, 2007 and 2006, were $101.0 billion and $78.2 billion, respectively. The increase in the derivative notional amount during 2007 was primarily due to the derivatives associated with the GMWB product feature. For further information, see Note 4 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. For further discussion on credit derivatives, see the Investment Credit Risk section. The following discussions focus on the key market risk exposures within Life and Property & Casualty portfolios. Life Life is responsible for maximizing economic value within acceptable risk parameters, including the management of the interest rate sensitivity of invested assets, while generating sufficient after-tax income to support policyholder and corporate obligations. Life fixed maturity portfolios and certain investment contracts and insurance product liabilities have material market exposure to interest rate risk. In addition, Life operations are significantly influenced by changes in the equity markets. Life profitability depends largely on the amount of assets under management, which is primarily driven by the level of sales, equity market appreciation and depreciation and the persistency of the in-force block of business. Life foreign currency exposure is primarily related to non-U.S. dollar denominated fixed income securities, non-U.S. dollar denominated liability contracts, the investment in and net income of the Japanese Life operation and certain foreign currency based individual fixed annuity contracts, and its GMDB, GMAB, and GMIB benefits associated with its Japanese variable annuities. Interest Rate Risk Life exposure to interest rate risk relates to the market price and/or cash flow variability associated with changes in market interest rates. As stated above, changes in interest rates can potentially impact Life profitability. In certain scenarios where interest rates are volatile, Life could be exposed to disintermediation risk and a reduction in net interest rate spread or profit margins. The investments and liabilities primarily associated with interest rate risk are included in the following discussion. Certain product liabilities, including those containing GMWB, GMAB, or GMDB, expose the Company to interest rate risk but also have significant equity risk. These liabilities are discussed as part of the Equity Risk section below. Fixed Maturity Investments Life investment portfolios primarily consist of investment grade fixed maturity securities, including corporate bonds, ABS, CMBS, tax-exempt municipal securities and CMOs. The fair value of Life fixed maturities was $52.5 billion and $52.1 billion at December 31, 2007 and 2006, respectively. The fair value of Life fixed maturities and other invested assets fluctuates depending on the interest rate environment and other general economic conditions. The weighted average duration of the fixed maturity portfolio was approximately 4.6 and 5.1 years as of December 31, 2007 and 2006, respectively. Liabilities Life investment contracts and certain insurance product liabilities, other than non-guaranteed separate accounts, include asset accumulation vehicles such as fixed annuities, guaranteed investment contracts, other investment and universal life-type contracts and certain insurance products such as long-term disability. Asset accumulation vehicles primarily require a fixed rate payment, often for a specified period of time. Product examples include fixed rate annuities with a market value adjustment feature and fixed rate guaranteed investment contracts. The duration of these contracts generally range from less than one year to ten years. In addition, certain products such as universal life contracts and the general account portion of Life variable annuity products, credit interest to policyholders subject to market conditions and minimum interest rate guarantees. The duration of these products is short-term to intermediate-term. 157 Table of Contents While interest rate risk associated with many of these products has been reduced through the use of market value adjustment features and surrender charges, the primary risk associated with these products is that the spread between investment return and credited rate may not be sufficient to earn targeted returns. The Company also manages the risk of certain insurance liabilities similarly to investment type products due to the relative predictability of the aggregate cash flow payment streams. Products in this category may contain significant actuarial (including mortality and morbidity) pricing and cash flow risks. Product examples include structured settlement contracts, on-benefit annuities (i.e., the annuitant is currently receiving benefits thereon) and short-term and long-term disability contracts. The cash outflows associated with these policy liabilities are not interest rate sensitive but do vary based on the timing and amount of benefit payments. The primary risks associated with these products are that the benefits will exceed expected actuarial pricing and/or that the actual timing of the cash flows will differ from those anticipated, resulting in an investment return lower than that assumed in pricing. Average contract duration can range from less than one year to typically up to fifteen years. Derivatives Life utilizes a variety of derivative instruments to mitigate interest rate risk. Interest rate swaps are primarily used to convert interest receipts or payments to a fixed or variable rate. The use of such swaps enables the Company to customize contract terms and conditions to customer objectives and satisfies the operation asset/liability duration matching policy. Occasionally, swaps are also used to hedge the variability in the cash flow of a forecasted purchase or sale due to changes in interest rates. Interest rate caps and floors, swaptions and option contracts are primarily used to hedge against the risk of liability contract holder disintermediation in a rising interest rate environment, and to offset the changes in fair value of corresponding derivatives embedded in certain of the Company fixed maturity investments. Interest rate caps are also used to manage the duration risk in certain portfolios. At December 31, 2007 and 2006, notional amounts pertaining to derivatives utilized to manage interest rate risk totaled $16.8 billion and $15.6 billion, respectively ($13.1 billion and $11.4 billion, respectively, related to investments and $3.7 billion and $4.2 billion, respectively, related to life liabilities). The fair value of these derivatives was $45 and $(42) as of December 31, 2007 and 2006, respectively. Calculated Interest Rate Sensitivity The after-tax change in the net economic value of investment contracts (e.g., guaranteed investment contracts) and certain insurance product liabilities (e.g., short-term and long-term disability contracts), for which the payment rates are fixed at contract issuance and the investment experience is substantially absorbed by Life, are included in the following table along with the corresponding invested assets. Also included in this analysis are the interest rate sensitive derivatives used by Life to hedge its exposure to interest rate risk. Certain financial instruments, such as limited partnerships, have been omitted from the analysis due to the fact that the investments are accounted for under the equity method and generally lack sensitivity to interest rate changes. Separate account assets and liabilities and equity securities held for trading and the corresponding liabilities associated with the variable annuity products sold in Japan are excluded from the analysis because gains and losses in separate accounts accrue to policyholders. The calculation of the estimated hypothetical change in net economic value below assumes a 100 basis point upward and downward parallel shift in the yield curve. Change in Net Economic Value As of December 31, 2007 2006 Basis point shift -100 +100 -100 +100 Amount $ (160 ) $ 60 $ 1 $ (33 ) The fixed liabilities included above represented approximately 45% and 46% of Life general account liabilities as of December 31, 2007 and 2006, respectively. The assets supporting the fixed liabilities are monitored and managed within rigorous duration guidelines using scenario simulation techniques, and are evaluated on an annual basis, in compliance with regulatory requirements. The after-tax change in fair value of the invested asset portfolios that support certain universal life-type contracts and other insurance contracts are shown in the following table. The cash flows associated with these liabilities are less predictable than fixed liabilities. The Company identifies the most appropriate investment strategy based upon the expected policyholder behavior and liability crediting needs. The calculation of the estimated hypothetical change in fair value below assumes a 100 basis point upward and downward parallel shift in the yield curve. Change in Fair Value As of December 31, 2007 2006 Basis point shift -100 +100 -100 +100 Amount $ 375 $ (364 ) $ 422 $ (415 ) The selection of the 100 basis point parallel shift in the yield curve was made only as an illustration of the potential hypothetical impact of such an event and should not be construed as a prediction of future market events. Actual results could differ materially from those illustrated above due to the nature of the estimates and assumptions used in the above analysis. The Company sensitivity analysis calculation assumes that the composition of invested assets and liabilities remain materially consistent throughout the year and that the 158 Table of Contents current relationship between short-term and long-term interest rates will remain constant over time. As a result, these calculations may not fully capture the impact of portfolio re-allocations, significant product sales or non-parallel changes in interest rates. Equity Risk The Company operations are significantly influenced by changes in the equity markets, primarily in the U.S., but increasingly in Japan and other global markets. The Company profitability in its investment products businesses depends largely on the amount of assets under management, which is primarily driven by the level of deposits, equity market appreciation and depreciation and the persistency of the in-force block of business. Prolonged and precipitous declines in the equity markets can have a significant effect on the Company operations, as sales of variable products may decline and surrender activity may increase, as customer sentiment towards the equity market turns negative. Lower assets under management will have a negative effect on the Company financial results, primarily due to lower fee income related to the Retail, Retirement Plans, Institutional and International and, to a lesser extent, the Individual Life segment, where a heavy concentration of equity linked products are administered and sold. Furthermore, the Company may experience a reduction in profit margins if a significant portion of the assets held in the U.S. variable annuity separate accounts move to the general account and the Company is unable to earn an acceptable investment spread, particularly in light of the low interest rate environment and the presence of contractually guaranteed minimum interest credited rates, which for the most part are at a 3% rate. In addition, immediate and significant declines in one or more equity markets may also decrease the Company expectations of future gross profits in one or more product lines, which are utilized to determine the amount of DAC to be amortized in reporting product profitability in a given financial statement period. A significant decrease in the Company future estimated gross profits would require the Company to accelerate the amount of DAC amortization in a given period, which, particularly in the case of U.S. variable annuities, could potentially cause a material adverse deviation in that period net income. Although an acceleration of DAC amortization would have a negative effect on the Company earnings, it would not affect the Company cash flow or liquidity position. The Company sells variable annuity contracts that offer one or more living benefits, the value of which, to the policyholder, generally increases with declines in equity markets. As is described in more detail below, the Company manages the equity market risks embedded in these guarantees through reinsurance, product design and hedging programs. The Company believes its ability to manage equity market risks by these means gives it a competitive advantage; and, in particular, its ability to create innovative product designs that allow the Company to meet identified customer needs while generating manageable amounts of equity market risk. The Company relative sales and variable annuity market share in the U.S. have generally increased during periods when it has recently introduced new products to the market. In contrast, the Company relative sales and market share have generally decreased when competitors introduce products that cause an issuer to assume larger amounts of equity and other market risk than the Company is confident it can prudently manage. The Company believes its long-term success in the variable annuity market will continue to be aided by successful innovation that allows the Company to offer attractive product features in tandem with prudent equity market risk management. In the absence of this innovation, the Company market share in one or more of its markets could decline. At times, the Company has experienced lower levels of U.S. variable annuity sales as competitors continue to introduce new equity guarantees of increasing risk and complexity. New product development is an ongoing process. During the first quarter of 2007, the Company launched a new product in its Japan variable annuity business ( 3 Win ) which provides three different potential outcomes for the contract holder. The first outcome allows the contract holder to lock-in gains on their account value after a 5-year waiting period and upon reaching a specified appreciation target chosen by the policyholder. Upon reaching the target and after a 5-year waiting period, contract holder funds are transferred out of the underlying funds and into the Company general account from which the contract holder can access their account value without penalty. The second outcome provides a safety-net that provides the contract holder a guaranteed minimum income benefit ( GMIB ) returning the contract holder original deposit over 15 years, if the contract holder account value drops by more than 20% from the original deposit. The third outcome provides the contract holder a guaranteed minimum accumulation benefit ( GMAB ) of the contract holder original deposit in a lump sum if the first two outcomes are not met after a ten-year waiting period. This is the Company first GMAB issuance. GMABs are accounted for differently from GMIBs, as described below. Due to the structure of this product, 159 Table of Contents significant equity market movements, either up, to a level that the specified appreciation target is reached, or down by more than 20% of the actual deposit, can result in significant DAC charges as the life of the product will have expired upon reaching either target. There is also a return of premium death benefit attached to this product. In addition, the Company expects to make further changes in its living benefit offerings from time to time. Depending on the degree of consumer receptivity and competitor reaction to continuing changes in the Company product offerings, the Company future level of sales will continue to be subject to a high level of uncertainty. As of December 31, 2007, account values associated with 3 Win were $2.7 billion. In addition, as of December 31, 2007, guaranteed balances associated with 3 Win were $2.8 billion. The accounting for various benefit guarantees offered with variable annuity contracts can be significantly different. Those accounted for under SFAS 133 (such as GMWBs or GMABs) are subject to significant fluctuation in value, which is reflected in net income, due to changes in interest rates, changes in the risk-free rate used for discounting equity markets and equity market volatility as use of those capital market rates are required in determining the liability fair value at each reporting date. Benefit guarantee liabilities accounted for under SOP 03-1 (such as GMIBs and GMDBs) may also change in value; however, the change in value is not immediately reflected in net income. Under SOP 03-1, the income statement reflects the current period increase in the liability due to the deferral of a percentage of current period revenues. The percentage is determined by dividing the present value of claims by the present value of revenues using best estimate assumptions over a range of market scenarios and discounted at a rate consistent with that used in the Company DAC models. Current period revenues are impacted by actual increases or decreases in account value. Claims recorded against the liability have no immediate impact on the income statement unless those claims exceed the liability. As a result of these significant accounting differences the liability for guarantees recorded under SOP 03-1 may be significantly different than if it was recorded under SFAS 133 and vice versa. In addition, the conditions in the capital markets in Japan vs. those in the U.S. are sufficiently different than if the Company GMWB product currently offered in the U.S. were offered in Japan, the capital market conditions in Japan would have a significant impact on the valuation of the GMWB, irrespective of the accounting model. The same would hold true if the Company GMIB product currently offered in Japan were to be offered in the U.S. Capital market conditions in the U.S. would have a significant impact on the valuation of the GMIB. Many benefit guarantees meet the definition of an embedded derivative, under SFAS 133 (GMWB and GMAB), and as such are recorded at fair value with changes in fair value recorded in net income. However, certain contract features that define how the contract holder can access the value and the substance of the guaranteed benefit change the accounting from SFAS 133 to SOP 03-1. For contracts where the contract holder can only obtain the value of the guaranteed benefit upon the occurrence of an insurable event such as death (GMDB) or when the benefit received is in substance a long-term financing (GMIB), the accounting for the benefit is prescribed by SOP 03-1. In the U.S., the Company sells variable annuity contracts that offer various guaranteed death benefits. The Company maintains a liability, under SOP 03-1, for the death benefit costs of $529, as of December 31, 2007. Declines in the equity market may increase the Company net exposure to death benefits under these contracts. The majority of the contracts with the guaranteed death benefit feature are sold by the Retail segment. For certain guaranteed death benefits, The Hartford pays the greater of (1) the account value at death; (2) the sum of all premium payments less prior withdrawals; or (3) the maximum anniversary value of the contract, plus any premium payments since the contract anniversary, minus any withdrawals following the contract anniversary. For certain guaranteed death benefits sold with variable annuity contracts beginning in June 2003, the Retail segment pays the greater of (1) the account value at death; or (2) the maximum anniversary value; not to exceed the account value plus the greater of (a) 25% of premium payments, or (b) 25% of the maximum anniversary value of the contract. The Company currently reinsures a significant portion of these death benefit guarantees associated with its in-force block of business. Under certain of these reinsurance agreements, the reinsurers exposure is subject to an annual cap. The Company total gross exposure (i.e., before reinsurance) to these guaranteed death benefits as of December 31, 2007 is $5.1 billion. Due to the fact that 81% of this amount is reinsured, the Company net exposure is $976. This amount is often referred to as the retained net amount at risk. However, the Company will incur these guaranteed death benefit payments in the future only if the policyholder has an in-the-money guaranteed death benefit at their time of death. In Japan, the Company offers certain variable annuity products with both a guaranteed death benefit and a guaranteed income benefit. The Company maintains a liability for these death and income benefits, under SOP 03-1, of $42 as of December 31, 2007. Declines in equity markets as well as a strengthening of the Japanese yen in comparison to the U.S. dollar and other currencies may increase the Company exposure to these guaranteed benefits. This increased exposure may be significant in extreme market scenarios. For the guaranteed death benefits, the Company pays the greater of (1) account value at death; (2) a guaranteed death benefit which, depending on the contract, may be based upon the premium paid and/or the maximum anniversary value established no later than age 80, as adjusted for withdrawals under the terms of the contract. With the exception of the GMIB in 3 Win as described above, the guaranteed income benefit guarantees to return the contract holder initial investment, adjusted for any earnings withdrawals, through periodic payments that commence at the end of a minimum deferral period of 10, 15 or 20 years as elected by the contract holder. The value of the GMAB associated with Japan new product offering in the first quarter of 2007, recorded as an embedded derivative under SFAS 133, was an asset of $2 at December 31, 2007. In April 2006, the Company entered into an indemnity reinsurance agreement with an unrelated party. Under this agreement, the reinsurer will reimburse the Company for death benefit claims, up to an annual cap, incurred for certain death benefit guarantees associated with an in-force block of variable annuity products offered in Japan with an account value of $2.3 billion as of December 31, 2007. 160 Table of Contents The Company total gross exposure (i.e., before reinsurance) to these guaranteed death benefits and income benefits offered in Japan as of December 31, 2007 is $649. Due to the fact that 35% of this amount is reinsured, the Company net exposure is $419. This amount is often referred to as the retained net amount at risk. However, the Company will incur these guaranteed death or income benefits in the future only if the contract holder has an in-the-money guaranteed benefit at either the time of their death or if the account value is insufficient to fund the guaranteed living benefits. The majority of the Company recent U.S. variable annuities are sold with a GMWB living benefit rider, which, as described above, is accounted for under SFAS 133. Declines in the equity market may increase the Company exposure to benefits under the GMWB contracts. For all contracts in effect through July 6, 2003, the Company entered into a reinsurance arrangement to offset its exposure to the GMWB for the remaining lives of those contracts. Substantially all U.S. GMWB riders sold since July 6, 2003 are not covered by reinsurance. These unreinsured contracts generate volatility in net income each quarter as the underlying embedded derivative liabilities are recorded at fair value each reporting period, resulting in the recognition of net realized capital gains or losses in response to changes in certain critical factors including capital market conditions and policyholder behavior. In order to minimize the volatility associated with the unreinsured GMWB liabilities, the Company established an alternative risk management strategy. The Company uses hedging instruments to hedge its unreinsured GMWB exposure. These instruments include interest rate futures and swaps, S&P 500 and NASDAQ index put options and futures contracts. The Company also uses EAFE Index swaps to hedge GMWB exposure to international equity markets. The hedging program involves a detailed monitoring of policyholder behavior and capital markets conditions on a daily basis and rebalancing of the hedge position as needed. While the Company actively manages this hedge position, hedge ineffectiveness may result due to factors including, but not limited to, policyholder behavior, capital markets dislocation or discontinuity and divergence between the performance of the underlying funds and the hedging indices. The Company is continually exploring new ways and new markets to manage or layoff the capital markets and policyholder behavior risks associated with its living benefits. During 2007, the Company opportunistically entered into two customized swap contracts to hedge certain capital market risk components for the remaining term of certain blocks of non-reinsured GMWB riders. As of December 31, 2007, these swaps had a notional value of $12.8 billion and a market value of $50. Due to the significance of the non-observable inputs associated with pricing these derivatives, the initial difference between the transaction price and modeled value was deferred in accordance with EITF No. 02-3 Issues Involved in Accounting for Derivative Contracts Held for Trading Purposes and Contracts Involved in Energy Trading and Risk Management Activities and included in other assets in the Consolidated Financial Statements. The deferred loss of $51 will be recognized in retained earnings upon adoption of SFAS No. 157, Fair Value Measurements ( SFAS 157 ). In addition, the change in value of the swaps due to the initial adoption of SFAS 157 of $35, will also be recorded in retained earnings. Future changes in fair value would be recorded in net realized capital gains (losses) in net income. The net effect of the change in value of the U.S. and UK embedded derivatives, net of the results of the hedging program, for the years ended December 31, 2007 and 2006, was a loss of $285 (primarily reflecting modeling refinements, assumption changes and reflecting newly reliable market inputs for volatility made by the Company during 2007) and $(26) before deferred policy acquisition costs and tax effects, respectively. As of December 31, 2007, the notional and fair value related to the embedded derivatives, the hedging strategy and reinsurance was $73.8 billion and $55, respectively. As of December 31, 2006, the notional and fair value related to the embedded derivatives, the hedging strategy, and reinsurance was $53.3 billion and $377, respectively. The Company employs additional strategies to manage equity market risk in addition to the derivative and reinsurance strategy described above that economically hedges the fair value of the U.S. GMWB rider. Notably, the Company purchases one and two year S&P 500 Index put option contracts to economically hedge certain other liabilities that could increase if the equity markets decline. As of December 31, 2007 and December 31, 2006, the notional value related to this strategy was $661 and $2.2 billion, respectively, while the fair value related to this strategy was $18 and $29, respectively. Because this strategy is intended to partially hedge certain equity-market sensitive liabilities calculated under statutory accounting (see Capital Resources and Liquidity), changes in the value of the put options may not be closely aligned to changes in liabilities determined in accordance with U.S. GAAP, causing volatility in U.S. GAAP net income. The Company continually seeks to improve its equity risk management strategies. The Company has made considerable investment in analyzing current and potential future market risk exposures arising from a number of factors, including but not limited to, product guarantees (GMDB, GMWB, GMAB, and GMIB), equity market and interest rate risks (in both the U.S. and Japan) and foreign currency exchange rates. The Company evaluates these risks individually and, increasingly, in the aggregate to determine the risk profiles of all of its products and to judge their potential impacts on U.S. GAAP net income, statutory capital volatility and other metrics. Utilizing this and future analysis, the Company expects to evolve its risk management strategies over time, modifying its reinsurance, hedging and product design strategies to optimally mitigate its aggregate exposures to market-driven changes in U.S. GAAP equity, statutory capital and other economic metrics. Because these strategies could target an optimal reduction of a combination of exposures rather than targeting a single one, it is possible that volatility of U.S. GAAP net income would increase, particularly if the Company places an increased relative weight on protection of statutory surplus in future strategies. Variable Annuity Equity Risk Impact on Statutory Distributable Earnings In addition to the impact on U.S. GAAP results, Life statutory financial results also have exposure to equity market volatility due to the issuance of variable annuity contracts with guarantees. Specifically, in scenarios where equity markets decline substantially, we would expect lower statutory net income and significant increases in the amount of statutory surplus Life would have to devote to maintain targeted rating agency, regulatory risk based capital ( RBC ) ratios and other similar solvency margin ratios. Life statutory net income for the years ended December 31, 2007, 2006 and 2005 was $729, $1.1 billion and $821, respectively. Life statutory surplus as of December 31, 2007, 2006 and 2005 was $5.8 billion, $4.7 billion and $4.3 billion, respectively. In order to estimate the impact equity markets could have on statutory financial results, Life projected 2008 statutory net income and the amount of statutory surplus required to maintain our financial strength ratings (targeted statutory surplus) under various stochastic scenarios and assumptions consistent with other sensitivity analyses performed by Life. Each scenario included the effects of guaranteed living and death benefit reinsurance, in-force hedging assets in place at December 31, 2007 and future dynamic hedging of GMWB riders. The sum of Life projected 2008 statutory net income and the (increase) decrease in the amount of targeted statutory surplus in each scenario is an estimate of the Life statutory distributable earnings . Subject to legal or regulatory constraints, statutory distributable earnings are usually available to dividend to an insurance entity parent holding company to support debt and dividend payments to shareholders. To illustrate the effects of a tail scenario, at or near the 95 th percentile, Life estimates that 2008 statutory distributable earnings generated by its variable annuity business could be $1 $2 billion worse than the mean of the stochastic scenarios. These tail events involve U.S. equity market declines of varying degrees, including rather large equity market declines of 20 25% from December 31, 2007 levels, or a combination of more moderate equity market declines in scenarios where the Japanese yen significantly strengthens against the Euro or the U.S. Dollar and interest rates rise significantly. In addition to the Company use of reinsurance, hedging instruments and other risk management techniques, the Company maintains capital resources to, at a minimum, manage the statutory distributable earnings equity tail scenario risk described above. Given the level of Life and Property & Casualty statutory surplus at December 31, 2007, as well as capital resources at the Corporate level, management of the Company believes the risk inherent in these tail scenarios can be managed within the Company capital resources. The magnitude of the tail scenario estimate, described above, of $1 $2 billion, subsequent changes to it and the width of the disclosed range can be significantly impacted by the following factors: Capital market levels at the date of the projections. A decision to buy hedging instruments would mitigate the exposure in the tail scenario. Such decisions are made based on a variety of factors including the price of the instrument versus the protection afforded. Life ability to organically generate surplus in excess of that required to maintain financial strength ratings would reduce the exposure in a tail scenario. Increases or decreases in surplus due to the impact capital market movements can have on the valuation of GMWB hedging instruments. Under statutory accounting, there is no fair value recognition of an embedded derivative; however, changes in value of the GMWB hedging instruments are recorded in capital and surplus. The tail scenario estimates described above incorporate the dynamic hedging of GMWB. Generally, increases in the value of GMWB hedging instruments will reduce the exposure in the tail scenario. Each year, Life writes new variable annuity business with existing or new living benefit guarantees, while older business, often without living benefit guarantees, is naturally lapsing. As a result the exposure in the tail scenario is likely to increase over time. Changes in statutory reserving requirements, which can ultimately impact the level of capital and surplus at a point in time, can impact the estimate of exposure in the tail scenario. Changes in estimates of policyholder behavior can impact the estimates of statutory distributable earnings. Changes in rating agency, regulatory risk based capital ( RBC ) ratios and other similar solvency margin ratios can impact the estimate of exposure in the tail scenario. Management regularly evaluates the model used to produce projections of distributable earnings and incorporates changes deemed necessary to improve the relevance and reliability of this estimate. 161 Table of Contents Foreign Currency Exchange Risk Life exposure to foreign currency exchange risk exists with respect to non-U.S. dollar denominated investments, Life investment in foreign operations, primarily Japan, and non-U.S. dollar denominated liability contracts, including the yen based individual fixed annuity product and its GMDB,GMAB, and GMIB benefits associated with its Japanese variable annuities. A portion of the Company foreign fixed maturity currency exposure is mitigated through the use of derivatives. Fixed Maturity Investments The risk associated with the non-U.S. dollar denominated fixed maturities relates to potential decreases in value and income resulting from unfavorable changes in foreign exchange rates. The fair value of the non-U.S. dollar denominated fixed maturities, which are primarily denominated in euro, sterling, yen and Canadian dollars, at December 31, 2007 and 2006, were approximately $1.6 billion and $1.9 billion, respectively. In order to manage its currency exposures, Life enters into foreign currency swaps and forwards to hedge the variability in cash flows associated with certain foreign denominated fixed maturities. These foreign currency swap agreements are structured to match the foreign currency cash flows of the hedged foreign denominated securities. At December 31, 2007 and 2006, the derivatives used to hedge currency exchange risk related to non-U.S. dollar denominated fixed maturities had a total notional value of $1.5 billion and $1.6 billion, respectively, and total fair value of $(296) and $(336), respectively. Liabilities Life issues non-U.S. dollar denominated funding agreement liability contracts. The Company hedges the foreign currency risk associated with these liability contracts with currency rate swaps. At December 31, 2007 and 2006, the derivatives used to hedge foreign currency exchange risk related to foreign denominated liability contracts had a total notional value of $790 and $585, respectively, and a total fair value of $32 and $(11), respectively. The yen based fixed annuity product is written by Hartford Life Insurance K.K. ( HLIKK ), a wholly-owned Japanese subsidiary of Hartford Life, Inc. ( HLI ), and subsequently reinsured to Hartford Life Insurance Company, a U.S. dollar based wholly-owned indirect subsidiary of HLI. The underlying investment involves investing in U.S. securities markets, which offer favorable credit spreads. The yen denominated fixed annuity product ( yen fixed annuities ) is recorded in the consolidated balance sheets with invested assets denominated in dollars while policyholder liabilities are denominated in yen and converted to U.S. dollars based upon the December 31, yen to U.S. dollar spot rate. The difference between U.S. dollar denominated investments and yen denominated liabilities exposes the Company to currency risk. The Company manages this currency risk associated with the yen fixed annuities primarily with pay variable U.S. dollar and receive fixed yen currency swaps. As of December 31, 2007 and 2006, the notional value and fair value of the currency swaps were $1.8 billion and $1.9 billion, respectively, and $(115) and $(225), respectively. Although economically an effective hedge, a divergence between the yen denominated fixed annuity product liability and the currency swaps exists primarily due to the difference in the basis of accounting between the liability and the derivative instruments (i.e. historical cost versus fair value). The yen denominated fixed annuity product liabilities are recorded on a historical cost basis and are only adjusted for changes in foreign spot rates and accrued income. The currency swaps are recorded at fair value, incorporating changes in value due to changes in forward foreign exchange rates, interest rates and accrued income. An after-tax net gain (loss) of $12 and $(11) for the years ended December 31, 2007 and 2006, respectively, which includes the changes in value of the currency swaps, excluding net periodic coupon settlements, and the yen fixed annuity contract remeasurement, was recorded in net realized capital gains and losses. Based on the fair values of Life non-U.S. dollar denominated investments and derivative instruments (including its yen based individual fixed annuity product) as of December 31, 2007 and 2006, management estimates that a 10% unfavorable change in exchange rates would decrease the fair values by an after-tax total of $1 and $3, respectively. The estimated impact was based upon a 10% change in December 31 spot rates. The selection of the 10% unfavorable change was made only for illustration of the potential hypothetical impact of such an event and should not be construed as a prediction of future market events. Actual results could differ materially from those illustrated above due to the nature of the estimates and assumptions used in the above analysis. Property & Casualty Property & Casualty attempts to maximize economic value while generating appropriate after-tax income and sufficient liquidity to meet policyholder and corporate obligations. Property & Casualty investment portfolio has material exposure to interest rates. The Company continually monitors these exposures and makes portfolio adjustments to manage these risks within established limits. Interest Rate Risk The primary exposure to interest rate risk in Property & Casualty relates to its fixed maturity securities, including corporate bonds, ABS, municipal bonds, CMBS and CMOs. The fair value of these investments was $27.2 billion and $26.7 billion at December 31, 2007 and 2006, respectively. The fair value of these and Property & Casualty other invested assets fluctuates depending on the interest rate environment and other general economic conditions. A variety of derivative instruments, primarily swaps, are used to manage interest rate risk and had a total notional amount as of December 31, 2007 and 2006 of $1.8 billion and $2.1 billion, respectively, and fair value of $(15) and $(4), respectively. One of the measures Property & Casualty uses to quantify its exposure to interest rate risk inherent in its invested assets is duration. The weighted average duration of the fixed maturity portfolio was 4.9 and 4.5 years as of December 31, 2007 and 2006, respectively. 162 Table of Contents Calculated Interest Rate Sensitivity The following table provides an analysis showing the estimated after-tax change in the fair value of Property & Casualty fixed maturity investments and related derivatives, assuming 100 basis point upward and downward parallel shifts in the yield curve as of December 31, 2007 and 2006. Certain financial instruments, such as limited partnerships, have been omitted from the analysis due to the fact that the investments are accounted for under the equity method and generally lack sensitivity to interest rate changes. Change in Fair Value As of December 31, 2007 2006 Basis point shift -100 +100 -100 +100 Amount $ 925 $ (894 ) $ 857 $ (829 ) The selection of the 100 basis point parallel shift in the yield curve was made only as an illustration of the potential hypothetical impact of such an event and should not be construed as a prediction of future market events. Actual results could differ materially from those illustrated above due to the nature of the estimates and assumptions used in the above analysis. The Company sensitivity analysis calculation assumes that the composition of invested assets remains materially consistent throughout the year and that the current relationship between short-term and long-term interest rates will remain constant over time. As a result, these calculations may not fully capture the impact of portfolio re-allocations or non-parallel changes in interest rates. Foreign Currency Exchange Risk Foreign currency exchange risk exists with respect to investments in non-U.S. dollar denominated fixed maturities, primarily euro, sterling and Canadian dollar denominated securities. The risk associated with these securities relates to potential decreases in value resulting from unfavorable changes in foreign exchange rates. The fair value of these fixed maturity securities at December 31, 2007 and 2006 was $1.0 billion. In order to manage its currency exposures, Property & Casualty enters into foreign currency swaps and forward contracts to hedge the variability in cash flow associated with certain foreign denominated securities. These foreign currency swap agreements are structured to match the foreign currency cash flows of the hedged foreign denominated securities. At December 31, 2007 and 2006, the derivatives used to hedge currency exchange risk had a total notional value of $428 and $805, respectively, and total fair value of $(43) and $(45), respectively. Based on the fair values of Property & Casualty non-U.S. dollar denominated securities and derivative instruments as of December 31, 2007 and 2006, management estimates that a 10% unfavorable change in exchange rates would decrease the fair values by an after-tax total of approximately $37 and $34, respectively. The estimated impact was based upon a 10% change in December 31 spot rates. The selection of the 10% unfavorable change was made only for illustration of the potential hypothetical impact of such an event and should not be construed as a prediction of future market events. Actual results could differ materially from those illustrated above due to the nature of the estimates and assumptions used in the above analysis. 163 Table of Contents CAPITAL RESOURCES AND LIQUIDITY Capital resources and liquidity represent the overall financial strength of The Hartford and its ability to generate strong cash flows from each of the business segments, borrow funds at competitive rates and raise new capital to meet operating and growth needs. Liquidity Requirements The liquidity requirements of The Hartford have been and will continue to be met by funds from operations as well as the issuance of commercial paper, common stock, debt or other capital securities and borrowings from its credit facilities. Current and expected patterns of claim frequency and severity may change from period to period but continue to be within historical norms and, therefore, the Company current liquidity position is considered to be sufficient to meet anticipated demands. However, if an unanticipated demand were placed on the Company it is likely that the Company would either sell certain of its investments to fund claims which could result in larger than usual realized capital gains and losses or the Company would enter the capital markets to raise further funds to provide the requisite liquidity. For a discussion and tabular presentation of the Company current contractual obligations by period including those related to its Life and Property & Casualty insurance refer to the Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements and Aggregate Contractual Obligations section below. The Hartford endeavors to maintain a capital structure that provides financial and operational flexibility to its insurance subsidiaries, ratings that support its competitive position in the financial services marketplace (see the Ratings section below for further discussion), and strong shareholder returns. As a result, the Company may from time to time raise capital from the issuance of stock, debt or other capital securities. The issuance of common stock, debt or other capital securities could result in the dilution of shareholder interests or reduced net income due to additional interest expense. The Hartford Board of Directors has authorized the Company to repurchase up to $2 billion of its securities. For the year ended December 31, 2007, The Hartford repurchased $1.2 billion of its common stock (12.9 million shares) under this program. The Company repurchase authorization permits purchases of common stock, which may be in the open market or through privately negotiated transactions. The Company also may enter into derivative transactions to facilitate future repurchases of common stock. The timing of any future repurchases will be dependent upon several factors, including the market price of the Company securities, the Company capital position, consideration of the effect of any repurchases on the Company financial strength or credit ratings, and other corporate considerations. The repurchase program may be modified, extended or terminated by the Board of Directors at any time. HFSG and HLI are holding companies which rely upon operating cash flow in the form of dividends from their subsidiaries, which enable them to service debt, pay dividends, and pay certain business expenses. Dividends to the Company from its insurance subsidiaries are restricted. The payment of dividends by Connecticut-domiciled insurers is limited under the insurance holding company laws of Connecticut. These laws require notice to and approval by the state insurance commissioner for the declaration or payment of any dividend, which, together with other dividends or distributions made within the preceding twelve months, exceeds the greater of (i) 10% of the insurer policyholder surplus as of December 31 of the preceding year or (ii) net income (or net gain from operations, if such company is a life insurance company) for the twelve-month period ending on the thirty-first day of December last preceding, in each case determined under statutory insurance accounting principles. In addition, if any dividend of a Connecticut-domiciled insurer exceeds the insurer earned surplus, it requires the prior approval of the Connecticut Insurance Commissioner. The insurance holding company laws of the other jurisdictions in which The Hartford insurance subsidiaries are incorporated (or deemed commercially domiciled) generally contain similar (although in certain instances somewhat more restrictive) limitations on the payment of dividends. Dividends paid to HFSG by its insurance subsidiaries are further dependent on cash requirements of HLI and other factors. The Company property-casualty insurance subsidiaries are permitted to pay up to a maximum of approximately $1.6 billion in dividends to HFSG in 2008 without prior approval from the applicable insurance commissioner. The Company life insurance subsidiaries are permitted to pay up to a maximum of approximately $784 in dividends to HLI in 2008 without prior approval from the applicable insurance commissioner. The aggregate of these amounts, net of amounts required by HLI, is the maximum the insurance subsidiaries could pay to HFSG in 2008. In 2007, HFSG and HLI received a combined total of $2.0 billion from their insurance subsidiaries. The principal sources of operating funds are premium, fees and investment income, while investing cash flows originate from maturities and sales of invested assets. The primary uses of funds are to pay claims, policy benefits, operating expenses and commissions and to purchase new investments. In addition, The Hartford has a policy of carrying a significant short-term investment position and does not anticipate selling intermediate- and long-term fixed maturity investments to meet any liquidity needs. (For a discussion of the Company investment objectives and strategies, see the Investments and Capital Markets Risk Management sections.) 164 Table of Contents Sources of Liquidity Shelf Registrations On April 11, 2007, The Hartford filed an automatic shelf registration statement (Registration No. 333-142044) for the potential offering and sale of debt and equity securities with the Securities and Exchange Commission. The registration statement allows for the following types of securities to be offered: (i) debt securities, preferred stock, common stock, depositary shares, warrants, stock purchase contracts, stock purchase units and junior subordinated deferrable interest debentures of the Company, and (ii) preferred securities of any of one or more capital trusts organized by The Hartford ( The Hartford Trusts ). The Company may enter into guarantees with respect to the preferred securities of any of The Hartford Trusts. In that The Hartford is a well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in Rule 405 under the Securities Act of 1933, the registration statement went effective immediately upon filing and The Hartford may offer and sell an unlimited amount of securities under the registration statement during the three-year life of the shelf. Contingent Capital Facility On February 12, 2007, The Hartford entered into a put option agreement (the Put Option Agreement ) with Glen Meadow ABC Trust, a Delaware statutory trust (the ABC Trust ), and LaSalle Bank National Association, as put option calculation agent. The Put Option Agreement provides The Hartford with the right to require the ABC Trust, at any time and from time to time, to purchase The Hartford junior subordinated notes (the Notes ) in a maximum aggregate principal amount not to exceed $500. Under the Put Option Agreement, The Hartford will pay the ABC Trust premiums on a periodic basis, calculated with respect to the aggregate principal amount of Notes that The Hartford had the right to put to the ABC Trust for such period. The Hartford has agreed to reimburse the ABC Trust for certain fees and ordinary expenses. The Company holds a variable interest in the ABC Trust where the Company is not the primary beneficiary. As a result, the Company did not consolidate the Trust, as they did not meet the consolidation requirements under FIN 46(R). Commercial Paper, Revolving Credit Facility and Line of Credit The table below details the Company short-term debt programs and the applicable balances outstanding. Maximum Available As of Outstanding As of Effective Expiration December 31, December 31, Description Date Date 2007 2006 2007 2006 Commercial Paper The Hartford 11/10/86 N/A $ 2,000 $ 2,000 $ 373 $ 299 HLI [1] 2/7/97 N/A 250 Total commercial paper 2,000 2,250 373 299 Revolving Credit Facility 5-year revolving credit facility 8/9/07 8/9/12 2,000 1,600 Line of Credit Life Japan Operations [2] 9/18/02 1/5/09 45 42 Total Commercial Paper, Revolving Credit Facility and Line of Credit $ 4,045 $ 3,892 $ 373 $ 299 [1] In January 2007, the commercial paper program of HLI was terminated. [2] As of December 31, 2007 and 2006, the Company Japanese operation line of credit in yen was 5 billion. In August 2007, The Hartford amended and restated its existing credit facility. The revolving credit facility provides for up to $2.0 billion of unsecured credit. Of the total availability under the revolving credit facility, up to $100 is available to support letters of credit issued on behalf of The Hartford or other subsidiaries of The Hartford. Under the revolving credit facility, the Company must maintain a minimum level of consolidated net worth. In addition, the Company must not exceed a maximum ratio of debt to capitalization. Quarterly, the Company certifies compliance with the financial covenants for the syndicate of participating financial institutions. As of December 31, 2007, the Company was in compliance with all such covenants. Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements and Aggregate Contractual Obligations The Company does not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that are reasonably likely to have a material effect on the financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, or capital resources of the Company, except for the contingent capital facility described above and the following: The Company has unfunded commitments to purchase investments in limited partnerships, mortgage and construction loans of about $1.6 billion as disclosed in Note 12 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 165 Table of Contents The following table identifies the Company aggregate contractual obligations as of December 31, 2007: Payments due by Period Less than More than Total 1 year 1-3years 3-5 years 5 years Property and casualty obligations [1] $ 22,721 $ 5,575 $ 5,638 $ 3,197 $ 8,311 Life, annuity and disability obligations [2] 457,882 29,588 60,778 65,671 301,845 Operating lease obligations [3] 482 147 199 105 31 Capital lease obligations [3] 141 41 100 Long-term debt obligations [4] 6,709 1,191 638 708 4,172 Consumer notes [5] 874 257 555 49 13 Purchase obligations [6] 2,713 2,144 349 167 53 Other long-term liabilities reflected on the balance sheet [7] 4,914 4,821 68 25 Total [8] $ 496,436 $ 43,764 $ 68,325 $ 69,897 $ 314,450 [1] The following points are significant to understanding the cash flows estimated for obligations under property and casualty contracts: Reserves for Property & Casualty unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses include case reserves for reported claims and reserves for claims incurred but not reported (IBNR). While payments due on claim reserves are considered contractual obligations because they relate to insurance policies issued by the Company, the ultimate amount to be paid to settle both case reserves and IBNR is an estimate, subject to significant uncertainty. The actual amount to be paid is not finally determined until the Company reaches a settlement with the claimant. Final claim settlements may vary significantly from the present estimates, particularly since many claims will not be settled until well into the future. In estimating the timing of future payments by year, the Company has assumed that its historical payment patterns will continue. However, the actual timing of future payments could vary materially from these estimates due to, among other things, changes in claim reporting and payment patterns and large unanticipated settlements. In particular, there is significant uncertainty over the claim payment patterns of asbestos and environmental claims. Also, estimated payments in 2008 do not include payments that will be made on claims incurred in 2008 on policies that were in-force as of December 31, 2007. In addition, the table does not include future cash flows related to the receipt of premiums that may be used, in part, to fund loss payments. Under U.S. GAAP, the Company is only permitted to discount reserves for losses and loss adjustment expenses in cases where the payment pattern and ultimate loss costs are fixed and determinable on an individual claim basis. For the Company, these include claim settlements with permanently disabled claimants and certain structured settlement contracts that fund loss runoffs for unrelated parties. As of December 31, 2007, the total property and casualty reserves in the above table are gross of a reserve discount of $568. [2] Estimated life, annuity and disability obligations include death and disability claims, policy surrenders, policyholder dividends and trail commissions offset by expected future deposits and premiums on in-force contracts. Estimated contractual policyholder obligations are based on mortality, morbidity and lapse assumptions comparable with Life historical experience, modified for recent observed trends. Life has also assumed market growth and interest crediting consistent with assumptions used in amortizing deferred acquisition costs. In contrast to this table, the majority of Life obligations are recorded on the balance sheet at the current account values and do not incorporate an expectation of future market growth, interest crediting, or future deposits. Therefore, the estimated contractual policyholder obligations presented in this table significantly exceed the liabilities recorded in reserve for future policy benefits and unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses, other policyholder funds and benefits payable and separate account liabilities. Due to the significance of the assumptions used, the amounts presented could materially differ from actual results. As separate account obligations are legally insulated from general account obligations, the separate account obligations will be fully funded by cash flows from separate account assets. Life expects to fully fund the general account obligations from cash flows from general account investments and future deposits and premiums. [3] Includes future minimum lease payments on operating and capital lease agreements. See Notes 12 and 14 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional discussion on lease commitments. [4] Includes contractual principal and interest payments. All long-term debt obligations have fixed rates of interest. See Note 14 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional discussion of long-term debt obligations. [5] Consumer notes include principal payments and contractual interest for fixed rate notes and interest based on current rates for floating rate notes. See Note 14 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional discussion of consumer notes. [6] Includes $1.8 billion in commitments to purchase investments including about $1.2 billion of limited partnership and $330 of mortgage and construction loans. Outstanding commitments under these limited partnerships and mortgage and construction loans are included in payments due in less than 1 year since the timing of funding these commitments cannot be reliably estimated. The remaining commitments to purchase investments primarily represent payables for securities purchased which are reflected on the Company consolidated balance sheet. Also included in purchase obligations is $790 relating to contractual commitments to purchase various goods and services such as maintenance, human resources, information technology, and transportation in the normal course of business. Purchase obligations exclude contracts that are cancelable without penalty or contracts that do not specify minimum levels of goods or services to be purchased. [7] Includes cash collateral of $4.7 billion which the Company has accepted in connection with the Company securities lending program and derivative instruments. Since the timing of the return of the collateral is uncertain, the return of the collateral has been included in the payments due in less than 1 year. [8] Does not include estimated voluntary contribution of $200 to the Company pension plan in 2008. 166 Table of Contents Pension Plans and Other Postretirement Benefits The Company made contributions to its pension plans of $158, $402 and $504 in 2007, 2006 and 2005, respectively, and contributions to its other postretirement plans of $46 in 2007. No contributions were made to the other postretirement plans in 2006 and 2005. The Company 2007 required minimum funding contribution was immaterial. The Company presently anticipates contributing approximately $200 to its pension plans and other postretirement plans in 2008, based upon certain economic and business assumptions. These assumptions include, but are not limited to, equity market performance, changes in interest rates and the Company other capital requirements. The Company does not have a required minimum funding contribution for the U.S. qualified defined benefit pension plan for 2008 and the funding requirements for all of the pension plans is expected to be immaterial. Pension expense reflected in the Company net income was $131, $152 and $137 in 2007, 2006 and 2005, respectively. The Company estimates its 2008 pension expense will be approximately $113, based on current assumptions. As provided for under SFAS No. 87, the Company uses a five-year averaging method to determine the market-related value of plan assets, which is used to determine the expected return component of pension expense. Under this methodology, asset gains/losses that result from returns that differ from the Company long-term rate of return assumption are recognized in the market-related value of assets on a level basis over a five year period. The difference between actual asset returns for the plans of $331 and $356 for the years ended December 31, 2007 and 2006, respectively, as compared to expected returns of $283 and $244 for the years ended December 31, 2007 and 2006, respectively, will be fully reflected in the market-related value of plan assets over the next five years using the methodology described above. The level of actuarial net losses continues to exceed the allowable amortization corridor as defined under SFAS No. 87. Based on the 6.25% discount rate selected as of December 31, 2007 and taking into account estimated future minimum funding, the difference between actual and expected performance in 2007 will decrease annual pension expense in future years. The decrease in pension expense will be approximately $2 in 2008 and will increase ratably to a decrease of approximately $12 in 2013. Capitalization The capital structure of The Hartford as of December 31, 2007 and 2006 consisted of debt and equity, summarized as follows: As of December 31, 2007 2006 Short-term debt (includes current maturities of long-term debt and capital lease obligations) $ 1,365 $ 599 Long-term debt 3,142 3,504 Total debt [1] 4,507 4,103 Equity excluding accumulated other comprehensive income (loss), net of tax ( AOCI ) 20,062 18,698 AOCI, net of tax (858 ) 178 Total stockholders equity $ 19,204 $ 18,876 Total capitalization including AOCI, net of tax $ 23,711 $ 22,979 Debt to equity 23 % 22 % Debt to capitalization 19 % 18 % [1] Total debt of the Company excludes $809 and $258 of consumer notes as of December 31, 2007 and 2006, respectively. The Hartford total capitalization as of December 31, 2007 increased $732 as compared with December 31, 2006. This increase was due to a $404 and $328 increase in total debt and total stockholders equity, respectively. Total debt increased from issuance of $500 of 5.375% senior notes, a $202 net increase in commercial paper and capital lease obligations, offset by $300 repayment on long-term debt. Total stockholders equity increased primarily due to net income of $2.9 billion partially offset by treasury stock acquired of $1.2 billion, other comprehensive loss of $1.0 billion, primarily due to unrealized losses on securities, and stockholder dividends of $643. Debt The following discussion describes the Company debt financing activities for 2007. For additional information regarding debt, see Note 14 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Senior Notes On March 9, 2007, The Hartford issued $500 of 5.375% senior notes due March 15, 2017. The Hartford used most of the net proceeds from this issuance to repay its $300 of 4.7% notes, due September 1, 2007, at maturity and the balance of the proceeds to pay down a portion of the commercial paper portfolio. The issuance was made pursuant to the Company shelf registration statement (Registration No. 333-108067). Capital Lease Obligations The Company recorded capital leases of $128 in 2007. Capital lease obligations are included in long-term debt, except for the current maturities, which are included in short-term debt, in the consolidated balance sheet as of December 31, 2007. See Note 12 for further information on capital lease commitments. 167 Table of Contents Consumer Notes Institutional Solutions Group began issuing Consumer Notes through its Retail Investor Notes Program in September 2006. A Consumer Note is an investment product distributed through broker-dealers directly to retail investors as medium-term, publicly traded fixed or floating rate, or a combination of fixed and floating rate, notes. In addition, discount notes, amortizing notes and indexed notes may also be offered and issued. Consumer Notes are part of the Company spread-based business and proceeds are used to purchase investment products, primarily fixed rate bonds. Proceeds are not used for general operating purposes. Consumer Notes are offered weekly with maturities up to 30 years and varying interest rates and may include a call provision. Certain Consumer Notes may be redeemed by the holder in the event of death. Redemptions are subject to certain limitations, including calendar year aggregate and individual limits equal to the greater of $1 or 1% of the aggregate principal amount of the notes and $250 thousand per individual, respectively. Derivative instruments will be utilized to hedge the Company exposure to interest rate risk in accordance with Company policy. As of December 31, 2007 and 2006, $809 and $258 of consumer notes had been issued. These notes have interest rates ranging from 4.75% to 6.25% for fixed notes and for variable notes, either consumer price index plus 157 basis points to 267 basis points, or indexed to the S&P 500, Dow Jones Industrials or the Nikkei 225. The aggregate maturities of consumer notes are as follows: $222 in 2008, $494 in 2009, $34 in 2010, $19 in 2011 and $40 thereafter. For 2007 and 2006, interest credited to holders of consumer notes was $11 and $2, respectively. Stockholders Equity Treasury stock acquired For the year ended December 31, 2007, The Hartford repurchased $1.2 billion of its common stock (12.9 million shares) under its share repurchase program. For additional information regarding the share repurchase program, see the Liquidity Requirements section above. Dividends On February 21, 2008, The Hartford Board of Directors declared a quarterly dividend of $0.53 per share payable on April 1, 2008 to shareholders of record as of March 3, 2008. The Hartford declared $643 and paid $636 in dividends to shareholders in 2007 and declared $531 and paid $460 in dividends to shareholders in 2006. AOCI AOCI, net of tax, decreased by $1.0 billion as of December 31, 2007 compared with December 31, 2006. The decrease in AOCI, net of tax, includes unrealized losses on securities of $1.4 billion, primarily due to widening credit spreads associated with fixed maturities, partially offset by changes in gains on cash-flow hedging instruments of $94, change in foreign currency translation adjustments of $146, and pension and other postretirement plan adjustments of $141. Because The Hartford investment portfolio has a duration of approximately 5 years, a 100 basis point parallel movement in rates would result in approximately a 5% change in fair value. Movements in short-term interest rates without corresponding changes in long-term rates will impact the fair value of our fixed maturities to a lesser extent than parallel interest rate movements. For additional information on stockholders equity, AOCI, net of tax, and pension and other postretirement plans see Notes 15, 16 and 17, respectively, of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Cash Flow 2007 2006 2005 Net cash provided by operating activities $ 5,991 $ 5,638 $ 3,732 Net cash used for investing activities $ (6,176 ) $ (7,410 ) $ (4,860 ) Net cash provided by financing activities $ 499 $ 1,915 $ 1,280 Cash end of year $ 2,011 $ 1,424 $ 1,273 Year ended December 31, 2007 compared to the year ended December 31, 2006 The increase in cash from operating activities compared to prior year period was primarily the result of premium cash flows in excess of claim payments, partially offset by increases in taxes paid. Net purchases of available-for-sale securities continue to account for the majority of cash used for investing activities. Cash from financing activities decreased primarily due to treasury stock acquired and increases in dividends paid; partially offset by higher net receipts from policyholder accounts related to investment and universal life contracts, proceeds from consumer notes, and issuance of long-term debt, net of repayments. Year ended December 31, 2006 compared to the year ended December 31, 2005 The increase in cash from operating activities was primarily the result of premium cash flows in excess of claim payments and increased net income as compared to prior year period. Net purchases of available-for-sale securities accounted for the majority of cash used for investing activities. Cash provided by financing activities increased primarily due to higher net receipts from policyholder accounts related to investment and universal life contracts, proceeds from issuance of consumer notes and proceeds from issuance of shares from equity unit contracts, less the portion that was used for debt repayments. Operating cash flows in each of the last three years have been adequate to meet liquidity requirements. 168 Table of Contents Equity Markets For a discussion of the potential impact of the equity markets on capital and liquidity, see the Capital Markets Risk Management section under Market Risk . Ratings Ratings are an important factor in establishing the competitive position in the insurance and financial services marketplace. There can be no assurance that the Company ratings will continue for any given period of time or that they will not be changed. In the event the Company ratings are downgraded, the level of revenues or the persistency of the Company business may be adversely impacted. On June 25, 2007, A.M. Best Co. upgraded the issuer credit ratings to a from a- and the senior debt ratings to a from a- of The Hartford Financial Services Group, Inc. and Hartford Life, Inc. In addition, the commercial paper rating of The Hartford Financial Services Group, Inc. was upgraded to AMB-1 from AMB-2. Concurrently, A.M. Best has affirmed the financial strength rating of A+ (Superior) and the issuer credit ratings of aa- of the Company insurance subsidiaries. The outlook for all ratings is stable. The following table summarizes The Hartford significant member companies financial ratings from the major independent rating organizations as of February 15, 2008. Insurance Financial Strength Ratings: A.M. Best Fitch Standard & Poor Moody Hartford Fire Insurance Company A+ AA AA- Aa3 Hartford Life Insurance Company A+ AA AA- Aa3 Hartford Life and Accident Insurance Company A+ AA AA- Aa3 Hartford Life and Annuity Insurance Company A+ AA AA- Aa3 Hartford Life Insurance KK (Japan) AA- Hartford Life Limited (Ireland) AA- Other Ratings: The Hartford Financial Services Group, Inc.: Senior debt a A A A2 Commercial paper AMB-1 F1 A-1 P-1 Hartford Life, Inc.: Senior debt a A A A2 Hartford Life Insurance Company: Short term rating A-1+ P-1 Consumer notes a+ AA- AA- A1 These ratings are not a recommendation to buy or hold any of The Hartford securities and they may be revised or revoked at any time at the sole discretion of the rating organization. The agencies consider many factors in determining the final rating of an insurance company. One consideration is the relative level of statutory surplus necessary to support the business written. Statutory surplus represents the capital of the insurance company reported in accordance with accounting practices prescribed by the applicable state insurance department. The table below sets forth statutory surplus for the Company insurance companies. 2007 2006 Life Operations $ 5,786 $ 4,733 Japan Life Operations 1,620 1,380 Property & Casualty Operations 8,509 8,230 Total $ 15,915 $ 14,343 Risk-based Capital The National Association of Insurance Commissioners ( NAIC ) has regulations establishing minimum capitalization requirements based on risk-based capital ( RBC ) formulas for both life and property and casualty companies. The requirements consist of formulas, which identify companies that are undercapitalized and require specific regulatory actions. The RBC formula for life companies establishes capital requirements relating to insurance, business, asset and interest rate risks and effective for 2005, it addresses the equity, interest rate and expense recovery risks associated with variable annuities and group annuities that contain death benefits or certain living benefit. RBC is calculated for property and casualty companies after adjusting capital for certain underwriting, asset, credit and off-balance sheet risks. As of December 31, 2007, each of The Hartford insurance subsidiaries within Life and Ongoing Property & Casualty had more than sufficient capital to meet the NAIC minimum RBC requirements. 169 Table of Contents Contingencies Legal Proceedings For a discussion regarding contingencies related to The Hartford legal proceedings, please see Item 3, Legal Proceedings . Regulatory Developments For a discussion regarding contingencies related to regulatory developments that affect The Hartford, please see Note 12 of Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. Legislative Initiatives For a discussion of terrorism reinsurance legislation and how it affects The Hartford, see the Risk Management Strategy-Terrorism under the Property & Casualty section of the MD&A. Tax proposals and regulatory initiatives which have been or are being considered by Congress and/or the United States Treasury Department could have a material effect on the insurance business. These proposals and initiatives include, or could include, changes pertaining to the income tax treatment of insurance companies and life insurance products and annuities, repeal or reform of the estate tax and comprehensive federal tax reform. The nature and timing of any Congressional or regulatory action with respect to any such efforts is unclear. Guaranty Fund and Other Insurance-related Assessments In all states, insurers licensed to transact certain classes of insurance are required to become members of a guaranty fund. In most states, in the event of the insolvency of an insurer writing any such class of insurance in the state, members of the funds are assessed to pay certain claims of the insolvent insurer. A particular state fund assesses its members based on their respective written premiums in the state for the classes of insurance in which the insolvent insurer was engaged. Assessments are generally limited for any year to one or two percent of premiums written per year depending on the state. The Hartford accounts for guaranty fund and other insurance assessments in accordance with Statement of Position No. 97-3, Accounting by Insurance and Other Enterprises for Insurance-Related Assessments . Liabilities for guaranty fund and other insurance-related assessments are accrued when an assessment is probable, when it can be reasonably estimated, and when the event obligating the Company to pay an imposed or probable assessment has occurred. Liabilities for guaranty funds and other insurance-related assessments are not discounted and are included as part of other liabilities in the Consolidated Balance Sheets. As of December 31, 2007 and 2006, the liability balance was $147 and $149, respectively. As of December 31, 2007 and 2006, $19 and $20, respectively, related to premium tax offsets were included in other assets. IMPACT OF NEW ACCOUNTING STANDARDS For a discussion of accounting standards, see Note 1 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 
