CIK: 874766
Company Name: HARTFORD FINANCIAL SERVICES GROUP INC DE
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2010-02-23


Item 7. MANAGEMENT S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS (Dollar amounts in millions, except for per share data, unless otherwise stated) Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations ( MD&A ) addresses the financial condition of The Hartford Financial Services Group, Inc. and its subsidiaries (collectively, The Hartford or the Company ) as of December 31, 2009, compared with December 31, 2008, and its results of operations for each of the three years in the period ended December 31, 2009. This discussion should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and related Notes beginning on page F-1. Certain reclassifications have been made to prior year financial information to conform to the current year presentation. INDEX Description Page Consolidated Results of Operations 31 Outlooks 34 Critical Accounting Estimates 39 The Hartford Operations Overview 67 Key Performance Measures and Ratios 73 Retail 80 Individual Life 83 Group Benefits 86 Retirement Plans 88 International 90 Institutional 93 Life Other 95 Personal Lines 96 Small Commercial 100 Middle Market 103 Specialty Commercial 106 Other Operations 109 Corporate 110 Property & Casualty Underwriting Risk Management Strategy 111 Investment Credit Risk 116 Capital Markets Risk Management 126 Capital Resources and Liquidity 133 Impact of New Accounting Standards 143 30 Table of Contents CONSOLIDATED RESULTS OF OPERATIONS (In millions, except for per share data) For the years ended December 31, Operating Summary 2009 2008 2007 Earned premiums $ 14,424 $ 15,503 $ 15,619 Fee income 4,576 5,135 5,436 Net investment income (loss): Securities available-for-sale and other 4,031 4,335 5,214 Equity securities, trading [1] 3,188 (10,340 ) 145 Total net investment income (loss) 7,219 (6,005 ) 5,359 Net realized capital losses: Total other-than-temporary impairment ( OTTI ) losses (2,191 ) (3,964 ) (483 ) OTTI losses recognized in other comprehensive income 683 Net OTTI losses recognized in earnings (1,508 ) (3,964 ) (483 ) Net realized capital losses, excluding net OTTI losses recognized in earnings (502 ) (1,954 ) (511 ) Total net realized capital losses (2,010 ) (5,918 ) (994 ) Other revenues 492 504 496 Total revenues 24,701 9,219 25,916 Benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses 13,831 14,088 13,919 Benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses returns credited on International variable annuities [1] 3,188 (10,340 ) 145 Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs and present value of future profits 4,267 4,271 2,989 Insurance operating costs and expenses 3,749 3,993 3,894 Interest expense 476 343 263 Goodwill impairment 32 745 Other expenses 886 710 701 Total benefits, losses and expenses 26,429 13,810 21,911 Income (loss) before income taxes (1,728 ) (4,591 ) 4,005 Income tax expense (benefit) (841 ) (1,842 ) 1,056 Net income (loss) $ (887 ) $ (2,749 ) $ 2,949 Supplemental Operating Data Diluted earnings (loss) per common share $ (2.93 ) $ (8.99 ) $ 9.24 Total revenues, excluding net investment income on equity securities, trading 21,513 19,559 25,771 DAC Unlock benefit (charge), after-tax (1,034 ) (932 ) 213 As of December 31, Summary of Financial Condition 2009 2008 2007 Total assets $ 307,717 $ 287,583 $ 360,361 Total investment, excluding equity securities, trading 93,235 89,287 94,904 Total stockholders equity 17,865 9,268 19,204 [1] Includes investment income and mark-to-market effects of equity securities, trading, supporting the international variable annuity business, which are classified in net investment income with corresponding amounts credited to policyholders within benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses. 31 Table of Contents Increase Increase (Decrease) From (Decrease) From Net Income (Loss) by Operation and Life Segment 2009 2008 2007 2008 to 2009 2007 to 2008 Life Retail $ (410 ) $ (1,399 ) $ 812 $ 989 $ (2,211 ) Individual Life 15 (43 ) 182 58 (225 ) Group Benefits 193 (6 ) 315 199 (321 ) Retirement Plans (222 ) (157 ) 61 (65 ) (218 ) International (183 ) (325 ) 223 142 (548 ) Institutional (515 ) (502 ) 17 (13 ) (519 ) Other (165 ) (11 ) (52 ) (154 ) 41 Total Life (1,287 ) (2,443 ) 1,558 1,156 (4,001 ) Property & Casualty Ongoing Operations Underwriting results Personal Lines 120 280 322 (160 ) (42 ) Small Commercial 395 437 508 (42 ) (71 ) Middle Market 258 169 157 89 12 Specialty Commercial 170 71 (18 ) 99 89 Ongoing Operations underwriting results 943 957 969 (14 ) (12 ) Net servicing income [1] 37 31 52 6 (21 ) Net investment income 943 1,056 1,439 (113 ) (383 ) Net realized capital losses (266 ) (1,669 ) (160 ) 1,403 (1,509 ) Other expenses (223 ) (219 ) (248 ) (4 ) 29 Income before income taxes 1,434 156 2,052 1,278 (1,896 ) Income tax expense (benefit) 374 (33 ) 575 407 (608 ) Ongoing Operations 1,060 189 1,477 871 (1,288 ) Other Operations (77 ) (97 ) 30 20 (127 ) Total Property & Casualty 983 92 1,507 891 (1,415 ) Corporate (583 ) (398 ) (116 ) (185 ) (282 ) Net income (loss) $ (887 ) $ (2,749 ) $ 2,949 $ 1,862 $ (5,698 ) [1] Net of expenses related to service business. Year ended December 31, 2009 compared to the year ended December 31, 2008 Consolidated net loss decreased primarily due to the following: A decrease in net realized losses, which included other-than-temporary impairments of $1.5 billion compared to $4.0 billion in 2009 and 2008, respectively, and gains on the variable annuity hedge program of $631 in 2009 compared to losses of $639 in 2008. Partially offsetting the decrease in realized losses was approximately $300 in net realized capital losses in 2009 related to the settlement of a contingent obligation to Allianz SE ( Allianz ). Goodwill impairments in 2009 were $32, after-tax, recorded in Corporate compared to $597, after-tax, in 2008 with $323, after-tax, recorded in Corporate and $274, after-tax, recorded in Life. Excluding net realized capital losses and goodwill impairments, Life operations earnings decreased approximately $300 and Property & Casualty operations earnings decreased approximately $150 from 2008 to 2009. See the segment sections of the MD&A for a discussion on the respective operations performance. Year ended December 31, 2008 compared to the year ended December 31, 2007 The change from consolidated net income to consolidated net loss was primarily due to the following: Net realized losses of $5.9 billion in 2008 compared to $994 in 2007, which included other-than-temporary impairments of $4.0 billion in 2008 and $483 in 2007. DAC Unlock, after-tax, impact to earnings was a charge of $932 in 2008 compared to a benefit of $213 in 2007. Goodwill impairments in 2008 were $597, after-tax, with $323, after-tax, recorded in Corporate and $274, after-tax, in Life compared to no goodwill impairments recorded in 2007. Excluding net realized capital losses, goodwill impairments and DAC Unlocks, Life operations earnings decreased approximately $500 and Property & Casualty operations earnings decreased approximately $300 from 2007 to 2008. See the segment sections of the MD&A for a discussion on the respective operations performance. 32 Table of Contents Income Taxes The effective tax rates for 2009, 2008 and 2007 were 49%, 40%, and 26%, respectively. The principal causes of the differences between the effective rate and the U.S. statutory rate of 35% for 2009, 2008 and 2007 were tax-exempt interest earned on invested assets and the separate account dividends received deduction ( DRD ). This caused an increase in the tax benefit on the 2009 and 2008 pre-tax losses and a decrease in the tax expense on the 2007 pre-tax income. The effective tax rate for 2009 also includes the tax effect of a non-deductible expense related to the settlement of a contingent obligation to Allianz. For additional information, see Note 13 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. The separate account DRD is estimated for the current year using information from the prior year-end, adjusted for current year equity market performance and other appropriate factors, including estimated levels of corporate dividend payments. The actual current year DRD can vary from estimates based on, but not limited to, changes in eligible dividends received by the mutual funds, amounts of distribution from these mutual funds, amounts of short-term capital gains at the mutual fund level and the Company taxable income before the DRD. The Company recorded benefits of $181, $176 and $155 related to the separate account DRD in the years ended December 31, 2009, 2008 and 2007, respectively, which included a benefit (charge) in 2009 of $29 related to prior year tax returns, in 2008 of $9 related to a true-up of the prior year tax return, and in 2007 of $(1) related to a true-up of the prior year tax return. In Revenue Ruling 2007-61, issued on September 25, 2007, the Internal Revenue Service ( IRS ) announced its intention to issue regulations with respect to certain computational aspects of the DRD on separate account assets held in connection with variable annuity contracts. Revenue Ruling 2007-61 suspended Revenue Ruling 2007-54, issued in August 2007 that purported to change accepted industry and IRS interpretations of the statutes governing these computational questions. Any regulations that the IRS may ultimately propose for issuance in this area will be subject to public notice and comment, at which time insurance companies and other members of the public will have the opportunity to raise legal and practical questions about the content, scope and application of such regulations. As a result, the ultimate timing and substance of any such regulations are unknown, but they could result in the elimination of some or all of the separate account DRD tax benefit that the Company receives. Management believes that it is highly likely that any such regulations would apply prospectively only. The Company receives a foreign tax credit against its U.S. tax liability for foreign taxes paid by the Company including payments from its separate account assets. The separate account foreign tax credit is estimated for the current year using information from the most recent filed return, adjusted for the change in the allocation of separate account investments to the international equity markets during the current year. The actual current year foreign tax credit can vary from the estimates due to actual foreign tax credits passed through by the mutual funds. The Company recorded benefits of $16, $16 and $11 related to the separate account foreign tax credit in the years ended December 31, 2009, 2008 and 2007, respectively. These amounts included benefits related to true-ups of prior years tax returns of $3, $4 and $0 in 2009, 2008 and 2007, respectively. The Company unrecognized tax benefits decreased by $43 during 2009 as a result of the completion of the 2002 through 2006 IRS examinations, bringing the total unrecognized tax benefits to $48 as of December 31, 2009. This entire amount, if it were recognized, would affect the effective tax rate. 33 Table of Contents OUTLOOKS Outlooks The Hartford provides projections and other forward-looking information in the following discussions, which contain many forward-looking statements, particularly relating to the Company future financial performance. These forward-looking statements are estimates based on information currently available to the Company, are made pursuant to the safe harbor provisions of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 and are subject to the precautionary statements set forth on page 3 of this Form 10-K. Actual results are likely to differ, and in the past have differed, materially from those forecast by the Company, depending on the outcome of various factors, including, but not limited to, those set forth in each discussion below and in Item 1A, Risk Factors. Life Retail In the long-term, management continues to believe the market for retirement products will expand as individuals increasingly save and plan for retirement. Demographic trends suggest that as the baby boom generation matures, a significant portion of the United States population will allocate a greater percentage of their disposable incomes to saving for their retirement years due to uncertainty surrounding the Social Security system and increases in average life expectancy. Near-term, the Company is continuing to experience lower variable annuity sales as a result of market disruption, and the competitiveness of the Company current product offerings. The Company expects these lower sales levels to continue into 2010. Despite the partial equity market recovery over the past nine months, the current market level and market volatility have resulted in higher claim costs, and have increased the cost and volatility of hedging programs, and the level of capital needed to support living benefit guarantees. Many competitors have responded to recent market turbulence by increasing the price of their guaranteed living benefits and changing the amount of the guarantee offered. Management believes that the most significant industry de-risking changes have occurred. In the first six months of 2009, the Company adjusted pricing levels and took other actions to de-risk its variable annuity product features in order to address the risks and costs associated with variable annuity benefit features in the current economic environment and continues to explore other risk limiting techniques such as changes to hedging or other reinsurance structures. The Company will continue to evaluate the benefits offered within its variable annuities and launched a new variable annuity product in October 2009 that responds to customer needs for growth and income within the risk tolerances of The Hartford. Continued equity market volatility or significant declines in interest rates are also likely to continue to impact the cost and effectiveness of our guaranteed minimum withdrawal benefit ( GMWB ) hedging program and could result in material losses in our hedging program. For more information on the GMWB hedging program, see the Life Equity Product Risk Management section within Capital Markets Risk Management. The Company fixed annuity sales have declined throughout 2009 as a result of lower interest rates and the transition to a new product. Management expects fixed annuity sales to continue to be challenged until interest rates increase. For the retail mutual fund business, net sales can vary significantly depending on market conditions, as was experienced throughout 2009. The continued declines in equity markets in the first quarter of 2009 helped drive declines in the Company mutual fund deposits and assets under management. During the last nine months of 2009, the equity markets improved from the first quarter and certain key funds performed strongly relative to the market, and as a result, the Company mutual fund assets under management and deposits have increased correspondingly. As this business continues to evolve, success will be driven by diversifying net sales across the mutual fund platform, delivering superior investment performance and creating new investment solutions for current and future mutual fund shareholders. The decline in assets under management as compared to 2008 is the result of continued depressed values of the equity markets in 2009 as compared to 2008, which has decreased the extent of the scale efficiencies that Retail has benefited from in recent years. The significant reduction in assets under management has resulted in revenues declining faster than expenses causing lower earnings during 2009. The equity markets have partially recovered during the last nine months of 2009, which has helped improve profitability in recent quarters, and management expects this improvement to continue into 2010. The equity markets have not recovered to their pre-2008 levels; so while profitability in 2010 is expected to be better than 2009 (barring any significant equity market declines), not withstanding expense reduction the Company has not recovered the efficiency of scale that it had prior to 2008. Individual Annuity net investment spread has been impacted by losses on limited partnership and other alternative investments, lower yields on fixed maturities and an increase in crediting rates on renewals for MVA annuities. Management expects these conditions to persist in 2010. Management has evaluated, and will continue to actively evaluate, its expense structure to ensure the business is controlling costs while maintaining an appropriate level of service to our customers. 34 Table of Contents Individual Life Future sales for all products will be influenced by active management of current distribution relationships, responding to the negative impact of recent merger and consolidation activity on existing distribution relationships and the development of new sources of distribution, and the Company ratings, as published by the various ratings agencies, while offering competitive and innovative products and product features. The current economic environment poses challenges for future sales; while life insurance products respond well to consumer demand for financial security and wealth accumulation solutions, individuals may be reluctant to transfer funds when market volatility has recently resulted in significant declines in investment values. In addition, the availability and terms of capital solutions in the marketplace, as discussed below, to support universal life products with secondary guarantees, may reduce future growth in these products. Effective November 1, 2007, Individual Life reinsured the policy liability related to statutory reserves in universal life with secondary guarantees to a captive reinsurance affiliate. An unaffiliated standby third-party letter of credit supports a portion of the statutory reserves that have been ceded to this subsidiary. The use of the letter of credit enhanced statutory capital but resulted in a decline in net investment income and increased expenses in future periods for Individual Life. As of December 31, 2009, the transaction provided approximately $585 of statutory capital relief associated with the Company universal life products with secondary guarantees. The Company received notice from the issuer of the letter of credit that they will be terminating the letter of credit as it applies to new business written after January 31, 2010. In addition, the issuer has notified the Company that it will not extend the letter of credit, covering the in-force, beyond its current expiration date of December 31, 2028. The letter of credit is expected to provide sufficient coverage for the reinsured business through 2028. Management is reviewing product design alternatives with the objective of developing a competitively priced product that meets the Company capital efficiency objectives. For risk management purposes, Individual Life accepts and retains up to $10 in risk on any one life. Individual Life uses reinsurance where appropriate to protect against the severity of losses on individual claims; however, death claim experience may continue to lead to periodic short-term earnings volatility. In the fourth quarter of 2008, Individual Life began ceding insurance under a new reinsurance structure for all new business excluding term life insurance. The new reinsurance structure allows Individual Life greater flexibility in writing larger policies, while retaining less of the overall risk associated with individual insured lives. This new reinsurance structure will help balance the overall profitability of Individual Life business. The financial results of this change in the reinsurance structure will be recognized over time as the percentage of new business subject to the structure grows. This will result in Individual Life recognizing increasing reinsurance premiums while reducing earnings volatility associated with mortality experience over time. Individual Life continues to face uncertainty surrounding estate tax legislation, aggressive competition from other life insurance providers, reduced availability and higher price of reinsurance, and the current regulatory environment related to reserving for term life insurance and universal life products with no-lapse guarantees. Additionally, volatility in the equity markets may reduce the attractiveness of variable universal life products. These risks may have a negative impact on Individual Life future sales and earnings. Despite these risks, management believes there are opportunities to increase future sales by implementing strategies to expand distribution capabilities, including utilizing independent agents and continuing to build on the strong relationships within the financial institution marketplace. Group Benefits Group Benefits sales may fluctuate based on the competitive pricing environment in the marketplace. In this competitive environment the Company has seen weakness in its first quarter 2010 sales. The Company anticipates relatively stable loss ratios and expense ratios over the long-term based on underlying trends in the in-force business and disciplined new business and renewal underwriting. The Company experienced higher disability loss ratios in 2009; however, the Company believes this is within the normal range of volatility. The economic downturn, which resulted in rising unemployment, combined with the potential for employees to lessen spending on the Company products, negatively impacted premium levels in 2009. Premium levels are expected to remain relatively flat in 2010, or until there is economic expansion and lower unemployment rates compared to the end of 2009 levels. Over time, as employers design benefit strategies to attract and retain employees, while attempting to control their benefit costs, management believes that the need for the Company products will continue to expand. This combined with the significant number of employees who currently do not have coverage or adequate levels of coverage, creates continued opportunities for our products and services. Retirement Plans The future financial results of the Retirement Plans segment will depend on Life ability to increase assets under management across all businesses, achieve scale in areas with a high degree of fixed costs and maintain its investment spread earnings on the general account products sold largely in the 403(b)/457 business. Disciplined expense management will continue to be a focus of the Retirement Plans segment as necessary investments in service and technology are made to effect the integration of the acquisitions made in 2008. Retirement Plans deposits have been negatively impacted by market volatility and by the market declines in 2008 and the first quarter of 2009 as businesses reduce their workforces and offer more modest salary increases and as workers potentially allocate less to retirement accounts in the near term. The impact of the partial equity markets recovery over the last nine months has been offset by a few large case surrenders, resulting in an overall decline in average assets under management compared to 2008. The reduction in average assets under management has strained net income in 2009, and this earnings strain is expected to continue until average account value exceeds the level seen in the first half of 2008. 35 Table of Contents International During the second quarter of 2009, the Company suspended all new sales in International Japan and European operations. International is currently in the process of restructuring its operations to maximize profitability and capital efficiency while continuing to focus on risk management and maintaining appropriate service levels. Profitability depends on the account values of our customers, which are affected by equity, bond and currency markets. Periods of favorable market performance will increase assets under management and thus increase fee income earned on those assets, while unfavorable market performance will have the reverse effect. In addition, higher or lower account value levels will generally reduce or increase, respectively, certain costs for individual annuities to the Company, such as guaranteed minimum death benefits ( GMDB ), guaranteed minimum income benefits ( GMIB ), guaranteed minimum accumulation benefits ( GMAB ) and GMWB. Prudent expense management is also an important component of product profitability. During 2009, the Company took actions to realign our organization and significantly reduce our expense structure which will result in improved earnings over time. The Company continually evaluates opportunities to mitigate the risks associated with International businesses and manage expenses in order to balance costs and earnings stability. Markets partly recovered in the last three quarters of 2009, after a decline in the first quarter, resulting in increased margins in the second, third, and fourth quarters. In the fourth quarter of 2009, Hartford Life International, Ltd., an indirect, wholly-owned subsidiary of Hartford Life Insurance Company, entered into a Share Purchase Agreement with Icatu Holding, S.A, the Company joint venture partner, for the sale of all of the Company common registered shares and preferred registered shares in Icatu Hartford Seguros S.A, its Brazil operation. The expected settlement date will be during the first quarter of 2010. The sale of our interests in Icatu Hartford Seguros S.A. will allow the Company to focus on its core U.S. centric businesses and reduce exposure to currency volatility, but will also reduce the expected future earnings of International. Institutional In 2009, the Company decided to exit several businesses that were determined to be outside of the Company core business model. Several lines institutional mutual funds, private placement life insurance, income annuities and certain institutional annuities will continue to be managed for growth. The private placement life insurance industry (including the corporate-owned and bank-owned life insurance markets) has experienced a slowdown in sales due to, among other things, limited availability of stable value wrap providers. We believe that the Company current PPLI assets will experience high persistency, but our ability to grow this business in the future will be affected by near term market and industry challenges. The remaining businesses, structured settlements, guaranteed investment products, and most institutional annuities will be managed in conjunction with other businesses that the Company has previously decided will not be actively marketed or sold. The net income of this segment depends on Institutional ability to retain assets under management, the relative mix of business, and net investment spread. Net investment spread, as discussed in Institutional Operating section of this MD&A, has declined year over year and management expects net investment spread will remain pressured in the intermediate future due to the low level of market short-term interest rates, increased allocation to lower yielding U.S. Treasuries and short-term investments, and anticipated performance of limited partnerships and other alternative investments. Stable value products experienced net outflows in 2009 as a result of contractual maturities and the payments associated with certain contracts which allow an investor to accelerate principal repayments (after a defined notice period of typically thirteen months), as well as the Company opting to accelerate the repayment of principal for certain stable value products. A total of $3.9 billion of account value was paid out on stable value contracts during 2009. The Company has the option to accelerate the repayment of principal for certain other stable value products and will continue to evaluate calling these contracts on a contract by contract basis based upon the financial impact to the Company. In addition, the Company may, from time to time, seek to retire or repurchase certain other stable value products in open market transactions. Such repurchases, if any, will depend on prevailing market conditions, our liquidity requirements, contractual restrictions and other factors. Institutional will fund these obligations from cash and short-term investments presently held in its investment portfolios along with projected receipts of earned interest and principal maturities from long-term invested assets. Property & Casualty Personal Lines The Company expects Personal Lines written premiums in 2010 will be relatively flat as growth in AARP is expected to be largely offset by a decline in Agency. The Company expects personal auto written premiums will be relatively flat as the effects of increased written premiums from the sale of the Company Open Road Advantage product and increased written pricing will likely be offset by actions to reduce written premiums in certain market segments and territories. The Company expects homeowners written premiums will also be relatively flat as an increase in written pricing and the cross-sell of AARP homeowners insurance to auto policyholders will likely be offset by the effect of rate and underwriting actions to improve profitability. 36 Table of Contents The Company will continue to use direct marketing to AARP members to drive new business in AARP and will expand the sale of its Open Road Advantage product through independent agents to drive new business in Agency. In all states where the Open Road Advantage product is available, the Company distributes its discounted AARP Open Road Advantage auto product through those independent agents who are authorized to offer the AARP product. The Company expects to expand the sale of the Open Road Advantage auto product to an additional 23 states in 2010. In 2009, renewal written pricing increased 3% for auto and 5% for home and management expects that renewal written pricing for both auto and homeowners will continue to increase in 2010 driven by rate increases in response to rising loss costs. For both auto and home, management expects that the increase in average written premium per policy in 2010 will not be as significant as the increase in written pricing due primarily to a continued shift to more preferred market segment business (which has lower average premium) and growth in states and territories with lower average premium. The combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development for Personal Lines in 2010 is expected to be relatively close to the 92.0 ratio achieved in 2009 as a slight improvement in the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio is expected to be offset by a slight increase in the expense ratio. For auto business, emerged claim frequency increased in 2009 after a historically low claim frequency in 2008. In 2010, management expects ultimate claim frequency for the 2010 accident year will be slightly favorable reflecting the Company shift to more preferred market segment business. While emerged claim severity increases for auto were flat to the prior year, management expects auto claim severity to increase in 2010 more in line with historical experience. Non-catastrophe homeowners loss costs increased in 2009 due to higher claim frequency and severity and management expects that loss costs will increase in 2010 driven by higher claim severity. In response to increasing loss costs, the Company is taking rating and underwriting actions in auto and homeowners and the Company expects the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes for both auto and homeowners will be slightly lower in 2010. Management expects the expense ratio will be slightly higher in 2010 driven by higher amortization of AARP acquisition costs. Small Commercial Within the Small Commercial segment, management expects single-digit written premium growth in 2010, due to higher new business premium and stabilization of policy count retention. During 2009, the Company experienced a decrease in both earned audit premium and endorsement premium, primarily as a result of lower payrolls. This resulted in declining average premium on renewed policies, a trend that is expected to continue into the early part of 2010. Small Commercial introduced several initiatives in 2009 including programs aimed at improving policy count retention and new product offerings for package business and expects to introduce a new pricing model for commercial auto in 2010. The workers compensation business is expected to produce strong policy growth in 2010 reflecting: our current market position and capabilities; targeted broadening of underwriting capabilities in selected industries; and leveraging the payroll model to both increase penetration in well-established partners and continue developing opportunities with recently added partners including the marketing relationship with Intuit. While renewal written pricing in Small Commercial was flat in 2009, increases are expected in 2010. The Small Commercial segment combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development is expected to be higher in 2010 than the 84.4 achieved in 2009. The increase in the combined ratio results from an expected increase in the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio, as well as, a higher expense ratio. Small Commercial experienced favorable frequency trends on workers compensation and commercial auto claims in recent accident years. Management expects favorable frequency to continue, but at a moderated rate, for the 2010 accident year. Across the Small Commercial lines of business, severity is expected to continue its long-term upward trend. The expense ratio is expected to be higher in 2010 driven by an increase in total underwriting expenses. Middle Market Management expects that 2010 written premiums for Middle Market will be higher due to an increase in new business premium, while policy count retention is expected to remain flat. Written premiums in Middle Market decreased by 10% in 2009 as the downturn in the economy reduced exposures across most lines of business, particularly payroll exposures for workers compensation and construction lines in marine, which were partially reflected in lower earned audit premium. The Company continues to take a disciplined approach to evaluating and pricing risks in the face of declines in renewal written pricing. While renewal written pricing for Middle Market business declined by 2% in 2009, management expects carriers will continue to price new business more aggressively than renewals. Carriers in the commercial lines market segment reported some moderation in the rate of price declines in 2009. Like in the Personal Lines and Small Commercial market segments, current economic conditions (lower payrolls, declines in production, lower sales, etc.) have reduced written premium growth opportunities in Middle Market. In 2010, management will seek to compete for new business and protect renewals in Middle Market by, among other actions, refining its pricing and risk selection models, targeting industries with growth potential and looking to cross-sell other lines on existing accounts. The combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development for Middle Market is expected to be higher in 2010 than the 95.1 achieved in 2009 due to an expected increase in the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio and, to a lesser extent, an increase in the expense ratio. Claim cost severity was favorable on property and marine in 2009. However, management expects that claim cost severity for property and marine claims will return to historically normal levels in 2010 and that severity will continue to increase for general liability and workers compensation claims. The Company also expects a continuation of moderately lower frequency in 2010. 37 Table of Contents Specialty Commercial Within Specialty Commercial, management expects written premiums to be slightly higher in 2010, primarily due to higher casualty premiums, partially offset by the impact of business and economic changes experienced in 2009. Written premiums decreased by 17% in 2009, due to a combination of the sale of First State Management Group, the effects of the economic downturn, ratings concerns, and market-driven changes in a reinsurance arrangement. The Company sold its core excess and surplus lines property businesses in March 2009. Additionally, as with other commercial lines segments, Specialty Commercial experienced the same negative impacts of the recession on written premiums. And, while the Company ratings stabilized in May of 2009, concerns about the Company financial strength to that point had a negative effect on commercial directors and officers and contract surety lines of business. Lastly, the reinsurance program for the professional liability lines renewed in July 2009 with a change in structure from primarily an excess of loss program to a variable quota share arrangement. This change was market driven and consistent with the Company expectations. This will have the impact of depressing the net written premium growth for professional liability through the second quarter of 2010. For professional liability business within Specialty Commercial, the Company expects its losses from the fallout of the sub-prime mortgage market and the broader credit crisis to be manageable based on several factors. Principal among them is the diversified nature of the Company product and customer portfolio, with a majority of the Company total in-force professional liability net written premium derived from policyholders with privately-held ownership and, therefore, relatively low shareholder class action exposure. Reinsurance substantially mitigates the net limits exposed per policy and no single industry segment comprises 15% or more of the Company professional liability book of business by net written premium. About half of the Company limits exposed to federal shareholder class action claims filed in 2008 and 2009 are under Side-A D&O insurance policies that provide protection to individual directors and officers only in cases where their company cannot indemnify them. In addition, 88% of the exposed limits are on excess policies rather than primary policies. Regarding the Madoff and Stanford alleged fraud cases which continue to evolve, based on a detailed ground-up review of all claims notices received to date and an analysis of potentially involved parties noted in press reports, the Company anticipates only a limited number of its policies and corresponding net limits to be exposed. The Company expects its losses from the sub-prime mortgage and credit crisis, as well as its exposure to the Madoff and Stanford cases, to be within its expected loss estimates. In 2010, the combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development for Specialty Commercial is expected to be slightly higher than the 100.1 experienced in 2009 due to an expected increase in the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio and the dividend ratio, partially offset by a decrease in the expense ratio. Investment Income Property & Casualty net investment income is expected to be more favorable in 2010 than in 2009 due to increased allocation of liquid investments to spread based investments, such as investment grade corporate bonds, and more favorable limited partnership results. 38 Table of Contents CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES The preparation of financial statements, in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America ( U.S. GAAP ), requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ, and in the past has differed, from those estimates. The Company has identified the following estimates as critical in that they involve a higher degree of judgment and are subject to a significant degree of variability: property and casualty reserves, net of reinsurance; life estimated gross profits used in the valuation and amortization of assets and liabilities associated with variable annuity and other universal life-type contracts; evaluation of other-than-temporary impairments on available-for-sale securities and valuation allowances on investments; living benefits required to be fair valued; goodwill impairment; valuation of investments and derivative instruments; pension and other postretirement benefit obligations; valuation allowance on deferred tax assets and contingencies relating to corporate litigation and regulatory matters. Certain of these estimates are particularly sensitive to market conditions, and deterioration and/or volatility in the worldwide debt or equity markets could have a material impact on the Consolidated Financial Statements. In developing these estimates management makes subjective and complex judgments that are inherently uncertain and subject to material change as facts and circumstances develop. Although variability is inherent in these estimates, management believes the amounts provided are appropriate based upon the facts available upon compilation of the financial statements. Property and Casualty Reserves, Net of Reinsurance The Hartford establishes property and casualty reserves to provide for the estimated costs of paying claims under insurance policies written by the Company. These reserves include estimates for both claims that have been reported and those that have not yet been reported, and include estimates of all expenses associated with processing and settling these claims. Incurred but not reported ( IBNR ) reserves represent the difference between the estimated ultimate cost of all claims and the actual reported loss and loss adjustment expenses ( reported losses ). Reported losses represent cumulative loss and loss adjustment expenses paid plus case reserves for outstanding reported claims. Company actuaries evaluate the total reserves (IBNR and case reserves) on an accident year basis. An accident year is the calendar year in which a loss is incurred, or, in the case of claims-made policies, the calendar year in which a loss is reported. Reserve estimates can change over time because of unexpected changes in the external environment. Potential external factors include (1) changes in the inflation rate for goods and services related to covered damages such as medical care, hospital care, auto parts, wages and home repair, (2) changes in the general economic environment that could cause unanticipated changes in the claim frequency per unit insured, (3) changes in the litigation environment as evidenced by changes in claimant attorney representation in the claims negotiation and settlement process, (4) changes in the judicial environment regarding the interpretation of policy provisions relating to the determination of coverage and/or the amount of damages awarded for certain types of damages, (5) changes in the social environment regarding the general attitude of juries in the determination of liability and damages, (6) changes in the legislative environment regarding the definition of damages and (7) new types of injuries caused by new types of injurious exposure: past examples include breast implants, lead paint and construction defects. Reserve estimates can also change over time because of changes in internal company operations. Potential internal factors include (1) periodic changes in claims handling procedures, (2) growth in new lines of business where exposure and loss development patterns are not well established or (3) changes in the quality of risk selection in the underwriting process. In the case of assumed reinsurance, all of the above risks apply. In addition, changes in ceding company case reserving and reporting patterns can create additional factors that need to be considered in estimating the reserves. Due to the inherent complexity of the assumptions used, final claim settlements may vary significantly from the present estimates, particularly when those settlements may not occur until well into the future. Through both facultative and treaty reinsurance agreements, the Company cedes a share of the risks it has underwritten to other insurance companies. The Company net reserves for loss and loss adjustment expenses include anticipated recovery from reinsurers on unpaid claims. The estimated amount of the anticipated recovery, or reinsurance recoverable, is net of an allowance for uncollectible reinsurance. Reinsurance recoverables include an estimate of the amount of gross loss and loss adjustment expense reserves that may be ceded under the terms of the reinsurance agreements, including IBNR unpaid losses. The Company calculates its ceded reinsurance projection based on the terms of any applicable facultative and treaty reinsurance, including an estimate by reinsurance agreement of how IBNR losses will ultimately be ceded. The Company provides an allowance for uncollectible reinsurance, reflecting management best estimate of reinsurance cessions that may be uncollectible in the future due to reinsurers unwillingness or inability to pay. The Company analyzes recent developments in commutation activity between reinsurers and cedants, recent trends in arbitration and litigation outcomes in disputes between reinsurers and cedants and the overall credit quality of the Company reinsurers. Where its contracts permit, the Company secures future claim obligations with various forms of collateral, including irrevocable letters of credit, secured trusts, funds held accounts and group-wide offsets. The allowance for uncollectible reinsurance was $335 as of December 31, 2009, including $226 related to Other Operations and $109 related to Ongoing Operations. The Company estimate of reinsurance recoverables, net of an allowance for uncollectible reinsurance, is subject to similar risks and uncertainties as the estimate of the gross reserve for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses. 39 Table of Contents The Hartford, like other insurance companies, categorizes and tracks its insurance reserves for its segments by line of business . Furthermore, The Hartford regularly reviews the appropriateness of reserve levels at the line of business level, taking into consideration the variety of trends that impact the ultimate settlement of claims for the subsets of claims in each particular line of business. In addition, within the Other Operations segment, the Company has reserves for asbestos and environmental ( A&E ) claims. Adjustments to previously established reserves, which may be material, are reflected in the operating results of the period in which the adjustment is determined to be necessary. In the judgment of management, information currently available has been properly considered in the reserves established for losses and loss adjustment expenses. The following table shows loss and loss adjustment expense reserves by line of business and by operating segment as of December 31, 2009, net of reinsurance: Personal Small Middle Specialty Ongoing Other Total Lines Commercial Market Commercial Operations Operations P&C Reserve Line of Business Property $ 323 $ 2 $ 42 $ 56 $ 423 $ $ 423 Auto physical damage 16 5 5 9 35 35 Auto liability 1,674 248 238 161 2,321 2,321 Package business 1,131 881 136 2,148 2,148 Workers compensation 9 1,933 2,270 2,272 6,484 6,484 General liability 26 145 693 1,286 2,150 2,150 Professional liability 742 742 742 Fidelity and surety 261 261 261 Assumed Reinsurance [1] 496 496 All other non-A&E 936 936 A&E 2 2 8 3 15 2,199 2,214 Total reserves-net 2,050 3,466 4,137 4,926 14,579 3,631 18,210 Reinsurance and other recoverables 20 137 305 2,118 2,580 861 3,441 Total reserves-gross $ 2,070 $ 3,603 $ 4,442 $ 7,044 $ 17,159 $ 4,492 $ 21,651 [1] These net loss and loss adjustment expense reserves relate to assumed reinsurance that was moved into Other Operations (formerly known as HartRe ). Reserving within Ongoing and Other Operations (See Reserving for Asbestos and Environmental Claims within Other Operations for a discussion of how A&E reserves are set) How reserves are set Reserves are set by line of business within the various operating segments. A single line of business may be written in more than one segment. Case reserves are established by a claims handler on each individual claim and are adjusted as new information becomes known during the course of handling the claim. Lines of business for which loss data (e.g., paid losses and case reserves) emerge (i.e., is reported) over a long period of time are referred to as long-tail lines of business. Lines of business for which loss data emerge more quickly are referred to as short-tail lines of business. Within the Company Ongoing Operations, the shortest-tail lines of business are property and auto physical damage. The longest tail lines of business within Ongoing Operations include workers compensation, general liability, and professional liability. Assumed reinsurance, which is within Other Operations, is also long-tail business. For short-tail lines of business, emergence of paid loss and case reserves is credible and likely indicative of ultimate losses. For long-tail lines of business, emergence of paid losses and case reserves is less credible in the early periods and, accordingly, may not be indicative of ultimate losses. Company reserving actuaries, who are independent of the business units, regularly review reserves for both current and prior accident years using the most current claim data. For most lines of business, these reserve reviews incorporate a variety of actuarial methods and judgments and involve rigorous analysis. These selections incorporate input, as judged by the reserving actuaries to be appropriate, from claims personnel, pricing actuaries and operating management on reported loss cost trends and other factors that could affect the reserve estimates. Most reserves are reviewed fully each quarter, including loss reserves for property, auto physical damage, auto liability, package business, workers compensation, most general liability, professional liability and fidelity and surety. Other reserves are reviewed semi-annually (twice per year) or annually. These include, but are not limited to, reserves for losses incurred before 1989, allocated loss adjustment expenses, assumed reinsurance, latent exposures such as construction defects, unallocated loss adjustment expense and all other non-A&E exposures within Other Operations. For reserves that are reviewed semi-annually or annually, management monitors the emergence of paid and reported losses in the intervening quarters to either confirm that the estimate of ultimate losses should not change or, if necessary, perform a reserve review to determine whether the reserve estimate should change. An expected loss ratio is used in initially recording the reserves for both short-tail and long-tail lines of business. This expected loss ratio is determined through a review of prior accident years loss ratios and expected changes to earned pricing, loss costs, mix of business, ceded reinsurance and other factors that are expected to impact the loss ratio for the current accident year. For short-tail lines, IBNR for the current accident year is initially recorded as the product of the expected loss ratio for the period, earned premium for the period and the proportion of losses expected to be reported in future calendar periods for the current accident period. For long-tailed lines, IBNR reserves for the current accident year are initially recorded as the product of the expected loss ratio for the period and the earned premium for the period, less reported losses for the period. 40 Table of Contents In addition to the expected loss ratio, the actuarial techniques or methods used primarily include paid and reported loss development and frequency / severity techniques as well as the Bornhuetter-Ferguson method (a combination of the expected loss ratio and paid development or reported development method). Within any one line of business, the methods that are given more influence vary based primarily on the maturity of the accident year, the mix of business and the particular internal and external influences impacting the claims experience or the methods. The output of the reserve reviews are reserve estimates that are referred to herein as the actuarial indication . Provided below is a general discussion of which methods are preferred by line of business. Because the actuarial estimates are generated at a much finer level of detail than line of business (e.g., by distribution channel, coverage, accident period), this description should not be assumed to apply to each coverage and accident year within a line of business. Also, as circumstances change, the methods that are given more influence will change. Property and Auto Physical Damage. These lines are fast-developing and paid and reported development techniques are used as these methods use historical data to develop paid and reported loss development patterns, which are then applied to current paid and reported losses by accident period to estimate ultimate losses. The Company relies primarily on reported development techniques although a review of frequency and severity and the initial loss expectation based on the expected loss ratio is used for the most immature accident months. The advantage of frequency / severity techniques is that frequency estimates are generally easier to predict and external information can be used to supplement internal data in making severity estimates. Auto Liability Personal Lines. For auto liability, and bodily injury in particular, the Company performs a greater number of techniques than it does for property and auto physical damage. In addition, because the paid development technique is affected by changes in claim closure patterns and the reported development method is affected by changes in case reserving practices, the Company uses Berquist-Sherman techniques which adjust these patterns to reflect current settlement rates and case reserving techniques. The Company generally uses the reported development method for older accident years as a higher percentage of ultimate losses are reflected in reported losses than in cumulative paid losses and the frequency/severity and Berquist-Sherman methods for more recent accident years. Recent periods are influenced by changes in case reserve practices and changing disposal rates; the frequency/severity techniques are not affected as much by these changes and the Berquist-Sherman techniques specifically adjust for these changes. Auto Liability Commercial Lines and Short-Tailed General Liability. As with Personal Lines auto liability, the Company performs a variety of techniques, including the paid and reported development methods and frequency / severity techniques. For older, more mature accident years, management finds that reported development techniques are best. For more recent accident years, management typically prefers frequency / severity techniques that make separate assumptions about loss activity above and below a selected capping level. Long-Tailed General Liability, Fidelity and Surety and Large Deductible Workers Compensation . For these long-tailed lines of business, the Company generally relies on the expected loss ratio and reported development techniques. Management generally weights these techniques together, relying more heavily on the expected loss ratio method at early ages of development and more on the reported development method as an accident year matures. Workers Compensation . Workers compensation is the Company single largest reserve line of business so a wide range of methods are reviewed in the reserve analysis. Methods performed include paid and reported development, variations on expected loss ratio methods, and an in-depth analysis on the largest states. Paid development patterns are historically very stable in the Company workers compensation business, so paid techniques are preferred for older accident periods. For more recent periods, paid techniques are less predictive of the ultimate liability since such a low percentage of ultimate losses are paid in early periods of development. Accordingly, for more recent accident periods, the Company generally relies more heavily on a state-by-state analysis and the expected loss ratio approach. Professional Liability. Reported and paid loss developments patterns for this line tend to be volatile. Therefore, the Company typically relies on frequency and severity techniques. Assumed Reinsurance and All Other within Other Operations. For these lines, management tends to rely on the reported development techniques. In assumed reinsurance, assumptions are influenced by information gained from claim and underwriting audits. Allocated Loss Adjustment Expenses (ALAE). For some lines of business (e.g., professional liability and assumed reinsurance), ALAE and losses are analyzed together. For most lines of business, however, ALAE is analyzed separately, using paid development techniques and an analysis of the relationship between ALAE and loss payments. Unallocated Loss Adjustment Expense (ULAE). ULAE is analyzed separately from loss and ALAE. For most lines of business, incurred ULAE costs to be paid in the future are projected based on an expected cost per claim year and the anticipated claim closure pattern and the ratio of paid ULAE to paid loss. The final step in the reserve review process involves a comprehensive review by senior reserving actuaries who apply their judgment and, in concert with senior management, determine the appropriate level of reserves based on the information that has been accumulated. Numerous factors are considered in this process including, but not limited to, the assessed reliability of key loss trends and assumptions that may be significantly influencing the current actuarial indications, the maturity of the accident year, pertinent trends observed over the recent past, the level of volatility within a particular line of business, and the improvement or deterioration of actuarial indications in the current period as compared to the prior periods. Total recorded net reserves excluding asbestos and environmental were 3.8% higher than the actuarial indication of the reserves as of December 31, 2009 and December 31, 2008. See the Reserve Development Section for a discussion of changes to reserve estimates recorded in 2009. 41 Table of Contents Current trends contributing to reserve uncertainty The Hartford is a multi-line company in the property and casualty business. The Hartford is therefore subject to reserve uncertainty stemming from a number of conditions, including but not limited to those noted above, any of which could be material at any point in time for any segment. Certain issues may become more or less important over time as conditions change. As various market conditions develop, management must assess whether those conditions constitute a long-term trend that should result in a reserving action (i.e., increasing or decreasing the reserve). Within the commercial segments and the Other Operations segment, the Company has exposure to claims asserted for bodily injury as a result of long-term or continuous exposure to harmful products or substances. Examples include, but are not limited to, pharmaceutical products, silica and lead paint. The Company also has exposure to claims from construction defects, where property damage or bodily injury from negligent construction is alleged. In addition, the Company has exposure to claims asserted against religious institutions and other organizations relating to molestation or abuse. Such exposures may involve potentially long latency periods and may implicate coverage in multiple policy periods. These factors make reserves for such claims more uncertain than other bodily injury or property damage claims. With regard to these exposures, the Company is monitoring trends in litigation, the external environment, the similarities to other mass torts and the potential impact on the Company reserves. In Personal Lines, reserving estimates are generally less variable than for the Company other property and casualty segments because of the coverages having relatively shorter periods of loss emergence. Estimates, however, can still vary due to a number of factors, including interpretations of frequency and severity trends and their impact on recorded reserve levels. Severity trends can be impacted by changes in internal claim handling and case reserving practices in addition to changes in the external environment. These changes in claim practices increase the uncertainty in the interpretation of case reserve data, which increases the uncertainty in recorded reserve levels. In addition, the introduction of new products has led to a different mix of business by type of insured than the Company experienced in the past. Such changes in mix increase the uncertainty of the reserve projections, since historical data and reporting patterns may not be applicable to the new business. In both Small Commercial and Middle Market, workers compensation is the Company single biggest line of business and the line of business with the longest pattern of loss emergence. Reserve estimates for workers compensation are particularly sensitive to changes in medical inflation, the changing use of medical care procedures and changes in state legislative and regulatory environments. Medical costs make up more than 50% of workers compensation payments and it is possible that federal health care reform will impact medical payments in workers compensation. These changes increase the uncertainty in the application of development patterns. In addition, over the past several accident years, the Company has experienced favorable claim frequency on workers compensation claims. The Company reserve estimates assume that reported losses for recent accident years will continue to emerge favorably and that severity will not be adversely impacted by the lower volume of reported claims. In the Specialty Commercial segment, many lines of insurance are long-tail , including large deductible workers compensation insurance, as such, reserve estimates for these lines are more difficult to determine than reserve estimates for shorter-tail lines of insurance. Estimating required reserve levels for large deductible workers compensation insurance is further complicated by the uncertainty of whether losses that are attributable to the deductible amount will be paid by the insured; if such losses are not paid by the insured due to financial difficulties, the Company would be contractually liable. Another example of reserve variability relates to reserves for directors and officers insurance. There is potential volatility in the required level of reserves due to the continued uncertainty regarding the number and severity of class action suits, including uncertainty regarding the Company exposure to losses arising from the collapse of the sub-prime mortgage market. Additionally, the Company exposure to losses under directors and officers insurance policies is primarily in excess layers, making estimates of loss more complex. The recent financial market turmoil has increased the number of shareholder class action lawsuits against our insureds or their directors and officers and this trend could continue for some period of time. Impact of changes in key assumptions on reserve volatility As stated above, the Company practice is to estimate reserves using a variety of methods, assumptions and data elements. Within its reserve estimation process for reserves other than asbestos and environmental, the Company does not consistently use statistical loss distributions or confidence levels around its reserve estimate and, as a result, does not disclose reserve ranges. The reserve estimation process includes assumptions about a number of factors in the internal and external environment. Across most lines of business, the most important assumptions are future loss development factors applied to paid or reported losses to date. The trend in loss costs is also a key assumption, particularly in the most recent accident years, where loss development factors are less credible. The following discussion includes disclosure of possible variation from current estimates of loss reserves due to a change in certain key indicators of potential losses. Each of the impacts described below is estimated individually, without consideration for any correlation among key indicators or among lines of business. Therefore, it would be inappropriate to take each of the amounts described below and add them together in an attempt to estimate volatility for the Company reserves in total. The estimated variation in reserves due to changes in key indicators is a reasonable estimate of possible variation that may occur in the future, likely over a period of several calendar years. It is important to note that the variation discussed is not meant to be a worst-case scenario, and therefore, it is possible that future variation may be more than the amounts discussed below. 42 Table of Contents Recorded reserves for auto liability, net of reinsurance, are $2.3 billion across all lines, $1.7 billion of which is in Personal Lines. Personal auto liability reserves are shorter-tailed than other lines of business (such as workers compensation) and, therefore, less volatile. However, the size of the reserve base means that future changes in estimates could be material to the Company results of operations in any given period. The key indicator for Personal Lines auto liability is the annual loss cost trend, particularly the severity trend component of loss costs. A 2.5 point change in annual severity for the two most recent accident years would change the estimated net reserve need by $90, in either direction. A 2.5 point change in annual severity is within historical variation for the industry and for the Company. Recorded reserves for workers compensation, net of reinsurance, are $6.5 billion in total for Ongoing Operations. Loss development patterns are a key indicator for this line of business, particularly for more mature accident years. Historically, loss development patterns have been impacted by, among other things, medical cost inflation. The Company has reviewed the historical variation in reported loss development patterns. If the reported loss development patterns change by 4%, the estimated net reserve need would change by $400, in either direction. A 4% change in reported loss development patterns is within historical variation, as measured by the variation around the average development factors as reported in statutory accident year reports. Recorded reserves for general liability, net of reinsurance, are $2.2 billion in total for Ongoing Operations. Loss development patterns are a key indicator for this line of business, particularly for more mature accident years. Historically, loss development patterns have been impacted by, among other things, emergence of new types of claims (e.g., construction defect claims) or a shift in the mixture between smaller, more routine claims and larger, more complex claims. The Company has reviewed the historical variation in reported loss development patterns. If the reported loss development patterns change by 9%, the estimated net reserve need would change by $200, in either direction. A 9% change in reported loss development patterns is within historical variation, as measured by the variation around the average development factors as reported in statutory accident year reports. Similar to general liability, assumed casualty reinsurance is affected by reported loss development patterns. In addition to the items identified above that would affect both direct and reinsurance liability claim development patterns, there is also an impact to reporting patterns for any changes in claim notification from ceding companies to the reinsurer. Recorded net reserves for HartRe assumed reinsurance business, excluding asbestos and environmental liabilities, within Other Operations were $496 as of December 31, 2009. If the reported loss development patterns underlying the Company net reserves for HartRe assumed casualty reinsurance change by 10%, the estimated net reserve need would change by $252, in either direction. A 10% change in reported loss development patterns is within historical variation, as measured by the variation around the average development factors as reported in statutory accident year reports. Reserving for Asbestos and Environmental Claims within Other Operations How A&E reserves are set In establishing reserves for asbestos claims, the Company evaluates its insureds estimated liabilities for such claims using a ground-up approach. The Company considers a variety of factors, including the jurisdictions where underlying claims have been brought, past, pending and anticipated future claim activity, disease mix, past settlement values of similar claims, dismissal rates, allocated loss adjustment expense, and potential bankruptcy impact. Similarly, a ground-up exposure review approach is used to establish environmental reserves. The Company evaluation of its insureds estimated liabilities for environmental claims involves consideration of several factors, including historical values of similar claims, the number of sites involved, the insureds alleged activities at each site, the alleged environmental damage at each site, the respective shares of liability of potentially responsible parties at each site, the appropriateness and cost of remediation at each site, the nature of governmental enforcement activities at each site, and potential bankruptcy impact. Having evaluated its insureds probable liabilities for asbestos and/or environmental claims, the Company then evaluates its insureds insurance coverage programs for such claims. The Company considers its insureds total available insurance coverage, including the coverage issued by the Company. The Company also considers relevant judicial interpretations of policy language and applicable coverage defenses or determinations, if any. Evaluation of both the insureds estimated liabilities and the Company exposure to the insureds depends heavily on an analysis of the relevant legal issues and litigation environment. This analysis is conducted by the Company lawyers and is subject to applicable privileges. For both asbestos and environmental reserves, the Company also compares its historical direct net loss and expense paid and reported experience, and net loss and expense paid and reported experience year by year, to assess any emerging trends, fluctuations or characteristics suggested by the aggregate paid and reported activity. Once the gross ultimate exposure for indemnity and allocated loss adjustment expense is determined for its insureds by each policy year, the Company calculates its ceded reinsurance projection based on any applicable facultative and treaty reinsurance and the Company experience with reinsurance collections. 43 Table of Contents Uncertainties Regarding Adequacy of Asbestos and Environmental Reserves A number of factors affect the variability of estimates for asbestos and environmental reserves including assumptions with respect to the frequency of claims, the average severity of those claims settled with payment, the dismissal rate of claims with no payment and the expense to indemnity ratio. The uncertainty with respect to the underlying reserve assumptions for asbestos and environmental adds a greater degree of variability to these reserve estimates than reserve estimates for more traditional exposures. While this variability is reflected in part in the size of the range of reserves developed by the Company, that range may still not be indicative of the potential variance between the ultimate outcome and the recorded reserves. The recorded net reserves as of December 31, 2009 of $2.21 billion ($1.90 billion and $312 for asbestos and environmental, respectively) is within an estimated range, unadjusted for covariance, of $1.75 billion to $2.52 billion. The process of estimating asbestos and environmental reserves remains subject to a wide variety of uncertainties, which are detailed in Note 12 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. The Company believes that its current asbestos and environmental reserves are appropriate. However, analyses of future developments could cause the Company to change its estimates and ranges of its asbestos and environmental reserves, and the effect of these changes could be material to the Company consolidated operating results, financial condition and liquidity. Consistent with the Company long-standing reserving practices, the Company will continue to review and monitor its reserves in the Other Operations segment regularly and, where future developments indicate, make appropriate adjustments to the reserves. Total Property & Casualty Reserves, Net of Reinsurance, Results In the opinion of management, based upon the known facts and current law, the reserves recorded for the Company property and casualty businesses at December 31, 2009 represent the Company best estimate of its ultimate liability for losses and loss adjustment expenses related to losses covered by policies written by the Company. However, because of the significant uncertainties surrounding reserves, and particularly asbestos exposures, it is possible that management estimate of the ultimate liabilities for these claims may change and that the required adjustment to recorded reserves could exceed the currently recorded reserves by an amount that could be material to the Company results of operations, financial condition and liquidity. Reserve Rollforwards and Development Based on the results of the quarterly reserve review process, the Company determines the appropriate reserve adjustments, if any, to record. Recorded reserve estimates are changed after consideration of numerous factors, including but not limited to, the magnitude of the difference between the actuarial indication and the recorded reserves, improvement or deterioration of actuarial indications in the period, the maturity of the accident year, trends observed over the recent past and the level of volatility within a particular line of business. In general, changes are made more quickly to more mature accident years and less volatile lines of business. As part of its quarterly reserve review process, the Company is closely monitoring reported loss development in certain lines where the recent emergence of paid losses and case reserves could indicate a trend that may eventually lead the Company to change its estimate of ultimate losses in those lines. If, and when, the emergence of reported losses is determined to be a trend that changes the Company estimate of ultimate losses, prior accident years reserves would be adjusted in the period the change in estimate is made. Such adjustments of reserves are referred to as reserve development . Reserve development that increases previous estimates of ultimate cost is called reserve strengthening . Reserve development that decreases previous estimates of ultimate cost is called reserve releases . Reserve development can influence the comparability of year over year underwriting results and is set forth in the paragraphs and tables that follow. 44 Table of Contents A roll-forward follows of Property & Casualty liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses by segment for the year ended December 31, 2009: For the Year Ended December 31, 2009 Personal Small Middle Specialty Ongoing Other Total Lines Commercial Market Commercial Operations Operations P&C Beginning liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses-gross $ 2,052 $ 3,572 $ 4,744 $ 6,981 $ 17,349 $ 4,584 $ 21,933 Reinsurance and other recoverables 60 176 437 2,110 2,783 803 3,586 Beginning liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses-net 1,992 3,396 4,307 4,871 14,566 3,781 18,347 Provision for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses Current accident year before catastrophes 2,700 1,396 1,352 842 6,290 6,290 Current accident year catastrophes 228 44 32 2 306 306 Prior accident years (33 ) (36 ) (187 ) (172 ) (428 ) 242 (186 ) Total provision for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses 2,895 1,404 1,197 672 6,168 242 6,410 Payments (2,837 ) (1,334 ) (1,367 ) (617 ) (6,155 ) (392 ) (6,547 ) Ending liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses net 2,050 3,466 4,137 4,926 14,579 3,631 18,210 Reinsurance and other recoverables 20 137 305 2,118 2,580 861 3,441 Ending liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses gross $ 2,070 $ 3,603 $ 4,442 $ 7,044 $ 17,159 $ 4,492 $ 21,651 Earned premiums $ 3,952 $ 2,580 $ 2,101 $ 1,228 $ 9,861 $ $ 9,861 Loss and loss expense paid ratio [1] 71.8 51.7 65.1 50.4 62.5 Loss and loss expense incurred ratio 73.3 54.4 57.0 54.7 62.6 Prior accident years development (pts) [2] (0.8 ) (1.4 ) (8.9 ) (14.0 ) (4.3 ) [1] The loss and loss expense paid ratio represents the ratio of paid losses and loss adjustment expenses to earned premiums. [2] Prior accident years development (pts) represents the ratio of prior accident years development to earned premiums. Prior accident years development recorded in 2009 Included within prior accident years development for the year ended December 31, 2009 were the following reserve strengthenings (releases): Personal Small Middle Specialty Ongoing Other Total Lines Commercial Market Commercial Operations Operations P&C Directors and officers claims $ $ $ $ (127 ) $ (127 ) $ $ (127 ) General liability (112 ) (112 ) (112 ) Workers compensation (40 ) (52 ) (92 ) (92 ) Personal auto liability (77 ) (77 ) (77 ) Commercial auto liability (33 ) (14 ) (47 ) (47 ) Package business 38 38 38 Surety business 28 28 28 Homeowners claims 18 18 18 Net asbestos reserves 138 138 Net environmental reserves 75 75 Other Operations non-asbestos and non-environmental reserves 35 35 Uncollectible reinsurance (20 ) (20 ) (20 ) (40 ) Other reserve re-estimates, net [1] 26 (1 ) (9 ) (53 ) (37 ) 14 (23 ) Total prior accident years development for the year ended December 31, 2009 $ (33 ) $ (36 ) $ (187 ) $ (172 ) $ (428 ) $ 242 $ (186 ) [1] Includes reserve discount accretion of $24, including $7 in Small Commercial, $9 in Middle Market and $8 in Specialty Commercial. 45 Table of Contents During 2009, the Company re-estimates of prior accident years reserves included the following significant reserve changes: Ongoing Operations While the Company expects its losses from the sub-prime mortgage and credit crisis, as well as its exposure to the Madoff and Stanford cases to be manageable, there is nonetheless the risk that claims under directors and officers ( D&O ) and errors and omissions ( E&O ) insurance policies incurred in the 2007 and 2008 accident years may develop adversely as the claims are settled. However, so far, the Company has seen no evidence of adverse loss experience related to these events. In fact, reported losses to date for claims under D&O and E&O policies for the 2007 accident year have been emerging favorably to initial expectations. In addition, for the 2003 to 2006 accident years, reported losses for claims under D&O and E&O policies have been emerging favorably to initial expectations due to lower than expected claim severity. The Company released a total of $127 of reserves for D&O and E&O claims in 2009 related to the 2003 to 2008 accident years. Any continued favorable emergence of claims under D&O and E&O insurance policies for the 2008 and prior accident years could lead the Company to reduce reserves for these liabilities in future quarters. Released reserves for general liability claims by $112, primarily related to accident years 2003 to 2007. Beginning in the third quarter of 2007, the Company observed that reported losses for high hazard and umbrella general liability claims, primarily related to the 2001 to 2006 accident years, were emerging favorably and this caused management to reduce its estimate of the cost of future reported claims for these accident years, resulting in a reserve release in each quarter since the third quarter of 2007. During 2009, management determined that the lower level of loss emergence was also evident in accident year 2007 and had continued for accident years 2003 to 2006 and, as a result, the Company reduced the reserves. In addition, during the third quarter of 2009, the Company recognized that the cost of late emerging exposures were likely to be higher than previously expected. Also in the third quarter, the Company recognized additional ceded losses on accident years 1999 and prior. These third quarter events were largely offsetting. Released workers compensation reserves by $92 in 2009, primarily related to additional ceded losses on accident years 1999 and prior and lower allocated loss adjustment expense reserves in accident years 2003 to 2007. During the first quarter of 2009, the Company observed lower than expected allocated loss adjustment expense payments on older accident years. As a result, the Company reduced its estimate for future expense payments on more recent accident years. Released reserves for Personal Lines auto liability claims by $77 in 2009. Beginning in the first quarter of 2008, management observed an improvement in emerged claim severity for the 2005 through 2007 accident years attributed, in part, to changes made in claim handling procedures in 2007. During 2009, the Company recognized that favorable development in reported severity was a sustained trend for those accident years and, accordingly, management reduced its reserve estimate. In the third quarter of 2009, management also recognized sustained favorable development trends in AARP for accident year 2008 and released reserves for that accident year. The fourth quarter 2009 reserve release is in response to a continuation of these same favorable trends, primarily for accident years 2006 to 2008. Released reserves for commercial auto liability claims by $47 in 2009 including $33 in Small Commercial, primarily related to accident years 2003 to 2008. In the fourth quarter of 2009, the Company recognized that the full value of large auto liability claims was being recognized as case reserves at an earlier age. The increased adequacy of case reserves caused the Company to decrease its estimate of reserves for IBNR loss and loss adjustment expenses. The Company reviewed its allowance for uncollectible reinsurance for Ongoing Operations in the second quarter of 2009 and reduced its allowance for Ongoing Operations by $20 driven, in part, by a reduction in gross ceded loss recoverables. The allowance for uncollectible reinsurance for Ongoing Operations is recorded within the Specialty Commercial segment. Strengthened reserves for liability claims under Small Commercial package policies by $38 in 2009, primarily related to allocated loss adjustment expenses for accident years 2000 to 2005 and 2007 and 2008. During the first quarter of 2009, the Company identified higher than expected expense payments on older accident years related to the liability coverage. Additional analysis in the second quarter of 2009 showed that this higher level of loss adjustment expense is likely to continue into more recent accident years. As a result, in the second quarter of 2009, the Company increased its estimates for future expense payments for the 2007 and 2008 accident years. In addition, during the third quarter of 2009, the Company recognized the cost of late emerging exposures were likely to be higher than previously expected. Also in the third quarter, the Company recognized a lower than expected frequency of high severity claims. These third quarter events were largely offsetting. Strengthened reserves for surety business by a net of $28 in 2009, primarily related to accident years 2004 to 2007. The net $28 of strengthening consisted of $55 strengthening of reserves for customs bonds, partially offset by a $27 release of reserves for contract surety claims. During 2008, the Company became aware that there were a large number of late reported surety claims related to customs bonds. Continued high volume of late reported claims during 2009 caused the Company to strengthen the reserves. Because the pattern of claim reporting for customs bonds has not been similar to the reporting pattern of other surety bonds, future claim activity is difficult to predict. It is possible that as additional claim activity emerges, our estimate of both the number of future claims and the cost of those claims could change substantially. 46 Table of Contents Strengthened reserves for homeowners claims by $18 in 2009, primarily driven by increased claim settlement costs in recent accident years and increased losses from underground storage tanks in older accident years. In 2008, the Company began to observe increasing claim settlement costs for the 2005 to 2008 accident years and, in the first quarter of 2009, determined that this higher cost level would continue, resulting in a reserve strengthening of $9 for these accident years. In addition, beginning in 2008, the Company observed unfavorable emergence of homeowners casualty claims for accident years 2003 and prior, primarily related to underground storage tanks. Following a detailed review of these claims in the first quarter of 2009, management increased its estimate of the magnitude of this exposure and strengthened homeowners casualty claim reserves by $9. Other Operations See Other Operations Claims Reserve Activity for information concerning the Company annual evaluation of these reserves and related reinsurance. A rollforward of liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses by segment for Property & Casualty for the year ended December 31, 2008 follows: For the year ended December 31, 2008 Personal Small Middle Specialty Ongoing Other Total Lines Commercial Market Commercial Operations Operations P&C Beginning liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses gross $ 2,042 $ 3,470 $ 4,697 $ 6,873 $ 17,082 $ 5,071 $ 22,153 Reinsurance and other recoverables 81 177 414 2,316 2,988 934 3,922 Beginning liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses net 1,961 3,293 4,283 4,557 14,094 4,137 18,231 Provision for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses Current accident year before catastrophes 2,542 1,447 1,460 941 6,390 6,390 Current accident year catastrophes 258 122 116 47 543 543 Prior accident years (51 ) (89 ) (134 ) (81 ) (355 ) 129 (226 ) Total provision for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses 2,749 1,480 1,442 907 6,578 129 6,707 Payments (2,718 ) (1,377 ) (1,418 ) (593 ) (6,106 ) (485 ) (6,591 ) Ending liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses net 1,992 3,396 4,307 4,871 14,566 3,781 18,347 Reinsurance and other recoverables 60 176 437 2,110 2,783 803 3,586 Ending liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses gross $ 2,052 $ 3,572 $ 4,744 $ 6,981 $ 17,349 $ 4,584 $ 21,933 Earned premiums $ 3,926 $ 2,724 $ 2,299 $ 1,382 $ 10,331 $ 7 $ 10,338 Loss and loss expense paid ratio [1] 69.2 50.5 61.6 42.8 59.1 Loss and loss expense incurred ratio 70.0 54.3 62.7 65.6 63.7 Prior accident year development (pts.) [2] (1.3 ) (3.3 ) (5.9 ) (5.8 ) (3.4 ) [1] The loss and loss expense paid ratio represents the ratio of paid losses and loss adjustment expenses to earned premiums. [2] Prior accident year development (pts) represents the ratio of prior accident year development to earned premiums. Current accident year catastrophes For 2008, net current accident year catastrophe loss and loss adjustment expenses totaled $543, of which $237 related to hurricane Ike. In addition to the $237 of net catastrophe loss and loss adjustment expenses from hurricane Ike, the Company incurred $20 of assessments due to hurricane Ike. The following table shows total current accident year catastrophe impacts in the year ended December 31, 2008: For the Year Ended December 31, 2008 Personal Small Middle Specialty Ongoing Other Total Lines Commercial Market Commercial Operations Operations P&C Gross incurred claim and claim adjustment expenses for current accident year catastrophes $ 260 $ 124 $ 130 $ 58 $ 572 $ $ 572 Ceded claim and claim adjustment expenses for current accident year catastrophes 2 2 14 11 29 29 Net incurred claim and claim adjustment expenses for current accident year catastrophes 258 122 116 47 543 543 Assessments owed to Texas Windstorm Insurance Association due to hurricane Ike 10 7 3 20 20 Reinstatement premium ceded to reinsurers due to hurricane Ike 1 1 1 Total current accident year catastrophe impacts $ 269 $ 129 $ 119 $ 47 $ 564 $ $ 564 47 Table of Contents A portion of the gross incurred loss and loss adjustment expenses are recoverable from reinsurers under the Company principal catastrophe reinsurance program in addition to other reinsurance programs. Reinsurance recoveries under the Company principal catastrophe reinsurance program, which covers multiple lines of business, are allocated to the segments in accordance with a pre-established methodology that is consistent with the method used to allocate the ceded premium to each segment. The Company estimate of ultimate loss and loss expenses arising from hurricanes and other catastrophes is based on covered losses under the terms of the policies. The Company does not provide residential flood insurance on its Personal Lines homeowners policies so the Company estimate of hurricane losses on Personal Lines homeowners business does not include any provision for damages arising from flood waters. The Company acts as an administrator for the Write Your Own flood program on behalf of the National Flood Insurance Program under FEMA, for which it earns a fee for collecting premiums and processing claims. Under the program, the Company services both personal lines and commercial lines flood insurance policies and does not assume any underwriting risk. As a result, catastrophe losses in the above table do not include any losses related to the Write Your Own flood program. Prior accident years development recorded in 2008 Included within prior accident years development for the year ended December 31, 2008 were the following reserve strengthenings (releases): Personal Small Middle Specialty Ongoing Other Total Lines Commercial Market Commercial Operations Operations P&C Workers compensation $ $ (92 ) $ (64 ) $ $ (156 ) $ $ (156 ) General liability (15 ) (90 ) (105 ) (105 ) Directors and officers claims (75 ) (75 ) (75 ) Personal auto liability (46 ) (46 ) (46 ) Commercial auto liability (27 ) (27 ) (27 ) Extra-contractual liability claims under non-standard personal auto policies (24 ) (24 ) (24 ) Construction defect claims (10 ) (10 ) (10 ) General liability and products liability 17 50 67 67 National account general liability allocated loss adjustment expense reserves 25 25 25 Net environmental reserves 53 53 Net asbestos reserves 50 50 Other reserve re-estimates, net [1] 19 1 (3 ) (21 ) (4 ) 26 22 Total prior accident years development for the year ended December 31, 2008 $ (51 ) $ (89 ) $ (134 ) $ (81 ) $ (355 ) $ 129 $ (226 ) [1] Includes reserve discount accretion of $26, including $6 in Small Commercial, $9 in Middle Market, $8 in Specialty Commercial and $3 in Other Operations. During 2008, the Company re-estimates of prior accident year reserves included the following significant reserve changes: Ongoing Operations Released workers compensation reserves primarily related to accident years 2000 to 2007 by $156. These reserve releases are a continuation of favorable developments first recognized in 2005 and recognized in both 2006 and 2007. The reserve releases in 2008 resulted from a determination that workers compensation losses continue to develop even more favorably from prior expectations due, in part, to state legal reforms, including in California and Florida, and underwriting actions as well as cost reduction initiatives first instituted in 2003. In particular, the state legal reforms and underwriting actions have resulted in lower than expected medical claim severity. The $156 reserve release represented 3% of the Company net reserves for workers compensation claims as of December 31, 2007. Released reserves for general liability claims primarily related to the 2001 to 2007 accident years by $105. Beginning in the third quarter of 2007, the Company observed that reported losses for high hazard and umbrella general liability claims, primarily related to the 2001 to 2006 accident years, were emerging favorably and this caused management to reduce its estimate of the cost of future reported claims for these accident years, resulting in a reserve release in each quarter since the third quarter of 2007. During 2008, the Company observed that this favorable trend continued with the 2007 accident year. The number of reported claims for this line of business has been lower than expected, a trend first observed in 2005. Over time, management has come to believe that the lower than expected number of claims reported to date will not be offset by a higher than expected number of late reported claims. The $105 reserve release represented 4% of the Company net reserves for general liability claims as of December 31, 2007. 48 Table of Contents Released reserves for professional liability claims for accident years 2003 to 2006 by $75. During 2008, the Company updated its analysis of certain professional liability claims and the new analysis showed that claim severity for directors and officers losses in the 2003 to 2006 accident years were favorable to previous expectations, resulting in a reduction of reserves. The analysis also showed favorable emergence of claim severity on errors and omission policy claims for the 2004 and 2005 accident years, resulting in a release of reserves. The $75 reserve release represented 13% of the Company net reserves for professional liability claims as of December 31, 2007. Released reserves for Personal Lines auto liability claims by $46, principally related to AARP business for the 2005 through 2007 accident years. Beginning in the first quarter of 2008, management observed an improvement in emerged claim severity for the 2005 through 2007 accident years attributed, in part, to changes made in claim handling procedures in 2007. In the third and fourth quarter of 2008, the Company recognized that favorable development in reported severity was a sustained trend and, accordingly, management reduced its reserve estimate. The $46 reserve release represented 3% of the Company net reserves for Personal Lines auto liability claims as of December 31, 2007. Released commercial auto liability reserves by $27, primarily related to accident years 2002 to 2007. Management has observed fewer than previously expected large losses in accident years 2006 and 2007 and lower than previously expected severity on large claims in accident years 2002 to 2005. In 2008, management recognized that favorable development in reported claim severity was a sustained trend and, accordingly, management reduced its estimate of the reserves. The $27 reserve release represented 9% of the Company net reserves for Middle Market commercial auto liability claims as of December 31, 2007. Released reserves for extra-contractual liability claims under non-standard personal auto policies by $24. As part of the agreement to sell its non-standard auto insurance business in November, 2006, the Company continues to be obligated for certain extra-contractual liability claims arising prior to the date of sale. Reserve estimates for extra-contractual liability claims are subject to significant variability depending on the expected settlement of individually large claims and, during 2008, the Company determined that the settlement value of a number of these claims was expected to be less than previously anticipated, resulting in a $24 release of reserves. The $24 reserve release represented 1% of the Company net reserves for Personal Lines auto liability claims as of December 31, 2007. Released reserves for construction defect claims in Specialty Commercial by $10 for accident years 2005 and prior due to lower than expected reported claim activity. Lower than expected claim activity was first noted in the first quarter of 2007 and continued throughout 2007. In the first quarter of 2008, management determined that this was a verifiable trend and reduced reserves accordingly. The $10 reserve release represented 1% of the Company net reserves for Specialty Commercial general liability claims as of December 31, 2007. Strengthened reserves for general liability and products liability claims primarily for accident years 2004 and prior by $67 for losses expected to emerge after 20 years of development. In 2007, management observed that long outstanding general liability claims have been settling for more than previously anticipated and, during the first quarter of 2008, the Company increased the estimate of late development of general liability claims. The $67 reserve strengthening represented 3% of the Company net reserves for general liability claims as of December 31, 2007. Strengthened reserves for allocated loss adjustment expenses on national account general liability claims within Specialty Commercial by $25. Allocated loss adjustment expense reserves on general liability excess and umbrella claims were strengthened for accident years 2004 and prior as the Company observed that the cost of settling these claims has exceeded previous expectations. The $25 reserve strengthening represented 2% of the Company net reserves for Specialty Commercial general liability claims as of December 31, 2007. 49 Table of Contents Other Operations See Other Operations Claims Reserve Activity for information concerning the Company annual evaluation of these reserves and related reinsurance. A rollforward of liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses by segment for Property & Casualty for the year ended December 31, 2007 follows: For the year ended December 31, 2007 Personal Small Middle Specialty Ongoing Other Total Lines Commercial Market Commercial Operations Operations P&C Beginning liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses-gross $ 1,959 $ 3,421 $ 4,536 $ 6,359 $ 16,275 $ 5,716 $ 21,991 Reinsurance and other recoverables 134 214 479 2,260 3,087 1,300 4,387 Beginning liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses-net 1,825 3,207 4,057 4,099 13,188 4,416 17,604 Provision for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses Current accident year before catastrophes 2,576 1,594 1,561 961 6,692 6,692 Current accident year catastrophes 125 28 15 9 177 177 Prior accident years (4 ) (209 ) (16 ) 84 (145 ) 193 48 Total provision for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses 2,697 1,413 1,560 1,054 6,724 193 6,917 Payments (2,503 ) (1,222 ) (1,248 ) (720 ) (5,693 ) (597 ) (6,290 ) Reallocation of reserves for unallocated loss adjustment expenses [1] (58 ) (105 ) (86 ) 124 (125 ) 125 Ending liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses-net 1,961 3,293 4,283 4,557 14,094 4,137 18,231 Reinsurance and other recoverables 81 177 414 2,316 2,988 934 3,922 Ending liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses-gross $ 2,042 $ 3,470 $ 4,697 $ 6,873 $ 17,082 $ 5,071 $ 22,153 Earned premiums $ 3,889 $ 2,736 $ 2,420 $ 1,446 $ 10,491 $ 5 $ 10,496 Loss and loss expense paid ratio [2] 64.4 44.7 51.5 49.8 54.3 Loss and loss expense incurred ratio 69.3 51.6 64.5 73.0 64.1 Prior accident year development (pts.) [3] (0.1 ) (7.6 ) (0.7 ) 5.8 (1.4 ) [1] Prior to the second quarter of 2007, the Company evaluated the adequacy of the reserves for unallocated loss adjustment expenses on a company-wide basis. During the second quarter of 2007, the Company refined its analysis of the reserves at the segment level, resulting in the reallocation of reserves among segments, including a reallocation of reserves from Ongoing Operations to Other Operations. [2] The loss and loss expense paid ratio represents the ratio of paid loss and loss adjustment expenses to earned premiums. [3] Prior accident year development (pts) represents the ratio of prior accident year development to earned premiums. Prior accident years development recorded in 2007 Included within prior accident years development for the year ended December 31, 2007 were the following reserve strengthenings (releases). Personal Small Middle Specialty Ongoing Other Total Lines Commercial Market Commercial Operations Operations P&C Workers compensation $ $ (184 ) $ 40 $ 47 $ (97 ) $ $ (97 ) Package business liability (30 ) (30 ) (30 ) Surety business (22 ) (22 ) (22 ) Commercial auto liability (18 ) (18 ) (18 ) Personal auto liability (16 ) (16 ) (16 ) Errors and omissions (15 ) (15 ) (15 ) Adverse arbitration decision 99 99 General liability (35 ) 59 24 24 Net environmental reserves 25 25 Other reserve re-estimates, net [1] 12 5 (3 ) 15 29 69 98 Total prior accident years development for the year ended December 31, 2007 $ (4 ) $ (209 ) $ (16 ) $ 84 $ (145 ) $ 193 $ 48 [1] Includes reserve discount accretion of $31, including $6 in Small Commercial, $8 in Middle Market, $11 in Specialty Commercial and $6 in Other Operations. 50 Table of Contents During the year ended December 31, 2007, the Company reestimates of prior accident year reserves included the following significant reserve changes. Ongoing Operations Released Small Commercial workers compensation reserves by $151, primarily related to accident years 2002 to 2006. This reserve release is a continuation of favorable developments first recognized in 2005 and 2006. The workers compensation reserve releases in 2007 resulted from a determination that workers compensation losses continue to develop even more favorably from prior expectations due to the California and Florida legal reforms and underwriting actions as well as cost reduction initiatives first instituted in 2003. In particular, the state legal reforms and underwriting actions have resulted in lower than expected medical claim severity. In addition, the Company determined that paid losses related to workers compensation policies sold through payroll service providers were emerging favorably, leading to a release of reserves for the 2003 to 2006 accident years. The $151 reserve release represented 9% of the Company net reserves for Small Commercial workers compensation claims as of December 31, 2006. Released Small Commercial workers compensation reserves related to accident years 2000 and prior by $33. The severity of workers compensation medical claims for these accident years has emerged favorably to previous expectations. As the continued development of these claims has resulted in a sustained favorable trend, management released reserves in the fourth quarter of 2007. The $33 reserve release represented 2% of the Company net reserves for Small Commercial workers compensation claims as of December 31, 2006. Released reserves for Middle Market general liability claims related to the 2003 to 2006 accident years by $49. Beginning in the third quarter of 2007, the Company observed that reported losses for high hazard and umbrella general liability claims for the 2003 to 2006 accident years were emerging favorably and this caused management to reduce its estimate of the cost of future reported claims for these accident years, resulting in a reserve release in the third and fourth quarter of 2007. This reserve development is unrelated to the reserve strengthening in 2005 and 2006 of other Middle Market general liability claims which developed unfavorably due to higher than anticipated loss payments beyond four years of development. The $49 reserve release represented 6% of the Company net reserves for Middle Market general liability claims as of December 31, 2006. Recorded a $30 net release of reserves for Small Commercial package business related to the 2003 to 2006 accident years. Reserve reviews completed during 2007 identified that the frequency of reported liability claims on Small Commercial package business policies for these accident years was lower than the previously expected frequency. In addition, reported loss costs on property coverages have emerged favorably for the 2006 accident year. In recognition of these trends, in the second and fourth quarter of 2007, management reduced reserves by a total of $30. The $30 reserve release represented 3% of the Company net reserves for Small Commercial package business claims as of December 31, 2006. Released reserves for commercial surety business by $22 for accident years 2003 to 2006. Reported losses for commercial surety business have been emerging favorably resulting in the Company lowering its estimate of ultimate unpaid losses during the third quarter of 2007. The $22 reserve release represented 14% of the Company net reserves for fidelity and surety claims as of December 31, 2006. Released Middle Market commercial auto liability reserves by $18 for accident years 2003 and 2004. Since the first quarter of 2007, reported losses for commercial auto liability claims in these accident years have emerged favorably although management did not determine that this was a verifiable trend until the third quarter of 2007 when it released the reserves. The $18 reserve release represented 6% of the Company net reserves for Middle Market auto liability claims as of December 31, 2006. Released reserves for Personal Lines auto liability claims for accident years 2002 to 2006 by $16. This reserve release was a continuation of trends first observed in 2006. During the first quarter of 2006, the Company released auto liability reserves related to the 2005 accident year due to frequency emerging favorable to initial expectations. During the second quarter of 2006, the Company observed that loss cost severity on auto liability claims for the 2004 accident year was emerging favorable to initial expectations and released reserves to recognize this trend. For each of the 2002 to 2006 accident years, the Company has continued to observe favorable trends in reported severity and, in the fourth quarter of 2007, the Company released an additional $16 in reserves. The $16 reserve release represented 1% of the Company net reserves for Personal Lines auto liability claims as of December 31, 2006. Released reserves for E&O claims for accident year 2005 by $15. During the fourth quarter of 2007, the Company updated its analysis of certain professional liability claims and the new analysis showed that claims under E&O policies were emerging favorable to initial expectations, resulting in this reserve release. The $15 reserve release represented 3% of the Company net reserves for professional liability claims as of December 31, 2006. Strengthened Specialty Commercial workers compensation reserves by $47, primarily related to accident years 1987 to 2001. Management has been observing larger than expected increases in loss cost severity, particularly on high deductible and excess policies. The $47 reserve strengthening represented 2% of the Company net reserves for Specialty Commercial workers compensation claims as of December 31, 2006. 51 Table of Contents Strengthened Middle Market workers compensation reserves by $40 for accident years 1973 and prior, primarily driven by a reduction in reinsurance recoverables from the commutation of certain reinsurance treaties. Due to the commutations, within the past two years, net paid losses on these claims have begun to emerge unfavorably to initial expectations and, during 2007, the Company determined that this trend in higher paid losses would ultimately result in unpaid losses settling for more than management previous estimates. The $40 reserve strengthening represented 2% of net reserves for Middle Market workers compensation claims as of December 31, 2006. Strengthened general liability reserves by $39 for accident years more than 20 years old, including $25 in Specialty Commercial. The Company has experienced an increase in defense costs for certain mass tort claims and, during 2007, the Company determined that the increase in defense costs was a sustained trend that resulted in an increase in reserves. The $39 reserve strengthening represented 2% of the Company net reserves for general liability claims as of December 31, 2006. Strengthened reserves for Specialty Commercial general and products liability claims by $34, primarily related to the 1987 to 1997 accident years. Reported losses on general and products liability claims have been emerging unfavorably to previous expectations and loss adjustment expenses have been higher than expected on late emerging claims. The $34 reserve strengthening represented 3% of the Company net reserves for Specialty Commercial general liability claims as of December 31, 2006. Also during 2007, the Company refined its processes for allocating IBNR reserves by accident year, resulting in a reclassification of $347 of IBNR reserves from the 2003 to 2006 accident years to the 2002 and prior accident years. This reclassification of reserves by accident year had no effect on total recorded reserves within any segment or on total recorded reserves for any line of business within a segment. Other Operations See Other Operations Claims Reserve Activity for information concerning the Company annual evaluation of these reserves and related reinsurance. 52 Table of Contents Other Operations Claims Reserve Activity Reserves and reserve activity in the Other Operations segment are categorized and reported as asbestos, environmental, or all other . The all other category of reserves covers a wide range of insurance and assumed reinsurance coverages, including, but not limited to, potential liability for construction defects, lead paint, silica, pharmaceutical products, molestation and other long-tail liabilities. The following table presents reserve activity, inclusive of estimates for both reported and incurred but not reported claims, net of reinsurance, for Other Operations, categorized by asbestos, environmental and all other claims, for the years ended December 31, 2009, 2008 and 2007. Other Operations Losses and Loss Adjustment Expenses Asbestos Environmental All Other [1] Total 2009 Beginning liability net [2] [3] $ 1,884 $ 269 $ 1,628 $ 3,781 Losses and loss adjustment expenses incurred 138 75 29 242 Losses and loss adjustment expenses paid (181 ) (40 ) (171 ) (392 ) Reclassification of asbestos and environmental liabilities [4] 51 3 (54 ) Ending liability net [2] [3] $ 1,892 [6] $ 307 $ 1,432 $ 3,631 2008 Beginning liability net [2] [3] $ 1,998 $ 251 $ 1,888 $ 4,137 Losses and loss adjustment expenses incurred 68 54 7 129 Losses and loss adjustment expenses paid (182 ) (36 ) (267 ) (485 ) Ending liability net [2] [3] $ 1,884 $ 269 $ 1,628 $ 3,781 2007 Beginning liability net [2] [3] $ 2,242 $ 316 $ 1,858 $ 4,416 Losses and loss adjustment expenses incurred 43 28 122 193 Losses and loss adjustment expenses paid (287 ) (93 ) (217 ) (597 ) Reallocation of reserves for unallocated loss adjustment expenses [5] 125 125 Ending liability net [2] [3] $ 1,998 $ 251 $ 1,888 $ 4,137 [1] All Other includes unallocated loss adjustment expense reserves. All Other also includes The Company allowance for uncollectible reinsurance. When the Company commutes a ceded reinsurance contract or settles a ceded reinsurance dispute, the portion of the allowance for uncollectible reinsurance attributable to that commutation or settlement, if any, is reclassified to the appropriate cause of loss. [2] Excludes asbestos and environmental net liabilities reported in Ongoing Operations of $10 and $5, respectively, as of December 31, 2009, $12 and $6, respectively, as of December 31, 2008, and $9 and $6, respectively, as of December 31, 2007. Total net losses and loss adjustment expenses incurred in Ongoing Operations for the years ended December 31, 2009, 2008 and 2007 includes $16, $16 and $10, respectively, related to asbestos and environmental claims. Total net losses and loss adjustment expenses paid in Ongoing Operations for the years ended December 31, 2009, 2008 and 2007 includes $19, $13 and $10, respectively, related to asbestos and environmental claims. [3] Gross of reinsurance, asbestos and environmental reserves, including liabilities in Ongoing Operations, were $2,484 and $367, respectively, as of December 31, 2009, $2,498 and $309, respectively, as of December 31, 2008, and $2,707 and $290, respectively, as of December 31, 2007. [4] During the three months ended June 30, 2009, the Company reclassified liabilities of $54 that were previously classified as All Other to Asbestos and Environmental . [5] Prior to the second quarter of 2007, the Company evaluated the adequacy of the reserves for unallocated loss adjustment expenses on a Company-wide basis. During the second quarter of 2007, the Company refined its analysis of the reserves at the segment level, resulting in the reallocation of reserves among segments, including a reallocation of reserves from Ongoing Operations to Other Operations. [6] The one year and average three-year net paid amounts for asbestos claims, including Ongoing Operations, were $192 and $224, respectively, resulting in a one year net survival ratio of 9.9 and a three year net survival ratio of 8.5. Net survival ratio is the quotient of the net carried reserves divided by the average annual payment amount and is an indication of the number of years that the net carried reserve would last (i.e. survive) if the future annual claim payments were consistent with the calculated historical average. In the fourth quarters of 2009, 2008 and 2007, the Company completed evaluations of certain of its non-asbestos and non-environmental reserves, including its assumed reinsurance liabilities. Based on this evaluation in 2009, the Company recognized unfavorable prior year development of $35, principally driven by higher projected unallocated loss adjustment expenses. The Company recognized favorable prior year development of $30 and $18 in 2008 and 2007, respectively, for its HartRe assumed reinsurance liabilities principally driven by lower than expected reported losses. In 2008 and 2007, the favorable HartRe assumed reinsurance prior year development was offset by unfavorable other non-asbestos and non-environmental prior year development of $30 and $17 in 2008 and 2007, respectively, including $25 of adverse development in 2008 for assumed reinsurance obligations of the Company Bermuda operations. 53 Table of Contents During the third quarters of 2009, 2008 and 2007, the Company completed its annual ground-up environmental reserve evaluations. In each of these evaluations, the Company reviewed all of its open direct domestic insurance accounts exposed to environmental liability, as well as assumed reinsurance accounts and its London Market exposures for both direct and assumed reinsurance. During the third quarters of 2009 and 2008, the Company found estimates for some individual accounts increased based upon additional sites identified, litigation developments and new damage and defense cost information obtained on these accounts since the last review. The Company also found that, during 2008, the decline in the reporting of new accounts and sites has been slower than anticipated in the previous review. In 2007, the Company found estimates for individual cases changed based upon the particular circumstances of each account. These changes were case specific and not as a result of any underlying change in the current environment. The net effect of these account-specific changes as well as actuarial evaluations of new account emergence and historical loss and expense paid experience resulted in $75, $53 and $25 increases in net environmental liabilities in 2009, 2008 and 2007, respectively. The Company currently expects to continue to perform an evaluation of its environmental liabilities annually. In reporting environmental results, the Company divides its gross exposure into Direct, which is subdivided further as: Accounts with future exposure greater than $2.5, Accounts with future exposure less than $2.5, and Other direct; Assumed Reinsurance; and London Market. The unallocated amounts in the Other direct category include an estimate of the necessary reserves for environmental claims related to direct insureds who have not previously tendered environmental claims to the Company. An account may move between categories from one evaluation to the next. For example, an account with future expected exposure of greater than $2.5 in one evaluation may be reevaluated due to changing conditions and re-categorized as less than $2.5 in a subsequent evaluation or vice versa. The following table displays gross environmental reserves and other statistics by category as of December 31, 2009. Summary of Gross Environmental Reserves As of December 31, 2009 Number of Total Gross Environmental Reserves as of September 30, 2009 [1] Accounts [2] Reserves Accounts with future exposure > $2.5 8 $ 43 Accounts with future exposure < $2.5 562 109 Other direct [3] 115 Total Direct 570 267 Assumed Reinsurance 56 London Market 61 Total gross environmental reserves as of September 30, 2009 [1] 384 Gross paid loss activity for the fourth quarter 2009 (18 ) Gross incurred loss activity for the fourth quarter 2009 1 Total gross environmental reserves as of December 31, 2009 [4] [5] $ 367 [1] Gross Environmental Reserves based on the third quarter 2009 environmental reserve study. [2] Number of accounts established as of June 2009. [3] Includes unallocated IBNR. [4] The one year gross paid amount for total environmental claims is $54, resulting in a one year gross survival ratio of 6.8. [5] The three year average gross paid amount for total environmental claims is $75, resulting in a three year gross survival ratio of 4.9. During the second quarters of 2009, 2008 and 2007, the Company completed its annual ground-up asbestos reserve evaluations. As part of these evaluations, the Company reviewed all of its open direct domestic insurance accounts exposed to asbestos liability, as well as assumed reinsurance accounts and its London Market exposures for both direct insurance and assumed reinsurance. Based on this evaluation, the Company increased its net asbestos reserves by $138 in second quarter 2009. For certain direct policyholders, the Company experienced increases in claim severity, expense and costs associated with litigating asbestos coverage matters. Increases in severity and expense were most prevalent among certain, peripheral defendant insureds. The Company also experienced unfavorable development on its assumed reinsurance accounts driven largely by the same factors experienced by the direct policyholders. In the second quarter of 2008, the Company found estimates for individual cases changed based upon the particular circumstances of each account. These changes were case specific and not as a result of any underlying change in the current environment. The net effect of these changes resulted in a $50 increase in net asbestos reserves. In 2007, these evaluations resulted in no addition to the Company net asbestos reserves. The Company currently expects to continue to perform an evaluation of its asbestos liabilities annually. The Company divides its gross asbestos exposures into Direct, Assumed Reinsurance and London Market. The Company further divides its direct asbestos exposures into the following categories: Major Asbestos Defendants (the Top 70 accounts in Tillinghast published Tiers 1 and 2 and Wellington accounts), which are subdivided further as: Structured Settlements, Wellington, Other Major Asbestos Defendants, Accounts with Future Expected Exposures greater than $2.5, Accounts with Future Expected Exposures less than $2.5, and Unallocated. Structured Settlements are those accounts where the Company has reached an agreement with the insured as to the amount and timing of the claim payments to be made to the insured. The Wellington subcategory includes insureds that entered into the Wellington Agreement dated June 19, 1985. The Wellington Agreement provided terms and conditions for how the signatory asbestos producers would access their coverage from the signatory insurers. 54 Table of Contents The Other Major Asbestos Defendants subcategory represents insureds included in Tiers 1 and 2, as defined by Tillinghast that are not Wellington signatories and have not entered into structured settlements with The Hartford. The Tier 1 and 2 classifications are meant to capture the insureds for which there is expected to be significant exposure to asbestos claims. Accounts with future expected exposures greater or less than $2.5 include accounts that are not major asbestos defendants. The Unallocated category includes an estimate of the reserves necessary for asbestos claims related to direct insureds that have not previously tendered asbestos claims to the Company and exposures related to liability claims that may not be subject to an aggregate limit under the applicable policies. An account may move between categories from one evaluation to the next. For example, an account with future expected exposure of greater than $2.5 in one evaluation may be reevaluated due to changing conditions and recategorized as less than $2.5 in a subsequent evaluation or vice versa. The following table displays gross asbestos reserves and other statistics by policyholder category as of December 31, 2009. Summary of Gross Asbestos Reserves As of December 31, 2009 Number of All Time Total All Time Accounts [2] Paid [3] Reserves Ultimate [3] Gross Asbestos Reserves as of June 30, 2009 [1] Major asbestos defendants [5] Structured settlements (includes 4 Wellington accounts) [6] 7 $ 270 $ 475 $ 745 Wellington (direct only) 29 904 43 947 Other major asbestos defendants 29 474 168 642 No known policies (includes 3 Wellington accounts) 5 Accounts with future exposure > $2.5 73 744 547 1,291 Accounts with future exposure < $2.5 1,104 424 119 543 Unallocated [7] 1,687 366 2,053 Total Direct 4,503 1,718 6,221 Assumed Reinsurance 1,110 557 1,667 London Market 581 347 928 Total as of June 30, 2009 [1] 6,194 2,622 8,816 Gross paid loss activity for the third quarter and fourth quarter 2009 143 (143 ) Gross incurred loss activity for the third quarter and fourth quarter 2009 5 5 Total as of December 31, 2009 [4] $ 6,337 $ 2,484 $ 8,821 [1] Gross Asbestos Reserves based on the second quarter 2009 asbestos reserve study. [2] An account may move between categories from one evaluation to the next. Reclassifications were made as a result of the reserve evaluation completed in the second quarter of 2009. [3] All Time Paid represents the total payments with respect to the indicated claim type that have already been made by the Company as of the indicated balance sheet date. All Time Ultimate represents the Company estimate, as of the indicated balance sheet date, of the total payments that are ultimately expected to be made to fully settle the indicated payment type. The amount is the sum of the amounts already paid (e.g. All Time Paid ) and the estimated future payments (e.g. the amount shown in the column labeled Total Reserves ). [4] Survival ratio is a commonly used industry ratio for comparing reserve levels between companies. While the method is commonly used, it is not a predictive technique. Survival ratios may vary over time for numerous reasons such as large payments due to the final resolution of certain asbestos liabilities, or reserve re-estimates. The survival ratio is computed by dividing the recorded reserves by the average of the past three years of payments. The ratio is the calculated number of years the recorded reserves would survive if future annual payments were equal to the average annual payments for the past three years. The 3-year gross survival ratio of 8.0 as of December 31, 2009 is computed based on total paid losses of $937 for the period from January 1, 2007 to December 31, 2009. As of December 31, 2009, the one year gross paid amount for total asbestos claims is $245 resulting in a one year gross survival ratio of 10.1. [5] Includes 25 open accounts at both June 30, 2009 and 2008. [6] Structured settlements include the Company reserves related to PPG Industries, Inc. ( PPG ). In January 2009, the Company, along with approximately three dozen other insurers, entered into a modified agreement in principle with PPG to resolve the Company coverage obligations for all of its PPG asbestos liabilities, including principally those arising out of its 50% stock ownership of Pittsburgh Corning Corporation ( PCC ), a joint venture with Corning, Inc. The agreement is contingent on the fulfillment of certain conditions, including the confirmation of a PCC plan of reorganization under Section 524(g) of the Bankruptcy Code, which have not yet been met. [7] Includes closed accounts (exclusive of Major Asbestos Defendants) and unallocated IBNR. For paid and incurred losses and loss adjustment expenses reporting, the Company classifies its asbestos and environmental reserves into three categories: Direct, Assumed Reinsurance and London Market. Direct insurance includes primary and excess coverage. Assumed reinsurance includes both treaty reinsurance (covering broad categories of claims or blocks of business) and facultative reinsurance (covering specific risks or individual policies of primary or excess insurance companies). London Market business includes the business written by one or more of the Company subsidiaries in the United Kingdom, which are no longer active in the insurance or reinsurance business. Such business includes both direct insurance and assumed reinsurance. Of the three categories of claims (Direct, Assumed Reinsurance and London Market), direct policies tend to have the greatest factual development from which to estimate the Company exposures. 55 Table of Contents Assumed reinsurance exposures are inherently less predictable than direct insurance exposures because the Company may not receive notice of a reinsurance claim until the underlying direct insurance claim is mature. This causes a delay in the receipt of information at the reinsurer level and adds to the uncertainty of estimating related reserves. London Market exposures are the most uncertain of the three categories of claims. As a participant in the London Market (comprised of both Lloyd of London and London Market companies), certain subsidiaries of the Company wrote business on a subscription basis, with those subsidiaries involvement being limited to a relatively small percentage of a total contract placement. Claims are reported, via a broker, to the lead underwriter and, once agreed to, are presented to the following markets for concurrence. This reporting and claim agreement process makes estimating liabilities for this business the most uncertain of the three categories of claims. The following table sets forth, for the years ended December 31, 2009, 2008 and 2007, paid and incurred loss activity by the three categories of claims for asbestos and environmental. Paid and Incurred Losses and Loss Adjustment Expenses ( LAE ) Development Asbestos and Environmental Asbestos [1] Environmental [1] Paid Incurred Paid Incurred Losses & LAE Losses & LAE Losses & LAE Losses & LAE 2009 Gross Direct $ 160 $ 117 $ 29 $ 92 Assumed Reinsurance 56 52 7 London Market 18 10 12 Total 234 169 46 104 Ceded (53 ) (31 ) (6 ) (29 ) Net prior to reclassification 181 138 40 75 Reclassification of asbestos and environmental liabilities [2] 51 3 Net $ 181 $ 189 $ 40 $ 78 2008 Gross Direct $ 207 $ 76 $ 32 $ 69 Assumed Reinsurance 61 9 (17 ) London Market 19 6 13 Total 287 76 47 65 Ceded (105 ) (8 ) (11 ) (11 ) Net $ 182 $ 68 $ 36 $ 54 2007 Gross Direct $ 251 $ (289 ) $ 90 $ 43 Assumed Domestic 112 72 16 London Market 31 76 8 Total 394 (141 ) 114 43 Ceded (107 ) 184 (21 ) (15 ) Net $ 287 $ 43 $ 93 $ 28 [1] Excludes asbestos and environmental paid and incurred loss and LAE reported in Ongoing Operations. Total gross losses and LAE incurred in Ongoing Operations for the years ended December 31, 2009, 2008 and 2007 includes $17, $15 and $9, respectively, related to asbestos and environmental claims. Total gross losses and LAE paid in Ongoing Operations for the years ended December 31, 2009, 2008 and 2007 includes $20, $12 and $10, respectively, related to asbestos and environmental claims. [2] During the three months ended June 30, 2009, the Company reclassified liabilities of $54 that were previously classified as All Other to Asbestos and Environmental . During the second quarter of 2007, an arbitration panel found that a Hartford subsidiary, established as a captive reinsurance company in the 1970s by The Hartford former parent, ITT, had additional obligations to ITT primary insurance carrier under ITT captive insurance program, which ended in 1993. When ITT spun off The Hartford in 1995, the former captive became a Hartford subsidiary. The arbitration concerned whether certain claims could be presented to the former captive in a different manner than ITT primary insurance carrier historically had presented them. Principally as a result of this adverse arbitration decision, the Company recorded a charge of $99. 56 Table of Contents The Company provides an allowance for uncollectible reinsurance, reflecting management best estimate of reinsurance cessions that may be uncollectible in the future due to reinsurers unwillingness or inability to pay. During the second quarters of 2009, 2008 and 2007, the Company completed its annual evaluations of the collectability of the reinsurance recoverables and the adequacy of the allowance for uncollectible reinsurance associated with older, long-term casualty liabilities reported in the Other Operations segment. In conducting this evaluation, the Company used its most recent detailed evaluations of ceded liabilities reported in the segment. The Company analyzed the overall credit quality of the Company reinsurers, recent trends in arbitration and litigation outcomes in disputes between cedants and reinsurers, and recent developments in commutation activity between reinsurers and cedants. As a result of the second quarter of 2009 evaluation, the Company reduced its allowance for uncollectible reinsurance by $20 principally to reflect decreased reinsurance recoverable dispute exposure and favorable activity since the last evaluation. As of December 31, 2009, the allowance for uncollectible reinsurance for Other Operations totals $226. The evaluations in the second quarters of 2008 and 2007 resulted in no addition to the allowance for uncollectible reinsurance. The Company currently expects to perform its regular comprehensive review of Other Operations reinsurance recoverables annually. Due to the inherent uncertainties as to collection and the length of time before reinsurance recoverables become due, particularly for older, long-term casualty liabilities, it is possible that future adjustments to the Company reinsurance recoverables, net of the allowance, could be required. Consistent with the Company long-standing reserving practices, the Company will continue to review and monitor its reserves in the Other Operations segment regularly and, where future developments indicate, make appropriate adjustments to the reserves. Impact of Re-estimates The establishment of Property and Casualty reserves is an estimation process, using a variety of methods, assumptions and data elements. Ultimate losses may vary significantly from the current estimates. Many factors can contribute to these variations and the need to change the previous estimate of required reserve levels. Subsequent changes can generally be thought of as being the result of the emergence of additional facts that were not known or anticipated at the time of the prior reserve estimate and/or changes in interpretations of information and trends. The table below shows the range of annual reserve re-estimates experienced by The Hartford over the past five years. The amount of prior accident year development (as shown in the reserve rollforward) for a given calendar year is expressed as a percent of the beginning calendar year reserves, net of reinsurance. The percentage relationships presented are significantly influenced by the facts and circumstances of each particular year and by the fact that only the last five years are included in the range. Accordingly, these percentages are not intended to be a prediction of the range of possible future variability. See Impact of key assumptions on reserve volatility within this section for further discussion of the potential for variability in recorded loss reserves. Personal Small Middle Specialty Ongoing Other Total Lines Commercial Market Commercial Operations Operations P&C Range of prior accident year unfavorable (favorable) development for the five years ended December 31, 2009 [1] (5.2) (0.2 ) (6.5) (1.0 ) (4.3) 1.6 (3.5) 3.1 (2.9) 0.3 3.1 7.4 (1.2) 1.5 [1] Over the past ten years, reserve re-estimates for total Property & Casualty ranged from (1.2)% to 21.5%. Excluding the reserve strengthening for asbestos and environmental reserves, over the past ten years reserve re-estimates for total Property & Casualty ranged from (3.0)% to 1.6%. The potential variability of the Company Property & Casualty reserves would normally be expected to vary by segment and the types of loss exposures insured by those segments. Illustrative factors influencing the potential reserve variability for each of the segments are discussed above. 57 Table of Contents Life Estimated Gross Profits Used in the Valuation and Amortization of Assets and Liabilities Associated with Variable Annuity and Other Universal Life-Type Contracts Estimated gross profits ( EGPs ) are used in the amortization of: Life deferred policy acquisition cost ( DAC ) asset, which includes the present value of future profits; sales inducement assets ( SIA ); and unearned revenue reserves ( URR ). See Note 7 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information on DAC. See Note 10 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information on SIA. EGPs are also used in the valuation of reserves for death and other insurance benefit features on variable annuity and universal life-type contracts. See Note 9 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information on death and other insurance benefit feature reserves. The specific breakdown of the most significant EGP based balances as of December 31, 2009 and 2008 are as follows: Individual Variable Individual Variable Annuities U.S. Annuities Japan Individual Life 2009 2008 2009 2008 2009 2008 DAC $ 3,378 $ 4,844 $ 1,566 $ 1,834 $ 2,528 $ 2,931 SIA $ 324 $ 436 $ 28 $ 19 $ 42 $ 36 URR $ 85 $ 109 $ 1 $ $ 1,185 $ 1,299 Death and Other Insurance Benefit Reserves $ 1,232 $ 867 $ 580 $ 229 $ 76 $ 40 For most contracts, the Company estimates gross profits over 20 years as EGPs emerging subsequent to that timeframe are immaterial. Products sold in a particular year are aggregated into cohorts. Future gross profits for each cohort are projected over the estimated lives of the underlying contracts, based on future account value projections for variable annuity and variable universal life products. The projection of future account values requires the use of certain assumptions including: separate account returns; separate account fund mix; fees assessed against the contract holder account balance; surrender and lapse rates; interest margin; mortality; and hedging costs. Changes in these assumptions and, in addition, changes to other policyholder behavior assumptions such as resets, partial surrenders, reaction to price increases, and asset allocations causes EGPs to fluctuate which impacts earnings. Prior to the second quarter of 2009, the Company determined EGPs using the mean derived from stochastic scenarios that had been calibrated to the estimated separate account return. The Company also completed a comprehensive assumption study, in the third quarter of each year, and revised best estimate assumptions used to estimate future gross profits when the EGPs in the Company models fell outside of an independently determined reasonable range of EGPs. The Company also considered, on a quarterly basis, other qualitative factors such as product, regulatory and policyholder behavior trends and would revise EGPs if those trends were expected to be significant. Beginning with the second quarter of 2009, the Company now determines EGPs from a single deterministic reversion to mean ( RTM ) separate account return projection which is an estimation technique commonly used by insurance entities to project future separate account returns. Through this estimation technique, the Company DAC model is adjusted to reflect actual account values at the end of each quarter. Through consideration of recent market returns, the Company will unlock, or adjust, projected returns over a future period so that the account value returns to the long-term expected rate of return, providing that those projected returns do not exceed certain caps or floors. This DAC Unlock for future separate account returns is determined each quarter. Under RTM, the expected long term weighted average rate of return is 7.1% and 5.6% for U.S. and Japan, respectively. The expected long-term equity total rate of return is 9.5% and 8.5% for the U.S. and Japan, respectively, and the expected long-term fixed income rate of return is 6.0% and 4.0% for the U.S. and Japan, respectively. In the third quarter of each year, the Company completes a comprehensive non-market related policyholder behavior assumption study and incorporates the results of those studies into its projection of future gross profits. Additionally, throughout the year, the Company evaluates various aspects of policyholder behavior and periodically revises its policyholder assumptions as emerging data indicates that changes are warranted. In the fourth quarter of 2009, recent market volatility provided the Company additional information regarding policyholder behavior, related to living benefit lapses, withdrawal rates and GMDB lapses. This information was incorporated into the Company assumptions used in determining estimated gross profits. Upon completion of an assumption study or evaluation of new information, the Company will revise its assumptions to reflect its current best estimate. These assumption revisions will change the projected account values and the related EGPs in the DAC, SIA and URR amortization models, as well as the death and other insurance benefit reserving model. All assumption changes that affect the estimate of future EGPs including the update of current account values, the use of the RTM estimation technique and policyholder behavior assumptions are considered an Unlock in the period of revision. An Unlock adjusts DAC, SIA, URR and death and other insurance benefit reserve balances in the Consolidated Balance Sheets with an offsetting benefit or charge in the Consolidated Statements of Operations in the period of the revision. An Unlock that results in an after-tax benefit generally occurs as a result of actual experience or future expectations of product profitability being favorable compared to previous estimates. An Unlock that results in an after-tax charge generally occurs as a result of actual experience or future expectations of product profitability being unfavorable compared to previous estimates. 58 Table of Contents An Unlock revises EGPs, on a quarterly basis, to reflect the Company current best estimate assumptions. After each quarterly Unlock, the Company also tests the aggregate recoverability of DAC by comparing the DAC balance to the present value of future EGPs. As of December 31, 2009, the margin between the DAC balance and the present value of future EGPs was 23% and 59% for U.S. and Japan individual variable annuities, respectively. If the margin between the DAC asset and the present value of future EGPs is exhausted, further reductions in EGPs would cause portions of DAC to be unrecoverable. Estimated gross profits are also used to determine the expected excess benefits and assessments included in the measurement of death and other insurance benefit reserves. These excess benefits and assessments are derived from a range of stochastic scenarios that have been calibrated to the Company RTM separate account returns. The determination of death and other insurance benefit reserves is also impacted by discount rates, lapses, volatilities and mortality assumptions. Unlocks The after-tax impact on the Company assets and liabilities as a result of the Unlocks for years ended 2009, 2008 and 2007, were: For the year ended 2009: Death and Other Insurance Segment Benefit After-tax (charge) benefit DAC URR Reserves [1] SIA Total [2] Retail $ (429 ) $ 17 $ (158 ) $ (36 ) $ (606 ) Retirement Plans (55 ) (1 ) (56 ) Individual Life (101 ) 54 (4 ) (51 ) Institutional (1 ) (1 ) International [3] (103 ) 6 (210 ) (10 ) (317 ) Corporate (3 ) (3 ) Total $ (692 ) $ 77 $ (372 ) $ (47 ) $ (1,034 ) [1] As a result of the Unlock, Retail reserves increased $522, pre-tax, offset by an increase in reinsurance recoverables of $279, pre-tax. International reserves increased $357, pre-tax, offset by an increase in reinsurance recoverables of $34, pre-tax. [2] The most significant contributor to the Unlock was a result of actual separate account returns being significantly below our aggregated estimated return for the period from October 1, 2008 to March 31, 2009, offset by actual returns being greater than our aggregated estimated return for the period from April 1, 2009 to December 31, 2009. [3] Includes $(49) related to DAC recoverability impairment associated with the decision to suspend sales in the U.K. variable annuity business. For the year ended 2008: Death and Other Insurance Segment Benefit After-tax (charge) benefit DAC URR Reserves [1] SIA Total [2] Retail $ (648 ) $ 18 $ (75 ) $ (27 ) $ (732 ) Retirement Plans (49 ) (49 ) Individual Life (29 ) (12 ) (3 ) (44 ) International (23 ) (1 ) (90 ) (2 ) (116 ) Corporate 9 9 Total $ (740 ) $ 5 $ (168 ) $ (29 ) $ (932 ) [1] As a result of the Unlock, Retail reserves increased $389, pre-tax, offset by an increase in reinsurance recoverables of $273, pre-tax. International reserves increased $164, pre-tax, offset by an increase in reinsurance recoverables of $25, pre-tax. [2] The most significant contributors to the Unlock were: Actual separate account returns were significantly below our aggregated estimated return. The Company reduced its 20-year projected separate account return assumption from 7.8% to 7.2% in the U.S. Retirement Plans reduced its estimate of future fees as plans met contractual size limits ( breakpoints ), causing a lower fee schedule to apply, and the Company increased its assumption for future deposits by existing plan participants. 59 Table of Contents For the year ended 2007: Death and Other Insurance Segment Benefit After-tax (charge) benefit DAC URR Reserves [1] SIA Total [2] Retail $ 180 $ (5 ) $ (4 ) $ 9 $ 180 Retirement Plans (9 ) (9 ) Institutional 1 1 Individual Life 24 (8 ) 16 International 16 6 22 Corporate 3 3 Total $ 215 $ (13 ) $ 2 $ 9 $ 213 [1] As a result of the Unlock, Retail reserves decreased $4, pre-tax, offset by a decrease, in reinsurance recoverables of $10, pre-tax. [2] The most significant contributors to the Unlock were: Actual separate account returns were above our aggregated estimated return. During the third quarter of 2007, the Company estimated gross profits using the mean of EGPs derived from a set of stochastic scenarios that have been calibrated to our estimated separate account return as compared to prior year where we used a single deterministic estimation. The impact of this change in estimation was a benefit of $20, after-tax, for U.S. variable annuities, and $13, after-tax, for Japan variable annuities. Dynamic lapse behavior assumptions, reflecting that lapse behavior will be different depending upon market movements, along with other base lapse rate assumption changes resulted in an approximate benefit of $40, after-tax, for U.S. variable annuities. Other-Than-Temporary Impairments and Valuation Allowances on Investments The Company has a monitoring process overseen by a committee of investment and accounting professionals that identifies investments that are subject to an enhanced evaluation on a quarterly basis to determine if an other-than-temporary impairment ( impairment ) is present for AFS securities or a valuation allowance is required for mortgage loans. This evaluation is a quantitative and qualitative process, which is subject to risks and uncertainties. For further discussion of the accounting policies, see the Significant Investment Accounting Policies Section in Note 5 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. For a discussion of results, see Other-Than-Temporary Impairments within the Investment Credit Risk section of the MD&A. 60 Table of Contents Living Benefits Required to be Fair Valued (in Other Policyholder funds and Benefits Payable ) Fair values for GMWB and GMAB contracts are calculated based upon internally developed models because active, observable markets do not exist for those items. The fair value of the Company guaranteed benefit liabilities, classified as embedded derivatives, and the related reinsurance and customized freestanding derivatives is calculated as an aggregation of the following components: Best Estimate Claims Costs; Credit Standing Adjustment; and Margins. The resulting aggregation is reconciled or calibrated, if necessary, to market information that is, or may be, available to the Company, but may not be observable by other market participants, including reinsurance discussions and transactions. The Company believes the aggregation of these components, as necessary and as reconciled or calibrated to the market information available to the Company, results in an amount that the Company would be required to transfer, or receive, to or from market participants in an active liquid market, if one existed, for those market participants to assume the risks associated with the guaranteed minimum benefits and the related reinsurance and customized derivatives. The fair value is likely to materially diverge from the ultimate settlement of the liability as the Company believes settlement will be based on our best estimate assumptions rather than those best estimate assumptions plus risk margins. In the absence of any transfer of the guaranteed benefit liability to a third party, the release of risk margins is likely to be reflected as realized gains in future periods net income. Each of the components described below are unobservable in the marketplace and require subjectivity by the Company in determining their value. Best Estimate Claims Costs The Best Estimate Claims Costs is calculated based on actuarial and capital market assumptions related to projected cash flows, including benefits and related contract charges, over the lives of the contracts, incorporating expectations concerning policyholder behavior such as lapses, fund selection, resets and withdrawal utilization (for the customized derivatives, policyholder behavior is prescribed in the derivative contract). Because of the dynamic and complex nature of these cash flows, best estimate assumptions and a Monte Carlo stochastic process involving the generation of thousands of scenarios that assume risk neutral returns consistent with swap rates and a blend of observable implied index volatility levels were used. Estimating these cash flows involves numerous estimates and subjective judgments including those regarding expected markets rates of return, market volatility, correlations of market index returns to funds, fund performance, discount rates and policyholder behavior. At each valuation date, the Company assumes expected returns based on: risk-free rates as represented by the current LIBOR forward curve rates; forward market volatility assumptions for each underlying index based primarily on a blend of observed market implied volatility data; correlations of market returns across underlying indices based on actual observed market returns and relationships over the ten years preceding the valuation date; three years of history for fund regression; and current risk-free spot rates as represented by the current LIBOR spot curve to determine the present value of expected future cash flows produced in the stochastic projection process. As many guaranteed benefit obligations are relatively new in the marketplace, actual policyholder behavior experience is limited. As a result, estimates of future policyholder behavior are subjective and based on analogous internal and external data. As markets change, mature and evolve and actual policyholder behavior emerges, management continually evaluates the appropriateness of its assumptions for this component of the fair value model. On a daily basis, the Company updates capital market assumptions used in the GMWB liability model such as interest rates and equity indices. On a weekly basis, the blend of implied equity index volatilities are updated. The Company continually monitors various aspects of policyholder behavior and may modify certain of its assumptions, including living benefit lapses and withdrawal rates, if credible emerging data indicates that changes are warranted. At a minimum, all policyholder behavior assumptions are reviewed and updated, as appropriate, in conjunction with the completion of the Company comprehensive study to refine its estimate of future gross profits during the third quarter of each year. Credit Standing Adjustment This assumption makes an adjustment that market participants would make to reflect the risk that guaranteed benefit obligations or the GMWB reinsurance recoverables will not be fulfilled ( nonperformance risk ). As a result of sustained volatility in the Company credit default spreads, during 2009 the Company changed its estimate of the Credit Standing Adjustment to incorporate observable Company and reinsurer credit default spreads from capital markets, adjusted for market recoverability. Prior to the first quarter of 2009, the Company calculated the Credit Standing Adjustment by using default rates published by rating agencies, adjusted for market recoverability. For twelve months ended December 31, 2009 and 2008, the credit standing adjustment resulted in a pre-tax gain of $154 and $6. 61 Table of Contents Margins The behavior risk margin adds a margin that market participants would require for the risk that the Company assumptions about policyholder behavior could differ from actual experience. The behavior risk margin is calculated by taking the difference between adverse policyholder behavior assumptions and best estimate assumptions. During 2009 and 2008, the Company revised certain adverse assumptions in the behavior risk margin for withdrawals, lapses and annuitization behavior as emerging policyholder behavior experience suggested the prior adverse policyholder behavior assumptions were no longer representative of an appropriate margin for risk. Assumption updates, including policyholder behavior assumptions, affected best estimates and margins for a total realized gain pre-tax of $566 and $470 for the years ended December 31, 2009 and 2008, respectively. For the year ended December 31, 2007, these updates affected best estimates resulting in a pre-tax realized loss of $(158). For additional information on the Company GMWB liability, see Equity Risk within the Capital Markets Risk Management section of MD&A for additional sensitivities. In addition to the non-market-based updates described above, for the twelve months ended December 31, 2009, 2008, and 2007, the Company recognized non-market-based updates driven by the relative outperformance (underperformance) of the underlying actively managed funds as compared to their respective indices resulting in a gain (loss) of approximately $550, $(355), and $(2), respectively. Goodwill Impairment Goodwill balances are reviewed for impairment at least annually or more frequently if events occur or circumstances change that would indicate that a triggering event has occurred. A reporting unit is defined as an operating segment or one level below an operating segment. Most of the Company reporting units, for which goodwill has been allocated, are equivalent to the Company operating segments as there is no discrete financial information available for the separate components of the segment or all of the components of the segment have similar economic characteristics. The 401(k), 457 and 403(b) components of Retirement Plans have been aggregated into one reporting unit; the variable life, universal life and term life components of Individual Life have been aggregated into one reporting unit; the private placement life insurance and institutional investment products components of the Institutional Solutions Group have been aggregated into one reporting unit; the group disability and group life components of Group Benefits have been aggregated into one reporting unit; and the homeowners and automobile components of Personal Lines have been aggregated into one reporting unit. In circumstances where the components of an operating segment constitute a business for which discrete financial information is available and segment management regularly reviews the operating results of that component such as with Other Retail, which combined with Individual Annuity constitutes the Retail operating segment, Hartford Financial Products, and Federal Trust Corporation, the Company has classified those components as reporting units. As of December 31, 2009, the Company had goodwill allocated to the following reporting units: Segment Goodwill Goodwill in Corporate Total Other Retail $ 159 $ 92 $ 251 Retirement Plans 87 69 156 Individual Life 224 118 342 Group Benefits 138 138 Personal Lines 119 119 Hartford Financial Products within Specialty Commercial 30 30 Federal Trust Corporation within Corporate[1] 168 168 Total $ 619 $ 585 $ 1,204 [1] In 2009, the Company completed the acquisition of Federal Trust Corporation which resulted in additional goodwill of $168 in Corporate. As of December 31, 2008, the Company had goodwill allocated to the following reporting units: Segment Goodwill Goodwill in Corporate Total Other Retail $ 159 $ 92 $ 251 Retirement Plans 79 69 148 Institutional Solutions Group 32 32 Individual Life 224 118 342 Group Benefits 138 138 Personal Lines 119 119 Hartford Financial Products within Specialty Commercial 30 30 Total $ 611 $ 449 $ 1,060 The goodwill impairment test follows a two step process. In the first step, the fair value of a reporting unit is compared to its carrying value. If the carrying value of a reporting unit exceeds its fair value, the second step of the impairment test is performed for purposes of measuring the impairment. In the second step, the fair value of the reporting unit is allocated to all of the assets and liabilities of the reporting unit to determine an implied goodwill value. This allocation is similar to a purchase price allocation performed in purchase accounting. If the carrying amount of the reporting unit goodwill exceeds the implied goodwill value, an impairment loss shall be recognized in an amount equal to that excess. 62 Table of Contents Management determination of the fair value of each reporting unit incorporates multiple inputs including discounted cash flow calculations, peer company price to earnings multiples, the level of the Company own share price and assumptions that market participants would make in valuing the reporting unit. Other assumptions include levels of economic capital, future business growth, earnings projections, assets under management for Life reporting units and the weighted average cost of capital used for purposes of discounting. Decreases in the amount of economic capital allocated to a reporting unit, decreases in business growth, decreases in earnings projections and increases in the weighted average cost of capital will all cause the reporting unit fair value to decrease. The Company goodwill impairment test performed during the first quarter of 2009 for the Life reporting units, resulted in a write-down of $32 in the Institutional reporting unit of Corporate. Goodwill within Corporate is primarily attributed to the Company buy-back of Life in 2000 and is allocated to the various Life reporting units. As a result of rating agency downgrades of Life financial strength ratings during the first quarter of 2009 and high credit spreads related to The Hartford, during the first quarter of 2009, the Company believed its ability to generate new business in the Institutional reporting unit would remain pressured for ratings-sensitive products. The Company believed goodwill associated with the Institutional line of business was impaired due to the pressure on new sales for Institutional ratings-sensitive business and the significant unrealized losses in Institutional investment portfolios. The Company completed its annual goodwill assessment for the remaining individual reporting units within Life and Property & Casualty as of January 1, 2009 and September 30, 2009, respectively, which resulted in no additional write-downs of goodwill for the year ended December 31, 2009. All remaining reporting units substantially passed the first step of their annual impairment tests with the exception of the Individual Life Division. Individual Life completed the second step of the annual goodwill impairment test resulting in an implied goodwill value substantially in excess of its carrying value. The Company will complete their annual impairment test for the Life reporting units during the first quarter of 2010 and expects to complete the Property & Casualty reporting units in the fourth quarter of 2010. The Company acquired Federal Trust Corporation ( FTC ) on June 24, 2009 for $10, resulting in goodwill of $168. No adverse events or impairment triggers have occurred since acquisition that would cause the Company to believe the bank fair value has declined below its carrying value. The Company will complete its annual impairment test for FTC goodwill in the second quarter of 2010. See Note 8 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for information on the results of goodwill impairment tests performed in 2008 and 2007. Valuation of Investments and Derivative Instruments The Hartford investments in fixed maturities include bonds, redeemable preferred stock and commercial paper. These investments, along with certain equity securities, which include common and non-redeemable preferred stocks, are classified as available-for-sale ( AFS ) and are carried at fair value. The after-tax difference from cost or amortized cost is reflected in stockholders equity as a component of Other Comprehensive Income (Loss), after adjustments for the effect of deducting the life and pension policyholders share of the immediate participation guaranteed contracts and certain life and annuity deferred policy acquisition costs and reserve adjustments. The equity investments associated with the variable annuity products offered in Japan are recorded at fair value and are classified as trading with changes in fair value recorded in net investment income. Policy loans are carried at outstanding balance. Mortgage loans are recorded at the outstanding principal balance adjusted for amortization of premiums or discounts and net of valuation allowances. Short-term investments are carried at amortized cost, which approximates fair value. Limited partnerships and other alternative investments are reported at their carrying value with the change in carrying value accounted for under the equity method and accordingly the Company share of earnings are included in net investment income. Recognition of limited partnerships and other alternative investment income is delayed due to the availability of the related financial information, as private equity and other funds are generally on a three-month delay and hedge funds are on a one-month delay. Accordingly, income for the years ended December 31, 2009, 2008 and 2007 may not include the full impact of current year changes in valuation of the underlying assets and liabilities, which are generally obtained from the limited partnerships and other alternative investments general partners. Other investments primarily consist of derivatives instruments which are carried at fair value. Available-for-Sale Securities and Short-Term Investments The fair value of AFS securities and short-term investments in an active and orderly market (i.e., not distressed or forced liquidation) is determined by management after considering one of three primary sources of information: third-party pricing services, independent broker quotations or pricing matrices. Security pricing is applied using a waterfall approach whereby prices are first sought from third-party pricing services, the remaining unpriced securities are submitted to independent brokers for prices, or lastly, securities are priced using a pricing matrix. Typical inputs used by these pricing methods include, but are not limited to, reported trades, benchmark yields, issuer spreads, bids, offers, and/or estimated cash flows and prepayments speeds. Based on the typical trading volumes and the lack of quoted market prices for fixed maturities, third party pricing services will normally derive the security prices through recent reported trades for identical or similar securities making adjustments through the reporting date based upon available market observable information as outlined above. If there are no recent reported trades, the third-party pricing services and brokers may use matrix or model processes to develop a security price where future cash flow expectations are developed based upon collateral performance and discounted at an estimated market rate. For further discussion, see the Available-for-Sale and Short-Term Investments section in Note 4 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 63 Table of Contents The Company has analyzed the third-party pricing services valuation methodologies and related inputs, and has also evaluated the various types of securities in its investment portfolio to determine an appropriate fair value hierarchy level based upon trading activity and the observability of market inputs. For further discussion of fair value measurement, see Note 4 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. The following table presents the fair value of AFS securities and short-term investments by pricing source and hierarchy level as of December 31, 2009. Quoted Prices in Active Markets Significant Significant for Identical Observable Unobservable Assets Inputs Inputs (Level 1) (Level 2) (Level 3) Total Priced via third-party pricing services $ 785 $ 58,274 $ 1,711 $ 60,770 Priced via independent broker quotations 4,071 4,071 Priced via matrices 7,053 7,053 Priced via other methods [1] 480 480 Short-term investments 6,846 3,511 10,357 Total $ 7,631 $ 61,785 $ 13,315 $ 82,731 % of Total 9.2 % 74.7 % 16.1 % 100.0 % [1] Represents securities for which adjustments were made to reduce prices received from third parties and certain private equity investments that are carried at the Company determination of fair value from inception. The fair value is the amount at which the security could be exchanged in a current transaction between knowledgeable, unrelated willing parties using inputs, including assumptions and estimates, a market participant would utilize. As the estimated fair value of a security utilizes assumptions and estimates, the amount that may be realized may differ significantly. Valuation of Derivative Instruments, excluding embedded derivatives within liability contracts and reinsurance related derivatives Derivative instruments are reported on the Consolidated Balance Sheets at fair value and are reported in Other Investments and Other Liabilities. Derivative instruments are fair valued using pricing valuation models, which utilize market data inputs or independent broker quotations. Excluding embedded and reinsurance related derivatives, as of December 31, 2009 and 2008, 97% and 94% of derivatives, respectively, based upon notional values, were priced by valuation models, which utilize independent market data. The remaining derivatives were priced by broker quotations. The derivatives are valued using mid-market level inputs that are predominantly observable in the market, with the exception of the customized swap contracts that hedge guaranteed minimum withdrawal benefits ( GMWB ) liabilities. Inputs used to value derivatives include, but are not limited to, swap interest rates, foreign currency forward and spot rates, credit spreads and correlations, interest and equity volatility and equity index levels. The Company performs a monthly analysis on derivative valuations which includes both quantitative and qualitative analysis. Examples of procedures performed include, but are not limited to, review of pricing statistics and trends, back testing recent trades, analyzing the impacts of changes in the market environment, and review of changes in market value for each derivative including those derivatives priced by brokers. The following table presents the notional value and net fair value of derivative instruments by hierarchy level as of December 31, 2009. Notional Value Fair Value Quoted prices in active markets for identical assets (Level 1) $ 2,279 $ 6 Significant observable inputs (Level 2) 40,871 (9 ) Significant unobservable inputs (Level 3) 44,917 337 Total $ 88,067 $ 334 The following table presents the notional value and net fair value of the derivative instruments within the Level 3 securities classification as of December 31, 2009. Notional Value Fair Value Credit derivatives $ 5,166 $ (193 ) Interest derivatives 2,591 (2 ) Equity derivatives 37,135 532 Currency derivatives 25 Total Level 3 $ 44,917 $ 337 64 Table of Contents Derivative instruments classified as Level 3 include complex derivatives, primarily consisting of equity options and swaps, interest rate derivatives which have interest rate optionality, certain credit default swaps, and long-dated interest rate swaps. These derivative instruments are valued using pricing models which utilize both observable and unobservable inputs and, to a lesser extent, broker quotations. A derivative instrument that is priced using both observable and unobservable inputs will be classified as a Level 3 financial instrument in its entirety if the unobservable input is significant in developing the price. The Company utilizes derivative instruments to manage the risk associated with certain assets and liabilities. However, the derivative instrument may not be classified with the same fair value hierarchy level as the associated assets and liabilities. Pension and Other Postretirement Benefit Obligations The Company maintains a U.S. qualified defined benefit pension plan (the Plan ) that covers substantially all employees, as well as unfunded excess plans to provide benefits in excess of amounts permitted to be paid to participants of the Plan under the provisions of the Internal Revenue Code. The Company has also entered into individual retirement agreements with certain retired directors providing for unfunded supplemental pension benefits. In addition, the Company provides certain health care and life insurance benefits for eligible retired employees. The Company maintains international plans which represent an immaterial percentage of total pension assets, liabilities and expense and, for reporting purposes, are combined with domestic plans. Pursuant to accounting principles related to the Company pension and other postretirement obligations to employees under its various benefit plans, the Company is required to make a significant number of assumptions in order to calculate the related liabilities and expenses each period. The two economic assumptions that have the most impact on pension and other postretirement expense are the discount rate and the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets. In determining the discount rate assumption, the Company utilizes a discounted cash flow analysis of the Company pension and other postretirement obligations and currently available market and industry data. The yield curve utilized in the cash flow analysis is comprised of bonds rated Aa or higher with maturities primarily between zero and thirty years. Based on all available information, it was determined that 6.00% and 5.75% were the appropriate discount rates as of December 31, 2009 to calculate the Company pension and other postretirement obligations, respectively. Accordingly, the 6.00% and 5.75% discount rates will also be used to determine the Company 2010 pension and other postretirement expense, respectively. At December 31, 2008, the discount rate was 6.25% for both pension and other postretirement expense. As of December 31, 2009, a 25 basis point increase/decrease in the discount rate would decrease/increase the pension and other postretirement obligations by $122 and $9, respectively. The Company determines the expected long-term rate of return assumption based on an analysis of the Plan portfolio historical compound rates of return since 1979 (the earliest date for which comparable portfolio data is available) and over 5 year and 10 year periods. The Company selected these periods, as well as shorter durations, to assess the portfolio volatility, duration and total returns as they relate to pension obligation characteristics, which are influenced by the Company workforce demographics. In addition, the Company also applies long-term market return assumptions to an investment mix that generally anticipates 60% fixed income securities, 20% equity securities and 20% alternative assets to derive an expected long-term rate of return. Based upon these analyses, management maintained the long-term rate of return assumption at 7.30% as of December 31, 2009. This assumption will be used to determine the Company 2010 expense. The long-term rate of return assumption at December 31, 2008, that was used to determine the Company 2009 expense, was also 7.30%. Pension expense reflected in the Company results was $137, $122 and $131 in 2009, 2008 and 2007, respectively. The Company estimates its 2010 pension expense will be approximately $186, based on current assumptions. To illustrate the impact of these assumptions on annual pension expense for 2010 and going forward, a 25 basis point decrease in the discount rate will increase pension expense by approximately $14 and a 25 basis point change in the long-term asset return assumption will increase/decrease pension expense by approximately $10. The Company uses a five-year averaging method to determine the market-related value of Plan assets, which is used to determine the expected return component of pension expense. Under this methodology, asset gains/losses that result from returns that differ from the Company long-term rate of return assumption are recognized in the market-related value of assets on a level basis over a five year period. The difference between actual asset returns for the plans of $184 and $(441) for the years ended December 31, 2009 and 2008, respectively, as compared to expected returns of $276 and $279 for the years ended December 31, 2009 and 2008, respectively, will be fully reflected in the market-related value of plan assets over the next five years using the methodology described above. The level of actuarial net loss continues to exceed the allowable amortization corridor. Based on the 6.00% discount rate selected as of December 31, 2009 and taking into account estimated future minimum funding, the difference between actual and expected performance in 2009 will increase annual pension expense in future years. The increase in pension expense will be approximately $3 in 2010 and will increase ratably to an increase of approximately $16 in 2015. 65 Table of Contents Valuation Allowance on Deferred Tax Assets Deferred tax assets represent the tax benefit of future deductible temporary differences and operating loss and tax credit carryforwards. Deferred tax assets are measured using the enacted tax rates expected to be in effect when such benefits are realized if there is no change in tax law. Under U.S. GAAP, the Company tests the value of deferred tax assets for impairment on a quarterly basis at the entity level within each tax jurisdiction, consistent with the Company filed tax returns. Deferred tax assets are reduced by a valuation allowance if, based on the weight of available evidence, it is more likely than not that some portion, or all, of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. The determination of the valuation allowance for our deferred tax assets requires management to make certain judgments and assumptions. In evaluating the ability to recover deferred tax assets, the Company has considered all available evidence including past operating results, the existence of cumulative losses in the most recent years, forecasted earnings, future taxable income, and prudent and feasible tax planning strategies. In the event the Company determines that it most likely would not be able to realize all or part of the Company deferred tax assets in the future, an increase to the valuation allowance would be charged to earnings in the period such determination is made. Likewise, if it is later determined that it is more likely than not that those deferred tax assets would be realized, the previously provided valuation allowance would be reversed. The Company judgment and assumptions are subject to change given the inherent uncertainty in predicting future performance, which is impacted by such things as policyholder behavior, competitor pricing, new product introductions, and specific industry and investment market conditions. In management judgment, the net deferred tax asset will more likely than not be realized. Included in the deferred tax asset is the expected tax benefit attributable to net operating losses of $308, consisting of U.S. losses of $18, which expire from 2012-2021, and foreign losses of $290. The foreign losses have no expiration. A valuation allowance of $86 has been recorded which consists of $6 related primarily to U.S and $80 related to foreign operations. No valuation allowance has been recorded for realized or unrealized losses. In assessing the need for a valuation allowance, management considered taxable income in prior carryback years, future taxable income and tax planning strategies that include holding debt securities with market value losses until recovery, selling appreciated securities to offset capital losses, and sales of certain corporate assets. Such tax planning strategies are viewed by management as prudent and feasible and will be implemented if necessary to realize the deferred tax asset. However, we anticipate limited ability, going forward, to recognize a full tax benefit on realized losses, which will result in additional valuation allowances. If interest rates rise, we may also experience an increased likelihood of recording a valuation allowance on previously recognized realized capital losses. Contingencies Relating to Corporate Litigation and Regulatory Matters Management evaluates each contingent matter separately. A loss is recorded if probable and reasonably estimable. Management establishes reserves for these contingencies at its best estimate, or, if no one number within the range of possible losses is more probable than any other, the Company records an estimated reserve at the low end of the range of losses. The Company has a quarterly monitoring process involving legal and accounting professionals. Legal personnel first identify outstanding corporate litigation and regulatory matters posing a reasonable possibility of loss. These matters are then jointly reviewed by accounting and legal personnel to evaluate the facts and changes since the last review in order to determine if a provision for loss should be recorded or adjusted, the amount that should be recorded, and the appropriate disclosure. The outcomes of certain contingencies currently being evaluated by the Company, which relate to corporate litigation and regulatory matters, are inherently difficult to predict, and the reserves that have been established for the estimated settlement amounts are subject to significant changes. In view of the uncertainties regarding the outcome of these matters, as well as the tax-deductibility of payments, it is possible that the ultimate cost to the Company of these matters could exceed the reserve by an amount that would have a material adverse effect on the Company consolidated results of operations or cash flows in a particular quarterly or annual period. 66 Table of Contents THE HARTFORD S OPERATIONS OVERVIEW The Hartford is organized into two major operations: Life and Property & Casualty, each containing reporting segments. The following discussion describes the Life and Property & Casualty operations. The Company considers several measures and ratios in assessing the performance its life and property and casualty underwriting businesses. The following discussions include the more significant ratios and measures of profitability for the years ended December 31, 2009, 2008 and 2007. Management believes that these ratios and measures are useful in understanding the underlying trends in The Hartford businesses. However, these performance indicators should only be used in conjunction with, and not in lieu of, net income for The Hartford as a whole. These ratios and measures may not be comparable to other performance measures used by the Company competitors. Life Operations Life is organized into six reporting segments, Retail Products Group ( Retail ), Individual Life, Group Benefits, Retirement Plans, International and Institutional Solutions Group ( Institutional ). Through Life, the Company provides retail and institutional investment products such as variable and fixed annuities, mutual funds, private placement life insurance and retirement plan services, individual life insurance products including variable universal life, universal life, interest sensitive whole life and term life; and group benefit products, such as group life and group disability insurance. Life derives its revenues principally from: (a) fee income, including asset management fees, on separate account and mutual fund assets and mortality and expense fees, as well as cost of insurance charges; (b) net investment income on general account assets; (c) fully insured premiums; and (d) certain other fees. Asset management fees and mortality and expense fees are primarily generated from separate account assets, which are deposited with Life through the sale of variable annuity and variable universal life products and from mutual funds. Cost of insurance charges are assessed on the net amount at risk for investment-oriented life insurance products. Premium revenues are derived primarily from the sale of group life, group disability and individual term insurance products. Life expenses essentially consist of interest credited to policyholders on general account liabilities, insurance benefits provided, amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs, expenses related to selling and servicing the various products offered by the Company, dividends to policyholders, and other general business expenses. Life financial results in its variable annuity, mutual fund and, to a lesser extent, variable universal life businesses, depends largely on the amount of the contract holder account value or assets under management on which it earns fees and the level of fees charged. Changes in account value or assets under management are driven by two main factors: net flows, which measure the success of the Company asset gathering and retention efforts, and the market return of the funds, which is heavily influenced by the return realized in the equity markets. Net flows are comprised of new sales and other deposits less surrenders, death benefits, policy charges and annuitizations of investment type contracts, such as variable annuity contracts. In the mutual fund business, net flows are known as net sales. Net sales are comprised of new sales less redemptions by mutual fund customers. Life uses the average daily value of the S&P 500 Index as an indicator for evaluating market returns of the underlying account portfolios in the United States. Relative financial results of variable products are highly correlated to the growth in account values or assets under management since these products generally earn fee income on a daily basis. Equity market movements could also result in benefits for or charges against deferred acquisition costs. See the Critical Accounting Estimates section of MD&A for further information on DAC Unlocks. During 2009, primarily as a result of current market conditions, the Company recorded an after tax Unlock charge of $(1,034). The profitability of Life fixed annuities and other spread-based products depends largely on its ability to earn target spreads between earned investment rates on its general account assets and interest credited to policyholders. Profitability is also influenced by operating expense management including the benefits of economies of scale in the administration of its United States variable annuity businesses in particular. In addition, the size and persistency of gross profits from these businesses is an important driver of earnings as it affects the rate of amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs. Life profitability in its individual life insurance and group benefits businesses depends largely on the size of its in force block, the adequacy of product pricing and underwriting discipline, actual mortality and morbidity experience, and the efficiency of its claims and expense management. 67 Table of Contents Definitions of measures and ratios for Life Operations After-tax Margin After-tax margin, excluding realized gains (losses) or DAC Unlock is a non-GAAP financial measure that the Company uses to evaluate, and believes are important measures of, segment operating performance. After-tax margin is the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP measure. The Hartford believes that the measure after-tax margin, excluding realized gains (losses) and DAC Unlock provides investors with a valuable measure of the performance of the Company on-going businesses because it reveals trends in our businesses that may be obscured by the effect of realized gains (losses) or quarterly DAC Unlocks. Some realized capital gains and losses are primarily driven by investment decisions and external economic developments, the nature and timing of which are unrelated to insurance aspects of our businesses. Accordingly, these non-GAAP measures exclude the effect of all realized gains and losses that tend to be highly variable from period to period based on capital market conditions. The Hartford believes, however, that some realized capital gains and losses are integrally related to our insurance operations, so after-tax margin, excluding the realized gains (losses) and DAC Unlock should include net realized gains and losses on net periodic settlements on the Japan fixed annuity cross-currency swap. These net realized gains and losses are directly related to an offsetting item included in the statement of operations such as net investment income. DAC Unlocks occur when the Company determines based on actual experience or other evidence, that estimates of future gross profits should be revised. As the DAC Unlock is a reflection of the Company new best estimates of future gross profits, the result and its impact on the DAC amortization ratio is meaningful; however, it does distort the trend of after-tax margin. After-tax margin, excluding realized gains (losses) and DAC Unlock should not be considered as a substitute for after-tax margin and does not reflect the overall profitability of our businesses. Therefore, the Company believes it is important for investors to evaluate both after-tax margin, excluding realized gains (losses) and DAC Unlock and after-tax margin when reviewing the Company performance. DAC amortization ratio DAC amortization ratio, excluding realized gains (losses) and DAC Unlock is a non-GAAP financial measure that the Company uses to evaluate, and believes is an important measure of, segment operating performance. DAC amortization ratio is the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP measure. The Hartford believes that the measure DAC amortization ratio, excluding realized gains (losses) and DAC Unlock provides investors with a valuable measure of the performance of the Company on-going businesses because it reveals trends in our businesses that may be obscured by the effect of realized gains (losses) or quarterly DAC Unlocks. Some realized capital gains and losses are primarily driven by investment decisions and external economic developments, the nature and timing of which are unrelated to insurance aspects of our businesses. Accordingly, these non-GAAP measures exclude the effect of all realized gains and losses that tend to be highly variable from period to period based on capital market conditions. The Hartford believes, however, that some realized capital gains and losses are integrally related to our insurance operations, so amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs and the present value of future profits (DAC amortization ratio), which is typically expressed as a percentage of pre-tax income before the cost of this amortization (an approximation of actual gross profits) and excludes the effects of realized capital gains and losses, excluding the realized gains (losses) and DAC Unlock should include net realized gains and losses on net periodic settlements on the Japan fixed annuity cross-currency swap. These net realized gains and losses are directly related to an offsetting item included in the statement of operations such as net investment income. DAC Unlocks occur when the Company determines based on actual experience or other evidence, that estimates of future gross profits should be revised. As the DAC Unlock is a reflection of the Company new best estimates of future gross profits, the result and its impact on the DAC amortization ratio is meaningful; however, it does distort the trend of DAC amortization ratio. DAC amortization ratio, excluding realized gains (losses) and DAC Unlock should not be considered as a substitute for DAC amortization ratio and does not reflect the overall profitability of our businesses. Therefore, the Company believes it is important for investors to evaluate both DAC amortization ratio, excluding realized gains (losses) and DAC Unlock and DAC amortization ratio when reviewing the Company performance. Fee Income Fee income is largely driven from amounts collected as a result of contractually defined percentages of assets under management. These fees are generally collected on a daily basis. For individual life insurance products, fees are contractually defined as percentages based on levels of insurance, age, premiums and deposits collected and contract holder value. Life insurance fees are generally collected on a monthly basis. Therefore, the growth in assets under management either through positive net flows or net sales, or favorable equity market performance will have a favorable impact on fee income. Conversely, either negative net flows or net sales, or unfavorable equity market performance will reduce fee income. Life Expenses There are three major categories for expenses. The first major category of expenses is benefits and losses. These include the costs of mortality and morbidity, particularly in the group benefits business, and mortality in the individual life businesses, as well as other contractholder benefits to policyholders. In addition, traditional insurance type products generally use a loss ratio which is expressed as the amount of benefits incurred during a particular period divided by total premiums and other considerations, as a key indicator of underwriting performance. Since Group Benefits occasionally buys a block of claims for a stated premium amount, the Company excludes this buyout from the loss ratio used for evaluating the underwriting results of the business as buyouts may distort the loss ratio. The second major category is insurance operating costs and expenses, which is commonly expressed in a ratio of a revenue measure depending on the type of business. The third major category is the DAC amortization ratio. Retail individual annuity business accounts for the majority of the amortization of DAC and present value of future profits for Life. 68 Table of Contents Life Premiums Traditional insurance type products, such as those sold by Group Benefits, collect premiums from policyholders in exchange for financial protection for the policyholder from a specified insurable loss, such as death or disability. These premiums together with net investment income earned from the overall investment strategy are used to pay the contractual obligations under these insurance contracts. Two major factors, new sales and persistency, impact premium growth. Sales can increase or decrease in a given year based on a number of factors, including but not limited to, customer demand for the Company product offerings, pricing competition, distribution channels and the Company reputation and ratings. Persistency refers to the percentage of policies remaining in-force from year-to-year. Net Investment Spread Management evaluates performance of certain products based on net investment spread. These products include those that have insignificant mortality risk, such as fixed annuities, certain general account universal life contracts and certain institutional contracts. Net investment spread is determined by taking the difference between the earned rate, (excluding the effects of realized capital gains and losses, including those related to the Company GMWB product and related reinsurance and hedging programs), and the related crediting rates on average general account assets under management. The net investment spreads are for the total portfolio of relevant contracts in each segment and reflect business written at different times. When pricing products, the Company considers current investment yields and not the portfolio average. The determination of credited rates is based upon consideration of current market rates for similar products, portfolio yields and contractually guaranteed minimum credited rates. Net investment spread can be volatile period over period, which can have a significant positive or negative effect on the operating results of each segment. The volatile nature of net investment spread is driven primarily by earnings on limited partnership and other alternative investments and prepayment premiums on securities. Investment earnings can also be influenced by factors such as changes in interest rates, credit spreads and decisions to hold higher levels of short-term investments. Return on Assets ( ROA ) ROA, excluding realized gains (losses) or DAC Unlock, is a non-GAAP financial measure that the Company uses to evaluate, and believes is an important measure of, segment operating performance. ROA is the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP measure. The Hartford believes that the measure ROA, excluding realized gains (losses) and DAC Unlock provides investors with a valuable measure of the performance of the Company on-going businesses because it reveals trends in our businesses that may be obscured by the effect of realized gains (losses) or quarterly DAC Unlocks. Some realized capital gains and losses are primarily driven by investment decisions and external economic developments, the nature and timing of which are unrelated to insurance aspects of our businesses. Accordingly, these non-GAAP measures exclude the effect of all realized gains and losses that tend to be highly variable from period to period based on capital market conditions. The Hartford believes, however, that some realized capital gains and losses are integrally related to our insurance operations, so ROA, excluding the realized gains (losses) and DAC Unlock should include net realized gains and losses on net periodic settlements on the Japan fixed annuity cross-currency swap. These net realized gains and losses are directly related to an offsetting item included in the statement of operations such as net investment income. DAC Unlocks occur when the Company determines based on actual experience or other evidence, that estimates of future gross profits should be revised. As the DAC Unlock is a reflection of the Company new best estimates of future gross profits, the result and its impact on the DAC amortization ratio is meaningful; however, it does distort the trend of ROA. ROA, excluding realized gains (losses) and DAC Unlock should not be considered as a substitute for ROA and does not reflect the overall profitability of our businesses. Therefore, the Company believes it is important for investors to evaluate both ROA, excluding realized gains (losses) and DAC Unlock and ROA when reviewing the Company performance. Property & Casualty Operations Property & Casualty is organized into five reporting segments: the underwriting segments of Personal Lines, Small Commercial, Middle Market and Specialty Commercial (collectively Ongoing Operations ), and the Other Operations segment. Through Property & Casualty the Company provides a number of coverages, as well as insurance-related services, to businesses throughout the United States, including workers compensation, property, automobile, liability, umbrella, specialty casualty, marine, livestock, fidelity and surety, professional liability and director and officer liability coverages. Property & Casualty also provides automobile, homeowners, and home-based business coverage to individuals throughout the United States, as well as insurance-related services to businesses. Property & Casualty derives its revenues principally from premiums earned for insurance coverages provided to insureds, investment income, and, to a lesser extent, from fees earned for services provided to third parties and net realized capital gains and losses. Premiums charged for insurance coverages are earned principally on a pro rata basis over the terms of the related policies in-force. Service fees principally include revenues from third-party claims administration services provided by Specialty Risk Services and revenues from member contact center services provided through the AARP Health program. 69 Table of Contents Net income is a measure of profit or loss used in evaluating the performance of Total Property & Casualty and the Ongoing Operations and Other Operations segments. Within Ongoing Operations, the underwriting segments of Personal Lines, Small Commercial, Middle Market and Specialty Commercial are evaluated by The Hartford management primarily based upon underwriting results. Underwriting results within Ongoing Operations are influenced significantly by changes in earned premium and the adequacy of the Company pricing. Underwriting profitability over time is also greatly influenced by the Company underwriting discipline, which seeks to manage exposure to loss through favorable risk selection and diversification, its management of claims, its use of reinsurance and its ability to manage its expense ratio which it accomplishes through economies of scale and its management of acquisition costs and other underwriting expenses. Pricing adequacy depends on a number of factors, including the ability to obtain regulatory approval for rate changes, proper evaluation of underwriting risks, the ability to project future loss cost frequency and severity based on historical loss experience adjusted for known trends, the Company response to rate actions taken by competitors, and expectations about regulatory and legal developments and expense levels. Property & Casualty seeks to price its insurance policies such that insurance premiums and future net investment income earned on premiums received will cover underwriting expenses and the ultimate cost of paying claims reported on the policies and provide for a profit margin. For many of its insurance products, Property & Casualty is required to obtain approval for its premium rates from state insurance departments. In setting its pricing, Property & Casualty assumes an expected level of losses from natural or man-made catastrophes that will cover the Company exposure to catastrophes over the long-term. In most years, however, Property & Casualty actual losses from catastrophes will be more or less than that assumed in its pricing due to the significant volatility of catastrophe losses. For a discussion on how The Hartford establishes property and casualty reserves, see Property and Casualty Reserves, Net of Reinsurance within the Critical Accounting Estimates section of the MD&A. The investment return, or yield, on Property & Casualty invested assets is an important element of the Company earnings since insurance products are priced with the assumption that premiums received can be invested for a period of time before loss and loss adjustment expenses are paid. For longer tail lines, such as workers compensation and general liability, claims are paid over several years and, therefore, the premiums received for these lines of business can generate significant investment income. Due to the need to maintain sufficient liquidity to satisfy claim obligations, the vast majority of Property & Casualty invested assets have been held in fixed maturities, including, among other asset classes, corporate bonds, municipal bonds, government debt, short-term debt, mortgage-backed securities and asset-backed securities. Through its Other Operations segment, Property & Casualty is responsible for managing property and casualty operations of The Hartford that have discontinued writing new or renewal business as well as managing the claims related to asbestos and environmental exposures. Definitions of measures and ratios for Property & Casualty Operations Written and earned premiums Written premium is a statutory accounting financial measure which represents the amount of premiums charged for policies issued, net of reinsurance, during a fiscal period. Earned premium is a U.S. GAAP and statutory measure. Premiums are considered earned and are included in the financial results on a pro rata basis over the policy period. Management believes that written premium is a performance measure that is useful to investors as it reflects current trends in the Company sale of property and casualty insurance products. Written and earned premium are recorded net of ceded reinsurance premium. Reinstatement premiums Reinstatement premium represents additional ceded premium paid for the reinstatement of the amount of reinsurance coverage that was reduced as a result of a reinsurance loss payment. Policies in force Policies in force represent the number of policies with coverage in effect as of the end of the period. The number of policies in force is a growth measure used for Personal Lines, Small Commercial and Middle Market and is affected by both new business growth and premium renewal retention. Renewal written pricing increase (decrease) Renewal written pricing increase (decrease) represents the combined effect of rate changes, amount of insurance and individual risk pricing decisions per unit of exposure since the prior year. The rate component represents the average change in rate filings during the period and the amount of insurance represents the value of the rating base, such as model year/vehicle symbol for auto, building replacement costs for property and wage inflation for workers compensation. The renewal written price increase (decrease) does not include other factors that affect average premium per unit of exposure such as changes in the mix of business by state, territory, class plan and tier of risk. A number of factors affect renewal written pricing increases (decreases) including expected loss costs as projected by the Company pricing actuaries, rate filings approved by state regulators, risk selection decisions made by the Company underwriters and marketplace competition. Renewal written pricing changes reflect the property and casualty insurance market cycle. Prices tend to increase for a particular line of business when insurance carriers have incurred significant losses in that line of business in the recent past or the industry as a whole commits less of its capital to writing exposures in that line of business. Prices tend to decrease when recent loss experience has been favorable or when competition among insurance carriers increases. 70 Table of Contents Renewal earned pricing increase (decrease) Written premiums are earned over the policy term, which is six months for certain Personal Lines auto business and 12 months for substantially all of the remainder of the Company business. Because the Company earns premiums over the 6 to 12 month term of the policies, renewal earned pricing increases (decreases) lag renewal written pricing increases (decreases) by 6 to 12 months. New business written premium New business written premium represents the amount of premiums charged for policies issues to customers who were not insured with the Company in the previous policy term. New business written premium plus renewal policy written premium equals total written premium. Policy count retention Policy count retention represents the ratio of the number of policies renewed during the period divided by the number of policies from the previous policy term period. The number of policies available to renew from the previous policy term represents the number of policies written in the previous policy term net of any cancellations of those policies. Policy count retention is affected by a number of factors, including the percentage of renewal policy quotes accepted and decisions by the Company to non-renew policies because of specific policy underwriting concerns or because of a decision to reduce premium writings in certain classes of business or states. Policy count retention is also affected by advertising and rate actions taken by competitors. Loss and loss adjustment expense ratio The loss and loss adjustment expense ratio is a measure of the cost of claims incurred in the calendar year divided by earned premium and includes losses incurred for both the current and prior accident years. Among other factors, the loss and loss adjustment expense ratio needed for the Company to achieve its targeted return on equity fluctuates from year to year based on changes in the expected investment yield over the claim settlement period, the timing of expected claim settlements and the targeted returns set by management based on the competitive environment. The loss and loss adjustment expense ratio is affected by claim frequency and claim severity, particularly for shorter-tail property lines of business, where the emergence of claim frequency and severity is credible and likely indicative of ultimate losses. Claim frequency represents the percentage change in the average number of reported claims per unit of exposure in the current accident year compared to that of the previous accident year. Claim severity represents the percentage change in the estimated average cost per claim in the current accident year compared to that of the previous accident year. As one of the factors used to determine pricing, the Company practice is to first make an overall assumption about claim frequency and severity for a given line of business and then, as part of the ratemaking process, adjust the assumption as appropriate for the particular state, product or coverage. Current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes The current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes is a measure of the cost of non-catastrophe claims incurred in the current accident year divided by earned premiums. Management believes that the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes is a performance measure that is useful to investors as it removes the impact of volatile and unpredictable catastrophe losses and prior accident year reserve development. Prior accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio The prior year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio represents the increase (decrease) in the estimated cost of settling catastrophe and non-catastrophe claims incurred in prior accident years as recorded in the current calendar year divided by earned premiums. Expense ratio The expense ratio is the ratio of underwriting expenses, excluding bad debt expense, to earned premiums. Underwriting expenses include the amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs and insurance operating costs and expenses. Deferred policy acquisition costs include commissions, taxes, licenses and fees and other underwriting expenses and are amortized over the policy term. Policyholder dividend ratio The policyholder dividend ratio is the ratio of policyholder dividends to earned premium. Combined ratio The combined ratio is the sum of the loss and loss adjustment expense ratio, the expense ratio and the policyholder dividend ratio. This ratio is a relative measurement that describes the related cost of losses and expenses for every $100 of earned premiums. A combined ratio below 100.0 demonstrates underwriting profit; a combined ratio above 100.0 demonstrates underwriting losses. Catastrophe ratio The catastrophe ratio (a component of the loss and loss adjustment expense ratio) represents the ratio of catastrophe losses incurred in the current calendar year (net of reinsurance) to earned premiums and includes catastrophe losses incurred for both the current and prior accident years. A catastrophe is an event that causes $25 or more in industry insured property losses and affects a significant number of property and casualty policyholders and insurers. The catastrophe ratio includes the effect of catastrophe losses, but does not include the effect of reinstatement premiums. 71 Table of Contents Combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development The combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development represents the combined ratio for the current accident year, excluding the impact of catastrophes. The Company believes this ratio is an important measure of the trend in profitability since it removes the impact of volatile and unpredictable catastrophe losses and prior accident year reserve development. Underwriting results Underwriting results is a before-tax measure that represents earned premiums less incurred losses, loss adjustment expenses, underwriting expenses and policyholder dividends. The Hartford believes that underwriting results provides investors with a valuable measure of before-tax profitability derived from underwriting activities, which are managed separately from the Company investing activities. Within Ongoing Operations, the underwriting segments of Personal Lines, Small Commercial, Middle Market and Specialty Commercial are evaluated by management primarily based upon underwriting results. Underwriting results is also presented for Ongoing Operations and Other Operations. A reconciliation of underwriting results to net income for Ongoing Operations and Other Operations is set forth in their respective discussions herein. Investment yield The investment yield, or return, on the Company invested assets primarily includes interest income on fixed maturity investments. Based upon the fair value of Property & Casualty investments as of December 31, 2009 and 2008, approximately 87% and 82%, respectively, of invested assets were held in fixed maturities. A number of factors affect the yield on fixed maturity investments, including fluctuations in interest rates and the level of principal prepayments. The Company also invests in equity securities, mortgage loans, limited partnership arrangements and other alternative investments. Total Property & Casualty investment yield, after-tax, was 3.1%, 3.2% and 4.4% for the years ended December 31, 2009, 2008 and 2007, respectively. 72 Table of Contents KEY PERFORMANCE MEASURES AND RATIOS Life Management evaluates the rates of return various businesses can provide as an input in determining where additional capital should be invested to increase net income and shareholder returns. The Company uses the return on assets for the Individual Annuity, Retirement Plans and Institutional businesses for evaluating profitability. In Group Benefits and Individual Life, after-tax margin is a key indicator of overall profitability. Ratios 2009 2008 2007 Retail Individual annuity ROA (48.6 ) bps (133.5 ) bps 58.9 bps Effect of net realized losses, net of tax and DAC on ROA (18.8 ) bps (96.5 ) bps (13.3 ) bps Effect of DAC Unlock on ROA [1] (67.1 ) bps (68.0 ) bps 15.6 bps ROA excluding realized losses and DAC Unlock 37.3 bps 31.0 bps 56.6 bps Individual Life After-tax margin 1.3 % (4.7 %) 16.0 % Effect of net realized losses, net of tax and DAC on after-tax margin (6.5 %) (13.1 %) (1.3 %) Effect of DAC Unlock on after-tax margin [1] (4.9 %) (4.7 %) 1.4 % After-tax margin excluding realized losses and DAC Unlock 12.7 % 13.1 % 15.9 % Group Benefits After-tax margin (excluding buyouts) 4.2 % (0.1 %) 6.7 % Effect of net realized losses, net of tax on after-tax margin (excluding buyouts) (1.6 %) (7.3 %) (0.4 %) After-tax margin (excluding buyouts) excluding realized losses 5.8 % 7.2 % 7.1 % Retirement Plans Retirement ROA (54.8 ) bps (47.9 ) bps 22.9 bps Effect of net realized losses, net of tax and DAC on ROA (44.8 ) bps (51.5 ) bps (10.5 ) bps Effect of DAC Unlock on ROA [1] (13.8 ) bps (15.0 ) bps (3.4 ) bps ROA excluding realized losses and DAC Unlock 3.8 bps 18.6 bps 36.8 bps International Japan International Japan ROA (16.7 ) bps (72.9 ) bps 73.4 bps Effect of net realized gains (losses) excluding net periodic settlements, net of tax and DAC on ROA [2] 9.5 bps (65.1 ) bps (8.1 ) bps Effect of DAC Unlock on ROA [1] (68.3 ) bps (31.9 ) bps 6.4 bps ROA excluding realized gains (losses) and DAC Unlock 42.1 bps 24.1 bps 75.1 bps Institutional Institutional ROA (86.5 ) bps (83.3 ) bps 3.0 bps Effect of net realized losses, net of tax and DAC on ROA (80.3 ) bps (85.0 ) bps (21.5 ) bps Effect of DAC Unlock on ROA [1] (0.2 ) bps 0.2 bps ROA excluding realized losses and DAC Unlock (6.0 ) bps 1.7 bps 24.3 bps [1] See Unlocks within the Critical Accounting Estimates section of the MD&A. [2] Included in the net realized capital gain (losses) are amounts that represent the net periodic accruals on currency rate swaps used in the risk management of Japan fixed annuity products. Year ended December 31, 2009 compared to year ended December 31, 2008 Individual Annuity ROA, excluding realized losses and DAC Unlock, increased primarily due to the impact of the write off of goodwill in 2008 of $274 after-tax or 19.4 bps, partially offset by higher DAC amortization and lower investment spread in 2009. The decrease in Individual Life after-tax margin, excluding realized losses and DAC Unlock, was primarily due to a higher DAC amortization rate, partially offset by a lower effective tax rate and lower operating expenses. The decrease in Retirement Plans ROA, excluding realized losses and DAC Unlock, was primarily driven by lower returns on fixed maturities and a full year of activity from the businesses acquired in 2008, which produce a lower ROA as they are mutual fund businesses. The decrease in Group Benefits after-tax margin, excluding realized losses, was primarily due to the unfavorable loss ratio, that resulted from unfavorable morbidity experience, which was primarily due to unfavorable reserve development from the 2008 incurral loss year and higher new incurred long-term disability claims in 2009. International-Japan ROA, excluding realized gains (losses) and DAC Unlock, increased primarily due to lower 3 Win related charges in 2009 versus 2008 of $40 and $152, after-tax, respectively. Excluding the effects of the 3 Win charge, ROA, excluding realized gains (losses) and DAC Unlock, would have been 53.7 bps in 2009 and 66.3 bps in 2008. The decline of ROA excluding the 3 Win charge is due to lower surrender fees due to a reduction in lapses and a higher benefit margin, partially offset by a decrease in the DAC amortization rate due to higher actual gross profits. The decrease in Institutional ROA, excluding realized losses, is primarily due to lower yields on investments. 73 Table of Contents Year ended December 31, 2008 compared to year ended December 31, 2007 The decrease in Individual Annuity ROA, excluding realized losses and the effect of the DAC Unlock, reflects the write-off of goodwill of $274 after-tax, or 19.4 bps; lower limited partnership and other alternative investment income; and the net effect of lower fees. The decrease in Individual Life after-tax margin, excluding realized losses and the effect of the DAC Unlock, was primarily due to unfavorable mortality expense, partially offset by a lower effective tax rate. The decrease in Retirement Plans ROA, excluding realized losses and the effect of the DAC Unlock, was primarily driven by an increase in assets under management due to the acquired rights to service $18.7 billion in mutual funds, comprised of $15.8 billion in mutual funds from Sun Life Retirement Services, Inc., and $2.9 billion in mutual funds from Princeton Retirement Group, both of which closed in the first quarter of 2008. The acquired blocks of assets produce a lower ROA as they are comprised of mutual fund assets and assets under management as opposed to traditional annuity contracts. Also contributing to the decrease was lower yields on fixed maturity investments and a decline in limited partnership and other alternative investment income, higher service and technology costs and additional expenses associated with the acquisitions. Partially offsetting these decreases were tax benefits primarily associated with DRD. The Group Benefit increase in after-tax margin was primarily due to the favorable expense ratio. International-Japan ROA, excluding realized gains (losses) and the effect of the DAC Unlock, declined due to lower earned fees as a result of declining account values, lower surrender fees due to a reduction in lapses and an increase in the DAC amortization rate due to lower actual gross profits, as well as the accelerated DAC amortization associated with the 3 Win trigger. The decrease in Institutional ROA, excluding realized losses, is primarily due to a decline in limited partnership and other alternative investment income. The decrease is also due to unfavorable mortality and lower yields on fixed maturity investments. 74 Table of Contents Property & Casualty The Company considers several measures and ratios to be the key performance indicators for the property and casualty underwriting businesses. The following table and the segment discussions include the more significant ratios and measures of profitability for the years ended December 31, 2009, 2008 and 2007. Management believes that these ratios and measures are useful in understanding the underlying trends in The Hartford property and casualty insurance underwriting business. However, these key performance indicators should only be used in conjunction with, and not in lieu of, underwriting income for the underwriting segments of Personal Lines, Small Commercial, Middle Market and Specialty Commercial and net income for the Property & Casualty business as a whole, Ongoing Operations and Other Operations. These ratios and measures may not be comparable to other performance measures used by the Company competitors. 2009 2008 2007 Ongoing Operations earned premium growth Personal Lines 1 % 1 % 3 % Small Commercial (5 %) 3 % Middle Market (9 %) (5 %) (4 %) Specialty Commercial (11 %) (4 %) (3 %) Total Ongoing Operations (5 %) (2 %) 1 % Ongoing Operations combined ratio Combined ratio before catastrophes and prior year development 91.7 88.9 90.5 Catastrophe ratio Current year 3.1 5.3 1.7 Prior years (0.2 ) (0.2 ) 0.1 Total catastrophe ratio 2.9 5.0 1.8 Non-catastrophe prior year development (4.2 ) (3.2 ) (1.5 ) Combined ratio 90.4 90.7 90.8 Other Operations net income (loss) $ (77 ) $ (97 ) $ 30 Year ended December 31, 2009 compared to the year ended December 31, 2008 Ongoing Operations earned premium growth Personal Lines Earned premium grew 1% in 2009, primarily due to new business growth on both AARP and Agency, partially offset by lower average renewal earned premium on auto business. Small Commercial The change to a 5% earned premium decline in 2009 was primarily attributable to lower earned audit premium on workers compensation business and the effect of non-renewals outpacing new business in package business and commercial auto. Middle Market The steeper earned premium decline in 2009 was primarily driven by decreases in general liability, commercial auto and marine due to renewal earned pricing decreases and the effect of non-renewals outpacing new business. Specialty Commercial Earned premium declined in all lines of business in 2009, including a larger decrease in property earned premium due to the sale of the Company core excess and surplus lines property business. Ongoing Operations combined ratio Combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident years development In 2009, the 2.8 point increase in the combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development was primarily driven by a 1.9 point increase in the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes and a 1.2 point increase in the expense ratio. Among other factors, the increase in the current loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes was driven by an increase for Personal Lines auto and homeowners business. The increase in the expense ratio in 2009 period includes the effects of the decrease in earned premiums, higher amortization of Personal Lines acquisition costs and increased IT costs. The increase in the expense ratio also includes a $23 increase in taxes, licenses and fees due to a $6 increase in the assessment for a second injury fund and $17 reserve strengthening for other state funds and taxes. Partially offsetting these expense increases was a $34 decrease in Texas Windstorm Insurance Association ( TWIA ) assessments related to hurricane Ike. Catastrophes The catastrophe ratio decreased 2.1 points in 2009 as losses from hurricane Ike in 2008 were higher than catastrophe losses in 2009 from hail and windstorms in Colorado, the Midwest and the Southeast. Non-catastrophe prior accident years development Favorable reserve development in 2009 included, among other reserve changes, the release of reserves for directors and officers claims for accident years 2003 to 2008, the release of reserves for general liability claims, primarily related to accident years 2003 to 2007, and the release of workers compensation reserves, partially offset by strengthening of reserves for Small Commercial package business. See Reserve Rollforwards and Development in the Critical Accounting Estimates section of the MD&A for a discussion of prior accident year reserve development for Ongoing Operations in 2009. 75 Table of Contents Other Operations net income (loss) Other Operations reported a lower net loss in 2009 as compared to 2008 primarily due to a decrease in net realized capital losses and a decrease in the allowance for uncollectible reinsurance as a result of the Company annual evaluation of reinsurance recoverables. Partially offsetting these drivers was an increase in net unfavorable prior accident year reserve development and a decrease in net investment income. See the Other Operations segment MD&A for further discussion. Year ended December 31, 2008 compared to the year ended December 31, 2007 Ongoing Operations earned premium growth Personal Lines The decrease in the earned premium growth rate from 2007 to 2008 was due to a significantly lower growth rate on AARP business and a change to declining earned premium in Agency, partially offset by the effect of the sale of Omni in 2006 which lowered the growth rate in 2007. Excluding Omni, Personal Lines earned premium grew 7% in 2007. The effects of larger declines in auto and homeowners new business premium and a change to declining homeowners renewal retention since the middle of 2007 were largely offset by the effect of a change to modest earned pricing increases in auto. Small Commercial The earned premium growth rate in 2008 was reduced from moderate earned premium increases in 2007 to no growth in 2008. The decrease in the growth rate was primarily attributable to slightly larger earned pricing decreases in 2008 compared to 2007 and a change to decreasing premium renewal retention since the middle of 2007. Middle Market Earned premium declined in the mid-single digits in both 2007 and 2008. The effect of slightly larger earned pricing decreases in 2008 has been largely offset by the effect of a change to new business growth since the second quarter of 2008. Specialty Commercial Earned premium decreased by 4% in 2008 compared to a decrease of 3% in 2007. A larger earned premium decrease in property and a change from earned premium growth in professional liability, fidelity and surety in 2007 to no growth in 2008 was partially offset by an improvement in the rate of earned premium decline in casualty. Ongoing Operations combined ratio Combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development The combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development decreased by 1.6 points as the effects of a lower loss and loss adjustment expense ratio for Small Commercial and Middle Market workers compensation claims, lower claim frequency on Personal Lines auto claims and lower non-catastrophe losses on Small Commercial package business were partially offset by earned pricing decreases across the commercial lines businesses and higher non-catastrophe losses on Middle Market property and Personal Lines homeowners business. Catastrophes The catastrophe ratio increased by 3.2 points, primarily due to an increase in current accident year catastrophes in 2008, driven by losses from hurricane Ike and losses from tornadoes and thunderstorms in the South and Midwest. Non-catastrophe prior accident year development Net non-catastrophe prior accident year reserve development in Ongoing Operations was more favorable in 2008 than in 2007. Favorable non-catastrophe reserve development of 3.2 points, or $333, in 2008 included, among other reserve changes, a $156 release of reserves for workers compensation claims, primarily related to accident years 2000 to 2007, a $105 release of general liability claims, primarily related to accident years 2001 to 2007, and a $75 release of reserves for professional liability claims related to accident years 2003 through 2006. See Reserve Rollforwards and Development in the Critical Accounting Estimates Section of the MD&A for a discussion of prior accident year reserve development for Ongoing Operations in 2008. Other Operations net income (loss) The change from net income in 2007 to a net loss in 2008 was primarily due to an increase in net realized capital losses and lower net investment income, partially offset by a decrease in net unfavorable prior accident year reserve development. See the Other Operations segment MD&A for further discussion. 76 Table of Contents Investment Results Composition of Invested Assets The primary investment objective for the Company is to maximize economic value, consistent with acceptable risk parameters, including the management of credit risk and interest rate sensitivity of invested assets, while generating sufficient after-tax income to meet policyholder and corporate obligations. Investment strategies are developed based on a variety of factors including business needs, regulatory requirements and tax considerations. December 31, 2009 December 31, 2008 Amount Percent Amount Percent Fixed maturities, AFS, at fair value $ 71,153 76.3 % $ 65,112 72.9 % Equity securities, AFS, at fair value 1,221 1.3 % 1,458 1.6 % Mortgage loans 5,938 6.4 % 6,469 7.3 % Policy loans, at outstanding balance 2,174 2.3 % 2,208 2.5 % Limited partnerships and other alternative investments 1,790 1.9 % 2,295 2.6 % Other investments [1] 602 0.7 % 1,723 1.9 % Short-term investments 10,357 11.1 % 10,022 11.2 % Total investments excluding equity securities, trading $ 93,235 100.0 % $ 89,287 100.0 % Equity securities, trading, at fair value [2] 32,321 30,820 Total investments $ 125,556 $ 120,107 [1] Primarily relates to derivative instruments. [2] These assets primarily support the International variable annuity business. Changes in these balances are also reflected in the respective liabilities. Total investments increased primarily due to fixed maturities and equity securities, trading, partially offset by a decline in other investments. The increase in fixed maturities was largely the result of improved security valuations due to credit spread tightening, partially offset by rising interest rates, and the maturation of the term lending portion of the securities lending program of approximately $2.9 billion. The increase in equity securities, trading, resulted from improved market performance of the underlying investments, partially offset by the yen weakening. The decline in other investments was primarily due to the change in market value of GMWB hedging derivatives driven by an increase in the equity markets, rising interest rates and a decline in equity volatility. Net Investment Income (Loss) For the years ended December 31, 2009 2008 2007 Amount Yield [1] Amount Yield [1] Amount Yield [1] Fixed maturities [2] $ 3,618 4.5 % $ 4,310 5.2 % $ 4,653 5.8 % Equity securities, AFS 93 6.5 % 167 6.9 % 139 6.6 % Mortgage loans 316 5.0 % 333 5.6 % 293 6.3 % Policy loans 139 6.3 % 139 6.5 % 135 6.5 % Limited partnerships and other alternative investments (341 ) (15.6 %) (445 ) (4.3 %) 255 13.3 % Other [3] 318 (72 ) (161 ) Investment expense (112 ) (97 ) (100 ) Total net investment income excluding equity securities, trading $ 4,031 4.1 % $ 4,335 4.6 % $ 5,214 5.9 % Equity securities, trading 3,188 (10,340 ) 145 Total net investment income (loss), before-tax $ 7,219 $ (6,005 ) $ 5,359 [1] Yields calculated using annualized investment income before investment expenses divided by the monthly average invested assets at cost, amortized cost, or adjusted carrying value, as applicable, excluding collateral received associated with the securities lending program and consolidated variable interest entity noncontrolling interests. Included in the fixed maturity yield is other, which primarily relates to fixed maturities (see footnote [3] below). Included in the total net investment income yield is investment expense. [2] Includes net investment income on short-term investments. [3] Includes income from derivatives that qualify for hedge accounting and hedge fixed maturities. Also includes fees associated with securities lending activities of $5, $100 and $138, respectively, for the years ended December 31, 2009, 2008 and 2007. The income from securities lending activities is included within fixed maturities. Year ended December 31, 2009 compared to the year ended December 31, 2008 Total net investment income increased primarily due to equity securities, trading, resulting from improved market performance of the underlying investment funds supporting the Japanese variable annuity product. Total net investment income, excluding equity securities, trading, decreased primarily due to lower income on fixed maturities resulting from a decline in average rates and fixed maturity investments, as well as an increased average asset base of securities with greater market liquidity. The decrease was partially offset by an increase in other income from interest rate swaps hedging variable rate bonds due to a decrease in LIBOR. Also offsetting were decreased losses on limited partnerships and other alternative investments, primarily within hedge funds. 77 Table of Contents Year ended December 31, 2008 compared to the year ended December 31, 2007 Total net investment income decreased primarily due to equity securities, trading, resulting from a decline in the value of the underlying investment funds supporting the Japanese variable annuity product due to negative market performance year over year. Total net investment income, excluding equity securities, trading, decreased primarily due to lower income on limited partnerships and other alternative investments and fixed maturities. The decline in limited partnerships and other alternative investments yield was largely due to negative returns on hedge funds and real estate partnerships as a result of the lack of liquidity in the financial markets and a wider credit spread environment. The decline in fixed maturity income was primarily due to lower yield on variable rate securities due to declines in short-term interest rates and increased allocation to lower yielding U.S. Treasuries and short-term investments. Net Realized Capital Losses For the years ended December 31, 2009 2008 2007 Gross gains on sales $ 1,056 $ 607 $ 374 Gross losses on sales (1,397 ) (856 ) (291 ) Net OTTI losses recognized in earnings (1,508 ) (3,964 ) (483 ) Japanese fixed annuity contract hedges, net [1] 47 64 18 Periodic net coupon settlements on credit derivatives/Japan (49 ) (33 ) (25 ) Fair value measurement transition impact [2] (650 ) Results of variable annuity hedge program GMWB derivatives, net 1,526 (713 ) (286 ) Macro hedge program (895 ) 74 (12 ) Total results of variable annuity hedge program 631 (639 ) (298 ) Other, net (790 ) (447 ) (289 ) Net realized capital losses, before-tax $ (2,010 ) $ (5,918 ) $ (994 ) [1] Relates to derivative hedging instruments, excluding periodic net coupon settlements, and is net of the Japanese fixed annuity product liability adjustment for changes in the dollar/yen exchange spot rate. [2] See Note 4a of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. The circumstances giving rise to the Company net realized capital gains and losses are as follows: Gross gains and losses on sales Gross gains and losses on sales for the year ended December 31, 2009 were predominantly within corporate, government and structured securities. Also included were gains of $360 related to the sale of Verisk/ISO securities. Gross gains and losses on sales primarily resulted from efforts to reduce portfolio risk through sales of subordinated financials and real estate related securities and from sales of U.S. Treasuries to manage liquidity. Gross gains and losses on sales for the year ended December 31, 2008 primarily resulted from the decision to reallocate the portfolio to securities with more favorable risk/return profiles. Also included was a gain of $141 from the sale of a synthetic CDO. Gross gains and losses on sales for the year ended December 31, 2007 were primarily comprised of corporate, foreign government and municipal securities. Net OTTI losses For further information, see Other-Than-Temporary Impairments within the Investment Credit Risk section of the MD&A. Variable annuity hedge program For the year ended December 31, 2009, the net gain on GMWB related derivatives was primarily due to liability model assumption updates related to favorable policyholder experience of $566, the relative outperformance of the underlying actively managed funds as compared to their respective indices of $550, and the impact of the Company own credit standing of $154. Additional net gains of $56 resulted from lower implied market volatility and a general increase in long-term interest rates, partially offset by rising equity markets. Increasing equity markets resulted in a loss of $895 related to the Company macro hedge program. Total gains related to GMWB hedging in 2009 were $1.5 billion. For further information, see Note 4a of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. In addition, see the Company variable annuity hedging program sensitivity disclosures within Capital Markets Risk Management section of the MD&A. For the year ended December 31, 2008, the net loss on GMWB derivatives was primarily due to losses of $904 related to market-based hedge ineffectiveness due to extremely volatile capital markets and $355 related to the relative underperformance of the underlying actively managed funds as compared to their respective indices, partially offset by gains of $470 in the fourth quarter related to liability model assumption updates for lapse rates. For the year ended December 31, 2007, the net loss on GMWB derivatives was primarily due to losses of $158 related to liability model assumption updates and model refinements made during the year, including those for dynamic lapse behavior and correlations of market returns across underlying indices, as well as updates to reflect newly reliable market inputs for volatility. 78 Table of Contents Other, net Other, net losses for the year ended December 31, 2009 primarily resulted in net losses of $463 on credit derivatives where the Company purchased credit protection due to credit spread tightening, $400 related to net additions to valuation allowances on impaired mortgage loans, and approximately $300 from contingent obligations associated with the Allianz transaction. These losses were partially offset by gains of $155 on credit derivatives that assume credit risk due to credit spread tightening, as well as $140 from a change in spot rates related to transactional foreign currency predominately on the internal reinsurance of the Japan variable annuity business, which is offset in accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) ( AOCI ). Other, net losses for the year ended December 31, 2008 were primarily due to net losses of $291 related to transactional foreign currency losses predominately on the internal reinsurance of the Japan variable annuity business, which is offset in AOCI, resulting from appreciation of the Yen, as well as credit derivative losses of $312 due to significant credit spread widening. Also included were derivative related losses of $46 due to counterparty default related to the bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers Holdings Inc. Other, net losses for the year ended December 31, 2007 were primarily driven by the change in value of non-qualifying derivatives due to credit spread widening, as well as fluctuations in interest rates and foreign currency exchange rates. 79 Table of Contents RETAIL Operating Summary 2009 2008 2007 Fee income and other $ 2,139 $ 2,757 $ 3,117 Earned premiums (7 ) (4 ) (62 ) Net investment income 750 747 801 Net realized capital losses (7 ) (1,910 ) (381 ) Total revenues [1] 2,875 1,590 3,475 Benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses 1,310 1,008 820 Insurance operating costs and other expenses 1,049 1,187 1,221 Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs and present value of future profits 1,389 1,344 406 Goodwill impairment 422 Total benefits, losses and expenses 3,748 3,961 2,447 Income (loss) before income taxes (873 ) (2,371 ) 1,028 Income tax expense (benefit) (463 ) (972 ) 216 Net income (loss) [2] $ (410 ) $ (1,399 ) $ 812 Assets Under Management 2009 2008 2007 Individual variable annuity account values $ 84,679 $ 74,578 $ 119,071 Individual fixed annuity and other account values 12,110 11,278 10,243 Other retail products account values 398 677 Total account values [3] 96,789 86,254 129,991 Retail mutual fund assets under management 42,829 31,032 48,383 Other mutual fund assets under management 1,202 1,678 2,113 Total mutual fund assets under management 44,031 32,710 50,496 Total assets under management $ 140,820 $ 118,964 $ 180,487 Account Value and Assets Under Management Roll Forward 2009 2008 2007 Individual Variable Annuities Account value, beginning of period $ 74,578 $ 119,071 $ 114,365 Net flows (7,122 ) (6,235 ) (2,733 ) Change in market value and other 17,223 (38,258 ) 7,439 Account value, end of period $ 84,679 $ 74,578 $ 119,071 Retail Mutual Funds Assets under management, beginning of period $ 31,032 $ 48,383 $ 38,536 Net sales 2,004 2,840 5,545 Change in market value and other 9,793 (20,191 ) 4,302 Assets under management, end of period $ 42,829 $ 31,032 $ 48,383 Net Investment Spread 2009 2008 2007 Individual Annuities Individual Annuity 28 bps 73 bps 174 bps Expense Ratios 2009 2008 2007 Individual Annuities General insurance expense ratio 21.0 bps 21.0 bps 17.9 bps DAC amortization ratio [4] 244.3 % 218.5 % 25.5 % DAC amortization ratio, excluding realized losses and DAC Unlocks [4] [5] 61.6 % 65.2 % 47.9 % [1] For the year ended December 31, 2008, the transition impact related to the adoption of fair value accounting guidance was a reduction in revenues of $616. For further discussion of the fair value guidance transition impact, see Note 4a of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. [2] For the year ended December 31, 2008, the transition impact related to the adoption of fair value accounting guidance was a reduction in net income of $209. For further discussion of the fair value guidance transition impact, see Note 4a of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. [3] Includes policyholders balances for investment contracts and reserves for future policy benefits for insurance contracts. [4] Excludes the effects of realized gains and losses. [5] See Unlock discussion. Retail focuses on the savings and retirement needs of the growing number of individuals who are preparing for retirement, or have already retired, through the sale of individual variable and fixed annuities, mutual funds and other investment products. Life is both a writer of individual variable annuities and a seller of individual variable annuities through banks in the United States. 80 Table of Contents Year ended December 31, 2009 compared to the year ended December 31, 2008 Net loss improved primarily due to lower net realized capital losses as a result of gains in the variable annuity hedge program in 2009 compared with losses in 2008; 2008 also included the transition impact related to the adoption of fair value accounting guidance, which resulted in a reduction in net income of $209. Additionally, impairment losses were higher in 2008. Also contributing to the lower net loss was the impairment of goodwill attributed to the individual annuity line of business in 2008. These items were offset partially by lower fee income. For further discussion of the fair value guidance transition impact, see Note 4 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. For further discussion of the 2009 and 2008 Unlocks, see Unlocks within the Critical Accounting Estimates section of the MD&A. The following other factors contributed to the changes in net income: Fee income and other Fee income and other decreased primarily as a result of lower variable annuity and mutual fund fee income due to a decline in average account values. Average variable annuity account values declined from $99.8 billion in 2008 to $77.3 billion in 2009 driven by net outflows of $7.1 billion during 2009 as well as the effect of the equity market declines in 2008 and the first quarter of 2009. Net outflows were driven by surrender activity resulting from the aging of the variable annuity in-force block of business; lower deposits driven by increased competition, particularly competition related to guaranteed living benefits, and volatility in the equity markets. Average retail mutual fund assets under management declined from $42.4 billion to $35.5 billion driven primarily by the effect of the equity market declines in 2008 and the first quarter of 2009, partially offset by net flows of $2.0 billion during 2009. Net investment income Net investment income in 2009 was relatively consistent with 2008 as increased derivative income and an increase in general account assets was largely offset by maintaining a greater percentage of assets in short-term investments and lower yields on fixed maturities. Net investment spread The drop in net investment spread is primarily related to lower earnings on fixed maturities of 15 bps, higher average crediting rates of 14 bps, lower partnership returns of 8 bps and lower earnings on equities of 4 bps. The decline in fixed maturity returns was primarily related to a higher percentage of fixed maturities being held in short-term investments. Net realized capital losses Net realized capital losses decreased as a result of the recognition of $1.5 billion of gains on GMWB derivatives in 2009 compared with losses of $631 in 2008; the transition impact related to the adoption of fair value accounting guidance, which resulted in losses of $616 in 2008; and impairment losses of $263 in 2009 compared with $474 in 2008. Partially offsetting these items were losses of $733 in 2009 related to the Company macro hedge program compared with gains of $40 in 2008 and net losses on sales of $329 in 2009 compared with net losses of $31 in 2008. Benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses Benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses increased primarily as a result of the net impact of the Unlocks over the last twelve months, which increased the benefit ratio used in the calculation of GMDB reserves. Insurance operating costs and other expenses Insurance operating costs and other expenses decreased primarily as a result of lower asset based trail commissions due to equity market declines, as well as ongoing efforts to actively reduce operating expenses. General insurance expense ratio The general expense ratio has remained flat as a result of management efforts to reduce expenses, offset by a decline in the average asset base. Amortization of DAC Amortization of DAC increased primarily due to the higher individual annuity DAC amortization rate in 2009 as compared to 2008 due primarily to Unlock assumption changes made in 2008 and 2009 and lower gross profits in 2009. Additionally, the adoption of fair value accounting guidance at the beginning of the first quarter of 2008 resulted in a DAC benefit. DAC amortization ratio, excluding realized losses and DAC Unlocks The Retail DAC amortization ratio, excluding realized losses and DAC Unlocks, decreased due to the impairment of goodwill in the fourth quarter of 2008, which reduced pre-tax earnings but did not affect EGPs. Excluding the impacts of the goodwill impairment, realized losses and DAC Unlock, the DAC amortization ratio was 43.3%. The 61.6% ratio in 2009 reflects lower EGPs driven by lower fee income due to declines in average account value and lower net investment income due to a greater percentage of fixed maturities being held in short-term investment and lower returns on investments in limited partnerships and other alternative investments. Income tax benefit The income tax benefit is primarily due to the pre-tax losses driven by the factors discussed previously. 2009 included a higher DRD benefit than 2008. The difference from a 35% tax rate is primarily due to the recognition of tax benefits associated with the DRD and foreign tax credits. 81 Table of Contents Year ended December 31, 2008 compared to the year ended December 31, 2007 Net income decreased primarily as a result of increased realized capital losses, the impact of the 2008 Unlock charge, the impairment of goodwill attributed to the individual annuity line of business and the effect of equity market declines on variable annuity and mutual fund fee income. For further discussion of the fair value accounting guidance transition impact, see Note 4 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. For further discussion of the 2008 and 2007 Unlock, see Unlocks within the Critical Accounting Estimates section of the MD&A. For further discussion of goodwill impairments, see Note 8 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. The following other factors contributed to the changes in net income: Fee income and other Fee income and other decreased $360 primarily as a result of lower variable annuity fee income due to a decline in average account values. The decrease in average variable annuity account values can be attributed to market depreciation of $38.2 billion and net outflows of $6.2 billion during the year. Net outflows were driven by surrender activity resulting from the aging of the variable annuity in-force block of business; increased competition, particularly competition related to guaranteed living benefits, and volatility in the equity markets. Also contributing to the decrease in fee income was lower mutual fund fees due to declining assets under management primarily driven by market depreciation of $20.1 billion, partially offset by $2.8 billion of net flows. Earned premiums Earned Premiums increased primarily due to an increase in life contingent premiums combined with a decrease in reinsurance premiums as a result of the lapsing of business covered by reinsurance and the significant decline in the equity markets. Net investment income Net investment income was lower primarily due to a $77 decline in income from limited partnerships and other alternative investments, combined with lower yields on fixed maturity investments due to interest rate declines, partially offset by an increase in general account assets from increased fixed account sales. Net investment spread The decline in net investment spread is attributable to lower fixed income returns of 62 bps and lower limited partnership returns of 45 bps, partially offset by a reduction in the average credited rate of 3 bps. The decline in fixed maturity returns was primarily related to a higher percentage of fixed maturities being held in short-term investments. Net realized capital losses Net realized capital losses increased primarily as a result of losses on GMWB derivatives of $631 in 2008 compared with losses of $286 in 2007; the transition impact related to the adoption of fair value accounting guidance, which resulted in losses of $616 in 2008; and impairments of $474 in 2008 compared with $87 in 2007. Benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses Benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses increased primarily as a result of the impact of the 2008 Unlock which increased the benefit ratio used in the calculation of GMDB reserves. Insurance operating costs and other expenses Insurance operating costs and other expenses decreased primarily as a result of lower non deferrable asset based trail commissions due to equity market declines. General insurance expense ratio The general insurance expense ratio increased due to the impact of a declining asset base on relatively consistent expenses. Amortization of DAC Amortization of DAC increased primarily due to the impact of the 2008 Unlock charge as compared to the 2007 Unlock benefit. This was partially offset by a DAC benefit associated with the adoption of fair value accounting guidance at the beginning of the first quarter of 2008. DAC amortization ratio, excluding realized losses and DAC Unlocks The Retail DAC amortization ratio, excluding realized losses and DAC Unlocks, increased due to the impairment of goodwill in the fourth quarter of 2008, which reduced pre-tax earnings but did not affect EGPs. Excluding the impacts of the goodwill impairment, realized losses, and DAC Unlock, the 2008 DAC amortization ratio was 43.3%, which reflects the 2008 effect of changes in assumptions made as part of the 2007 and 2008 Unlocks. Goodwill impairment As a result of testing performed during the fourth quarter of 2008, all goodwill attributed to the individual annuity business in Retail was deemed to be impaired and was written down to $0. For further discussion of this impairment, see Note 8 in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Income tax expense (benefit) The effective tax rate increased from 21% to 41% for the year ended December 31, 2008 as compared to the prior year primarily due to losses before income taxes in 2008 compared to pre-tax earnings in 2007. The impact of DRD and other permanent differences caused an increase in the tax benefit to above 35% on the 2008 pre-tax loss and a decrease in the tax expense on the 2007 pre-tax income. 82 Table of Contents INDIVIDUAL LIFE Operating Summary 2009 2008 2007 Fee income and other $ 1,027 $ 899 $ 870 Earned premiums (87 ) (71 ) (62 ) Net investment income 335 338 359 Net realized capital losses (145 ) (252 ) (28 ) Total revenues 1,130 914 1,139 Benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses 640 627 562 Insurance operating costs and other expenses 188 202 193 Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs and present value of future profits 314 169 121 Total benefits, losses and expenses 1,142 998 876 Income (loss) before income taxes (12 ) (84 ) 263 Income tax expense (benefit) (27 ) (41 ) 81 Net income (loss) $ 15 $ (43 ) $ 182 Account Values 2009 2008 2007 Variable universal life insurance $ 5,766 $ 4,802 $ 7,284 Universal life/interest sensitive whole life 5,071 4,727 4,388 Modified guaranteed life and other 622 653 677 Total account values $ 11,459 $ 10,182 $ 12,349 Life Insurance In-force Variable universal life insurance $ 78,671 $ 78,853 $ 77,566 Universal life/interest sensitive whole life 55,169 52,356 48,636 Term life 69,932 63,334 52,298 Modified guaranteed life and other 897 921 983 Total life insurance in-force $ 204,669 $ 195,464 $ 179,483 Net Investment Spread 81 bps 90 bps 130 bps Death Benefits $ 346 $ 359 $ 298 Individual Life provides life insurance solutions to a wide array of business intermediaries to solve the wealth protection, accumulation and transfer needs of their affluent, emerging affluent and small business insurance clients. 83 Table of Contents Year ended December 31, 2009 compared to the year ended December 31, 2008 Net income increased for the year ended December 31, 2009, driven primarily by lower net realized capital losses. The following other factors contributed to the changes in net income: Fee income and other Fee income and other increased primarily due to the impact of the 2009 Unlock amortization of unearned revenue reserves of $83 and increased cost of insurance charges of $38 as a result of growth in guaranteed universal life insurance in-force, partially offset by lower variable life fees as a result of equity market declines. For further discussion on the Unlock, see the Critical Accounting Estimates section of the MD&A. Earned premiums Earned premiums, which include premiums for ceded reinsurance, decreased primarily due to increased ceded reinsurance premiums due to aging and growth in life insurance in-force. Net investment spread Net investment spread was lower due to a $3 decline in investment income and a $2 increase in interest credited. Interest credited increased due primarily to increased average account values, partially offset by a reduction in the average credited rate of 18 bps. Net realized capital losses Net realized capital losses improved primarily related to lower losses from impairments. For further discussion on impairments, see Other-Than-Temporary Impairments within the Investment Credit Risk section of the MD&A. Benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses Benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses increased primarily related to reserve increases on secondary guaranteed universal life products due to aging and growth in life insurance in-force, partially offset by favorable mortality experience. Death benefits Death benefits decreased due to favorable mortality partially offset by an increase in net amount at risk for variable universal life policies caused by equity market declines. Insurance operating costs and other expenses Insurance operating costs and other expenses decreased primarily as a result of continued active expense management efforts. Amortization of DAC Amortization of DAC increased primarily as a result of the additional Unlock charges in 2009 compared to 2008. DAC amortization had a partial offset in amortization of unearned revenue reserves, which drove the increase in fee income noted above. Income tax benefit Income tax benefit decreased as a result of improved earnings before income taxes primarily due to lower net realized capital losses and the effects of the 2009 Unlocks. The effective tax rate for 2009 differs from the statutory rate of 35% primarily due to the recognition of the DRD. 84 Table of Contents Year ended December 31, 2008 compared to the year ended December 31, 2007 Net income decreased for the year ended December 31, 2008, driven primarily by significantly higher net realized capital losses and the impacts of the Unlock in 2008 as compared to 2007. For further discussion on the Unlock, see Unlocks within the Critical Accounting Estimates section of the MD&A. The following other factors contributed to the changes in net income: Fee income and other Fee income and other increased primarily due to an increase in cost of insurance charges of $45 as a result of growth in guaranteed universal life insurance in-force and fees on higher surrenders of $12 due to internal exchanges from non-guaranteed universal life insurance to variable universal life insurance. Partially offsetting these increases are the impacts of the 2008 and 2007 Unlocks as well as lower variable life fees as a result of equity market declines. Earned premiums Earned premiums, which include premiums for ceded reinsurance, decreased primarily due to increased ceded reinsurance premiums due to life insurance in-force growth. Net investment income Net investment income decreased primarily due to lower income from limited partnerships and other alternative investments, lower yields on fixed maturity investments, and reduced net investment income associated with a more efficient capital approach for our secondary guarantee universal life business, which released assets supporting capital and the related net investment income earned on those assets (described further in the Outlook section), partially offset by growth in general account values. Net investment spread The decrease in net investment spread was attributable to lower limited partnership returns of 52 bps and lower fixed maturity income returns, partially offset by a reduction in the credited rate of 23 bps. Net realized capital losses Net realized capital losses increased primarily related to losses from impairments. For further discussion on impairments, see Other-Than-Temporary Impairments within the Investment Credit Risk section of the MD&A. Benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses Benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses increased as a result of higher death benefits consistent with a larger life insurance in-force and unfavorable mortality, as well as the impact of the 2008 Unlock. Death benefits Death benefits increased, primarily due to growth of life insurance in-force and unfavorable mortality. Insurance operating costs and other expenses Insurance operating costs and other increased less than the growth of in-force business as a result of active expense management efforts. Amortization of DAC Amortization of DAC increased primarily as a result of the Unlock expense in 2008 as compared to the Unlock benefit in 2007, partially offset by reduced DAC amortization primarily attributed to net realized capital losses. This increase in DAC amortization had a partial offset in amortization of unearned revenue reserves, included in fee income. Income tax expense (benefit) Income tax benefits were a result of lower income before income taxes primarily due to an increase in net realized capital losses and DAC amortization. 85 Table of Contents GROUP BENEFITS Operating Summary 2009 2008 2007 Premiums and other considerations $ 4,350 $ 4,391 $ 4,301 Net investment income 403 419 465 Net realized capital losses (124 ) (540 ) (30 ) Total revenues 4,629 4,270 4,736 Benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses 3,196 3,144 3,109 Insurance operating costs and other expenses 1,120 1,128 1,131 Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs 61 57 62 Total benefits, losses and expenses 4,377 4,329 4,302 Income (loss) before income taxes 252 (59 ) 434 Income tax expense (benefit) 59 (53 ) 119 Net income (loss) $ 193 $ (6 ) $ 315 Earned Premiums and Other 2009 2008 2007 Fully insured ongoing premiums $ 4,309 $ 4,355 $ 4,239 Buyout premiums 1 27 Other 41 35 35 Total earned premiums and other $ 4,350 $ 4,391 $ 4,301 Fully insured ongoing sales, excluding buyouts $ 741 $ 820 $ 770 Persistency 87 % 89 % 87 % Ratios, excluding buyouts Loss ratio 73.5 % 71.6 % 72.1 % Loss ratio, excluding financial institutions 77.8 % 76.3 % 77.3 % Expense ratio 27.1 % 27.0 % 27.9 % Expense ratio, excluding financial institutions 22.6 % 22.4 % 23.0 % The Group Benefits segment provides employers, associations, affinity groups and financial institutions with group life, accident and disability coverage, along with other products and services, including voluntary benefits, and group retiree health. The Company also offers disability underwriting, administration, claims processing services and reinsurance to other insurers and self-funded employer plans. Group Benefits has a block of financial institution business that is experience rated. This business comprised approximately 9% to 10% of the segment 2009, 2008 and 2007 premiums and other considerations (excluding buyouts) respectively, and, on average, 2% to 4% of the segment 2009, 2008 and 2007 net income (loss), excluding realized capital losses and the commission accrual adjustment in 2009 discussed below. 86 Table of Contents Year ended December 31, 2009 compared to the year ended December 31, 2008 The increase in net income for the year ended December 31, 2009, was primarily due to lower net realized capital losses in 2009. The following other factors contributed to the changes in net income: Premiums and other considerations Premiums and other considerations decreased primarily due to reductions in covered lives within our customer base. Net investment income Net investment income decreased primarily as a result of lower yields on fixed maturity investments. Net realized capital losses Lower net realized capital losses were primarily driven by fewer impairments in 2009 compared to 2008. For further discussion on impairments, see Other-Than-Temporary Impairments within the Investment Credit Risk section of the MD&A. Loss ratio The segment loss ratio increased primarily due to unfavorable morbidity experience, which was primarily due to unfavorable reserve development from the 2008 incurral loss year and higher new incurred long-term disability claims in 2009. Expense ratio The segment expense ratio, excluding buyouts increased compared to the prior year due primarily to a commission accrual adjustment recorded in 2009 on financial institutions business. Income tax expense (benefit) Income tax expense increased as a result of improved earnings before income taxes primarily due to lower net realized capital losses. The effective tax rate for 2009 differs from the statutory rate of 35% primarily due to investments in tax exempt securities. Fully insured ongoing sales, excluding buyouts Fully insured ongoing sales, excluding buyouts, decreased in 2009 from 2008 primarily due to the competitive marketplace and economic environment. Year ended December 31, 2008 compared to the year ended December 31, 2007 The decrease in net income for the year ended December 31, 2008, was primarily due to increased net realized capital losses. Premiums and other considerations Premiums and other considerations increased largely due to business growth driven by new sales and persistency over the last twelve months. Net investment income Net investment income decreased primarily as a result of lower yields on fixed maturity investments and lower limited partnership and other alternative investment returns of $33. Net realized capital losses Higher net realized capital losses were primarily driven by higher impairments in 2008 compared to 2007. For further discussion on impairments, see Other-Than-Temporary Impairments within the Investment Credit Risk section of the MD&A. Loss ratio The segment loss ratio decreased due to favorable disability and medical stop loss experience partially offset by unfavorable mortality. Expense ratio The segment expense ratio, excluding buyouts decreased compared to the prior year due primarily to lower commission expenses. Income tax expense (benefit) 2008 had an income tax benefit compared to an income tax expense in 2007 as a result of higher net realized capital losses. The effective tax rate for 2008 differs from the statutory rate of 35% primarily due to investments in tax exempt securities. 87 Table of Contents RETIREMENT PLANS Operating Summary 2009 2008 2007 Fee income and other $ 321 $ 334 $ 238 Earned premiums 3 4 4 Net investment income 315 342 355 Net realized capital losses (333 ) (272 ) (41 ) Total revenues 306 408 556 Benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses 269 271 249 Insurance operating costs and other expenses 346 335 170 Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs and present value of future profits 56 91 58 Total benefits, losses and expenses 671 697 477 Income (loss) before income taxes (365 ) (289 ) 79 Income tax expense (benefit) (143 ) (132 ) 18 Net income (loss) $ (222 ) $ (157 ) $ 61 Assets Under Management 2009 2008 2007 403(b)/457 account values $ 11,116 $ 10,242 $ 12,363 401(k) account values 16,142 11,956 14,731 Total account values [1] 27,258 22,198 27,094 403(b)/457 mutual fund assets under management 245 99 26 401(k) mutual fund assets under management [2] 16,459 14,739 1,428 Total mutual fund assets under management 16,704 14,838 1,454 Total assets under management $ 43,962 $ 37,036 $ 28,548 Total assets under administration 401(k) [3] $ 5,588 $ 5,122 $ Account Value and Assets Under Management Roll Forward 2009 2008 2007 Retirement Plans Group Annuities Account value, beginning of period $ 22,198 $ 27,094 $ 23,575 Net flows 563 2,418 1,669 Change in market value and other 4,497 (7,314 ) 1,850 Account value, end of period $ 27,258 $ 22,198 $ 27,094 Retirement Plans Mutual Funds Assets under management, beginning of period $ 14,838 $ 1,454 $ 1,140 Net sales/(redemptions) (1,705 ) (446 ) 103 Acquisitions 18,725 Change in market value and other 3,571 (4,895 ) 211 Assets under management, end of period $ 16,704 $ 14,838 $ 1,454 Net Investment Spread 66 bps 92 bps 162 bps [1] Includes policyholder balances for investment contracts and reserves for future policy benefits for insurance contracts. [2] During the year ended December 31, 2008, Life acquired the rights to service mutual fund assets from Sun Life Retirement Services, Inc., and Princeton Retirement Group. [3] During the year ended December 31, 2008, Life acquired the rights to service assets under administration ( AUA ) from Princeton Retirement Group. Servicing revenues from AUA are based on the number of plan participants and do not vary directly with asset levels. As such, they are not included in assets under management upon which asset based returns are calculated. The Retirement Plans segment primarily offers customized wealth creation and financial protection for corporate, government and tax-exempt employers through its two business units, 403(b)/457 and 401(k). 88 Table of Contents Year ended December 31, 2009 compared to the year ended December 31, 2008 Net loss in Retirement Plans increased due to an increase in net realized capital losses, lower net investment income and lower fee income. For further discussion of the Unlock, see Unlocks within the Critical Accounting Estimates section of the MD&A. The following other factors contributed to the changes in net loss: Fee income and other Fee income and other decreased primarily due to lower average account values. Despite equity market improvements during the last nine months of 2009, account values have not returned to early 2008 levels. Net flows in group annuities and net sales in mutual funds have declined due primarily to a few large case surrenders. Net investment income Net investment income decreased primarily as a result of lower yields on fixed maturity investments partially offset by an increase in derivative income. Net investment spread The decline in net investment spread is attributable to lower fixed income returns of 34 bps and lower partnership returns of 3 bps, partially offset by a reduction in credited rates of 10 bps. Net realized capital losses Net realized capital losses increased primarily as a result of realized losses of $56 on non-qualifying derivatives in 2009 compared with $14 of gains in 2008 and mortgage valuation allowances of $38 in 2009, partially offset by OTTI impairment losses of $178 in 2009 compared with $243 in 2008. Insurance operating costs and other expenses Insurance operating costs and other expenses increased primarily due to a full year of operating expenses associated with the businesses acquired in the latter part of the first quarter of 2008 and lower deferrable acquisition expenses due to low sales levels, partially offset by expense management initiatives. Amortization of DAC Amortization of DAC decreased as a result of lower gross profits in 2009 than 2008. Income tax benefit The income tax benefit is greater than the prior year income tax benefit due to a higher loss before income taxes primarily due to the income items discussed above. The effective tax rate differs from the statutory rate of 35% primarily due to the recognition of the DRD. Year ended December 31, 2008 compared to the year ended December 31, 2007 Net income in Retirement Plans decreased due to higher net realized capital losses, the DAC Unlock in 2008 as compared to 2007 and increased operating expenses partially offset by growth in fee income. For further discussion of the 2008 and 2007 Unlocks, see Unlocks within the Critical Accounting Estimates section of the MD&A. The following other factors contributed to the changes in net income: Fee income and other Fee income and other increased primarily due to $109 of fees earned on assets relating to the acquisitions in the first quarter of 2008. Offsetting this increase was lower annuity fees driven by lower average account values as a result of market depreciation of $7.3 billion, partially offset by positive net flows of $2.4 billion over the past four quarters. Group annuities had positive net flows driven by higher deposits as a result of the expanded sales force obtained through the 2008 acquisitions. Net investment income Net investment income declined due to a decrease in the returns from limited partnerships and other alternative investments income of $33, partially offset by growth in general account assets. Net investment spread The decline in net investment spread is attributable to lower limited partnership returns of 50 bps and lower fixed income returns of 25 bps, partially offset by a reduction in credited rates of 6 bps. Net realized capital losses Net realized capital losses increased primarily due to impairment losses of $243 in 2008 compared with losses of $22 in 2007. Insurance operating costs and other expenses Insurance operating costs and other expenses increased primarily attributable to operating expenses associated with the acquired businesses. Also contributing to higher insurance operating costs were higher trail commissions resulting from an aging portfolio and higher service and technology costs. Amortization of DAC Amortization of DAC increased as a result of the higher Unlock charge in the third quarter of 2008 of $75 as compared to the Unlock charge in the third quarter of 2007 of $14, partially offset by lower DAC amortization associated with lower gross profits. For further discussion, see Unlocks within the Critical Accounting Estimates section of the MD&A. Income tax expense (benefit) The income tax benefit for 2008 as compared to the prior year periods income tax expense was due to lower income before income taxes primarily due to increased net realized capital losses and increased tax benefits associated with the dividends received deduction. 89 Table of Contents INTERNATIONAL Operating Summary 2009 2008 2007 Fee income $ 834 $ 881 $ 843 Earned premiums (7 ) (9 ) (11 ) Net investment income 182 167 131 Net realized capital gains (losses) 35 (422 ) (116 ) Total revenues [1] 1,044 617 847 Benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses 621 270 32 Insurance operating costs and other expenses 291 321 246 Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs 364 496 214 Total benefits, losses and expenses 1,276 1,087 492 Income (loss) before income taxes (232 ) (470 ) 355 Income tax expense (benefit) (49 ) (145 ) 132 Net income (loss) [2] $ (183 ) $ (325 ) $ 223 Assets Under Management Japan 2009 2008 2007 Japan variable annuity account values $ 30,521 $ 29,726 $ 35,793 Japan fixed annuity and other account values [3] 4,365 4,769 1,844 Total assets under management Japan $ 34,886 $ 34,495 $ 37,637 Account Value and Assets Under Management Roll Forward 2009 2008 2007 Japan Annuities Account value, beginning of period $ 34,495 $ 37,637 $ 31,343 Net flows [4] (1,200 ) 714 4,525 Change in market value and other 2,270 (10,921 ) (608 ) Effect of currency translation (679 ) 7,065 2,377 Account value, end of period $ 34,886 $ 34,495 $ 37,637 Expense Ratios 2009 2008 2007 International Japan General insurance expense ratio 40.6 bps 49.4 bps 48.4 bps DAC amortization ratio [5] 225.2 % 109.3 % 35.3 % DAC amortization ratio excluding realized gains (losses) and DAC Unlocks [5] [6] 42.5 % 42.4 % 40.0 % [1] The transition impact related to the adoption of fair value accounting guidance was a reduction in revenues of $34, for the year ended December 31, 2008. For further discussion of the fair value guidance transition impact, see Note 4a of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. [2] The transition impact related to the adoption of fair value accounting guidance was a reduction in net income of $11 the year ended December 31, 2008. For further discussion of the fair value guidance transition impact, refer to Note 4a of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. [3] Japan fixed annuity and other account values include a $1.8 billion increase as of December 31, 2009 due to the impact of the GMIB pay-out annuity account value trigger for the 3 Win product with a corresponding decrease to Japan variable annuity account values. This payout annuity account value is not expected to generate material future profit or loss to the Company. [4] Includes the effect of the triggering of the guaranteed minimum income benefit ( GMIB ) for the 3 Win product in 2008, of which $(809) relates to policyholders surrendering and $(181) relates to the current period annuity payments. In 2009, net flows decreased due to the suspension of sales and an additional $(267) related to the current period annuity payments for the 3 Win product. [5] Excludes the effects of realized gains and losses except for net periodic settlements. Included in the net realized capital gain (losses) are amounts that represent the net periodic accruals on currency rate swaps used in the risk management of Japan fixed annuity products. [6] Excludes the effects of 3 Wins related charges in 2009 and 2008, of $62 and $237, pre-tax, on net income. Including the effects of 3 Wins related charges DAC amortization would have been 48.9% and 77.8%, respectively. International, which has operations located in Japan, Brazil, Ireland and the United Kingdom, provides investments, retirement savings and other insurance and savings products to individuals and groups outside the United States and Canada. Prior to the second quarter 2009 suspension of new product sales, International focused on the savings and retirement needs of the growing number of individuals outside the United States who are preparing for retirement, or have already retired, through the sale of variable annuities, fixed annuities and other insurance and savings products. The Company Japan operation is the largest component of the International segment. 90 Table of Contents Year ended December 31, 2009 compared to the year ended December 31, 2008 Net loss decreased for the year ended December 31, 2009 as a result of decreased realized capital losses, partially offset by an unfavorable 2009 Unlock. For further discussion on the Unlocks, see Unlocks within the Critical Accounting Estimates section of the MD&A. The following other factors contributed to the changes in net loss: Fee income Fee income decreased primarily due to lower variable annuity fee income due to a decline in Japan average variable annuity account value. Average variable annuity account value declined due to net outflows driven by the suspension of new sales in the second quarter of 2009 as well as the effect of equity market declines in 2008 and the first quarter 2009. Benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses Benefits, losses and loss adjustment expense increased, driven by an unfavorable Unlock in the first quarter of 2009, a charge related to the 3 Win product of $39, after-tax, and increased claim cost. For further discussion on the Unlocks, see Unlocks within the Critical Accounting Estimates section of the MD&A. Net realized capital gains (losses) Gains for the year ended December 31, 2009 were primarily driven by transactional foreign currency gains predominately on the internal reinsurance of the Japan variable annuity business, which is entirely offset in AOCI, resulting from depreciation of the Yen and GMWB derivative gains. These gains were partially offset by the $51 loss on the pending sale of the joint venture interest in ICATU Hartford Seguros, S.A and macro hedge program losses of $163. Insurance operating costs and other expenses Insurance operating costs and other expenses decreased due to expense savings associated with the restructuring of the International operations. General insurance expense ratio Japan general insurance expense ratio decreased due to the restructuring of Japan operations. Amortization of DAC Amortization of DAC decreased as a result of a favorable Unlock in the third quarter of 2009. For further discussion see Unlocks within the Critical Accounting Estimates section of the MD&A. Income tax benefit Income tax benefit declined as a result of fluctuating earnings and varying tax rates by country. 91 Table of Contents Year ended December 31, 2008 compared to the year ended December 31, 2007 Net income decreased for the year ended December 31, 2008 as a result of the 2008 Unlock versus the 2007 Unlock along with increased realized capital losses from the adoption of fair value guidance, which resulted in a net realized capital loss of $34 during the first quarter of 2008, impact of the 3 Win trigger, impairment charges, increases in insurance operating costs and other expenses, partially offset by an increase in fee income. Due to significant market declines in the fourth quarter of 2008, approximately 97% of the Company in-force 3 Win policies, or $3.1 billion in account value, had triggered the associated GMIB. 3 Win is a variable annuity product that was offered in Japan with a GMIB and GMAB rider. The GMIB trigger occurred as a result of policyholder account values falling below 80% of their initial deposit. As a result of the GMIB trigger, the majority of the Company 3 Win policies annuitized or surrendered free of charge in the fourth quarter of 2008. For further discussion on the Unlock, see Unlocks within the Critical Accounting Estimates section of the MD&A. For further discussion of the fair value guidance transition impact, see Note 4a of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. The following other factors contributed to the changes in net income: Fee income Fee income increased primarily due to growth in Japan variable annuity average assets under management. The increase in average assets under management over the prior year was driven by deposits of $3.0 billion and a $6.6 billion increase due to foreign currency exchange translation as the yen strengthened compared to the U.S. dollar. Deposits and favorable foreign currency exchange were offset by unfavorable market performance of $10.9 billion. Net flows have decreased in Japan annuities due the 3 Win trigger and to increased competition from domestic and foreign insurers, particularly competition relating to products offered with living benefit guarantees. Benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses Benefits, losses and loss adjustment expense increased as a result of the impacts of the Unlock in the third quarter of 2008 as compared to the third quarter of 2007, the impact of the 3 Win trigger, as well as higher GMDB net amount at risk and increased claims costs. Net realized capital gains (losses) Losses for the year ended December 31, 2008 were primarily driven by transactional foreign currency losses predominately on the internal reinsurance of the Japan variable annuity business, which is entirely offset in AOCI, resulting from appreciation of the Yen, fair value measurement transition and impairments. Insurance operating costs and other expenses Insurance operating costs and other expenses increased due to the growth and strategic investment in the Japan and Other International operations, as well as lower capitalization of deferred policy acquisition costs, as acquisition costs exceeded pricing allowables. Amortization of DAC Amortization of DAC increased as a result of the impacts of the Unlock in the third quarter of 2008 as compared to the third quarter of 2007, as well as the accelerated amortization associated with the 3 Win trigger. DAC amortization ratio, excluding realized gains (losses) and DAC Unlocks Japan DAC amortization ratio, excluding realized gains (losses) and DAC Unlocks, increased due to actual gross profits being less than expected as a result of lower fees earned on declining assets resulting in negative true-ups and a higher DAC amortization rate, as well as the accelerated amortization associated with the impact of the 3 Win trigger. Income tax expense (benefit) Income tax expense decreased primarily as a result of a decline in income before taxes. 92 Table of Contents INSTITUTIONAL Operating Summary 2009 2008 2007 Fee income and other $ 143 $ 152 $ 251 Earned premiums 352 889 987 Net investment income 833 1,004 1,241 Net realized capital losses (738 ) (789 ) (188 ) Total revenues 590 1,256 2,291 Benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses 1,301 1,907 2,074 Insurance operating costs and expenses 83 120 185 Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs 17 19 23 Total benefits, losses and expenses 1,401 2,046 2,282 Income (loss) before income taxes (811 ) (790 ) 9 Income tax benefit (296 ) (288 ) (8 ) Net income (loss) $ (515 ) $ (502 ) $ 17 Assets Under Management 2009 2008 2007 Institutional account values [1] $ 22,373 $ 24,081 $ 25,103 Private Placement Life Insurance account values [1] 33,356 32,459 32,792 Mutual fund assets under management 4,262 2,578 3,581 Total assets under management $ 59,991 $ 59,118 $ 61,476 Net Investment Spread 2009 2008 2007 Stable Value (GICs, Funding Agreements, Funding Agreement Backed Notes and Consumer Notes) (48 )bps 21 bps 101 bps Expense Ratios 2009 2008 2007 General insurance expense ratio 11.8 bps 14.1 bps 14.1 bps [1] Includes policyholder balances for investment contracts and reserves for future policy benefits for insurance contracts. Institutional has historically provided customized investment, insurance and income solutions to select markets through a broad range of products including PPLI owned by corporations and high net worth individuals, institutional annuities, mutual funds owned by institutional investors, structured settlements, stable value contracts and individual products such as income annuities and longevity assurance. During 2009, the Company decided to not actively market or sell certain Institutional products, including: structured settlements, guaranteed investment products, and most institutional annuities. Year ended December 31, 2009 compared to the year ended December 31, 2008 Net loss in Institutional increased primarily due to negative net investment spread due to continued partnership losses and as a result of management desire to maintain additional liquidity by increasing asset allocations in short term and treasury investments. Further discussion of income is presented below: Fee income and other Fee income and other was lower due to lower asset levels through beginning of the year as well as lower positive flows than prior year, offset by an increase in market return and higher sales. Earned premiums Earned premiums decreased as ratings downgrades reduced payout annuity sales. The decrease in earned premiums was offset by a corresponding decrease in benefits, losses, and loss adjustment expenses. Net investment income Net investment income declined due to lower income on fixed maturities resulting from a decline in average rates and fixed maturity investments, as well as an increased average asset base of securities with greater market liquidity. This was partially offset by a corresponding decrease in interest credited on liabilities reported in benefits, losses, and loss adjustment expenses. Net investment spread Stable Value, net investment spreads were negatively impacted by 166 bps due to lower yields on variable rate securities and maintaining additional liquidity in the Institutional portfolios in the form of short term and U.S. Treasuries. In both periods, the drop in variable rate yields was partially offset by lower credited rates on floating rate liabilities. Net realized capital losses Net realized capital losses were slightly lower due to smaller impairments. 93 Table of Contents Benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses Benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses were lower driven by lower interest credited due to lower rates on floating rate GIP as well as an overall smaller block of business. Insurance operating costs and expenses and general insurance expense ratio Insurance operating costs and other expenses decreased due to active expense management efforts and reduced information technology expenses. Income tax benefit The income tax benefit was flat due to flat income before taxes. Year ended December 31, 2008 compared to the year ended December 31, 2007 Net income in Institutional decreased primarily due to increased net realized capital losses and lower net investment income. The following other factors contributed to changes in net income: Fee income and other Fee income and other decreased primarily due to lower front-end loads on private placement life insurance ( PPLI ) cases during 2008. PPLI collects front-end loads recorded in fee income, offset by corresponding premium taxes reported in insurance operating costs and other expenses. For 2008 and 2007, PPLI deposits of $247 and $5.2 billion, respectively, resulted in fee income due to front-end loads of $2 and $107, respectively. Earned premiums Earned premiums decreased as compared to the prior year due to greater amounts of life contingent business sold in 2007. The decrease in earned premiums was offset by a corresponding decrease in benefits, losses, and loss adjustment expenses. Net investment income Net investment income declined due to losses from limited partnership and other alternative investments of $(127), lower yields on fixed maturity investments indexed to LIBOR, and lower assets under management. The decline in yield on fixed maturities was largely offset by a corresponding decrease in interest credited on liabilities reported in benefits, losses, and loss adjustment expense. Assets under management decreased primarily due to stable value outflows. Net investment spread Stable Value, net investment spreads were negatively impacted by 158 bps due to lower yields on variable rate securities and maintaining additional liquidity in the Institutional portfolios in the form of short-term investments and U.S. Treasuries, and 55 bps attributable to negative limited partnership returns. In both periods, the drop in variable rate yields was partially offset by lower credited rates on floating rate liabilities. Net realized capital losses Net realized capital losses were higher due to significant impairments. Benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses Benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses decreased primarily due to lower reserve increases as the result of lower sales in life contingent business, as well as lower interest credited on liabilities indexed to LIBOR. The decrease was partially offset by an increase in mortality losses of $8. Insurance operating costs and expenses and general insurance expense ratio Insurance operating costs and other expenses decreased due to a decline in premium tax, driven by reduced PPLI deposits, partially offset by discontinued administrative system projects and product development expenses. Income tax benefit The income tax benefit increased compared to the prior year primarily due to a decline in income before taxes primarily due to increased realized capital losses. 94 Table of Contents LIFE OTHER Operating Summary 2009 2008 2007 Fee income and other $ 58 $ 60 $ 67 Net investment income (loss) Securities available-for-sale and other 85 28 145 Equity securities, trading [1] 3,188 (10,340 ) 145 Total net investment income (loss) 3,273 (10,312 ) 290 Net realized capital gains (losses) (176 ) 47 (35 ) Total revenues 3,155 (10,205 ) 322 Benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses 84 154 156 Benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses returns credited on International variable annuities [1] 3,188 (10,340 ) 145 Insurance operating costs and other expenses 124 7 84 Total benefits, losses and expenses 3,396 (10,179 ) 385 Loss before income taxes (241 ) (26 ) (63 ) Income tax benefit (76 ) (15 ) (11 ) Net loss $ (165 ) $ (11 ) $ (52 ) [1] Includes investment income (loss) and mark-to-market effects of equity securities, trading, supporting the international variable annuity business, which are classified in net investment income with corresponding amounts credited to policyholders within benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses. Life includes in Other its leveraged PPLI product line of business; corporate items not directly allocated to any of its reportable operating segments; inter-segment eliminations and the mark-to-mark adjustment for the International variable annuity assets that are classified as equity securities held for trading reported in net investment income and the related change in interest credited reported as a component of benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses. Year ended December 31, 2009 compared to the year ended December 31, 2008 Net investment income securities available-for-sale and other Net investment income on securities available-for-sale and other increased due to reduced losses on limited partnerships and other alternative investments, partially offset by the effects of inter-segment eliminations in 2009. Net realized capital gains (losses) Net realized capital losses increased due to increases in mortgage loan valuation allowances in 2009. Insurance operating costs and other expenses Insurance operating costs and other expenses increased due to restructuring costs that include severance benefits and other costs associated with the suspension of sales in International Japan and European operations as well as other restructuring costs across Life operations of $119. See Note 23 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further details on the Company restructuring, severance and other costs. Year ended December 31, 2008 compared to the year ended December 31, 2007 Net investment income securities available-for-sale and other Net investment income on securities available-for-sale and other declined primarily due to decreases in yields on fixed maturity investments and declines in limited partnership and other alternative investment income. Net realized capital gains (losses) Net realized capital gains increased due to trading and valuation gains on derivatives, partially offset by increased impairments. Insurance operating costs and other expenses Insurance operating costs and other expenses decreased for the year ended December 31, 2008 as compared to the prior year period, primarily due to a charge of $21 for regulatory matters in the second quarter of 2007 and reallocation of expenses to the applicable lines of business in 2008. 95 Table of Contents PERSONAL LINES Underwriting Summary 2009 2008 2007 Written premiums $ 3,987 $ 3,925 $ 3,947 Change in unearned premium reserve 35 (1 ) 58 Earned premiums 3,952 3,926 3,889 Losses and loss adjustment expenses Current accident year before catastrophes 2,700 2,542 2,576 Current accident year catastrophes 228 258 125 Prior accident years (33 ) (51 ) (4 ) Total losses and loss adjustment expenses 2,895 2,749 2,697 Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs 674 633 617 Insurance operating costs and expenses 263 264 253 Underwriting results $ 120 $ 280 $ 322 Written Premiums 2009 2008 2007 Business Unit AARP $ 2,871 $ 2,813 $ 2,750 Agency 1,061 1,050 1,123 Other 55 62 74 Total $ 3,987 $ 3,925 $ 3,947 Product Line Automobile $ 2,869 $ 2,829 $ 2,848 Homeowners 1,118 1,096 1,099 Total $ 3,987 $ 3,925 $ 3,947 Earned Premiums 2009 2008 2007 Business Unit AARP $ 2,844 $ 2,778 $ 2,681 Agency 1,049 1,080 1,123 Other 59 68 85 Total $ 3,952 $ 3,926 $ 3,889 Product Line Automobile $ 2,850 $ 2,824 $ 2,822 Homeowners 1,102 1,102 1,067 Total $ 3,952 $ 3,926 $ 3,889 Premium Measures 2009 2008 2007 Policies in force at year end Automobile 2,395,421 2,323,882 2,349,402 Homeowners 1,488,408 1,455,954 1,481,542 Total policies in force at year end 3,883,829 3,779,836 3,830,944 New business premium Automobile $ 455 $ 364 $ 424 Homeowners $ 149 $ 106 $ 140 Policy count retention Automobile 86 % 86 % 87 % Homeowners 86 % 87 % 89 % Renewal written pricing increase Automobile 3 % 4 % 3 % Homeowners 5 % 6 % 7 % Renewal earned pricing increase Automobile 4 % 4 % 3 % Homeowners 6 % 5 % 7 % 96 Table of Contents Ratios and Supplemental Data 2009 2008 2007 Loss and loss adjustment expense ratio Current accident year before catastrophes 68.3 64.8 66.2 Current accident year catastrophes 5.8 6.6 3.2 Prior accident years (0.8 ) (1.3 ) (0.1 ) Total loss and loss adjustment expense ratio 73.3 70.0 69.3 Expense ratio 23.7 22.8 22.4 Combined ratio 97.0 92.9 91.7 Catastrophe ratio Current accident year 5.8 6.6 3.2 Prior accident years 0.1 0.2 0.2 Total catastrophe ratio 5.9 6.8 3.4 Combined ratio before catastrophes 91.1 86.1 88.3 Combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development 92.0 87.6 88.6 Other revenues [1] $ 153 $ 135 $ 141 [1] Represents servicing revenues. Combined Ratios 2009 2008 2007 Automobile 96.6 91.0 96.2 Homeowners 98.0 97.6 79.8 Total 97.0 92.9 91.7 Underwriting results, premium measures and ratios Year ended December 31, 2009 compared to the year ended December 31, 2008 Underwriting results decreased by $160, with a corresponding 4.1 point increase in the combined ratio. Earned premiums Earned premiums grew by 1% in 2009, primarily due to earned premium growth in AARP, largely offset by earned premium decreases in Agency and Other. AARP earned premiums grew $66 in 2009, reflecting an increase in new business written premium over the first nine months of 2009, driven by increased direct marketing spend, higher auto policy conversion rates and cross-selling homeowners insurance to insureds who have auto policies. Agency earned premiums decreased by $31, reflecting a decrease in policy count retention and a decrease in average renewal premium per policy, partially offset by an increase in new business written premium. The decrease in policy count retention was primarily due to a decrease in retention on homeowners as a result of the Company decision to stop renewing Florida homeowners policies. The increase in new business was primarily due to an increase in the number of agency appointments, an increase in the number of policy quotes and an increase in the policy issue rate for auto. Other earned premiums decreased primarily due to a strategic decision to reduce other affinity business. Auto earned premiums grew 1% in 2009 as the effect of an increase in new business was largely offset by a decrease in average renewal premium per policy. Homeowners earned premiums were flat in 2009 as the effect of an increase in new business was largely offset by a decrease in policy count retention driven by the Company decision to stop renewing Florida homeowners policies in Agency. While the Company recognized higher renewal earned pricing in 2009, driven by higher rates and an increase in the amount of insurance per exposure unit, average renewal premium per policy decreased for auto and was flat for home. For both auto and home, average renewal premium was impacted by a shift to more preferred market segment business and growth in states and territories with lower average premium. In addition, average renewal premium was affected by the impact of the economic downturn on consumer behavior. Among other actions, insureds have reduced their premiums by raising deductibles, reducing limits, dropping coverage and reducing mileage. 97 Table of Contents New business premium Auto and homeowners new business written premium increased by $91, or 25% and $43 or 41%, respectively, in 2009. AARP new business written premium increased for both auto and home primarily due to increased direct marketing spend, higher auto policy conversion rates and cross-selling homeowners insurance to insureds who have auto policies. Agency new business written premium increased for both auto and home primarily due to an increase in the number of agency appointments, an increase in the number of policy quotes and an increase in the policy issue rate for auto. Policy count retention Policy count retention for auto remained flat in 2009 for both AARP and Agency policies, primarily due to stable renewal written pricing increases and policy retention initiatives. Policy count retention for homeowners decreased slightly in 2009, primarily due to a decrease in policy retention for Agency business largely due to the Company decision to stop renewing Florida homeowners policies. Renewal earned pricing increase The increases in renewal earned pricing during 2009 were primarily a reflection of written pricing changes over the last two years. Renewal written pricing in 2009 increased in auto by 3% due to rate increases and the effect of policyholders purchasing newer vehicle models in place of older models. Homeowners renewal written pricing increased by 5% due to rate increases and increased coverage amounts reflecting higher rebuilding costs. For both auto and home, the Company has increased rates in certain states for certain classes of business to maintain profitability in the face of rising loss costs. Policies in-force The number of policies in-force increased 3% in auto, driven by an increase in both AARP and Agency and increased 2% for homeowners, driven by an increase in AARP. Losses and loss adjustment expenses Current accident year losses and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes Personal Lines current accident year losses and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes increased by $158, primarily due to the increase in the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes. The current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes increased by 3.5 points, driven by a 3.3 point increase for auto and a 4.2 point increase for home. The 3.3 point increase for auto was due to an increase in expected liability loss costs, an increase in physical damage frequency and a decline in average premium. After a historically low claim frequency in 2008, auto claim frequency increased in 2009, mostly in bodily injury coverage, driven by an increase in miles driven. The 4.2 point increase for home was driven by increasing severity in AARP, increasing frequency in Agency and a decline in average premium in Agency. Current accident year catastrophes Current accident year catastrophes decreased by $30 as catastrophe losses in 2008, driven by losses from hurricane Ike and from wind and thunderstorms, were higher than catastrophe losses in 2009, driven by losses from hail and windstorms in Colorado, the Midwest and the Southeast. Prior accident year reserve development Net favorable reserve development was $18 lower in 2009. Net favorable reserve development of $33 in 2009 included, among other reserve changes, a $77 release of auto liability reserves principally related to AARP business for the 2006 through 2008 accident years, partially offset by an $18 strengthening of reserves for homeowners claims for the 2005 through 2008 accident years. Net favorable reserve development of $51 in 2008 included a $46 release of auto liability reserves, primarily related to accident years 2005 to 2007 and a $24 release of reserves for extra-contractual liability claims under non-standard personal auto policies. Operating expenses The expense ratio increased by 0.9 points due largely to higher amortization of deferred acquisition costs and an increase in other non-deferrable costs, partially offset by a decrease in TWIA assessments of $17. Amortization of acquisition costs increased for both AARP business and for business sold direct to the consumer in four pilot states. 98 Table of Contents Year ended December 31, 2008 compared to the year ended December 31, 2007 Underwriting results decreased by $42, with a corresponding 1.2 point increase in the combined ratio. Earned premiums Earned premiums increased $37, or 1%, due primarily to earned premium growth in AARP, partially offset by earned premium decreases in Agency and Other. AARP earned premium grew $97, reflecting modest renewal earned pricing increases for both auto and homeowners and the effect of new business premium outpacing non-renewals in the last nine months of 2007. New business offset non-renewals in 2008 and new business in 2008 was driven by growth in the size of the AARP target market, the effect of direct marketing programs and the effect of cross-selling homeowners insurance to insureds who have auto policies. Agency earned premium decreased by $43 as the effect of a decline in new business premium and policy count retention since the middle of 2007 was partially offset by the effect of modest renewal earned pricing increases. The market environment continued to be intensely competitive in 2008. The increase in advertising for auto business among the top carriers also occurred with homeowners business, particularly in non-coastal and non-catastrophe prone areas. In 2008, a number of Personal Lines carriers began to increase rates although a significant portion of the market continued to compete heavily on price. Other earned premium decreased by $17, primarily due to a decision to reduce other affinity business. Auto earned premium was relatively flat in 2008 as the effect of renewal earned pricing increases of 4% was largely offset by a decrease in new business since the middle of 2007. Homeowners earned premium grew 3% largely due to renewal earned pricing increases of 5%. New business premium Both auto and homeowners new business written premium decreased in 2008 including decreases in AARP and Agency. Auto new business decreased by $60, or 14% and homeowners new business decreased by $34, or 24%. AARP new business written premium decreased primarily due to lower auto and homeowners policy conversion rates, driven by increased competition, including the effect of price decreases by some carriers and the effect of continued advertising among carriers for new business. Agency new business written premium decreased primarily due to price competition driven, in part, by a greater number of agents using comparative rating software to obtain quotes from multiple carriers. Policy count retention Policy count retention for auto decreased, driven primarily by a decrease in policy retention for both AARP and Agency business. Policy count retention for homeowners decreased for both AARP and Agency business. The decrease in policy count retention for AARP homeowners business was driven by increased price competition by some carriers. The decrease in policy count retention for Agency homeowners business was due, in part, to Florida policyholders non-renewing as a result of the Company decision to stop renewing Florida homeowners policies sold through agents. Renewal earned pricing increase Auto renewal earned pricing increases of 4% represent the portion of the 4% increase in renewal written pricing for 2008 that is reflected in earned premium. In 2008, the Company increased auto insurance rates in certain states for certain classes to maintain profitability in the face of rising loss costs. Renewal written pricing increases in 2008 included the effect of policyholders purchasing newer vehicle models in place of older models. Homeowners renewal earned pricing increases of 5% primarily reflected the earning of a blend of mid-single digit renewal written pricing increases recognized over the last nine months of 2007 and renewal written pricing increases recognized in the first nine months of 2008. Renewal written pricing increases in homeowners were largely driven by increases in coverage limits due to rising replacement costs. Policies in-force The number of policies in-force decreased slightly for both auto and homeowners, primarily due to a 7% decline in the number of Agency policies in-force, partially offset by a 1% increase in the number of AARP policies in-force. Losses and loss adjustment expenses Current accident year losses and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes Personal Lines current accident year losses and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes decreased by $34 due to a decrease in the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes, partially offset by the effect of higher earned premium. The current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes decreased by 1.4 points, primarily due to favorable expected frequency on auto liability claims and the effect of renewal earned pricing increases for both auto and homeowners, partially offset by increased frequency and severity of non-catastrophe losses on homeowners business. Current accident year catastrophes Current accident year catastrophe losses of $258 in 2008 were higher than current accident year catastrophe losses of $125 in 2007, primarily due to losses from hurricane Ike and tornadoes and thunderstorms in the South and Midwest. 99 Table of Contents Prior accident year reserve development Net favorable reserve development of $51 in 2008 included a $46 release of auto liability reserves, primarily related to accident years 2005 to 2007 and a $24 release of reserves for extra-contractual liability claims under non-standard personal auto policies. Net favorable reserve development of $4 in 2007 included a $16 release of reserves for loss and allocated loss and loss adjustment expenses on Personal Lines auto liability claims for accident years 2002 to 2006. Operating expenses Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs increased by $16, driven primarily by the increase in earned premium and the amortization of a higher amount of acquisition costs for AARP business. Insurance operating costs and expenses increased by $11, primarily due to an estimated $10 of assessments owed to TWIA in 2008. The expense ratio increased 0.4 points due to the increase in insurance operating costs and expenses and the amortization of a higher amount of acquisition costs on AARP business. SMALL COMMERCIAL Underwriting Summary 2009 2008 2007 Written premiums $ 2,572 $ 2,696 $ 2,747 Change in unearned premium reserve (8 ) (28 ) 11 Earned premiums 2,580 2,724 2,736 Losses and loss adjustment expenses Current accident year before catastrophes 1,396 1,447 1,594 Current accident year catastrophes 44 122 28 Prior accident years (36 ) (89 ) (209 ) Total losses and loss adjustment expenses 1,404 1,480 1,413 Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs 622 636 635 Insurance operating costs and expenses 159 171 180 Underwriting results $ 395 $ 437 $ 508 Premium Measures 2009 2008 2007 New business premium $ 482 $ 446 $ 481 Policy count retention 81 % 82 % 84 % Renewal written pricing increase (decrease) (1 %) (1 %) Renewal earned pricing increase (decrease) (1 %) Policies in-force end of period 1,077,189 1,055,463 1,038,542 Ratios 2009 2008 2007 Loss and loss adjustment expense ratio Current accident year before catastrophes 54.1 53.1 58.3 Current accident year catastrophes 1.7 4.5 1.0 Prior accident years (1.4 ) (3.3 ) (7.6 ) Total loss and loss adjustment expense ratio 54.4 54.3 51.6 Expense ratio 30.2 29.1 29.2 Policyholder dividend ratio 0.5 0.6 Combined ratio 84.7 84.0 81.4 Catastrophe ratio Current accident year 1.7 4.5 1.0 Prior accident years (0.1 ) (0.1 ) 0.2 Total catastrophe ratio 1.6 4.4 1.2 Combined ratio before catastrophes 83.1 79.6 80.3 Combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development 84.4 82.8 88.0 100 Table of Contents Underwriting results, premium measures and ratios Year ended December 31, 2009 compared to the year ended December 31, 2008 Underwriting results decreased by $42, with a corresponding 0.7 point increase in the combined ratio. Earned premiums Earned premiums for the Small Commercial segment decreased by $144 in 2009 primarily due to lower earned audit premium on workers compensation business and the effect of non-renewals outpacing new business over the last two years for package business and commercial auto. While the Company has focused on increasing new business from its agents and expanding writings in certain territories, the effects of the economic downturn and competitor actions to increase market share and increase business appetite in certain classes of risks have contributed to the decrease in earned premiums in 2009. New business premium New business written premium was up $36, or 8%, in 2009 primarily driven by an increase in workers compensation business and the impact from the rollout of a new business owners policy product during the second half of 2009. The Company continues to increase its new business for workers compensation through refinement of pricing and underwriting appetite in certain markets. Policy count retention Policy count retention decreased slightly due to the impact from declining economic conditions including increased mid-term cancellations. The impact affected all lines of business. Renewal earned pricing increase (decrease) Renewal earned pricing was flat as an increase in renewal earned pricing for package business was offset by a decrease for workers compensation. Renewal earned pricing for the commercial auto business was essentially flat. The earned pricing changes were primarily a reflection of written pricing changes over the last two years. In addition to the effect of written pricing decreases in workers compensation, average premium per policy in Small Commercial has declined due to a reduction in the payrolls of workers compensation insureds and the effect of declining endorsements. Policies in-force The number of policies-in-force increased by 2% in 2009. Despite the growth in policies, earned premiums have decreased by 5%, reflecting the decrease in average premium per policy. The growth or decline in policies in-force does not correspond directly with the change in earned premiums due to the effect of changes in earned pricing and changes in the average premium per policy. Losses and loss adjustment expenses Current accident year losses and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes Small Commercial current accident year losses and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes decreased by $51, primarily due to the decrease in earned premiums, partially offset by a 1.0 point increase in the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes. The increase in this ratio was primarily due to a higher loss and loss adjustment expense ratio on workers compensation and package business. The higher loss and loss adjustment expense ratio on workers compensation business reflected the effect of a 2009 decrease in estimated audit premium related to exposures earned in 2008, partially offset by a continuation of favorable expected frequency. Current accident year catastrophes Current accident year catastrophe losses decreased by $78 in 2009, as losses in 2008 from hurricane Ike and tornadoes and thunderstorms in the South and Midwest were higher than catastrophe losses in 2009 from hail and windstorms in Colorado, the Midwest and the Southeast. Prior accident year reserve development Net favorable prior accident year development decreased by $53 in 2009. Net favorable prior accident year development of $36 in 2009 included a $40 release of workers compensation reserves related to accident years 2007 and prior, a $33 release of commercial auto liability reserves and a $38 strengthening of reserves for package business. Net favorable prior accident year development of $89 in 2008 included a $92 release of workers compensation reserves related to accident years 2000 to 2007. Operating expenses Insurance operating costs and expenses decreased by $12, driven by a decrease in TWIA assessments of $12 and an increase in the estimated amount of dividends payable to certain workers compensation policyholders due to underwriting profits of $8 recognized in 2008, partially offset by an increase in compensation-related costs and higher IT costs. Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs decreased by $14 in 2009, primarily driven by the decrease in earned premiums, partially offset by higher amortization of other underwriting expenses. The expense ratio increased by 1.1 points, primarily due to the decrease in earned premiums, partially offset by the decrease in TWIA assessments. 101 Table of Contents Year ended December 31, 2008 compared to the year ended December 31, 2007 Underwriting results decreased by $71, with a corresponding 2.6 point increase in the combined ratio. Earned premiums Earned premiums for the Small Commercial segment were down slightly as a decrease in commercial auto was largely offset by an increase in worker compensation. The earned premium decrease was largely due to the effect of non-renewals outpacing new business for commercial auto business in 2008 and to earned pricing decreases, largely offset by new business outpacing non-renewals in workers compensation business over the last nine months of 2007 and the first nine months of 2008. While the Company has focused on increasing new business from its agents and expanding writings in certain territories, actions taken by some of the Company competitors to increase market share and increase business appetite in certain classes of risks and actions taken by the Company to reduce workers compensation rates in certain states have contributed to the decrease in written premiums from 2007 to 2008. New business premium New business written premium was down $35, or 7%, driven by a decrease in new package and commercial automobile business. New business for package and commercial auto business declined due to increased competition despite the use of lower pricing on targeted accounts and an increase in commissions paid to agents. New business written premium for workers compensation was up modestly. Policy count retention Policy count retention decreased in all lines of business. Renewal earned pricing increase (decrease) Renewal earned pricing decreased for workers compensation and commercial auto and was relatively flat for package business. The earned pricing changes during 2008 were primarily a reflection of written pricing changes over the last two years. Policies in-force While earned premium was slightly down for 2008, the number of policies in-force has increased 2%. The growth in policies in-force does not correspond directly with the change in earned premiums due to the effect of changes in earned pricing and changes in the average premium per policy. Losses and loss adjustment expenses Current accident year losses and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes Small Commercial current accident year losses and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes decreased by $147 in 2008, primarily due to a 5.2 point decrease in the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes. The decrease in this ratio was primarily due to a lower loss and loss adjustment expense ratio for workers compensation business and, to a lesser extent, a lower loss and loss adjustment expense ratio for package business. Workers compensation claim frequency has been trending favorably for recent accident years due to improved workplace safety and underwriting actions and the lower loss and loss adjustment expense ratio for the 2008 accident year includes an assumption that this lower claim frequency would continue for the 2008 accident year. The loss and loss adjustment expense ratio for the 2007 accident year recorded in 2007 did not give as much credence to this lower level of claim frequency. The effect of lower claim frequency for workers compensation claims was partially offset by the effect of earned pricing decreases. Current accident year catastrophes Current accident year catastrophe losses of $122, in 2008, were higher than current accident year catastrophe losses of $28, in 2007, primarily due to hurricane Ike and tornadoes and thunderstorms in the South and Midwest. Prior accident year reserve development Net favorable prior accident year development of $89 in 2008 included a $92 release of workers compensation reserves related to accident years 2000 to 2007. Net favorable reserve development of $209 in 2007 included a $151 release of workers compensation loss and loss adjustment expense reserves for accident years 2002 to 2006, a $33 release of workers compensation loss reserves for accident years 1987 to 2000 and a $30 release of loss reserves for package business for accident years 2003 to 2006. Operating expenses Insurance operating costs and expenses decreased by $9, primarily due to lower compensation-related and servicing costs, partially offset by an estimated $7 of TWIA assessments in 2008. Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs was relatively flat consistent with the change in earned premium. The expense ratio decreased slightly in 2008, driven by the decrease in insurance operating costs and expenses. 102 Table of Contents MIDDLE MARKET Underwriting Summary 2009 2008 2007 Written premiums $ 2,021 $ 2,242 $ 2,326 Change in unearned premium reserve (80 ) (57 ) (94 ) Earned premiums 2,101 2,299 2,420 Losses and loss adjustment expenses Current accident year before catastrophes 1,352 1,460 1,561 Current accident year catastrophes 32 116 15 Prior accident years (187 ) (134 ) (16 ) Total losses and loss adjustment expenses 1,197 1,442 1,560 Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs 486 513 529 Insurance operating costs and expenses 160 175 174 Underwriting results $ 258 $ 169 $ 157 Premium Measures 2009 2008 2007 New business premium $ 434 $ 420 $ 394 Policy count retention 77 % 79 % 80 % Renewal written pricing decrease (2 %) (6 %) (5 %) Renewal earned pricing decrease (4 %) (6 %) (4 %) Policies in-force as of end of period 95,540 97,308 94,828 Ratios 2009 2008 2007 Loss and loss adjustment expense ratio Current accident year before catastrophes 64.3 63.5 64.5 Current accident year catastrophes 1.5 5.1 0.6 Prior accident years (8.9 ) (5.9 ) (0.7 ) Total loss and loss adjustment expense ratio 57.0 62.7 64.5 Expense ratio 30.4 29.0 28.5 Policyholder dividend ratio 0.4 0.9 0.6 Combined ratio 87.7 92.6 93.5 Catastrophe ratio Current accident year 1.5 5.1 0.6 Prior accident years (0.7 ) (0.5 ) (0.1 ) Total catastrophe ratio 0.9 4.6 0.5 Combined ratio before catastrophes 86.9 88.1 93.0 Combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development 95.1 93.4 93.5 Underwriting results, premium measures and ratios Year ended December 31, 2009 compared to the year ended December 31, 2008 Underwriting results increased by $89 with a corresponding decrease in the combined ratio of 4.9 points. Earned premiums Earned premiums for the Middle Market segment decreased by $198 in 2009, primarily driven by decreases in general liability and commercial auto due to earned pricing decreases and the effect of non-renewals outpacing new business. Middle Market workers compensation earned premium increased modestly as the effect of an increase in new business written premium was partially offset by lower earned audit premium. 103 Table of Contents New business premium New business written premium increased by $14 primarily due to an increase in new business written premium for workers compensation, partially offset by a decrease in new business for marine, general liability and commercial auto. Despite continued pricing competition, the Company has increased new business for workers compensation by targeting business in selected industries and regions of the country where attractive new business opportunities remain. Policy count retention Policy count retention decreased largely due to a decrease in workers compensation, property, general liability and marine. Policy count retention declined due to the effects of the downturn in the economy which caused business closures and increased shopping of policies by businesses seeking lower premiums. Renewal earned pricing decrease Earned pricing decreased in workers compensation, commercial auto, general liability, property and marine. The earned pricing changes were primarily a reflection of written pricing changes over the last two years. A number of carriers have continued to compete fairly aggressively on price, particularly on larger accounts within Middle Market. Beginning in the second quarter of 2009, however, written pricing decreases moderated for workers compensation, general liability and marine and were flat or slightly positive for property and commercial auto. Policies in-force The number of policies in-force decreased by 2%, partially contributing to the decline in earned premiums. Losses and loss adjustment expenses Current accident year losses and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes Middle Market current accident year losses and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes decreased by $108, primarily due to a decrease in earned premium, partially offset by an increase in the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes. The current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes increased, primarily due to a higher loss and loss adjustment expense ratio on workers compensation and general liability, partially offset by lower non-catastrophe losses on property and marine business, driven by favorable claim frequency and severity. The higher loss and loss adjustment expense ratio on workers compensation and general liability business was primarily due to the effects of renewal earned pricing decreases in excess of loss cost changes. Current accident year catastrophes Current accident year catastrophe losses decreased by $84 as losses in 2008 from hurricane Ike and tornadoes and thunderstorms in the South and Midwest were higher than losses in 2009 from hail and windstorms in Colorado, the Midwest and Southeast. Prior accident year reserve development Net favorable prior accident year reserve development increased by $53. Net favorable prior accident year reserve development of $187 in 2009 included, among other reserve changes, general liability reserve releases of $112 primarily related to accident years 2003 to 2007 and a $52 release of workers compensation reserves, primarily related to accident years 2007 and prior. Net favorable reserve development of $134 in 2008 primarily included a $90 release of reserves for high hazard and umbrella general liability claims, primarily related to the 2001 to 2007 accident years, a $64 release of workers compensation reserves, primarily related to accident years 2000 to 2007 and a $27 release of commercial auto liability reserves, primarily related to accident years 2002 to 2007, partially offset by a $50 strengthening of reserves for general liability and products liability claims primarily for accident years 2004 and prior. Operating expenses Insurance operating costs and expenses decreased by $15 primarily due to a $14 increase in the estimated amount of dividends payable to certain workers compensation policyholders due to underwriting profits recognized in 2008. Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs decreased by $27 largely due to the decrease in earned premiums. The expense ratio increased by 1.4 points in 2009 as insurance operating costs and expenses other than policyholders dividends did not decrease commensurate with the decrease in earned premiums. 104 Table of Contents Year ended December 31, 2008 compared to the year ended December 31, 2007 Underwriting results increased by $12 with a corresponding 0.9 point decrease in the combined ratio. Earned premiums Earned premiums for the Middle Market segment decreased by $121, or 5%, driven primarily by decreases in commercial auto, workers compensation and general liability. Earned premium decreases were primarily due to a decline in earned pricing in 2008 and the effect of non-renewals outpacing new business in commercial auto and general liability over the last nine months of 2007 and the first nine months of 2008, partially offset by the effect of new business written premium outpacing non-renewals in workers compensation since the fourth quarter of 2007. New business premium New business written premium increased by $26, or 7%, in 2008 as an increase in new business written premium for workers compensation was partially offset by a decrease in new business for general liability, marine and commercial auto. While continued price competition and the effect of some state-mandated rate reductions in workers compensation has lessened the attractiveness of new business in certain lines and regions, the Company has increased new business for workers compensation due, in part, to the effect of targeting business in selected industries and regions of the country. Policy count retention Policy count retention decreased due largely to a decrease in retention for general liability. Renewal earned pricing decrease Renewal earned pricing decreased in workers compensation, commercial auto, general liability, property and marine. The earned pricing decreases in 2008 were primarily a reflection of written pricing changes over the last two years. A number of carriers have continued to compete fairly aggressively on price, particularly on larger accounts within Middle Market, which has contributed to mid-single digit price decreases across the industry. Policies in-force The number of policies in-force increased by 3%, due largely to growth on smaller accounts. Losses and loss adjustment expenses Current accident year losses and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes Middle Market current accident year losses and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes decreased by $101 due largely to a decrease in earned premium. Before catastrophes, the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio decreased by 1.0 point, primarily due to a lower loss and loss adjustment expense ratio on workers compensation and general liability business, largely offset by higher non-catastrophe losses on property and marine business and the effect of earned pricing decreases. The higher non-catastrophe losses on property business were driven by increased severity, including a number of large individual claims, and the higher non-catastrophe losses on marine business were primarily driven by increased frequency. Current accident year catastrophes Current accident year catastrophe losses of $116 in 2008 were higher than current accident year catastrophe losses of $15 in 2007, primarily due to losses from hurricane Ike and tornadoes and thunderstorms in the South and Midwest. Prior accident year development Net favorable prior accident year reserve development increased by $118 in 2008. Net favorable reserve development of $134 in 2008 primarily included a $90 release of reserves for high hazard and umbrella general liability claims, primarily related to the 2001 to 2007 accident years, a $64 release of workers compensation reserves, primarily related to accident years 2000 to 2007 and a $27 release of commercial auto liability reserves, primarily related to accident years 2002 to 2007, partially offset by a $50 strengthening of reserves for general liability and products liability claims primarily for accident years 2004 and prior. Net favorable reserve development of $16 in 2007 primarily included a $49 release of general liability loss and loss adjustment expense reserves for accident years 2003 to 2006 and an $18 release of commercial auto liability reserves for accident years 2003 and 2004, partially offset by a $40 strengthening of workers compensation reserves for accident years 1973 & prior and a $14 strengthening of general liability reserves for accident years more than 20 years old. Operating expenses The $16 decrease in the amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs was largely due to the decrease in earned premium, partially offset by the amortization of higher underwriting costs. Insurance operating costs and expenses included policyholder dividends of $21 in 2008 and $14 in 2007 which increased primarily due to a $6 increase in the estimated amount of dividends payable to certain workers compensation policyholders due to underwriting profits. Apart from policyholder dividends, insurance operating costs and expenses decreased by $6 as the effect of lower compensation-related costs was partially offset by higher IT costs and an estimated $3 of TWIA assessments in 2008. The expense ratio increased by 0.5 points due to the amortization of higher underwriting costs, the TWIA assessments in 2008 and the effect of lower earned premiums, partially offset by the effect of lower compensation-related costs. 105 Table of Contents SPECIALTY COMMERCIAL Underwriting Summary 2009 2008 2007 Written premiums $ 1,127 $ 1,361 $ 1,415 Change in unearned premium reserve (101 ) (21 ) (31 ) Earned premiums 1,228 1,382 1,446 Losses and loss adjustment expenses Current accident year before catastrophes 842 941 961 Current accident year catastrophes 2 47 9 Prior accident years (172 ) (81 ) 84 Total losses and loss adjustment expenses 672 907 1,054 Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs 284 313 323 Insurance operating costs and expenses 102 91 87 Underwriting results $ 170 $ 71 $ (18 ) 2009 2008 2007 Written Premiums Property $ (16 ) $ 50 $ 111 Casualty 494 538 534 Professional liability, fidelity and surety 582 691 689 Other 67 82 81 Total $ 1,127 $ 1,361 $ 1,415 Earned Premiums Property $ 21 $ 87 $ 133 Casualty 496 526 543 Professional liability, fidelity and surety 643 685 685 Other 68 84 85 Total $ 1,228 $ 1,382 $ 1,446 Ratios 2009 2008 2007 Loss and loss adjustment expense ratio Current accident year before catastrophes 68.6 68.1 66.6 Current accident year catastrophes 0.1 3.4 0.6 Prior accident years (14.0 ) (5.8 ) 5.8 Total loss and loss adjustment expense ratio 54.7 65.6 73.0 Expense ratio 31.4 28.3 27.4 Policyholder dividend ratio 0.1 0.9 0.9 Combined ratio 86.2 94.8 101.3 Catastrophe ratio Current accident year 0.1 3.4 0.6 Prior accident years (0.4 ) (1.2 ) 0.1 Total catastrophe ratio (0.3 ) 2.2 0.7 Combined ratio before catastrophes 86.5 92.6 100.6 Combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development 100.1 97.3 94.9 Other revenues [1] $ 340 $ 371 $ 354 [1] Represents servicing revenue 106 Table of Contents Underwriting results, premium measures and ratios Year ended December 31, 2009 compared to the year ended December 31, 2008 Underwriting results increased by $99 with a corresponding decrease in the combined ratio of 8.6 points. Earned premiums Earned premiums for the Specialty Commercial segment decreased by $154 due to decreases in all lines of business. Property earned premiums decreased by $66 primarily due to the sale of the Company core excess and surplus lines property business. Effective March 31, 2009, the Company sold its core excess and surplus lines property business, to Beazley Group PLC. Concurrent with the sale, the in-force book of business was ceded to Beazley under a separate reinsurance agreement, whereby the Company ceded $26 of unearned premium, net of $10 in ceding commission. The ceding of the unearned premium was reflected as a reduction of written premium as of December 31, 2009. Casualty earned premiums decreased by $30, primarily due to lower audit premiums and a decrease in insured exposures driven by the downturn in the economy. Professional liability, fidelity and surety earned premium decreased by $42 primarily due to the effects of lower new business and premium renewal retention and earned pricing decreases. The adverse impact of ratings downgrades early in 2009 and the loss of key leadership personnel contributed to a decline in new business and renewal retention. Within the Other category, earned premium decreased by $16 in 2009. The Other category of earned premiums includes premiums assumed under inter-segment arrangements. Losses and loss adjustment expenses Current accident year losses and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes Current accident year losses and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes decreased by $99 primarily due to a decrease in earned premiums. Current accident year catastrophe losses Current accident year catastrophe losses were $45 lower in 2009 as compared to prior year primarily due to losses from hurricane Ike in 2008. Prior accident year reserve development Net favorable prior accident year reserve development of $172 in 2009 included, among other reserve changes, releases of reserves for directors and officers insurance claims of $127 and a $20 release of reserves for uncollectible reinsurance. Net favorable prior accident year reserve development of $81 in 2008 primarily included a $75 release of reserves for directors and officers insurance and errors and omissions insurance claims related to accident years 2003 to 2006. Operating expenses Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs decreased by $29 due to the decrease in earned premiums. Insurance operating costs and expenses increased by $11, primarily due to a $23 increase in taxes, licenses and fees due to a $6 increase in the assessment for a second injury fund and $17 reserve strengthening for other state funds and taxes, partially offset by a decrease in policyholder dividends and compensation-related costs. The expense ratio increased by 3.1 points due to the decrease in earned premiums and the increase in insurance operating costs and expenses. Year ended December 31, 2008 compared to the year ended December 31, 2007 Underwriting results increased by $89 with a corresponding 6.5 point decrease in the combined ratio. Earned premiums Earned premiums for the Specialty Commercial segment decreased by $64 or 4%, primarily due to a decrease in property and, to a lesser extent, casualty earned premiums. Property earned premiums decreased by $46, primarily due to the Company decision to stop writing specialty property business with large, national accounts and the effect of increased competition for core excess and surplus lines business. As a result of increased competition and capacity for core excess and surplus lines business, the Company has experienced a decrease in earned pricing, lower new business growth and lower premium renewal retention since the third quarter of 2007, particularly for catastrophe-exposed business. Casualty earned premiums decreased by $17, primarily because of lower earned premium from captive programs and a decline in new business premium on loss-sensitive business written with larger accounts over the last nine months of 2007 and first three months of 2008. 107 Table of Contents Professional liability, fidelity and surety earned premium was flat. Earned premium for professional liability was relatively flat as the effect of earned pricing decreases in 2008 and the effect of a decline in new business written premium over the last nine months of 2007 and the first six months of 2008 were largely offset by the effect of a decrease in the portion of risks ceded to outside reinsurers. Earned premium for fidelity and surety business was also relatively flat as a modest decrease in commercial surety was largely offset by a modest increase in contract surety. Within the Other category, earned premium remained relatively flat from 2007 to 2008. The Other category of earned premiums includes premiums assumed under inter-segment arrangements. Losses and loss adjustment expenses Current accident year losses and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes Specialty Commercial current accident year losses and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes decreased by $20, due to a decrease in earned premium, partially offset by an increase in the loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development. The loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development increased by 1.5 points, primarily due to a higher loss and loss adjustment expense ratio for directors and officers insurance in professional liability, driven by earned pricing decreases, and a lower mix of property business which has a lower loss and loss adjustment ratio than other businesses within Specialty Commercial. Current accident year catastrophe losses Current accident year catastrophe losses increased $38, primarily due to losses from hurricane Ike. Prior accident year reserve development Prior accident year reserve development changed from net unfavorable prior accident year reserve development of $84 in 2007 to net favorable prior accident year reserve development of $81 in 2008. Net favorable prior accident year reserve development in 2008 primarily included a $75 release of reserves for directors and officers insurance and errors and omissions insurance claims related to accident years 2003 to 2006. Prior accident year reserve development in 2007 consisted primarily of a $47 strengthening of workers compensation loss and loss adjustment expense reserves for accident years 1987 to 2001, a $34 strengthening of general liability reserves, primarily related to accident years 1987 to 1997, and a $25 strengthening of general liability reserves for accident years more than 20 years old. Partially offsetting the unfavorable reserve development in 2007 was a $22 release of reserves for surety business for accident years 2003 to 2006. Operating expenses Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs decreased by $10 due to the decrease in earned premium, partially offset by the effect of an increase in net acquisition costs related to writing a greater mix of higher net commission small commercial and private directors and officers insurance. Insurance operating costs and expenses increased by $4, primarily due to an increase in IT costs. The expense ratio increased by 0.9 points, primarily due to the increase in insurance operating costs and expenses, the increase in net acquisition costs for directors and officers insurance and the effect of the decrease in earned premium. 108 Table of Contents OTHER OPERATIONS Operating Summary 2009 2008 2007 Written premiums $ 4 $ 7 $ 5 Change in unearned premium reserve 4 Earned premiums 7 5 Losses and loss adjustment expenses prior year 242 129 193 Insurance operating costs and expenses 19 23 22 Underwriting results (261 ) (145 ) (210 ) Net investment income 163 197 248 Net realized capital losses (28 ) (208 ) (12 ) Other expenses (3 ) (1 ) Income (loss) before income taxes (126 ) (159 ) 25 Income tax benefit (49 ) (62 ) (5 ) Net income (loss) $ (77 ) $ (97 ) $ 30 The Other Operations segment includes operations that are under a single management structure, Heritage Holdings, which is responsible for two related activities. The first activity is the management of certain property and casualty subsidiaries and operations of the Company that have discontinued writing new business. The second is the management of claims (and the associated reserves) related to asbestos, environmental and other exposures. The Other Operations book of business contains policies written from approximately the 1940s to 2003. The Company experience has been that this book of run-off business has, over time, produced significantly higher claims and losses than were contemplated at inception. Year ended December 31, 2009 compared to the year ended December 31, 2008 Net loss for 2009 decreased by $20 compared to the prior year period, driven primarily by the following: A $180 decrease in net realized capital losses, primarily due to fewer impairments and stabilizing market and credit conditions. A $116 decrease in underwriting results, primarily due to a $113 increase in unfavorable prior year loss development. Reserve development in 2009 included $138 of asbestos reserve strengthening and $75 of environmental reserve strengthening as a result of the Company annual asbestos and environmental reserve evaluations, partially offset by a decrease of $20 in the allowance for uncollectible reinsurance as a result of the Company annual evaluation of reinsurance recoverables. In 2008, reserve development included $50 of asbestos reserve strengthening and $53 of environmental reserve strengthening. A $34 decrease in net investment income, primarily as a result of a decrease in investment yield for fixed maturities and, to a lesser extent, lower income on limited partnerships and other alternative investments. A $13 decrease in income tax benefit due to the pre-tax factors described above. Year ended December 31, 2008 compared to the year ended December 31, 2007 Other Operations reported a net loss of $97 in 2008 compared to net income of $30 in 2007, driven primarily by the following: A $65 increase in underwriting results, primarily due to a $64 decrease in unfavorable prior year loss development. Reserve development in 2008 included $50 of asbestos reserve strengthening and $53 of environmental reserve strengthening. In 2007, reserve development included $99 principally as a result of an adverse arbitration decision and $25 of environmental reserve strengthening. A $51 decrease in net investment income, primarily as a result of net losses on limited partnerships and other alternative investments in 2008 and decreased fixed maturity income. A $196 increase in net realized capital losses, primarily due to realized losses in 2008 from impairments of subordinated fixed maturities and preferred equity securities in the financial services sector as well as of securitized assets. A $57 increase in income tax benefit, primarily as a result of a change from pre-tax income in 2007 to a pre-tax loss in 2008. 109 Table of Contents CORPORATE Operating Summary 2009 2008 2007 Fee income $ 13 $ 17 $ 16 Net investment income 22 37 30 Net realized capital gains (losses) (228 ) 97 (3 ) Total revenues (193 ) 151 43 Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs and present value of future profits 1 Interest expense 476 341 259 Goodwill impairment 32 323 Other expenses 53 (14 ) (40 ) Total expenses 561 650 220 Loss before income taxes (754 ) (499 ) (177 ) Income tax benefit (171 ) (101 ) (61 ) Net loss [1] $ (583 ) $ (398 ) $ (116 ) [1] The year ended December 31, 2009 includes a net loss from Federal Trust Corporation of $6. See Note 22 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further information on the Company acquisition of Federal Trust Corporation. Year ended December 31, 2009 compared to the year ended December 31, 2008 Net realized capital gains (losses) The change was primarily due to approximately $300 in net realized losses related to the settlement of a contingent obligation to Allianz partially offset by realized gains of $70 on the change in fair value of the liability related to warrants issued to Allianz. Additionally, 2008 included realized gains of $110 on the change in fair value of the liability related to warrants issued to Allianz. See Note 21 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for a further discussion on Allianz. Interest expense The increase in interest expense was primarily due to the issuance of $1.75 billion 10.0% junior subordinated debentures on October 17, 2008, partially offset by a reduction from debt repayments of $955 in 2008. For further discussion on the Company debt see Note 14 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Goodwill impairment The Company goodwill impairment test performed during 2009 resulted in a write-down of $32 in Corporate related to the Institutional segment as compared to $323 in 2008 related to the Individual Annuity and International reporting units. See Note 8 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for a further discussion on Goodwill. Other expenses The increase in other expenses was a result of $19 in expenses incurred in 2009 from Federal Trust Corporation, a company The Hartford acquired in June of 2009, restructuring costs of $12 and an increase of $17 in the DAC Unlock charge recorded in Corporate. Additionally, 2008 included a benefit of $15 from interest charged by Corporate on the amount of capital held by the Life and Property & Casualty operations in excess of the amount needed to support the capital requirements of the respective operations. Year ended December 31, 2008 compared to the year ended December 31, 2007 Net realized capital gains (losses) The change was primarily due to a realized gain of approximately $110 on the change in fair value of the liability related to warrants issued to Allianz in 2008. See Note 21 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for a further discussion on Allianz. Interest expense The additional interest expense was primarily due to $106 related to total debt issuances in 2008 of $3.25 billion, partially offset by a reduction of $23 from debt repayments of $955 and $300 in 2008 and 2007, respectively. See Note 14 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for a further discussion on the Company debt. Goodwill impairment The Company goodwill impairment test performed during 2008 resulted in a write-down of $323 in Corporate related to the Individual Annuity and International reporting units. See Note 8 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for a further discussion on Goodwill. Other expenses The increase in other expenses was a result of a reduction of $62 in the benefit received from interest charged by Corporate on the amount of capital held by the Life and Property & Casualty operations in excess of the amount needed to support the capital requirements of the respective operations, which was offset by an increase of $8 in the DAC Unlock benefit and a benefit of $28 related to modifications to stock option awards and other compensation. 110 Table of Contents PROPERTY & CASUALTY UNDERWRITING RISK MANAGEMENT STRATEGY The Hartford property and casualty operations have processes to manage risk related to natural disasters, such as hurricanes and earthquakes, and other perils, such as terrorism. The Hartford risk management processes include, but are not limited to, disciplined underwriting protocols, exposure controls, sophisticated risk modeling, risk transfer, and capital management strategies. In managing risk, The Hartford management processes involve establishing underwriting guidelines for both individual risks, including individual policy limits, and in aggregate, including aggregate exposure limits by geographic zone and peril. The Company establishes risk limits and actively monitors the risk exposures as a percent of Property & Casualty statutory surplus. For natural catastrophe perils, the Company generally limits its estimated loss to natural catastrophes from a single 250-year event prior to reinsurance to less than 30% of statutory surplus of the Property & Casualty operations and its estimated loss to natural catastrophes from a single 250-year event after reinsurance to less than 15% of statutory surplus of the Property & Casualty operations. From time to time, the estimated loss to natural catastrophes from a single 250-year event prior to reinsurance may fluctuate above or below 30% of statutory surplus due to changes in modeled loss estimates, exposures, or statutory surplus. Currently, the Company estimated pre-tax loss to a single 250-year natural catastrophe event prior to reinsurance is less than 30% of the statutory surplus of the Property & Casualty operations and the Company estimated pre-tax loss net of reinsurance is less than 15% of statutory surplus of the Property & Casualty operations. For terrorism, the Company monitors its exposure in major metropolitan areas to a single-site conventional terrorism attack scenario, and manages its potential estimated loss, including exposures resulting from the Company Group Life operations, to less than $1.3 billion. Among the landmark locations specifically monitored by the Company as of December 31, 2009, the largest estimated modeled loss arising from a single event is approximately $1.1 billion. The Company monitors exposures monthly and employs both internally developed and vendor-licensed loss modeling tools as part of its risk management discipline. Use of Reinsurance In managing risk, The Hartford utilizes reinsurance to transfer risk to well-established and financially secure reinsurers. Reinsurance is used to manage aggregations of risk as well as to transfer certain risks to reinsurance companies based on specific geographic or risk concentrations. All treaty purchases related to the Company property and casualty operations are administered by a centralized function to support a consistent strategy and ensure that the reinsurance activities are fully integrated into the organization risk management processes. A variety of traditional reinsurance products are used as part of the Company risk management strategy, including excess of loss occurrence-based products that protect property and workers compensation exposures, and individual risk or quota share arrangements, that protect specific classes or lines of business. The Company has no significant finite risk contracts in place and the statutory surplus benefit from all such prior year contracts is immaterial. Facultative reinsurance is used by the Company to manage policy-specific risk exposures based on established underwriting guidelines. The Hartford also participates in governmentally administered reinsurance facilities such as the Florida Hurricane Catastrophe Fund ( FHCF ), the Terrorism Risk Insurance Program established under The Terrorism Risk Insurance Program Reauthorization Act of 2007 ( TRIPRA ) and other reinsurance programs relating to particular risks or specific lines of business. The Company has several catastrophe reinsurance programs, including reinsurance treaties that cover property and workers compensation losses aggregating from single catastrophe events. The following table summarizes the primary catastrophe treaty reinsurance coverages that the Company has in place as of February 1, 2010: % of layer(s) Coverage Treaty term reinsured Per occurrence limit Retention Principal property catastrophe program covering property catastrophe losses from a single event 1/1/2010 to 1/1/2011 Varies by layer, but averages 81% across all layers Aggregates to $690 across all layers $ 250 Reinsurance with the FHCF covering Florida Personal Lines property catastrophe losses from a single event 6/1/2009 to 6/1/2010 90% 293 [1] 69 Workers compensation losses arising from a single catastrophe event 7/1/2009 to 7/1/2010 95% 280 20 [1] The per occurrence limit on the FHCF treaty is $293 for the 6/1/2009 to 6/1/2010 treaty year based on the Company election to purchase additional limits under the Temporary Increase in Coverage Limit (TICL) statutory provision in excess of the coverage the Company is required to purchase from the FHCF. 111 Table of Contents In addition to the property catastrophe reinsurance coverage described in the above table, the Company has other treaties and facultative reinsurance agreements that cover property catastrophe losses on an aggregate excess of loss and on a per risk basis. The principal property catastrophe reinsurance program and other reinsurance programs include a provision to reinstate limits in the event that a catastrophe loss exhausts limits on one or more layers under the treaties. In addition to the reinsurance protection provided by The Hartford traditional property catastrophe reinsurance program described above, the Company has fully collateralized reinsurance coverages from Foundation Re, Foundation Re II and Foundation Re III for losses sustained from qualifying hurricane and earthquake loss events and other qualifying catastrophe losses. Foundation Re, Foundation Re II and Foundation Re III are Cayman Islands reinsurance companies which financed the provision of the reinsurance through the issuance of catastrophe bonds. Under the terms of the treaties with Foundation Re, Foundation Re II and Foundation Re III, the Company is reimbursed for losses from natural disaster events using a customized industry index contract designed to replicate The Hartford own catastrophe losses, with a provision that the actual losses incurred by the Company for covered events, net of reinsurance recoveries, cannot be less than zero. The following table summarizes the terms of the reinsurance treaties with Foundation Re, Foundation Re II and Foundation Re III that were in place as of February 1, 2010: Bond amount issued by Foundation Re, Foundation Re II or Covered perils Treaty term Covered losses Foundation Re III Hurricane loss events affecting the Gulf and Eastern Coast of the United States and loss events arising from California, Pacific Northwest, and New Madrid earthquakes. 2/17/2006 to 2/17/2010 26% of $400 in losses in excess of an index loss trigger equating to approximately $1.3 billion in Hartford losses $ 105 Hurricane loss events affecting the Gulf and Eastern Coast of the United States 11/17/2006 to 11/17/2010 45% of $400 in losses in excess of an index loss trigger equating to approximately $1.85 billion in Hartford losses 180 Hurricane loss events affecting the Gulf and Eastern Coast of the United States 1/27/2010 to 1/27/2014 90% of $200 in losses in excess of an index loss trigger equating to approximately $1.2 billion in Hartford losses 180 As of February 1, 2010, there have been no events that are expected to trigger a recovery under any of the reinsurance programs with Foundation Re, Foundation Re II or Foundation III and, accordingly, the Company has not recorded any recoveries from the associated reinsurance treaties. 112 Table of Contents Estimated Catastrophe Exposures The Company uses third-party models to estimate the potential loss resulting from various catastrophe events and the potential financial impact those events would have on the Company financial position and results of operations. The following table shows modeled loss estimates before expected reinsurance recoveries and after expected reinsurance recoveries. The loss estimates represent total property losses for hurricane events and property and workers compensation losses for earthquake events resulting from a single event. The estimates provided are based on 250-year return period loss estimates, which have a 0.4% likelihood of being exceeded in any single year. The net loss estimates assume that the Company would be able to recover all losses ceded to reinsurers under its reinsurance programs. There are various methodologies used in the industry to estimate the potential property and workers compensation losses that would arise from various catastrophe events and companies may use different models and assumptions in their estimates. Therefore, the Company estimates of gross and net losses arising from a 250-year hurricane or earthquake event may not be comparable to estimates provided by other companies. Furthermore, the Company estimates are subject to significant uncertainty and could vary materially from the actual losses that would arise from these events. The Company modeled loss estimates are derived by averaging 21 modeled loss events representing a 250-year return period loss. For the peril of earthquake, the 21 events averaged to determine the modeled loss estimate include events occurring in California as well as the Northwestern, Northeastern, Southeastern and Midwestern regions of the United States with associated magnitudes ranging from 6.1 to 7.9 on the Moment Magnitude scale. For the peril of hurricane, the 21 events averaged to determine the modeled loss estimate include category 3, 4 and 5 events in Florida, as well as other Southeastern and Northeastern region landfalls. Hurricane Earthquake Net of Expected Net of Expected Before Reinsurance Before Reinsurance Reinsurance Recoveries Reinsurance Recoveries Estimated 250-year probable maximum loss, before-tax $ 1,587 $ 603 $ 686 $ 316 After-tax effect as a percentage of statutory surplus of the Property & Casualty operations as of December 31, 2009 7 % 3 % Terrorism The Company is exposed to losses from terrorist attacks, including losses caused by nuclear, biological, chemical or radiological weapons ( NBCR ) attacks. For terrorism, private sector catastrophe reinsurance capacity is limited and generally unavailable for terrorism losses caused by nuclear, biological, chemical or radiological weapons attacks. As such, the Company principal reinsurance protection against large-scale terrorist attacks is the coverage currently provided through the Terrorism Risk Insurance Program Reauthorization Act ( TRIPRA ). On December 26, 2007, the President signed TRIPRA extending the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act of 2002 ( TRIA ) through the end of 2014. TRIPRA provides a backstop for insurance-related losses resulting from any act of terrorism certified by the Secretary of the Treasury, in concurrence with the Secretary of State and Attorney General, that result in industry losses in excess of $100. In addition, TRIPRA revised the TRIA definition of a certified act of terrorism by removing the requirement that an act be committed on behalf of any foreign person or foreign interest. As a result, domestic acts of terrorism can now be certified as acts of terrorism under the program, subject to the other requirements of TRIPRA. Under the program, in any one calendar year, the federal government would pay 85% of covered losses from a certified act of terrorism after an insurer losses exceed 20% of the company eligible direct commercial earned premiums of the prior calendar year, up to a combined annual aggregate limit for the federal government and all insurers of $100 billion. If an act of terrorism or acts of terrorism result in covered losses exceeding the $100 billion annual industry aggregate limit, a future Congress would be responsible for determining how additional losses in excess of $100 billion will be paid. Among other items, TRIPRA required that the President Working Group on Financial Markets ( PWG ) continue to perform an analysis regarding the long-term availability and affordability of insurance for terrorism risk. Among the findings detailed in the PWG initial report, released October 2, 2006, were that the high level of uncertainty associated with predicting the frequency of terrorist attacks, coupled with the unwillingness of some insurance policyholders to purchase insurance coverage, makes predicting long-term development of the terrorism risk market difficult, and that there is likely little potential for future market development for NBCR coverage. A December 2008 study by the U.S. Government Accountability Office ( GAO ) found that property and casualty insurers still generally seek to exclude NBCR coverage from their commercial policies when permitted. However, while nuclear, pollution and contamination exclusions are contained in many property and liability insurance policies, the GAO report concluded that such exclusions may be subject to challenges in court because they were not specifically drafted to address terrorist attacks. Furthermore, workers compensation policies generally have no exclusions or limitations. The GAO found that commercial property and casualty policyholders, including companies that own high-value properties in large cities, generally reported that they could not obtain NBCR coverage. Commercial property and casualty insurers generally remain unwilling to offer NBCR coverage because of uncertainties about the risk and the potential for catastrophic losses. 113 Table of Contents The Texas Windstorm Insurance Association ( TWIA ) The Texas Windstorm Insurance Association provides hail and windstorm coverage to Texas residents of 14 counties along the Texas Gulf coast who are unable to obtain insurance from other carriers. Insurance carriers who write property insurance in the state of Texas, including The Hartford, are required to be members of TWIA and are obligated to pay assessments in the event that TWIA losses exceed funds on hand, the available funds in the Texas Catastrophe Reserve Trust Fund ( CRTF ) and any available reinsurance. Assessments are allocated to carriers based on their share of premium writings in the state of Texas, as defined. During 2008, the board of directors of TWIA notified its member companies that it would assess them $430 to cover TWIA losses from hurricane Ike. In the third quarter of 2008, the Company accrued a liability of $27 for its estimate of assessments it would ultimately get from TWIA. In the first quarter of 2009, the Company reduced its estimated assessments by $14, from $27 to $13, resulting in a reduction in insurance operating costs and expenses. The Company estimates that of the $13 of accrued assessments for Ike, it will ultimately be able to recoup $8 through premium tax credits. Florida Citizens Assessments Citizens Property Insurance Corporation in Florida ( Citizens ) provides property insurance to Florida homeowners and businesses that are unable to obtain insurance from other carriers, including for properties deemed to be high risk . Citizens maintains a Personal Lines account, a Commercial Lines account and a High Risk account. If Citizens incurs a deficit in any of these accounts, Citizens may impose a regular assessment on other insurance carriers in the state to fund the deficits, subject to certain restrictions and subject to approval by the Florida Office of Insurance Regulation. Carriers are then permitted to surcharge policyholders to recover the assessments over the next few years. Citizens may also opt to finance a portion of the deficits through issuing bonds and may impose emergency assessments on other insurance carriers to fund the bond repayments. Unlike with regular assessments, however, insurance carriers only serve as a collection agent for emergency assessments and are not required to remit surcharges for emergency assessments to Citizens until they collect surcharges from policyholders. Under U.S. GAAP, the Company is required to accrue for regular assessments in the period the assessments become probable and estimable and the obligating event has occurred. Surcharges to recover the amount of regular assessments may not be recorded as an asset until the related premium is written. Emergency assessments that may be levied by Citizens are not recorded in the income statement. Reinsurance Recoverables The following table shows the components of the gross and net reinsurance recoverable as of December 31, 2009 and 2008: Reinsurance Recoverable December 31, 2009 December 31, 2008 Paid loss and loss adjustment expenses $ 208 $ 326 Unpaid loss and loss adjustment expenses 3,321 3,492 Gross reinsurance recoverable 3,529 3,818 Less: allowance for uncollectible reinsurance (335 ) (379 ) Net reinsurance recoverable $ 3,194 $ 3,439 Reinsurance recoverables represent loss and loss adjustment expenses recoverable from a number of entities, including reinsurers and pools. As shown in the following table, a portion of the total gross reinsurance recoverable relates to the Company mandatory participation in various involuntary assigned risk pools and the value of annuity contracts held under structured settlement agreements. Reinsurance recoverables due from mandatory pools are backed by the financial strength of the property and casualty insurance industry. Annuities purchased from third-party life insurers under structured settlements are recognized as reinsurance recoverables in cases where the Company has not obtained a release from the claimant. Of the remaining gross reinsurance recoverable as of December 31, 2009 and 2008, the following table shows the portion of recoverables due from companies rated by A.M. Best. Distribution of gross reinsurance recoverable December 31, 2009 December 31, 2008 Gross reinsurance recoverable $ 3,529 $ 3,818 Less: mandatory (assigned risk) pools and structured settlements (642 ) (638 ) Gross reinsurance recoverable excluding mandatory pools and structured settlements $ 2,887 $ 3,180 % of Total % of Total Rated A- (Excellent) or better by A.M. Best [1] $ 2,091 72.4 % $ 2,426 76.3 % Other rated by A.M. Best 48 1.7 % 52 1.6 % Total rated companies 2,139 74.1 % 2,478 77.9 % Voluntary pools 152 5.3 % 181 5.7 % Captives 209 7.2 % 220 6.9 % Other not rated companies 387 13.4 % 301 9.5 % Total $ 2,887 100 % $ 3,180 100.0 % [1] Based on A.M. Best ratings as of December 31, 2009 and 2008, respectively. 114 Table of Contents Where its contracts permit, the Company secures future claim obligations with various forms of collateral, including irrevocable letters of credit, secured trusts, funds held accounts and group wide offsets. As part of its reinsurance recoverable review, the Company analyzes recent developments in commutation activity between reinsurers and cedants, recent trends in arbitration and litigation outcomes in disputes between cedants and reinsurers and the overall credit quality of the Company reinsurers. Due largely to investment losses sustained by reinsurers in 2008, the financial strength ratings of some reinsurers have been downgraded and the financial strength ratings of other reinsurers have been put on negative watch. Nevertheless, as indicated in the above table, approximately 98% of the gross reinsurance recoverables due from reinsurers rated by A.M. Best were rated A- (excellent) or better as of December 31, 2009. Due to the inherent uncertainties as to collection and the length of time before such amounts will be due, it is possible that future adjustments to the Company reinsurance recoverables, net of the allowance, could be required, which could have a material adverse effect on the Company consolidated results of operations or cash flows in a particular quarterly or annual period. Annually, the Company completes an evaluation of the reinsurance recoverable asset associated with older, long-term casualty liabilities reported in the Other Operations segment. As a result of this evaluation, the Company reduced its net reinsurance recoverable by $20 in 2009. See the Other Operations section of the MD&A for further discussion. In addition, the Company reviewed its allowance for uncollectible reinsurance for Ongoing Operations in the second quarter of 2009 and reduced its allowance for Ongoing Operations by $20 driven, in part, by a reduction in gross ceded loss recoverables. The allowance for uncollectible reinsurance for Ongoing Operations is recorded within the Specialty Commercial segment. Monitoring Reinsurer Security To manage the potential credit risk resulting from the use of reinsurance, management and ERM evaluate the credit standing, financial performance, management and operational quality of each potential reinsurer. Through that process, the Company maintains a list of reinsurers approved for participation on all treaty and facultative reinsurance placements. The Company approval designations reflect the differing credit exposure associated with various classes of business. Participation authorizations are categorized along property, short-tail casualty and long-tail casualty lines. In addition to defining participation eligibility, the Company regularly monitors each active reinsurer credit risk exposure in the aggregate and limits that exposure based upon independent credit rating levels. 115 Table of Contents INVESTMENT CREDIT RISK The Company has established investment credit policies that focus on the credit quality of obligors and counterparties, limit credit concentrations, encourage diversification and require frequent creditworthiness reviews. Investment activity, including setting of policy and defining acceptable risk levels, is subject to regular review and approval by senior management. The Company invests primarily in securities which are rated investment grade and has established exposure limits, diversification standards and review procedures for all credit risks including borrower, issuer and counterparty. Creditworthiness of specific obligors is determined by consideration of external determinants of creditworthiness, typically ratings assigned by nationally recognized ratings agencies and is supplemented by an internal credit evaluation. Obligor, asset sector and industry concentrations are subject to established Company limits and are monitored on a regular basis. The Company is not exposed to any credit concentration risk of a single issuer greater than 10% of the Company stockholders equity other than U.S. government and government agencies backed by the full faith and credit of the U.S. government. For further discussion of concentration of credit risk, see the Concentration of Credit Risk section in Note 5 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Derivative Instruments In the normal course of business, the Company uses various derivative counterparties in executing its derivative transactions. The use of counterparties creates credit risk that the counterparty may not perform in accordance with the terms of the derivative transaction. The Company has developed a derivative counterparty exposure policy which limits the Company exposure to credit risk. The derivative counterparty exposure policy establishes market-based credit limits, favors long-term financial stability and creditworthiness of the counterparty and typically requires credit enhancement/credit risk reducing agreements. The Company minimizes the credit risk of derivative instruments by entering into transactions with high quality counterparties rated A2/A or better, which are monitored and evaluated by the Company risk management team and reviewed by senior management. In addition, the Company monitors counterparty credit exposure on a monthly basis to ensure compliance with Company policies and statutory limitations. The Company also maintains a policy of requiring that derivative contracts, other than exchange traded contracts, certain currency forward contracts, and certain embedded and reinsurance derivatives, be governed by an International Swaps and Derivatives Association Master Agreement which is structured by legal entity and by counterparty and permits right of offset. The Company has developed credit exposure thresholds which are based upon counterparty ratings. Credit exposures are measured using the market value of the derivatives, resulting in amounts owed to the Company by its counterparties or potential payment obligations from the Company to its counterparties. Credit exposures are generally quantified daily based on the prior business day market value and collateral is pledged to and held by, or on behalf of, the Company to the extent the current value of derivatives exceeds the contractual thresholds. In accordance with industry standards and the contractual agreements, collateral is typically settled on the next business day. The Company has exposure to credit risk for amounts below the exposure thresholds which are uncollateralized, as well as for market fluctuations that may occur between contractual settlement periods of collateral movements. The maximum uncollateralized threshold for a derivative counterparty for a single legal entity is $10. The Company currently transacts over-the-counter derivatives in five legal entities and therefore the maximum combined threshold for a single counterparty over all legal entities that use derivatives is $50. In addition, the Company may have exposure to multiple counterparties in a single corporate family due to a common credit support provider. As of December 31, 2009, the maximum combined threshold for all counterparties under a single credit support provider over all legal entities that use derivatives is $100. Based on the contractual terms of the collateral agreements, these thresholds may be immediately reduced due to a downgrade in a counterparty credit rating. For further discussion, see the Derivative Commitments Section of Note 12 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. For the year ended December 31, 2009, the Company has incurred no losses on derivative instruments due to counterparty default. In addition to counterparty credit risk, the Company enters into credit default swaps to manage credit exposure. Credit default swaps involve a transfer of credit risk of one or many referenced entities from one party to another in exchange for periodic payments. The party that purchases credit protection will make periodic payments based on an agreed upon rate and notional amount, and for certain transactions there will also be an upfront premium payment. The second party, who assumes credit risk, will typically only make a payment if there is a credit event and such payment will be equal to the notional value of the swap contract less the value of the referenced security issuer debt obligation. A credit event is generally defined as default on contractually obligated interest or principal payments or bankruptcy of the referenced entity. 116 Table of Contents The Company uses credit derivatives to purchase credit protection and, to a lesser extent, assume credit risk with respect to a single entity, referenced index, or asset pool. The Company purchases credit protection through credit default swaps to economically hedge and manage credit risk of certain fixed maturity investments across multiple sectors of the investment portfolio. The Company has also entered into credit default swaps that assume credit risk as part of replication transactions. Replication transactions are used as an economical means to synthetically replicate the characteristics and performance of assets that would otherwise be permissible investments under the Company investment policies. These swaps reference investment grade single corporate issuers and baskets, which include trades ranging from baskets of up to five corporate issuers to standard and customized diversified portfolios of corporate issuers, which are established within sector concentration limits and are typically divided into tranches which possess different credit ratings ranging from AAA through the CCC rated first loss position. Investments The following table presents the Company fixed maturities by credit quality. The ratings referenced below are based on the ratings of a nationally recognized rating organization or, if not rated, assigned based on the Company internal analysis of such securities. Fixed Maturities by Credit Quality December 31, 2009 December 31, 2008 Percent of Percent of Amortized Total Fair Amortized Total Fair Cost Fair Value Value Cost Fair Value Value United States Government/Government agencies $ 7,299 $ 7,172 10.1 % $ 9,409 $ 9,568 14.7 % AAA 11,974 11,188 15.7 % 17,844 13,489 20.7 % AA 14,845 13,932 19.6 % 14,093 11,646 17.9 % A 19,822 18,664 26.2 % 18,742 15,831 24.4 % BBB 17,886 17,071 24.0 % 15,749 12,794 19.6 % BB & below 4,189 3,126 4.4 % 2,401 1,784 2.7 % Total fixed maturities $ 76,015 $ 71,153 100.0 % $ 78,238 $ 65,112 100.0 % The movement within the Company investment ratings was primarily attributable to rating agency downgrades across multiple sectors and sales of U.S. Treasuries that were re-deployed to securities with more favorable risk profiles, in particular investment grade corporate securities. The ratings associated with the Company commercial mortgage-backed securities ( CMBS ), commercial real estate ( CRE ) collateralized debt obligations ( CDOs ) and residential mortgage-backed securities ( RMBS ) may be negatively impacted as rating agencies continue to make changes to their methodologies and monitor security performance. 117 Table of Contents The following table presents the Company AFS securities by type. Available-for-Sale Securities by Type December 31, 2009 December 31, 2008 Percent Percent Cost or Gross Gross of Total Cost or Gross Gross of Total Amortized Unrealized Unrealized Fair Fair Amortized Unrealized Unrealized Fair Fair Cost Gains Losses Value Value Cost Gains Losses Value Value Asset-backed securities ( ABS ) Consumer loans $ 2,087 $ 15 $ (277 ) $ 1,825 2.6 % $ 2,251 $ $ (589 ) $ 1,662 2.6 % Small business 548 1 (232 ) 317 0.4 % 570 (250 ) 320 0.5 % Other 405 20 (44 ) 381 0.5 % 610 6 (132 ) 484 0.7 % CDOs CLOs [1] 2,727 (288 ) 2,439 3.5 % 2,865 (735 ) 2,130 3.3 % CREs 1,319 21 (901 ) 439 0.6 % 1,763 2 (1,302 ) 463 0.7 % Other 8 6 14 27 (8 ) 19 CMBS Agency backed [2] 62 3 65 0.1 % 433 16 449 0.7 % Bonds 9,600 52 (2,241 ) 7,411 10.4 % 11,144 10 (4,370 ) 6,784 10.4 % Interest only ( IOs ) 1,074 59 (65 ) 1,068 1.5 % 1,396 17 (333 ) 1,080 1.7 % Corporate Basic industry 2,642 112 (56 ) 2,698 3.8 % 2,138 33 (338 ) 1,833 2.8 % Capital goods 3,085 140 (51 ) 3,174 4.5 % 2,480 32 (322 ) 2,190 3.3 % Consumer cyclical 1,946 75 (45 ) 1,976 2.8 % 2,335 34 (388 ) 1,981 3.0 % Consumer non-cyclical 4,737 281 (22 ) 4,996 7.0 % 3,435 60 (252 ) 3,243 5.0 % Energy 3,070 163 (18 ) 3,215 4.5 % 1,669 24 (146 ) 1,547 2.4 % Financial services 8,059 118 (917 ) 7,260 10.1 % 8,422 254 (1,543 ) 7,133 10.9 % Tech./comm. 3,984 205 (75 ) 4,114 5.8 % 3,738 86 (400 ) 3,424 5.3 % Transportation 698 22 (23 ) 697 1.0 % 508 8 (90 ) 426 0.7 % Utilities 5,755 230 (85 ) 5,900 8.3 % 4,859 92 (578 ) 4,373 6.7 % Other [3] 1,342 22 (151 ) 1,213 1.7 % 1,475 (444 ) 1,031 1.6 % Foreign govt./govt. agencies 1,376 52 (20 ) 1,408 2.0 % 2,786 100 (65 ) 2,821 4.3 % Municipal Taxable 1,176 4 (205 ) 975 1.4 % 1,115 8 (229 ) 894 1.4 % Tax-exempt 10,949 314 (173 ) 11,090 15.6 % 10,291 194 (724 ) 9,761 15.0 % RMBS Agency 3,383 99 (6 ) 3,476 4.9 % 3,092 88 (15 ) 3,165 4.9 % Non-agency 143 (16 ) 127 0.2 % 213 (48 ) 165 0.2 % Alt-A 218 (58 ) 160 0.2 % 305 (108 ) 197 0.3 % Sub-prime 1,768 5 (689 ) 1,084 1.5 % 2,435 8 (862 ) 1,581 2.4 % U.S. Treasuries 3,854 14 (237 ) 3,631 5.1 % 5,883 112 (39 ) 5,956 9.2 % Total fixed maturities 76,015 2,033 (6,895 ) 71,153 100.0 % 78,238 1,184 (14,310 ) 65,112 100.0 % Equity securities Financial Services 836 7 (164 ) 679 973 13 (196 ) 790 Other 497 73 (28 ) 542 581 190 (103 ) 668 Total equity securities 1,333 80 (192 ) 1,221 1,554 203 (299 ) 1,458 Total AFS securities [4] $ 77,348 $ 2,113 $ (7,087 ) $ 72,374 $ 79,792 $ 1,387 $ (14,609 ) $ 66,570 [1] As of December 31, 2009, 79% of these senior secured bank loan collateralized loan obligations ( CLOs ) were rated AA and above with an average subordination of 29%. [2] Represents securities with pools of loans by the Small Business Administration whose issued loans are backed by the full faith and credit of the U.S. government. [3] Includes structured investments with an amortized cost and fair value of $533 and $433, respectively, as of December 31, 2009 and $526 and $364, respectively, as of December 31, 2008. The underlying securities supporting these investments are primarily diversified pools of investment grade corporate issuers which can withstand a 15% cumulative default rate, assuming a 35% recovery. [4] Gross unrealized gains represent gains of $1,474, $633, and $6 for Life, Property & Casualty, and Corporate, respectively, as of December 31, 2009 and $860, $526, and $1, respectively, as of December 31, 2008. Gross unrealized losses represent losses of $5,592, $1,491, and $4 for Life, Property & Casualty, and Corporate, respectively, as of December 31, 2009 and $10,766, $3,835, and $8, respectively, as of December 31, 2008. The Company reallocated its AFS investment portfolio to securities with more favorable risk profiles, in particular investment grade corporate securities, while reducing its exposure to real estate related securities. Additionally, the Company reduced its allocation to U.S. Treasuries in order to manage liquidity. The Company AFS net unrealized loss position decreased primarily as a result of improved security valuations due to credit spread tightening, partially offset by rising interest rates and a $1.4 billion before-tax cumulative effect of accounting change related to impairments. For further discussion on the accounting change, see Note 1 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. The following sections highlight the Company significant investment sectors. 118 Table of Contents Financial Services Several positive developments occurred in the financial services sectors during the second half of 2009. Earnings for large domestic banks surpassed expectations and losses for banks that underwent the Supervisory Capital Assessment Program ( SCAP ), or stress test, were less than the Federal Reserve projections. Unrealized losses on banks investment portfolios decreased as credit spreads tightened and the pace of deterioration of the credit quality of certain assets slowed. Banks and insurance firms were also able to access re-opened debt capital markets, reducing their dependence on government guarantee programs and enhancing their liquidity positions. In addition, certain financial institutions were able to improve their junior capital ratios through common equity capital raises, exchanges and tenders. Despite these positive developments, financial services companies continue to face a difficult macroeconomic environment and regulatory uncertainty which could affect future earnings. The Company has exposure to the financial services sector predominantly through banking and insurance firms. The following table presents the Company exposure to the financial services sector included in the AFS Securities by Type table above. A comparison of fair value to amortized cost is not indicative of the pricing of individual securities as impairments have occurred. December 31, 2009 December 31, 2008 Percent of Percent of Amortized Total Fair Amortized Total Fair Cost Fair Value Value Cost Fair Value Value AAA $ 299 $ 290 3.7 % $ 728 $ 628 7.9 % AA 1,913 1,867 23.5 % 2,067 1,780 22.5 % A 4,510 3,987 50.2 % 5,479 4,606 58.1 % BBB 1,664 1,379 17.4 % 1,015 816 10.3 % BB & below 509 416 5.2 % 106 93 1.2 % Total [1] $ 8,895 $ 7,939 100.0 % $ 9,395 $ 7,923 100.0 % [1] The credit qualities above include downgrades that have shifted the portfolio from higher rated assets to lower rated assets since December 31, 2008. Sub-Prime Residential Mortgage Loans The following table presents the Company exposure to RMBS supported by sub-prime mortgage loans by current credit quality and vintage year included in the AFS Securities by Type table above. These securities have been affected by deterioration in collateral performance caused by declining home prices and continued macroeconomic pressures including higher unemployment levels. A comparison of fair value to amortized cost is not indicative of the pricing of individual securities as impairments have occurred. Credit protection represents the current weighted average percentage, excluding wrapped securities, of the outstanding capital structure subordinated to the Company investment holding that is available to absorb losses before the security incurs the first dollar loss of principal. The ratings associated with the Company RMBS may be negatively impacted as rating agencies make changes to their methodologies and continue to monitor security performance. Sub-Prime Residential Mortgage Loans [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] December 31, 2009 AAA AA A BBB BB and Below Total Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Cost Value Cost Value Cost Value Cost Value Cost Value Cost Value 2003 & Prior $ 40 $ 31 $ 76 $ 58 $ 70 $ 48 $ 18 $ 12 $ 67 $ 41 $ 271 $ 190 2004 82 68 286 210 61 38 7 4 6 2 442 322 2005 67 42 270 196 148 90 86 26 153 40 724 394 2006 8 7 11 8 21 16 27 10 155 79 222 120 2007 109 58 109 58 Total $ 197 $ 148 $ 643 $ 472 $ 300 $ 192 $ 138 $ 52 $ 490 $ 220 $ 1,768 $ 1,084 Credit protection 48.2 % 53.3 % 40.6 % 35.8 % 25.4 % 41.6 % 119 Table of Contents December 31, 2008 AAA AA A BBB BB and Below Total Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Cost Value Cost Value Cost Value Cost Value Cost Value Cost Value 2003 & Prior $ 49 $ 41 $ 162 $ 136 $ 60 $ 43 $ 32 $ 26 $ 34 $ 20 $ 337 $ 266 2004 112 81 349 277 8 7 10 7 479 372 2005 90 71 543 367 154 77 24 16 23 18 834 549 2006 77 69 126 56 18 9 120 50 143 54 484 238 2007 42 27 40 10 38 18 47 26 134 75 301 156 Total $ 370 $ 289 $ 1,220 $ 846 $ 278 $ 154 $ 233 $ 125 $ 334 $ 167 $ 2,435 $ 1,581 Credit protection 40.5 % 47.6 % 31.4 % 21.9 % 19.9 % 41.0 % [1] The vintage year represents the year the underlying loans in the pool were originated. [2] Includes second lien residential mortgages with an amortized cost and fair value of $42 and $34, respectively, as of December 31, 2009 and $173 and $82, respectively, as of December 31, 2008, which are composed primarily of loans to prime and Alt-A borrowers. [3] As of December 31, 2009, the weighted average life of the sub-prime residential mortgage portfolio was 4.1 years. [4] Approximately 93% of the portfolio is backed by adjustable rate mortgages. [5] The credit qualities above include downgrades that have shifted the portfolio from higher rated assets to lower rated assets since December 31, 2008. Commercial Mortgage Loans The Company observed significant pressure on commercial real estate market fundamentals throughout 2009 including increased vacancies, rising delinquencies and declining property values and expects continued pressure in the upcoming year. The following tables present the Company exposure to CMBS bonds, CRE CDOs and CMBS IOs by current credit quality and vintage year, included in the AFS Securities by Type table above. A comparison of fair value to amortized cost is not indicative of the pricing of individual securities as impairments have occurred. Credit protection represents the current weighted average percentage of the outstanding capital structure subordinated to the Company investment holding that is available to absorb losses before the security incurs the first dollar loss of principal. This credit protection does not include any equity interest or property value in excess of outstanding debt. The ratings associated with the Company CMBS and CRE CDOs may be negatively impacted as rating agencies continue to make changes to their methodologies and monitor security performance. CMBS Bonds [1] [2] December 31, 2009 AAA AA A BBB BB and Below Total Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Cost Value Cost Value Cost Value Cost Value Cost Value Cost Value 2003 & Prior $ 1,732 $ 1,716 $ 297 $ 230 $ 150 $ 113 $ 20 $ 17 $ 11 $ 7 $ 2,210 $ 2,083 2004 639 626 82 52 52 34 15 7 788 719 2005 1,011 930 356 230 228 123 100 64 89 54 1,784 1,401 2006 1,945 1,636 430 275 536 247 323 132 231 83 3,465 2,373 2007 498 408 139 101 169 68 346 160 201 98 1,353 835 Total $ 5,825 $ 5,316 $ 1,304 $ 888 $ 1,135 $ 585 $ 804 $ 380 $ 532 $ 242 $ 9,600 $ 7,411 Credit protection 26.5 % 21.2 % 13.1 % 11.6 % 8.7 % 22.0 % December 31, 2008 AAA AA A BBB BB and Below Total Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Cost Value Cost Value Cost Value Cost Value Cost Value Cost Value 2003 & Prior $ 2,057 $ 1,869 $ 455 $ 299 $ 175 $ 102 $ 36 $ 27 $ 37 $ 25 $ 2,760 $ 2,322 2004 667 576 85 35 65 22 23 10 840 643 2005 1,142 847 475 152 325 127 55 27 1,997 1,153 2006 2,562 1,498 385 110 469 168 385 140 40 12 3,841 1,928 2007 981 504 438 128 148 45 134 60 5 1 1,706 738 Total $ 7,409 $ 5,294 $ 1,838 $ 724 $ 1,182 $ 464 $ 633 $ 264 $ 82 $ 38 $ 11,144 $ 6,784 Credit protection 24.4 % 16.4 % 12.2 % 5.3 % 4.4 % 20.6 % [1] The vintage year represents the year the pool of loans was originated. [2] The credit qualities above include downgrades that have shifted the portfolio from higher rated assets to lower rated assets since December 31, 2008. 120 Table of Contents CRE CDOs [1] [2] [3] [4] December 31, 2009 AAA AA A BBB BB and Below Total Amortized Cost Fair Value Amortized Cost Fair Value Amortized Cost Fair Value Amortized Cost Fair Value Amortized Cost Fair Value Amortized Cost Fair Value 2003 & Prior $ 60 $ 41 $ 30 $ 15 $ 69 $ 26 $ 165 $ 44 $ 95 $ 14 $ 419 $ 140 2004 19 11 70 22 37 11 27 4 23 4 176 52 2005 17 8 72 12 35 14 49 8 26 6 199 48 2006 23 13 108 33 82 28 69 22 23 12 305 108 2007 62 33 12 3 20 5 26 9 15 10 135 60 2008 22 12 5 1 15 4 13 3 55 20 2009 15 8 2 4 1 9 2 30 11 Total $ 218 $ 126 $ 292 $ 85 $ 250 $ 85 $ 355 $ 92 $ 204 $ 51 $ 1,319 $ 439 Credit protection 40.0 % 10.5 % 25.5 % 34.9 % 31.6 % 28.1 % December 31, 2008 AAA AA A BBB BB and Below Total Amortized Cost Fair Value Amortized Cost Fair Value Amortized Cost Fair Value Amortized Cost Fair Value Amortized Cost Fair Value Amortized Cost Fair Value 2003 & Prior $ 180 $ 59 $ 96 $ 29 $ 79 $ 17 $ 64 $ 7 $ 31 $ 7 $ 450 $ 119 2004 129 38 17 6 31 9 11 2 14 3 202 58 2005 94 37 62 15 65 12 10 2 1 232 66 2006 242 76 91 25 81 20 15 2 429 123 2007 139 45 106 19 101 11 12 1 358 76 2008 43 13 22 5 24 3 3 92 21 Total $ 827 $ 268 $ 394 $ 99 $ 381 $ 72 $ 115 $ 14 $ 46 $ 10 $ 1,763 $ 463 Credit protection 29.7 % 21.3 % 18.2 % 19.4 % 57.0 % 25.4 % [1] The vintage year represents the year that the underlying collateral in the pool was originated. Individual CDO fair value is allocated by the proportion of collateral within each vintage year. [2] As of December 31, 2009, approximately 42% of the underlying CRE CDOs collateral are seasoned, below investment grade securities. [3] For certain CRE CDOs, the collateral manager has the ability to reinvest proceeds that become available, primarily from collateral maturities. The increase in the 2008 and 2009 vintage years represents reinvestment under these CRE CDOs. [4] The credit qualities above include downgrades that have shifted the portfolio from higher rated assets to lower rated assets since December 31, 2008. CMBS IOs [1] [2] December 31, 2009 December 31, 2008 AAA A BBB BB and Below Total AAA Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Cost Value Cost Value Cost Value Cost Value Cost Value Cost Value 2003 & Prior $ 331 $ 352 $ $ $ $ $ $ $ 331 $ 352 $ 440 $ 423 2004 207 217 207 217 268 199 2005 284 275 1 2 285 277 354 245 2006 137 120 3 1 1 2 141 123 165 104 2007 110 99 110 99 169 109 Total $ 1,069 $ 1,063 $ 3 $ 1 $ 1 $ 2 $ 1 $ 2 $ 1,074 $ 1,068 $ 1,396 $ 1,080 [1] The vintage year represents the year the pool of loans was originated. [2] The credit qualities above include downgrades that have shifted the portfolio from higher rated assets to lower rated assets since December 31, 2008. In addition to CMBS, the Company has exposure to commercial mortgage loans as presented in the following table. These loans are collateralized by a variety of commercial properties and are diversified both geographically throughout the United States and by property type. These loans may be either in the form of a whole loan, where the Company is the sole lender, or a loan participation. Loan participations are loans where the Company has purchased or retained a portion of an outstanding loan or package of loans and participates on a pro-rata basis in collecting interest and principal pursuant to the terms of the participation agreement. In general, A-Note participations have senior payment priority, followed by B-Note participations and then mezzanine loan participations. As of December 31, 2009, loans within the Company mortgage loan portfolio have had minimal extension or restructurings. The recent deterioration in the global real estate market, as evidenced by increases in property vacancy rates, delinquencies and foreclosures, has negatively impacted property values and sources of refinancing and should these trends continue, additional increases in our valuation allowance for mortgage loans may result. 121 Table of Contents Commercial Mortgage Loans December 31, 2009 December 31, 2008 Amortized Valuation Carrying Amortized Valuation Carrying Cost [1] Allowance Value Cost [1] Allowance Value Whole loans $ 3,319 $ (40 ) $ 3,279 $ 3,557 $ (2 ) $ 3,555 A-Note participations 391 391 460 (13 ) 447 B-Note participations 701 (176 ) 525 724 724 Mezzanine loans 1,081 (142 ) 939 1,108 1,108 Total [2] $ 5,492 $ (358 ) $ 5,134 $ 5,849 $ (15 ) $ 5,834 [1] Amortized cost represents carrying value prior to valuation allowances, if any. [2] Excludes agricultural and residential mortgage loans. For further information on the total mortgage loan portfolio, see Note 5 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Included in the table above are valuation allowances on mortgage loans held for sale associated with B-note participations and mezzanine loans of $51 and $43, respectively, which had a carrying value of $47 and $96, respectively, as of December 31, 2009. At origination, the weighted average loan-to-value ( LTV ) rate of the Company commercial mortgage loan portfolio was approximately 63%. As of December 31, 2009, the current weighted average LTV rate was approximately 83%. LTV rates compare the loan amount to the value of the underlying property collateralizing the loan. The loan values are updated periodically through property level reviews of the portfolio. Factors considered in the property valuation include, but are not limited to, actual and expected property cash flows, geographic market data and capitalization rates. ABS Consumer Loans The following table presents the Company exposure to ABS consumer loans by credit quality, included in the AFS Securities by Type table above. Currently, the Company expects its ABS consumer loan holdings will continue to pay contractual principal and interest payments due to the ultimate expected borrower repayment performance and structural credit enhancements, which remain sufficient to absorb a significantly higher level of defaults than are currently anticipated. December 31, 2009 AAA AA A BBB BB and Below Total Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Cost Value Cost Value Cost Value Cost Value Cost Value Cost Value Auto [1] $ 136 $ 137 $ 47 $ 47 $ 96 $ 96 $ 105 $ 103 $ 22 $ 17 $ 406 $ 400 Credit card 703 714 26 24 197 186 926 924 Student loan [2] 292 186 326 249 137 66 755 501 Total [3] $ 1,131 $ 1,037 $ 373 $ 296 $ 259 $ 186 $ 302 $ 289 $ 22 $ 17 $ 2,087 $ 1,825 December 31, 2008 AAA AA A BBB BB and Below Total Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Cost Value Cost Value Cost Value Cost Value Cost Value Cost Value Auto $ 135 $ 109 $ 29 $ 27 $ 142 $ 103 $ 209 $ 162 $ 30 $ 20 $ 545 $ 421 Credit card 419 367 6 3 108 97 351 248 58 39 942 754 Student loan 294 159 332 244 138 84 764 487 Total $ 848 $ 635 $ 367 $ 274 $ 388 $ 284 $ 560 $ 410 $ 88 $ 59 $ 2,251 $ 1,662 [1] As of December 31, 2009, approximately 8% of the auto consumer loan-backed securities were issued by lenders whose primary business is to sub-prime borrowers. [2] As of December 31, 2009, approximately half of the student loan-backed exposure is guaranteed by the Federal Family Education Loan Program, with the remainder comprised of loans to prime borrowers. [3] The credit qualities above include downgrades that have shifted the portfolio from higher rated assets to lower rated assets since December 31, 2008. Municipal Bonds The Company has investments in securities backed by states, municipalities and political subdivisions issuers ( municipal ) with an amortized cost and fair value of $12.1 billion as of December 31, 2009 and $11.4 billion and $10.7 billion, respectively, as of December 31, 2008. The Company municipal bond portfolio is diversified across the United States and primarily consists of general obligation and revenue bonds issued by states, cities, counties, school districts and similar issuers. As of December 31, 2009, the largest concentrations were in California, Georgia and Illinois which each comprised less than 3% of the municipal bond portfolio and were primarily comprised of general obligation securities. Certain of the Company municipal bonds were enhanced by third-party insurance for the payment of principal and interest in the event of an issuer default. Excluding the benefit of this insurance, the average credit rating was AA- and AA, respectively, as of December 31, 2009 and 2008. 122 Table of Contents Limited Partnerships and Other Alternative Investments The following table presents the Company investments in limited partnerships and other alternative investments which include hedge funds, mortgage and real estate funds, mezzanine debt funds, and private equity and other funds. Hedge funds include investments in funds of funds and direct funds. Mortgage and real estate funds consist of investments in funds whose assets consist of mortgage loans, mortgage loan participations, mezzanine loans or other notes which may be below investment grade quality, as well as equity real estate and real estate joint ventures. Mezzanine debt funds include investments in funds whose assets consist of subordinated debt that often incorporates equity-based options such as warrants and a limited amount of direct equity investments. Private equity and other funds primarily consist of investments in funds whose assets typically consist of a diversified pool of investments in small non-public businesses with high growth potential. December 31, 2009 December 31, 2008 Amount Percent Amount Percent Hedge funds $ 596 33.3 % $ 834 36.3 % Mortgage and real estate funds 302 16.9 % 551 24.0 % Mezzanine debt funds 133 7.4 % 156 6.8 % Private equity and other funds 759 42.4 % 754 32.9 % Total $ 1,790 100.0 % $ 2,295 100.0 % Limited partnerships and other alternative investments decreased primarily due to hedge fund redemptions and negative re-valuations of the underlying investments associated primarily with the real estate markets. Security Unrealized Loss Aging As part of the Company ongoing security monitoring process, the Company has reviewed its AFS securities in an unrealized loss position and concluded that there were no additional impairments as of December 31, 2009 and 2008 and that these securities have sufficient expected future cash flows to recover the entire amortized cost basis, are temporarily depressed and are expected to recover in value as the securities approach maturity or as CMBS and sub-prime RMBS market spreads return to more normalized levels. Most of the securities depressed over 20% for nine months or more are supported by real estate related assets, specifically investment grade CMBS bonds, sub-prime RMBS and CRE CDOs, and have a weighted average current rating of A. Current market spreads continue to be significantly wider for securities supported by real estate related assets, as compared to spreads at the security respective purchase date, largely due to the continued effects of the recession and the economic and market uncertainties regarding future performance of commercial and residential real estate. The Company reviewed these securities as part of its impairment evaluation process. The Company best estimate of future cash flows utilized in its impairment process involves both macroeconomic and security specific assumptions that may differ based on asset class, vintage year and property location including, but not limited to, historical and projected default and recovery rates, current and expected future delinquency rates, property value declines and the impact of obligor re-financing. For these securities in an unrealized loss position where a credit impairment has not been recorded, the Company best estimate of expected future cash flows are sufficient to recover the amortized cost basis of the security. For further discussion on the Company ongoing security monitoring process and the factors considered in determining whether a credit impairment exists, see the Recognition and Presentation of Other-Than-Temporary Impairments section in Note 5 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. The following table presents the Company unrealized loss aging for AFS securities by length of time the security was in a continuous unrealized loss position. December 31, 2009 December 31, 2008 Cost or Cost or Amortized Fair Unrealized Amortized Fair Unrealized Items Cost Value Loss Items Cost Value Loss Three months or less 1,237 $ 11,197 $ 10,838 $ (359 ) 1,718 $ 16,425 $ 14,992 $ (1,433 ) Greater than three to six months 105 317 289 (28 ) 972 6,533 5,247 (1,286 ) Greater than six to nine months 311 2,940 2,429 (511 ) 764 7,053 5,873 (1,180 ) Greater than nine to twelve months 134 2,054 1,674 (380 ) 741 6,459 4,957 (1,502 ) Greater than twelve months 2,020 22,445 16,636 (5,809 ) 2,417 25,279 16,071 (9,208 ) Total 3,807 $ 38,953 $ 31,866 $ (7,087 ) 6,612 $ 61,749 $ 47,140 $ (14,609 ) 123 Table of Contents The following tables present the Company unrealized loss aging for AFS securities continuously depressed over 20% by length of time. December 31, 2009 December 31, 2008 Cost or Cost or Amortized Fair Unrealized Amortized Fair Unrealized Consecutive Months Items Cost Value Loss Items Cost Value Loss Three months or less 161 $ 951 $ 672 $ (279 ) 1,789 $ 21,512 $ 13,483 $ (8,029 ) Greater than three to six months 51 55 38 (17 ) 225 2,139 800 (1,339 ) Greater than six to nine months 159 2,046 1,397 (649 ) 112 1,448 618 (830 ) Greater than nine to twelve months 86 1,398 913 (485 ) 169 1,989 610 (1,379 ) Greater than twelve months 715 8,146 4,228 (3,918 ) 33 377 71 (306 ) Total 1,172 $ 12,596 $ 7,248 $ (5,348 ) 2,328 $ 27,465 $ 15,582 $ (11,883 ) The following tables present the Company unrealized loss aging for AFS securities (included in the tables above) continuously depressed over 50% by length of time. December 31, 2009 December 31, 2008 Cost or Cost or Amortized Fair Unrealized Amortized Fair Unrealized Consecutive Months Items Cost Value Loss Items Cost Value Loss Three months or less 62 $ 169 $ 61 $ (108 ) 650 $ 8,350 $ 2,923 $ (5,427 ) Greater than three to six months 28 5 2 (3 ) 38 352 56 (296 ) Greater than six to nine months 54 190 74 (116 ) 28 267 44 (223 ) Greater than nine to twelve months 58 592 210 (382 ) 3 15 3 (12 ) Greater than twelve months 220 2,553 735 (1,818 ) Total 422 $ 3,509 $ 1,082 $ (2,427 ) 719 $ 8,984 $ 3,026 $ (5,958 ) Other-Than-Temporary Impairments The following table presents the Company impairments recognized in earnings by security type. For the years ended December 31, 2009 2008 2007 ABS $ 54 $ 27 $ 19 CDOs CREs 483 398 Other 28 CMBS Bonds 257 141 18 IOs 25 61 Corporate Financial services 137 1,342 67 Other 61 510 98 Equity securities Financial services 92 1,142 36 Other 53 19 20 Foreign govt./govt. agencies 31 13 Municipal 18 21 RMBS Non-agency 4 13 Alt-A 62 24 Sub-prime 232 235 212 U.S. Treasuries 2 Total $ 1,508 $ 3,964 $ 483 124 Table of Contents Year ended December 31, 2009 Impairments recognized in earnings were comprised of credit impairments of $1,216, impairments on debt securities for which the Company intended to sell of $156 and impairments on equity securities of $136. Credit impairments were primarily concentrated on structured securities, mainly CRE CDOs, below-prime RMBS and CMBS bonds. These securities were impaired primarily due to increased severity in macroeconomic assumptions and continued deterioration of the underlying collateral. The Company determined these impairments utilizing both a top down modeling approach and, for certain real estate-backed securities, a loan by loan collateral review. The top down modeling approach used discounted cash flow models that considered losses under current and expected future economic conditions. Assumptions used over the current recessionary period included macroeconomic factors, such as a high unemployment rate, as well as sector specific factors including, but not limited to: Commercial property value declines that averaged 40% to 45% from the valuation peak but differed by property type and location. Average cumulative CMBS collateral loss rates that varied by vintage year but reached approximately 12% for the 2007 vintage year. Residential property value declines that averaged 40% to 45% from the valuation peak but differed by location. Average cumulative RMBS collateral loss rates that varied by vintage year but reached approximately 50% for the 2007 vintage year. In addition to the top down modeling approach, the Company reviewed the underlying collateral of certain of its real estate-backed securities to estimate potential future losses. This review included loan by loan underwriting utilizing assumptions about expected future collateral cash flows discounted at the security book yield prior to impairment. The expected future cash flows included projected rental rates and occupancy levels that varied based on property type and sub-market. Impairments are recorded to the lower discounted value between the top down modeling approach and loan by loan collateral review. Impairments on securities for which the Company had the intent to sell were primarily on corporate financial services securities where the Company had an active plan to dispose of the securities. Impairments on equity securities were primarily on below investment grade hybrid securities that had been depressed 20% for six continuous months. In addition to the credit impairments recognized in earnings, the Company recognized $683 of non-credit impairments in other comprehensive income, predominately concentrated in RMBS and CRE CDOs. These non-credit impairments represent the difference between the fair value and the Company best estimate of expected future cash flows discounted at the security effective yield prior to impairment, rather than at current credit spreads. The non-credit impairments primarily represent increases in market liquidity premiums and credit spread widening that occurred after the securities were purchased. In general, larger liquidity premiums and wider credit spreads are the result of deterioration of the underlying collateral performance of the securities, as well as the risk premium required to reflect future uncertainty in the real estate market. Future impairments may develop as the result of changes in intent to sell or if actual results underperform current modeling assumptions, which may be the result of, but are not limited to, macroeconomic factors, changes in assumptions used and property performance below current expectations. Year ended December 31, 2008 Impairments were primarily concentrated on subordinated fixed maturities and preferred equities within the financial services sector, as well as in sub-prime RMBS and CRE CDOs. The remaining impairments were primarily recorded on securities in various sectors that experienced significant credit spread widening and for which the Company was uncertain of its intent to retain the investments for a period of time sufficient to allow for recovery. Year ended December 31, 2007 Impairments were primarily concentrated on structured securities backed by sub-prime RMBS and corporate securities primarily within the financial services and home builders sectors. The remaining impairments were primarily recorded on securities in various sectors that had declined in value for which the Company was uncertain of its intent to retain the investments for a period of time sufficient to allow for recovery. 125 Table of Contents CAPITAL MARKETS RISK MANAGEMENT The Company has a disciplined approach to managing risks associated with its capital markets and asset/liability management activities. Investment portfolio management is organized to focus investment management expertise on the specific classes of investments, while asset/liability management is the responsibility of a dedicated risk management unit supporting Life and Property & Casualty operations. Derivative instruments are utilized in compliance with established Company policy and regulatory requirements and are monitored internally and reviewed by senior management. The Company utilizes a variety of over-the-counter and exchange traded derivative instruments as a part of its overall risk management strategy, as well as to enter into replication transactions. Derivative instruments are used to manage risk associated with interest rate, equity market, credit spread, issuer default, price, and currency exchange rate risk or volatility. Replication transactions are used as an economical means to synthetically replicate the characteristics and performance of assets that would otherwise be permissible investments under the Company investment policies. For further information, see Note 5 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Derivative activities are monitored and evaluated by the Company risk management team and reviewed by senior management. In addition, the Company monitors counterparty credit exposure on a monthly basis to ensure compliance with Company policies and statutory limitations. The notional amounts of derivative contracts represent the basis upon which pay or receive amounts are calculated and are not reflective of credit risk. For further information on the Company use of derivatives, see Note 5 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Market Risk The Company is exposed to market risk, primarily relating to the market price and/or cash flow variability associated with changes in interest rates, credit spreads including issuer defaults, equity prices or market indices, and foreign currency exchange rates. The Company is also exposed to credit and counterparty repayment risk. Interest Rate Risk The Company exposure to interest rate risk relates to the market price and/or cash flow variability associated with changes in market interest rates. The Company manages its exposure to interest rate risk by constructing investment portfolios that maintain asset allocation limits and asset/liability duration matching targets which include the use of derivatives. The Company analyzes interest rate risk using various models including parametric models and cash flow simulation of the liabilities and the supporting investments, including derivative instruments under various market scenarios. Measures the Company uses to quantify its exposure to interest rate risk inherent in its invested assets and interest rate sensitive liabilities include duration, convexity and key rate duration. Duration is the weighted average term-to-maturity of a security cash flows and is used to approximate the percentage change in the price of a security for a given change in market interest rates. For example, a duration of 5 means the price of the security will change by approximately 5% for a 1% change in interest rates. Convexity is used to approximate how the duration of a security changes as interest rates change. As duration in convexity calculations assume parallel yield curve shifts, key rate duration analysis considers price sensitivity to changes in various interest rate terms-to-maturity. Key rate duration analysis enables the Company to estimate the price change of a security assuming non-parallel interest rate movements. To calculate duration, convexity, and key rate duration, projections of asset and liability cash flows are discounted to a present value using interest rate assumptions. These cash flows are then revalued at alternative interest rate levels to determine the percentage change in fair value due to an incremental change in rates. Cash flows from corporate obligations are assumed to be consistent with the contractual payment streams on a yield to worst basis. Yield to worst is the lowest possible yield when all potential call dates prior to maturity are considered. The primary assumptions used in calculating cash flow projections include expected asset payment streams taking into account prepayment speeds, issuer call options and contract holder behavior. Mortgage-backed and asset-backed securities are modeled based on estimates of the rate of future prepayments of principal over the remaining life of the securities. These estimates are developed by incorporating collateral surveillance and anticipated future market dynamics. Actual prepayment experience may vary from these estimates. The Company is also exposed to interest rate risk based upon the discount rate assumption associated with the Company pension and other postretirement benefit obligations. The discount rate assumption is based upon an interest rate yield curve comprised of bonds rated Aa with maturities primarily between zero and thirty years. For further discussion of interest rate risk associated with the benefit obligations, see Pension and Other Postretirement Benefit Obligations within the Critical Accounting Estimates section of the MD&A and Note 17 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. In addition, management evaluates performance of certain Life products based on net investment spread which is, in part, influenced by changes in interest rates. For further discussion, see the Retail, Individual Life, Retirement Plans, and Institutional sections of the MD&A. 126 Table of Contents As interest rates decline, certain mortgage-backed securities are more susceptible to paydowns and prepayments. During such periods, the Company generally will not be able to reinvest the proceeds at comparable yields. Lower interest rates will also likely result in lower net investment income, increased hedging cost associated with variable annuities and, if declines are sustained for a long period of time, it may subject the Company to reinvestment risks, higher pension costs expense and possibly reduced profit margins associated with guaranteed crediting rates on certain Life products. Conversely, the fair value of the investment portfolio will increase when interest rates decline and the Company interest expense will be lower on its variable rate debt obligations. The Company believes that an increase in interest rates from the current levels is generally a favorable development for the Company. Rate increases are expected to provide additional net investment income, increase sales of fixed rate Life investment products, reduce the cost of the variable annuity hedging program, limit the potential risk of margin erosion due to minimum guaranteed crediting rates in certain Life products and, if sustained, could reduce the Company prospective pension expense. Conversely, a rise in interest rates will reduce the fair value of the investment portfolio, increase interest expense on the Company variable rate debt obligations and, if long-term interest rates rise dramatically within a six to twelve month time period, certain Life businesses may be exposed to disintermediation risk. Disintermediation risk refers to the risk that policyholders will surrender their contracts in a rising interest rate environment requiring the Company to liquidate assets in an unrealized loss position. In conjunction with the interest rate risk measurement and management techniques, certain of Life fixed income product offerings have market value adjustment provisions at contract surrender. An increase in interest rates may also impact the Company tax planning strategies and in particular its ability to utilize tax benefits to offset certain previously recognized realized capital losses. The investments and liabilities primarily associated with interest rate risk are included in the following discussion. Certain product liabilities, including those containing GMWB, GMIB, GMAB, or GMDB, expose the Company to interest rate risk but also have significant equity risk. These liabilities are discussed as part of the Equity Risk section below. Fixed Maturity Investments The Company investment portfolios primarily consist of investment grade fixed maturity securities. The fair value of these investments was $71.2 billion and $65.1 billion at December 31, 2009 and 2008, respectively. The fair value of these and other invested assets fluctuates depending on the interest rate environment and other general economic conditions. The weighted average duration of the fixed maturity portfolio was approximately 4.9 and 4.8 years as of December 31, 2009 and 2008, respectively. Liabilities The Company investment contracts and certain insurance product liabilities, other than non-guaranteed separate accounts, include asset accumulation vehicles such as fixed annuities, guaranteed investment contracts, other investment and universal life-type contracts and certain insurance products such as long-term disability. Asset accumulation vehicles primarily require a fixed rate payment, often for a specified period of time. Product examples include fixed rate annuities with a market value adjustment feature and fixed rate guaranteed investment contracts. The term to maturity of these contracts generally range from less than one year to ten years. In addition, certain products such as universal life contracts and the general account portion of Life variable annuity products, credit interest to policyholders subject to market conditions and minimum interest rate guarantees. The term to maturity of these products is short to intermediate. While interest rate risk associated with many of these products has been reduced through the use of market value adjustment features and surrender charges, the primary risk associated with these products is that the spread between investment return and credited rate may not be sufficient to earn targeted returns. The Company also manages the risk of certain insurance liabilities similarly to investment type products due to the relative predictability of the aggregate cash flow payment streams. Products in this category may contain significant actuarial (including mortality and morbidity) pricing and cash flow risks. Product examples include structured settlement contracts, on-benefit annuities (i.e., the annuitant is currently receiving benefits thereon) and short-term and long-term disability contracts. The cash outflows associated with these policy liabilities are not interest rate sensitive but do vary based on the timing and amount of benefit payments. The primary risks associated with these products are that the benefits will exceed expected actuarial pricing and/or that the actual timing of the cash flows will differ from those anticipated, resulting in an investment return lower than that assumed in pricing. Average contract duration can range from less than one year to typically up to fifteen years. Derivatives The Company utilizes a variety of derivative instruments to mitigate interest rate risk. Interest rate swaps are primarily used to convert interest receipts or payments to a fixed or variable rate. The use of such swaps enables the Company to customize contract terms and conditions to customer objectives and satisfies its asset/liability duration matching policy. Interest rate swaps are also used to hedge the variability in the cash flow of a forecasted purchase or sale of fixed rate securities due to changes in interest rates. Forward rate agreements are used to convert interest receipts on floating-rate securities to fixed rates. These derivatives are used to lock in the forward interest rate curve and reduce income volatility that results from changes in interest rates. Interest rate caps, floors, swaptions, and futures are primarily used to manage portfolio duration. At December 31, 2009 and 2008, notional amounts pertaining to derivatives utilized to manage interest rate risk totaled $21.3 billion and $19.3 billion, respectively ($19.7 billion and $17.4 billion, respectively, related to investments and $1.6 billion and $1.9 billion, respectively, related to life liabilities). The fair value of these derivatives was $18 and $457 as of December 31, 2009 and 2008, respectively. 127 Table of Contents Calculated Interest Rate Sensitivity The after-tax change in the net economic value of investment contracts (e.g., guaranteed investment contracts) and certain insurance product liabilities (e.g., short-term and long-term disability contracts), for which the payment rates are fixed at contract issuance and the investment experience is substantially absorbed by the Company Life operations, are included in the following table along with the corresponding invested assets. Also included in this analysis are the interest rate sensitive derivatives used by the Company to hedge its exposure to interest rate risk. Certain financial instruments, such as limited partnerships and other alternative investments, have been omitted from the analysis due to the fact that the investments are accounted for under the equity method and generally lack sensitivity to interest rate changes. Separate account assets and liabilities, equity securities, trading and the corresponding liabilities associated with the variable annuity products sold in Japan are excluded from the analysis because gains and losses in separate accounts accrue to policyholders. The calculation of the estimated hypothetical change in net economic value below assumes a 100 basis point upward and downward parallel shift in the yield curve. Change in Net Economic Value As of December 31, 2009 2008 Basis point shift - 100 + 100 - 100 + 100 Amount $ (30 ) $ (9 ) $ (173 ) $ 114 The fixed liabilities included above represented approximately 63% of the Company Life operations general account liabilities as of December 31, 2009 and 2008. The assets supporting the fixed liabilities are monitored and managed within rigorous duration guidelines, and are evaluated on a monthly basis, as well as annually using scenario simulation techniques in compliance with regulatory requirements. The following table provides an analysis showing the estimated after-tax change in the fair value of the Company fixed maturity investments and related derivatives, assuming 100 basis point upward and downward parallel shifts in the yield curve as of December 31, 2009 and 2008. Certain financial instruments, such as limited partnerships and other alternative investments, have been omitted from the analysis due to the fact that the investments are accounted for under the equity method and generally lack sensitivity to interest rate changes. Change in Fair Value As of December 31, 2009 2008 Basis point shift - 100 + 100 - 100 + 100 Amount $ 2,326 $ (2,230 ) $ 2,015 $ (1,944 ) The selection of the 100 basis point parallel shift in the yield curve was made only as an illustration of the potential hypothetical impact of such an event and should not be construed as a prediction of future market events. Actual results could differ materially from those illustrated above due to the nature of the estimates and assumptions used in the above analysis. The Company sensitivity analysis calculation assumes that the composition of invested assets and liabilities remain materially consistent throughout the year and that the current relationship between short-term and long-term interest rates will remain constant over time. As a result, these calculations may not fully capture the impact of portfolio re-allocations, significant product sales or non-parallel changes in interest rates. Credit Risk The Company is exposed to credit risk within our investment portfolio and through counterparties. Credit risk relates to the uncertainty of an obligor continued ability to make timely payments in accordance with the contractual terms of the instrument or contract. The Company manages credit risk through established investment credit policies which address quality of obligors and counterparties, credit concentration limits, diversification requirements and acceptable risk levels under expected and stressed scenarios. These policies are regularly reviewed and approved by senior management. The derivative counterparty exposure policy establishes market-based credit limits, favors long-term financial stability and creditworthiness of the counterparty and typically requires credit enhancement/credit risk reducing agreements. The Company minimizes the credit risk in derivative instruments by entering into transactions with high quality counterparties rated A2/A or better, which are monitored and evaluated by the Company risk management team and reviewed by senior management. In addition, the Company monitors counterparty credit exposure on a monthly basis to ensure compliance with Company policies and statutory limitations. For further information on derivative counterparty credit risk, see the Investment Credit Risk section of the MD&A. In addition to counterparty credit risk, the Company enters into credit derivative instruments to manage credit exposure. The Company purchases credit protection through credit default swaps to economically hedge and manage credit risk of certain fixed maturity investments across multiple sectors of the investment portfolio. The Company has also entered into credit default swaps that assume credit risk to synthetically replicate the characteristics and performance of assets that would otherwise be permissible investments under the Company investment policies. Credit spread widening will generally result in an increase in fair value of derivatives that purchase credit protection and a decrease in fair value of derivatives that assume credit risk. These derivatives do not receive hedge accounting treatment and, as such, changes in fair value are reported through earnings. As of December 31, 2009 and 2008, the notional amount related to credit derivatives that purchase credit protection was $2.6 billion and $3.7 billion, respectively, while the fair value was $(50) and $340, respectively. As of December 31, 2009 and 2008, the notional amount related to credit derivatives that assume credit risk was $1.2 billion, while the fair value was $(240) and $(403), respectively. For further information on credit derivatives, see the Investment Credit Risk section of the MD&A and Note 5 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 128 Table of Contents The Company is also exposed to credit spread risk related to security market price and cash flows associated with changes in credit spreads. Credit spread widening will reduce the fair value of the investment portfolio and will increase net investment income on new purchases. If issuer credit spreads increase significantly or for an extended period of time, it may result in higher impairment losses. Credit spread tightening will reduce net investment income associated with new purchases of fixed maturities and increase the fair value of the investment portfolio. For further discussion of sectors most significantly impacted, see the Investment Credit Risk section of the MD&A. Also, for a discussion of the movement of credit spread impacts on the Company statutory financial results as it relates to the accounting and reporting for market value fixed annuities, see the Capital Resources & Liquidity section of the MD&A. Equity Risk The Company does not have significant equity risk exposure from invested assets. The Company primary exposure to equity risk relates to the potential for lower earnings associated with certain of the Life businesses such as variable annuities where fee income is earned based upon the fair value of the assets under management. During 2009, Life fee income declined $555 or 11%. In addition, Life offers certain guaranteed benefits, primarily associated with variable annuity products, which increases the Company potential benefit exposure as the equity markets decline. The Company is also subject to equity risk based upon the assets that support its pension plans. The asset allocation mix is reviewed on a periodic basis. In order to minimize risk, the pension plans maintain a listing of permissible and prohibited investments. In addition, the pension plans have certain concentration limits and investment quality requirements imposed on permissible investment options. For further discussion of equity risk associated with the pension plans, see Pension and Other Postretirement Benefit Obligations within the Critical Accounting Estimates section of the MD&A and Note 17 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Foreign Currency Exchange Risk The Company foreign currency exchange risk is related to non U.S. dollar denominated investments, which primarily consist of fixed maturity investments, the investment in and net income of the Japanese Life and U.K. Life operations, and non-U.S. dollar denominated liability contracts, including its GMDB, GMAB, GMWB and GMIB benefits associated with its Japanese and U.K. variable annuities, and a yen denominated individual fixed annuity product. A portion of the Company foreign currency exposure is mitigated through the use of derivatives. Fixed Maturity Investments The risk associated with the non-U.S. dollar denominated fixed maturities relates to potential decreases in value and income resulting from unfavorable changes in foreign exchange rates. The fair value of the non-U.S. dollar denominated fixed maturities, which are primarily denominated in euro, sterling, yen and Canadian dollars, at December 31, 2009 and 2008, were approximately $1.2 billion and $3.8 billion, respectively. In order to manage its currency exposures, the Company enters into foreign currency swaps and forwards to hedge the variability in cash flows associated with certain foreign denominated fixed maturities. These foreign currency swap and forward agreements are structured to match the foreign currency cash flows of the hedged foreign denominated securities. At December 31, 2009 and 2008, the derivatives used to hedge currency exchange risk related to non-U.S. dollar denominated fixed maturities had a total notional amount of $480 and $1.6 billion, respectively, and total fair value of $(26) and $39, respectively. Based on the fair values of the Company non-U.S. dollar denominated securities and derivative instruments as of December 31, 2009 and 2008, management estimates that a 10% unfavorable change in exchange rates would decrease the fair values by a before-tax total of approximately $62 and $205, respectively. The estimated impact was based upon a 10% change in December 31 spot rates. The selection of the 10% unfavorable change was made only for illustration of the potential hypothetical impact of such an event and should not be construed as a prediction of future market events. Actual results could differ materially from those illustrated above due to the nature of the estimates and assumptions used in the above analysis. Liabilities The Company Life operations issued non-U.S. dollar denominated funding agreement liability contracts. The Company hedges the foreign currency risk associated with these liability contracts with currency rate swaps. At December 31, 2009 and 2008, the derivatives used to hedge foreign currency exchange risk related to foreign denominated liability contracts had a total notional amount of $814 and $820, respectively, and a total fair value of $(2) and $(76), respectively. The Company enters into foreign currency forward and option contracts that convert euros to yen in order to economically hedge the foreign currency risk associated with certain Japanese variable annuity products. As of December 31, 2009 and 2008, the derivatives used to hedge foreign currency risk associated with Japanese variable annuity products had a total notional amount of $257 and $259, respectively, and a total fair value of ($8) and $35, respectively. 129 Table of Contents The yen based fixed annuity product is written by Hartford Life Insurance K.K. ( HLIKK ), a wholly-owned Japanese subsidiary of Hartford Life, Inc. ( HLI ), and subsequently reinsured to Hartford Life Insurance Company, a U.S. dollar based wholly-owned indirect subsidiary of HLI. The underlying investment involves investing in U.S. securities markets, which offer favorable credit spreads. The yen denominated fixed annuity product ( yen fixed annuities ) is recorded in the consolidated balance sheets with invested assets denominated in dollars while policyholder liabilities are denominated in yen and converted to U.S. dollars based upon the December 31, yen to U.S. dollar spot rate. The difference between U.S. dollar denominated investments and yen denominated liabilities exposes the Company to currency risk. The Company manages this currency risk associated with the yen fixed annuities primarily with pay variable U.S. dollar and receive fixed yen currency swaps. As of December 31, 2009 and 2008, the notional value of the currency swaps was $2.3 billion and the fair value was $316 and $383, respectively. Although economically an effective hedge, a divergence between the yen denominated fixed annuity product liability and the currency swaps exists primarily due to the difference in the basis of accounting between the liability and the derivative instruments (i.e. historical cost versus fair value). The yen denominated fixed annuity product liabilities are recorded on a historical cost basis and are only adjusted for changes in foreign spot rates and accrued income. The currency swaps are recorded at fair value, incorporating changes in value due to changes in forward foreign exchange rates, interest rates and accrued income. A before-tax net gain of $47 and $64 for the years ended December 31, 2009 and 2008, respectively, which includes the changes in value of the currency swaps, excluding net periodic coupon settlements, and the yen fixed annuity contract remeasurement, was recorded in net realized capital gains and losses. Life Equity Product Risk The Company Life operations are significantly influenced by the U.S., Japanese, and other global equity markets. Increases or declines in equity markets impact certain assets and liabilities related to the Company variable products and the Company earnings derived from those products. The Company variable products include variable annuity contracts, mutual funds, and variable life insurance. Generally, declines in equity markets will: reduce the value of assets under management and the amount of fee income generated from those assets; reduce the value of equity securities, trading, for international variable annuities, the related policyholder funds and benefits payable, and the amount of fee income generated from those variable annuities; increase the liability for GMWB benefits resulting in realized capital losses; increase the value of derivative assets used to dynamically hedge product guarantees resulting in realized capital gains; increase costs under the Company hedging program; increase the Company net amount at risk for GMDB and GMIB benefits; decrease the Company actual gross profits, resulting in increased DAC amortization; increase the amount of required statutory capital necessary to maintain targeted risk based capital ratios; turn customer sentiment toward equity-linked products negative, causing a decline in sales; and decrease the Company estimated future gross profits. See Life Estimated Gross Profits Used in the Valuation and Amortization of Assets and Liabilities Associated with Variable Annuity and Other Universal Life-Type Contracts within the Critical Accounting Estimates section of MD&A for further information. Generally, increases in equity markets will reduce the value of derivative assets used to provide a macro hedge on statutory surplus, resulting in realized capital losses during periods of market appreciation. GMWB The majority of the Company U.S. and U.K. variable annuities, and a portion of Japan variable annuities, include a GMWB rider. In the second quarter of 2009, the Company suspended all new sales in the U.K. and Japan. The Company new variable annuity product, launched in the U.S. in October 2009 does not offer a GMWB. Declines in equity markets will generally increase the Company liability for the in-force GMWB riders. A GMWB contract is in the money if the contract holder guaranteed remaining benefit ( GRB ) is greater than their current account value. As of December 31, 2009 and December 31, 2008, 48% and 88%, respectively, of all unreinsured U.S. GMWB in-force contracts were in the money . For U.S., U.K. and Japan GMWB contracts that were in the money , the Company exposure to the GRB, after reinsurance, as of December 31, 2009 and 2008, was $2.7 billion and $7.7 billion, respectively. However, the Company expects to incur these payments in the future only if the policyholder has an in the money GMWB at their death or their account value is reduced to a specified level through contractually permitted withdrawals and/or market declines. If the account value is reduced to the specified level, the contract holder will receive an annuity equal to the remaining GRB. For the Company life-time GMWB products, this annuity can continue beyond the GRB. As the account value fluctuates with equity market returns on a daily basis and the life-time GMWB payments can exceed the GRB, the ultimate amount to be paid by the Company, if any, is uncertain and could be significantly more or less than $2.7 billion. For additional information on the Company GMWB liability, see Note 4a of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 130 Table of Contents GMDB and GMIB The majority of the Company U.S. variable annuity contracts include a GMDB rider. Declines in the equity markets will generally increase the Company liability for GMDB riders. The Company total gross exposure (i.e., before reinsurance) to U.S. GMDB as of December 31, 2009 is $18.4 billion. However, the Company will incur these payments in the future only if the policyholder has an in the money GMDB at their death. The Company currently reinsures 53% of these death benefit guarantees. Under certain of these reinsurance agreements, the reinsurers exposure is subject to an annual cap. The Company net exposure (i.e., after reinsurance) is $8.5 billion, as of December 31, 2009. In the second quarter of 2009, the Company suspended all new product sales in Japan. Prior to that, the Company offered certain variable annuity products in Japan with both a GMDB and a GMIB. For the in-force block of Japan business, declines in equity markets, as well as a strengthening of the Japanese yen in comparison to the U.S. dollar and other currencies, will increase the Company liability for GMDB and GMIB riders. This increase may be significant in extreme market scenarios. The Company total gross exposure (i.e., before reinsurance) to the GMDB and GMIB offered in Japan as of December 31, 2009 is $6.3 billion. However, the Company will incur these payments in the future only if the contract holder has an in the money GMDB and GMIB at their death or if their account value is insufficient to fund the benefit. The Company currently reinsures 17% of the GMDB to a third party reinsurer. Under certain of these reinsurance agreements, the reinsurers exposure is subject to an annual cap. The Company net exposure (i.e. after reinsurance) is $5.2 billion. In addition, as of December 31, 2009, 59% of the account value and 52% of retained net amount at risk is reinsured to a Hartford affiliate. For additional information on the Company GMDB and GMIB liability, see Note 9 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Life Equity Product Risk Management The Company has made considerable investment in analyzing market risk exposures arising from: GMDB, GMWB, and GMIB; equity market and interest rate risks; and foreign currency exchange rates. The Company evaluates these risks both individually and, in the aggregate, to determine the financial risk of its products and to judge their potential impacts on U.S. GAAP earnings and statutory surplus. The Company manages the equity market, interest rate and foreign currency exchange risks embedded in its products through product design, reinsurance, customized derivatives, and dynamic hedging and macro hedging programs. The Company recently launched a new variable annuity product with reduced equity risk and has increased GMWB rider fees on new sales of the Company legacy variable annuities and the related in-force, as contractually permitted. Depending upon competitors reactions with respect to products and related rider charges, the Company strategy of reducing product risk and increasing fees may cause a decline in market share. Reinsurance The Company uses reinsurance for a portion of contracts issued with GMWB riders prior to the third quarter of 2003. The Company also reinsures GMWB risks associated with a block of business sold between the third quarter of 2003 and the second quarter of 2006. The Company also uses reinsurance for a majority of the GMDB issued in the U.S. and a portion of the GMDB issued in Japan. Derivative Hedging Programs The Company maintains derivative hedging programs for its product guarantee risk to meet multiple, and in some cases, competing risk management objectives, including providing protection against tail scenario equity market events, providing resources to pay product guarantee claims, and minimizing U.S. GAAP earnings volatility, statutory surplus volatility and other economic metrics. The Company holds customized derivative contracts to provide protection from certain capital market risks for the remaining term of specified blocks of non-reinsured GMWB riders. These customized derivative contracts are based on policyholder behavior assumptions specified at the inception of the derivative contracts. The Company retains the risk for actual policyholder behavior that is different from assumptions within the customized derivatives. The Company dynamic hedging program uses derivative instruments to manage the U.S. GAAP earnings volatility associated with variable annuity product guarantees including equity market declines, equity implied volatility, declines in interest rates and foreign currency exchange risk. The Company uses hedging instruments including interest rate futures and swaps, variance swaps, S&P 500, NASDAQ and EAFE index put options and futures contracts. While the Company actively manages this dynamic hedging program, increased U.S. GAAP earnings volatility may result from factors including, but not limited to, policyholder behavior, capital markets, divergence between the performance of the underlying funds and the hedging indices, and the relative emphasis placed on various risk management objectives. The Company macro hedging program uses derivative instruments to partially hedge the statutory tail scenario risk arising from U.S. and Japan GMWB, GMDB, and GMIB statutory liabilities, on the Company statutory surplus and the associated target RBC ratios (see Capital Resources and Liquidity). The macro hedge program will result in additional cost and U.S. GAAP earnings volatility in times of market increases as changes in the value of the macro hedge derivatives which hedge statutory liabilities may not be closely aligned to changes in U.S. GAAP liabilities. For additional information on hedging derivatives, see Note 5 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 131 Table of Contents The following table summarizes the Company U.S. GMWB account value by type of risk management strategy, as of December 31, 2009: GMWB Account % of GMWB Risk Management Strategy Duration Value Account Value Entire GMWB risk reinsured with a third party Life of the product $ 11,299 25 % Capital markets risk transferred to a third party behavior risk retained by the Company Designed to cover the effective life of the product 10,838 24 % Dynamic hedging of capital markets risk using various derivative instruments [1] Weighted average of 4 years [2] 23,369 51 % $ 45,506 100 % [1] During 2009, the Company continued to maintain a reduced level of dynamic hedge protection on U.S GAAP earnings while placing a greater relative emphasis on the protection of statutory surplus including the macro hedging program. [2] The weighted average of 4 years reflects varying durations by hedging strategy and the impact of non parallel shifts will increase GAAP volatility. Based on the construction of the Company derivative hedging program (both dynamic and macro hedge) as of December 31, 2009, which can change based on capital market conditions, notional amounts and other factors, an independent change in the following capital market factors is likely to have the following impacts. These sensitivities do not capture the impact of elapsed time on liabilities or hedge assets. Additionally, duration varies by hedging strategy and the impact of non parallel shifts will increase U.S. GAAP volatility. Each of the sensitivities set forth below is estimated individually, without consideration of any correlation among the key assumptions. Therefore, it would be inappropriate to take each of the sensitivities below and add them together in an attempt to estimate the volatility in our variable annuity hedging program. In addition, there are other factors, including policyholder behavior and variation in underlying fund performance relative to the hedged index, which could materially impact the GMWB liability. As a result, actual net changes in the value of the GMWB liability, the related dynamic hedging program derivative assets and the macro hedge program derivative assets may vary materially from those calculated using only the sensitivities disclosed below: Net Impact on Hedging Program Pre-Tax/DAC Capital Market Factor Gain (Loss) Equity markets increase 1% [1] $ (12 ) Equity markets decrease 1% [1] 12 Volatility increases 1% [2] (30 ) Volatility decreases 1% [2] 30 Interest rates increase 1 basis point [3] 2 Interest rates decrease 1 basis point [3] (2 ) [1] Represents the aggregate net impact of a 1% increase or decrease in each of the S&P 500, NASDAQ and EAFE indices. [2] Represents the aggregate net impact of a 1% increase or decrease in blended implied volatility that is generally skewed towards longer durations of each of the S&P 500, NASDAQ and EAFE indices. [3] Represents the aggregate net impact of a 1 basis point parallel shift on the LIBOR yield curve. During the quarter ended December 31, 2009, U.S. GMWB liabilities, net of the dynamic and macro hedging programs, reported a net realized pre-tax gain of $311 primarily driven by model assumption changes of $260, increases in interest rate of approximately 50 basis points, decreases in volatility of approximately 1%, and the relative outperformance of the underlying actively managed funds as compared to their respective indices, partially offset by increases in U.S. equity markets of approximately 5%. During the year ended December 31, 2009, U.S. GMWB liabilities, net of the dynamic and macro hedging programs, reported a net realized pre-tax gain of $732 primarily driven by model assumption changes of $566, increases in interest rates of approximately 100 basis points, decreases in volatility of approximately 5%, the relative outperformance of the underlying actively managed funds as compared to their respective indices, and the impact of the Company credit spread, partially offset by increases in U.S. equity markets of approximately 25%. See Note 4a of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for description and impact of the Company credit spread and liability model assumption changes. Equity Risk Impact on Statutory Capital and Risk Based Capital See Statutory Surplus within the Capital Resources and Liquidity section of the MD&A for information on the equity risk impact on statutory results. 132 Table of Contents CAPITAL RESOURCES AND LIQUIDITY Capital resources and liquidity represent the overall financial strength of The Hartford and the Life and Property & Casualty insurance operations and their ability to generate cash flows from each of their business segments, borrow funds at competitive rates and raise new capital to meet operating and growth needs over the next twelve months. Liquidity Requirements and Sources of Capital The Hartford Financial Services Group, Inc. (Holding Company) The liquidity requirements of the holding company of The Hartford Financial Services Group, Inc. ( HFSG Holding Company ) have been and will continue to be met by HFSG Holding Company fixed maturities, short-term investments, and cash of $2.2 billion at December 31, 2009, dividends from the Life and Property & Casualty insurance operations, as well as the issuance of common stock, debt or other capital securities and borrowings from its credit facilities. Expected liquidity requirements of the HFSG Holding Company for the next twelve months include interest on debt of approximately $450, maturity of senior notes of $275, common stockholder dividends, subject to the discretion of the Board of Directors, of approximately $80, and preferred stock dividends of approximately $170. Debt HFSG Holding Company debt maturities over the next twelve months include $275 aggregate principal amount of its 7.9% senior notes that mature in June 2010. In addition, HLI has a capital lease obligation of $73, which was paid in January 2010. For additional information regarding debt, see Notes 12 and 14 in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Dividends On February 18, 2010, The Hartford Board of Directors declared a quarterly dividend of $0.05 per common share payable on April 1, 2010 to common shareholders of record as of March 1, 2010. Pension Plans and Other Postretirement Benefits While the Company has significant discretion in making voluntary contributions to the U. S. qualified defined benefit pension plan, the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, as amended by the Pension Protection Act of 2006 and further amended by the Worker, Retiree, and Employer Recovery Act of 2008, and Internal Revenue Code regulations mandate minimum contributions in certain circumstances. The Company made contributions to its pension plans of $201, $2, and $158 in 2009, 2008 and 2007, respectively, and contributions to its other postretirement plans of $46 in 2007. No contributions were made to the other postretirement plans in 2009 and 2008. The Company 2009 required minimum funding contribution was immaterial. The Company presently anticipates contributing approximately $200 to its pension plans and other postretirement plans in 2010, based upon certain economic and business assumptions. These assumptions include, but are not limited to, equity market performance, changes in interest rates and the Company other capital requirements. The Company does not have a required minimum funding contribution for the U.S. qualified defined benefit pension plan for 2010 and the funding requirements for all of the pension plans is expected to be immaterial. Dividends from Insurance Subsidiaries Dividends to the HFSG Holding Company from its insurance subsidiaries are restricted. The payment of dividends by Connecticut-domiciled insurers is limited under the insurance holding company laws of Connecticut. These laws require notice to and approval by the state insurance commissioner for the declaration or payment of any dividend, which, together with other dividends or distributions made within the preceding twelve months, exceeds the greater of (i) 10% of the insurer policyholder surplus as of December 31 of the preceding year or (ii) net income (or net gain from operations, if such company is a life insurance company) for the twelve-month period ending on the thirty-first day of December last preceding, in each case determined under statutory insurance accounting principles. In addition, if any dividend of a Connecticut-domiciled insurer exceeds the insurer earned surplus, it requires the prior approval of the Connecticut Insurance Commissioner. The insurance holding company laws of the other jurisdictions in which The Hartford insurance subsidiaries are incorporated (or deemed commercially domiciled) generally contain similar (although in certain instances somewhat more restrictive) limitations on the payment of dividends. Dividends paid to HFSG Holding Company by its insurance subsidiaries are further dependent on cash requirements of HLI and other factors. The Company property-casualty insurance subsidiaries are permitted to pay up to a maximum of approximately $1.4 billion in dividends to HFSG Holding Company in 2010 without prior approval from the applicable insurance commissioner. Statutory dividends from the Company life insurance subsidiaries in 2010 require prior approval from the applicable insurance commissioner. The aggregate of these amounts, net of amounts required by HLI, is the maximum the insurance subsidiaries could pay to HFSG Holding Company in 2010. In 2009, HFSG Holding Company and HLI received $700 in dividends from the life insurance subsidiaries representing the movement of a life subsidiary to HFSG Holding Company, and HFSG Holding Company received $251 in dividends from its property-casualty insurance subsidiaries. Other Sources of Capital for the HFSG Holding Company The Hartford endeavors to maintain a capital structure that provides financial and operational flexibility to its insurance subsidiaries, ratings that support its competitive position in the financial services marketplace (see the Ratings section below for further discussion), and shareholder returns. As a result, the Company may from time to time raise capital from the issuance of stock, debt or other capital securities and is continuously evaluating strategic opportunities. The issuance of common stock, debt or other capital securities could result in the dilution of shareholder interests or reduced net income due to additional interest expense. 133 Table of Contents Capital Purchase Program On June 26, 2009, as part of the Capital Purchase Program ( CPP ) established by the U.S. Department of the Treasury ( Treasury ) under the Emergency Economic Stabilization Act of 2008 (the EESA ), the Company entered into a Private Placement Purchase Agreement with Treasury pursuant to which the Company issued and sold to the Treasury 3,400,000 shares of the Company Fixed Rate Cumulative Perpetual Preferred Stock, Series E, having a liquidation preference of $1,000 per share (the Series E Preferred Stock ), and a ten-year warrant to purchase up to 52,093,973 shares of the Company common stock, par value $0.01 per share, at an initial exercise price of $9.79 per share, for an aggregate purchase price of $3.4 billion. To satisfy a key eligibility requirement for participation in the CPP, The Hartford acquired Federal Trust Corporation and has agreed with OTS to serve as a source of strength to its wholly-owned subsidiary Federal Trust Bank ( FTB ), which included the contribution of $195 of CPP funds to FTB in the second and third quarter of 2009 and could require further contributions of capital to FTB in the future. In addition, The Hartford has contributed $1.7 billion of the CPP funds to its indirect wholly-owned subsidiary Hartford Life Insurance Company and used $500 to purchase a surplus note from a wholly-owned captive insurance company. The remaining $1.0 billion is held at the HFSG Holding Company in a segregated account. Cumulative dividends on the Series E Preferred Stock will accrue on the liquidation preference at a rate of 5% per annum for the first five years, and at a rate of 9% per annum thereafter. The Series E Preferred Stock has no maturity date and ranks senior to the Company common stock. The Series E Preferred Stock is non-voting. Payments on the cumulative dividends are approximately $170 over the next twelve months. The cumulative dividends on preferred stock and related accretion of discount on preferred stock will reduce net income available to common shareholders. Pursuant to the Private Placement Purchase Agreement the Company has certain restrictions on dividends for its common stock, for further information on common stock dividend restrictions see Note 15 in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Discretionary Equity Issuance Program On August 6, 2009, the Company completed its discretionary equity issuance program. The Hartford issued 56.1 million shares of common stock and received net proceeds of $887 under this program. Additionally, this program triggered an anti-dilution provision in The Hartford investment agreement with Allianz, which resulted in the adjustment to the warrant exercise price to $25.25 from $25.32 and to the number of shares that may be purchased to 69,314,987 from 69,115,324. Shelf Registrations On April 11, 2007, The Hartford filed with the SEC an automatic shelf registration statement (Registration No. 333-142044) for the potential offering and sale of debt and equity securities. The registration statement allows for the following types of securities to be offered: (i) debt securities, preferred stock, common stock, depositary shares, warrants, stock purchase contracts, stock purchase units and junior subordinated deferrable interest debentures of the Company, and (ii) preferred securities of any of one or more capital trusts organized by The Hartford ( The Hartford Trusts ). The Company may enter into guarantees with respect to the preferred securities of any of The Hartford Trusts. In that The Hartford is a well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in Rule 405 under the Securities Act of 1933, the registration statement went effective immediately upon filing and The Hartford may offer and sell an unlimited amount of securities under the registration statement during the three-year life of the shelf. Contingent Capital Facility On February 12, 2007, The Hartford entered into a put option agreement (the Put Option Agreement ) with Glen Meadow ABC Trust, a Delaware statutory trust (the ABC Trust ), and LaSalle Bank National Association, as put option calculation agent. The Put Option Agreement provides The Hartford with the right to require the ABC Trust, at any time and from time to time, to purchase The Hartford junior subordinated notes in a maximum aggregate principal amount not to exceed $500. 134 Table of Contents Commercial Paper and Revolving Credit Facility The table below details the Company short-term debt programs and the applicable balances outstanding. Maximum Available As of Outstanding As of Effective Expiration December 31, December 31, Description Date Date 2009 2008 2009 2008 Commercial Paper The Hartford 11/10/86 N/A $ 2,000 $ 2,000 $ $ 374 Revolving Credit Facility 5-year revolving credit facility 8/9/07 8/9/12 1,900 1,900 Total Commercial Paper and Revolving Credit Facility $ 3,900 $ 3,900 $ $ 374 While The Hartford maximum borrowings available under its commercial paper program are $2.0 billion, the Company is dependent upon market conditions to access short-term financing through the issuance of commercial paper to investors. As of December 31, 2009, the Company has no commercial paper outstanding. The revolving credit facility provides for up to $1.9 billion of unsecured credit through August 9, 2012, which excludes a $100 commitment from an affiliate of Lehman Brothers. Of the total availability under the revolving credit facility, up to $100 is available to support letters of credit issued on behalf of The Hartford or other subsidiaries of The Hartford. Under the revolving credit facility, the Company must maintain a minimum level of consolidated net worth of $12.5 billion. At December 31, 2009, the consolidated net worth of the Company as calculated in accordance with the terms of the credit facility was $22.9 billion. The definition of consolidated net worth under the terms of the credit facility, excludes AOCI and includes the Company outstanding junior subordinated debentures and perpetual preferred securities, net of discount. In addition, the Company must not exceed a maximum ratio of debt to capitalization of 40%. At December 31, 2009, as calculated in accordance with the terms of the credit facility, the Company debt to capitalization ratio was 15.3%. Quarterly, the Company certifies compliance with the financial covenants for the syndicate of participating financial institutions. As of December 31, 2009, the Company was in compliance with all such covenants. The Hartford Life Japan operations also maintain a line of credit in the amount of $54, or 5 billion, which expires January 4, 2011 in support of the subsidiary operations. Derivative Commitments Certain of the Company derivative agreements contain provisions that are tied to the financial strength ratings of the individual legal entity that entered into the derivative agreement as set by nationally recognized statistical rating agencies. If the insurance operating entity financial strength were to fall below certain ratings, the counterparties to the derivative agreements could demand immediate and ongoing full collateralization and in certain instances demand immediate settlement of all outstanding derivative positions traded under each impacted bilateral agreement. The settlement amount is determined by netting the derivative positions transacted under each agreement. If the termination rights were to be exercised by the counterparties, it could impact the insurance operating entity ability to conduct hedging activities by increasing the associated costs and decreasing the willingness of counterparties to transact with the insurance operating entity. The aggregate fair value of all derivative instruments with credit-risk-related contingent features that are in a net liability position as of December 31, 2009, is $655. Of this $655, the insurance operating entities have posted collateral of $591 in the normal course of business. Based on derivative market values as of December 31, 2009, a downgrade of one level below the current financial strength ratings by either Moody or S&P could require approximately an additional $50 to be posted as collateral. Based on derivative market values as of December 31, 2009, a downgrade by either Moody or S&P of two levels below the insurance operating entities current financial strength ratings could require approximately an additional $70 of assets to be posted as collateral. These collateral amounts could change as derivative market values change, as a result of changes in our hedging activities or to the extent changes in contractual terms are negotiated. The nature of the collateral that we may be required to post is primarily in the form of U.S. Treasury bills and U.S. Treasury notes. The table below presents the aggregate notional amount and fair value of derivative relationships that could be subject to immediate termination in the event of further rating agency downgrades. As of December 31, 2009 Ratings levels Notional Amount Fair Value Either BBB+ or Baa1 $ 4,700 $ 211 Both BBB+ and Baa1 [1] [2] $ 14,057 $ 381 [1] The notional amount and fair value include both the scenario where only one rating agency takes action to this level as well as where both rating agencies take action to this level. [2] The notional and fair value amounts include a customized GMWB derivative with a notional amount of $5.4 billion and a fair value of $137, for which the Company has a contractual right to make a collateral payment in the amount of approximately $61 to prevent its termination. 135 Table of Contents Insurance Operations Current and expected patterns of claim frequency and severity or surrenders may change from period to period but continue to be within historical norms and, therefore, the Company insurance operations current liquidity position is considered to be sufficient to meet anticipated demands over the next twelve months, including any obligations related to the Company restructuring activities. For a discussion and tabular presentation of the Company current contractual obligations by period, refer to Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements and Aggregate Contractual Obligations within the Capital Resources and Liquidity section of the MD&A. The principal sources of operating funds are premiums, fees earned from assets under management and investment income, while investing cash flows originate from maturities and sales of invested assets. The primary uses of funds are to pay claims, claim adjustment expenses, commissions and other underwriting expenses, to purchase new investments and to make dividend payments to the HFSG Holding Company. Property & Casualty Property & Casualty holds fixed maturity securities including a significant short-term investment position (securities with maturities of one year or less at the time of purchase) to meet liquidity needs. The following table summarizes Property & Casualty fixed maturities, short-term investments, and cash, as of December 31, 2009: Fixed maturities [1] $ 23,911 Short-term investments 1,283 Cash 240 Less: Derivative collateral (103 ) Total $ 25,331 [1] Includes $829 of U.S. Treasuries. Liquidity requirements that are unable to be funded by Property & Casualty short-term investments would be satisfied with current operating funds, including premiums received or through the sale of invested assets. A sale of invested assets could result in significant realized losses. Life Life total general account contractholder obligations are supported by Life total general account invested assets and cash of $65.0 billion, which includes a significant short-term investment position, as depicted below, to meet liquidity needs. The following table summarizes Life fixed maturities, short-term investments, and cash, as of December 31, 2009: Fixed maturities [1] $ 46,912 Short-term investments 7,079 Cash 1,898 Less: Derivative collateral (1,591 ) Cash associated with Japan variable annuities (634 ) Total $ 53,664 [1] Includes $2.6 billion of U.S. Treasuries. 136 Table of Contents Capital resources available to fund liquidity, upon contract holder surrender, are a function of the legal entity in which the liquidity requirement resides. Generally, obligations of Group Benefits will be funded by Hartford Life and Accident Insurance Company; Individual Annuity and Individual Life obligations will be generally funded by both Hartford Life Insurance Company and Hartford Life and Annuity Insurance Company; obligations of Retirement Plans and Institutional will be generally funded by Hartford Life Insurance Company; and obligations of International will be generally funded by the legal entity in the country in which the obligation was generated. As of December 31, 2009 Contractholder Obligations Total Life contractholder obligations $ 247,658 Less: Separate account assets [1] (150,394 ) International statutory separate accounts [1] (32,296 ) General account contractholder obligations $ 64,968 Composition of General Account Contractholder Obligations Contracts without a surrender provision and/or fixed payout dates [2] $ 31,759 Retail fixed MVA annuities [3] 11,029 International fixed MVA annuities 2,565 Guaranteed investment contracts ( GIC ) [4] 1,362 Other [5] 18,253 General account contractholder obligations $ 64,968 [1] In the event customers elect to surrender separate account assets or international statutory separate accounts, Life will use the proceeds from the sale of the assets to fund the surrender, and Life liquidity position will not be impacted. In many instances Life will receive a percentage of the surrender amount as compensation for early surrender (surrender charge), increasing Life liquidity position. In addition, a surrender of variable annuity separate account or general account assets (see below) will decrease Life obligation for payments on guaranteed living and death benefits. [2] Relates to contracts such as payout annuities or institutional notes, other than guaranteed investment products with an MVA feature (discussed below) or surrenders of term life, group benefit contracts or death and living benefit reserves for which surrenders will have no current effect on Life liquidity requirements. [3] Relates to annuities that are held in a statutory separate account, but under U.S. GAAP are recorded in the general account as Fixed MVA annuity contract holders are subject to the Company credit risk. In the statutory separate account, Life is required to maintain invested assets with a fair value equal to the MVA surrender value of the Fixed MVA contract. In the event assets decline in value at a greater rate than the MVA surrender value of the Fixed MVA contract, Life is required to contribute additional capital to the statutory separate account. Life will fund these required contributions with operating cash flows or short-term investments. In the event that operating cash flows or short-term investments are not sufficient to fund required contributions, the Company may have to sell other invested assets at a loss, potentially resulting in a decrease in statutory surplus. As the fair value of invested assets in the statutory separate account are generally equal to the MVA surrender value of the Fixed MVA contract, surrender of Fixed MVA annuities will have an insignificant impact on the liquidity requirements of Life. [4] GICs are subject to discontinuance provisions which allow the policyholders to terminate their contracts prior to scheduled maturity at the lesser of the book value or market value. Generally, the market value adjustment reflects changes in interest rates and credit spreads. As a result, the market value adjustment feature in the GIC serves to protect the Company from interest rate risks and limit Life liquidity requirements in the event of a surrender. [5] Surrenders of, or policy loans taken from, as applicable, these general account liabilities, which include the general account option for Retail individual variable annuities and Individual Life variable life contracts, the general account option for Retirement Plans annuities and universal life contracts sold by Individual Life may be funded through operating cash flows of Life, available short-term investments, or Life may be required to sell fixed maturity investments to fund the surrender payment. Sales of fixed maturity investments could result in the recognition of significant realized losses and insufficient proceeds to fully fund the surrender amount. In this circumstance, Life may need to take other actions, including enforcing certain contract provisions which could restrict surrenders and/or slow or defer payouts. Consolidated Liquidity Position The following table summarizes the liquidity available to The Hartford: As of December 31, Liquidity available to The Hartford 2009 Short-term investments $ 10,357 U.S. Treasuries 3,631 Cash 2,142 Less: Derivative collateral (1,694 ) Cash associated with Japan variable annuities (634 ) Total liquidity available $ 13,802 137 Table of Contents Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements and Aggregate Contractual Obligations The Company does not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that are reasonably likely to have a material effect on the financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, or capital resources of the Company, except for the contingent capital facility described above and the following: The Company has unfunded commitments to purchase investments in limited partnerships, private placements and mortgage loans of about $1.2 billion as disclosed in Note 12 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. The following table identifies the Company aggregate contractual obligations as of December 31, 2009: Payments due by period Less than More than Total 1 year 1-3 years 3-5 years 5 years Property and casualty obligations [1] $ 22,162 $ 5,649 $ 4,796 $ 3,055 $ 8,662 Life, annuity and disability obligations [2] 398,035 27,387 55,721 51,925 263,002 Operating lease obligations [3] 392 130 168 55 39 Capital lease obligations [3] 73 73 Long-term debt obligations [4] 18,466 727 1,262 1,342 15,135 Consumer notes [5] 1,392 176 471 338 407 Purchase obligations [6] 2,919 2,669 218 32 Other long-term liabilities reflected on the balance sheet [7] 1,425 1,237 94 31 63 Total [8] $ 444,864 $ 38,048 $ 62,730 $ 56,778 $ 287,308 [1] The following points are significant to understanding the cash flows estimated for obligations under property and casualty contracts: Reserves for Property & Casualty unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses include IBNR and case reserves. While payments due on claim reserves are considered contractual obligations because they relate to insurance policies issued by the Company, the ultimate amount to be paid to settle both case reserves and IBNR is an estimate, subject to significant uncertainty. The actual amount to be paid is not finally determined until the Company reaches a settlement with the claimant. Final claim settlements may vary significantly from the present estimates, particularly since many claims will not be settled until well into the future. In estimating the timing of future payments by year, the Company has assumed that its historical payment patterns will continue. However, the actual timing of future payments could vary materially from these estimates due to, among other things, changes in claim reporting and payment patterns and large unanticipated settlements. In particular, there is significant uncertainty over the claim payment patterns of asbestos and environmental claims. Also, estimated payments in 2010 do not include payments that will be made on claims incurred in 2010 on policies that were in force as of December 31, 2009. In addition, the table does not include future cash flows related to the receipt of premiums that may be used, in part, to fund loss payments. Under U.S. GAAP, the Company is only permitted to discount reserves for losses and loss adjustment expenses in cases where the payment pattern and ultimate loss costs are fixed and determinable on an individual claim basis. For the Company, these include claim settlements with permanently disabled claimants. As of December 31, 2009, the total property and casualty reserves in the above table are gross of a reserve discount of $511. [2] Estimated life, annuity and disability obligations include death and disability claims, policy surrenders, policyholder dividends and trail commissions offset by expected future deposits and premiums on in-force contracts. Estimated life, annuity and disability obligations are based on mortality, morbidity and lapse assumptions comparable with Life historical experience, modified for recent observed trends. Life has also assumed market growth and interest crediting consistent with assumptions used in amortizing deferred acquisition costs. In contrast to this table, the majority of Life obligations are recorded on the balance sheet at the current account values and do not incorporate an expectation of future market growth, interest crediting, or future deposits. Therefore, the estimated obligations presented in this table significantly exceed the liabilities recorded in reserve for future policy benefits and unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses, other policyholder funds and benefits payable and separate account liabilities. Due to the significance of the assumptions used, the amounts presented could materially differ from actual results. [3] Includes future minimum lease payments on operating and capital lease agreements. See Notes 12 and 14 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional discussion on lease commitments. [4] Includes contractual principal and interest payments. Long-term debt obligations primarily have fixed rates of interest, for the Company junior subordinated debentures, where the interest is fixed for a period of time and then floating, the period of variable interest is computed using prevailing rates at December 31, 2009 and, as such, does not consider the impact of future rate movements. See Note 14 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional discussion of long-term debt obligations. [5] Consumer notes include principal payments and contractual interest for fixed rate notes and interest based on current rates for floating rate notes. See Note 14 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional discussion of consumer notes. [6] Includes $1.2 billion in commitments to purchase investments including about $886 of limited partnership, $284 of private placements and $47 of mortgage loans. Outstanding commitments under these limited partnerships and mortgage loans are included in payments due in less than 1 year since the timing of funding these commitments cannot be reliably estimated. The remaining commitments to purchase investments primarily represent payables for securities purchased which are reflected on the Company consolidated balance sheet. Also included in purchase obligations is $484 relating to contractual commitments to purchase various goods and services such as maintenance, human resources, information technology, and transportation in the normal course of business. Purchase obligations exclude contracts that are cancelable without penalty or contracts that do not specify minimum levels of goods or services to be purchased. [7] Includes cash collateral of $888 which the Company has accepted in connection with the Company derivative instruments. Since the timing of the return of the collateral is uncertain, the return of the collateral has been included in the payments due in less than 1 year. Includes deposits and bank advances that were acquired through the purchase of Federal Trust Corporation in the second quarter of 2009. Also included in other long-term liabilities is $48 of net unrecognized tax benefits. [8] Does not include estimated voluntary contribution of $200 to the Company pension plan in 2010. 138 Table of Contents Capitalization The capital structure of The Hartford as of December 31, 2009 and 2008 consisted of debt and stockholders equity, as follows: December 31, December 31, 2009 2008 Change Short-term debt (includes current maturities of long-term debt and capital lease obligations) $ 343 $ 398 (14 %) Long-term debt 5,496 5,823 (6 %) Total debt [1] 5,839 6,221 (6 %) Stockholders equity excluding AOCI 21,177 16,788 26 % AOCI, net of tax (3,312 ) (7,520 ) 56 % Total stockholders equity $ 17,865 $ 9,268 93 % Total capitalization including AOCI $ 23,704 $ 15,489 53 % Debt to stockholders equity 33 % 67 % Debt to capitalization 25 % 40 % [1] Total debt of the Company excludes $1.1 billion and $1.2 billion of consumer notes as of December 31, 2009 and 2008, respectively, and $78 of Federal Home Loan Bank advances recorded in other liabilities as of December 31, 2009 that were acquired through the purchase of Federal Trust Corporation in the second quarter of 2009. The Hartford total capitalization increased $8.2 billion, or 53%, from December 31, 2008 to December 31, 2009 primarily due to the following: Stockholders equity excluding AOCI, net of tax Increased primarily due to the issuance of $3.4 billion in preferred stock and warrants to Treasury as a part of the CPP, cumulative effect of accounting change of $912, issuance of common shares of $887, reclassification of warrants from other liabilities to equity and extension of certain warrants term of $186 partially offset by a net loss of $887. See Notes 1 and 15 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information on the cumulative effect of accounting change and issuance of preferred stock and warrants to Treasury as a part of the CPP, respectively. AOCI, net of tax Increased primarily due to decreases in unrealized losses on available-for-sale securities of $5.7 billion primarily due to tightening credit spreads, partially offset by a cumulative effect of accounting change of $912, see Note 1 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further information on the cumulative effect of accounting change. Total debt Total debt has decreased due to the repayment of commercial paper of $375 and payments on capital lease obligations in 2009. For additional information on stockholders equity, AOCI, net of tax, pension and other postretirement plans and Allianz investment in The Hartford see Notes 15, 16, 17 and 21, respectively, of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Cash Flow 2009 2008 2007 Net cash provided by operating activities $ 2,974 $ 4,192 $ 5,991 Net cash used for investing activities $ (3,123 ) $ (8,827 ) $ (6,176 ) Net cash provided by financing activities $ 523 $ 4,274 $ 499 Cash end of year $ 2,142 $ 1,811 $ 2,011 Year ended December 31, 2009 compared to the year ended December 31, 2008 The decrease in cash from operating activities compared to the prior year period was primarily the result of lower premiums, lower fee income and lower net investment income. Net derivative settlements and pay down of collateral under securities lending account for the majority of cash used for investing activities. Cash from financing activities decreased primarily due to net flows decrease in investment and universal life-type contracts of $5.5 billion partially offset by issuances of preferred stock and warrants to Treasury for $3.4 billion and issuance of common stock through a discretionary equity issuance plan of $887 in 2009 and treasury stock acquired in 2008, partially offset by issuance of long-term debt and consumer notes in 2008 and repayments of commercial paper in 2009. Year ended December 31, 2008 compared to the year ended December 31, 2007 The decrease in cash from operating activities compared to prior year period was primarily the result of a decrease in net investment income as a result of lower yields and reduced fee income as a result of declines in equity markets. Net purchases of available-for-sale securities continue to account for the majority of cash used for investing activities. Cash from financing activities increased primarily due to $2.5 billion in investment in The Hartford by Allianz SE, increased transfers from the separate account to the general account for investment and universal life-type contracts and net issuances of long-term debt and consumer notes, offset by treasury stock acquired and dividends paid. Operating cash flows in each of the last three years have been adequate to meet liquidity requirements. 139 Table of Contents Equity Markets For a discussion of the potential impact of the equity markets on capital and liquidity, see the Capital Markets Risk Management section under Market Risk . Ratings Ratings are an important factor in establishing competitive position in the insurance and financial services marketplace. There can be no assurance that the Company ratings will continue for any given period of time or that they will not be changed. In the event the Company ratings are downgraded, the level of revenues or the persistency of the Company business may be adversely impacted. On January 29, 2010, Standard & Poor Ratings Services withdrew its A financial strength ratings on Hartford Life Insurance K.K. of Japan ( HLIKK ) and Hartford Life Ltd. of Ireland ( HLL ), two international subsidiaries of The Hartford Financial Services Group Inc., at the parent company request. The following table summarizes The Hartford significant member companies financial ratings from the major independent rating organizations as of February 22, 2010. A.M. Best Fitch Standard & Poor Moody Insurance Financial Strength Ratings: Hartford Fire Insurance Company A A+ A A2 Hartford Life Insurance Company A A- A A3 Hartford Life and Accident Insurance Company A A- A A3 Hartford Life and Annuity Insurance Company A A- A A3 Other Ratings: The Hartford Financial Services Group, Inc.: Senior debt bbb+ BBB- BBB Baa3 Commercial paper AMB-2 F2 A-2 P-3 Junior subordinated debentures bbb- BB BB+ Ba1 Hartford Life, Inc.: Senior debt bbb+ BBB- BBB Baa3 Hartford Life Insurance Company: Short term rating A-1 P-2 Consumer notes a BBB+ A Baa1 These ratings are not a recommendation to buy or hold any of The Hartford securities and they may be revised or revoked at any time at the sole discretion of the rating organization. The agencies consider many factors in determining the final rating of an insurance company. One consideration is the relative level of statutory surplus necessary to support the business written. Statutory surplus represents the capital of the insurance company reported in accordance with accounting practices prescribed by the applicable state insurance department. Statutory Surplus The table below sets forth statutory surplus for the Company insurance companies. The statutory surplus amount as of December 31, 2008 in the table below is based on actual statutory filings with the applicable U.S. regulatory authorities. The statutory surplus amount as of December 31, 2009 is an estimate, as the respective 2009 statutory filings have not yet been made. 2009 2008 Life Operations, includes domestic captive insurance subsidiaries $ 7,287 $ 6,046 Property & Casualty Operations, excluding non-Property & Casualty subsidiaries 7,364 6,012 Total $ 14,651 $ 12,058 The Company also holds regulatory capital and surplus for its operations in Japan. Using the investment in subsidiary accounting requirements defined in the U.S. National Association of Insurance Commissioners Statements of Statutory Accounting Practices, the Company statutory capital and surplus attributed to the Japan operations was $1,311 and $1,718 as of December 31, 2009 and 2008, respectively. However, under the accounting practices and procedures governed by Japanese regulatory authorities, the Company statutory capital and surplus was $1.1 billion as of December 31, 2009 and 2008. 140 Table of Contents The Company received approval from the Connecticut Insurance Department regarding the use of two permitted practices in the statutory financial statements of its Connecticut-domiciled life insurance subsidiaries as of December 31, 2008. The first permitted practice related to the statutory accounting for deferred income taxes. Specifically, this permitted practice modified the accounting for deferred income taxes prescribed by the NAIC by increasing the realization period for deferred tax assets from one year to three years and increasing the asset recognition limit from 10% to 15% of adjusted statutory capital and surplus. The benefits of this permitted practice were not considered by the Company when determining surplus available for dividends. The second permitted practice related to the statutory reserving requirements for variable annuities with guaranteed living benefit riders. Actuarial guidelines prescribed by the NAIC required a stand-alone asset adequacy analysis reflecting only benefits, expenses and charges that are associated with the riders for variable annuities with guaranteed living benefits. The permitted practice allowed for all benefits, expenses and charges associated with the variable annuity contract to be reflected in the stand-alone asset adequacy test. These permitted practices resulted in an increase to Life operations statutory surplus of $987 as of December 31, 2008. The effects of these permitted practices were included in the 2008 Life operations surplus amount in the table above. In December, 2009 the NAIC issued SSAP 10R which codified the three year realization period and 15% of adjusted statutory capital and surplus recognition limits for accounting for deferred tax assets for both life and property and casualty companies. SSAP 10R will expire for periods after December 31, 2010. Statutory Capital The Company stockholders equity, as prepared using U.S. generally accepted accounting principles ( U.S. GAAP ) was $17.9 billion as of December 31, 2009. The Company estimated aggregate statutory capital and surplus, as prepared in accordance with the National Association of Insurance Commissioners Accounting Practices and Procedures Manual ( U.S. STAT ) was $14.7 billion as of December 31, 2009. Significant differences between U.S. GAAP stockholders equity and aggregate statutory capital and surplus prepared in accordance with U.S. STAT include the following: Costs incurred by the Company to acquire insurance policies are deferred under U.S. GAAP while those costs are expensed immediately under U.S. STAT. Temporary differences between the book and tax basis of an asset or liability which are recorded as deferred tax assets are evaluated for recoverability under U.S. GAAP while those amounts deferred are subject to limitations under U.S. STAT. The assumptions used in the determination of Life benefit reserves is prescribed under U.S. STAT, while the assumptions used under U.S. GAAP are generally the Company best estimates. The methodologies for determining Life reserve amounts may also be different. For example, reserving for living benefit reserves under U.S. STAT is generally addressed by the Commissioners Annuity Reserving Valuation Methodology and the related Actuarial Guidelines, while under U.S. GAAP, those same living benefits may be considered embedded derivatives and recorded at fair value or they may be considered SOP 03-1 reserves. The sensitivity of these Life reserves to changes in equity markets, as applicable, will be different between U.S. GAAP and U.S. STAT. The difference between the amortized cost and fair value of fixed maturity and other investments, net of tax, is recorded as an increase or decrease to the carrying value of the related asset and to equity under U.S. GAAP, while U.S. STAT only records certain securities at fair value, such as equity securities and certain lower rated bonds required by the NAIC to be recorded at the lower of amortized cost or fair value. U.S. STAT for life insurance companies establishes a formula reserve for realized and unrealized losses due to default and equity risks associated with certain invested assets (the Asset Valuation Reserve), while U.S. GAAP does not. Also, for those realized gains and losses caused by changes in interest rates, U.S. STAT for life insurance companies defers and amortizes the gains and losses, caused by changes in interest rates, into income over the original life to maturity of the asset sold (the Interest Maintenance Reserve) while U.S. GAAP does not. Goodwill arising from the acquisition of a business is tested for recoverability on an annual basis (or more frequently, as necessary) for U.S. GAAP, while under U.S. STAT goodwill is amortized over a period not to exceed 10 years and the amount of goodwill is limited. In addition, certain assets, including a portion of premiums receivable and fixed assets, are non-admitted (recorded at zero value and charged against surplus) under U.S. STAT. U.S. GAAP generally evaluates assets based on their recoverability. Risk-Based Capital State insurance regulators and the NAIC have adopted risk-based capital requirements for life insurance companies to evaluate the adequacy of statutory capital and surplus in relation to investment and insurance risks. The requirements provide a means of measuring the minimum amount of statutory surplus appropriate for an insurance company to support its overall business operations based on its size and risk profile. Under risk-based capital ( RBC ) requirements, a company RBC is calculated by applying factors and performing calculations relating to various asset, premium, claim, expense and reserve items. The adequacy of a company actual capital is determined by the ratio of a company total adjusted capital, as defined by the insurance regulators, to its company action level of RBC (known as the RBC ratio), also as defined by insurance regulators. RBC standards are used by regulators to set in motion appropriate regulatory actions related to insurers that show indications of inadequate conditions. In addition, rating agencies consider RBC ratios, along with their proprietary models, in making ratings determinations. 141 Table of Contents Sensitivity In any particular year, statutory surplus amounts and RBC ratios may increase or decrease depending upon a variety of factors. The amount of change in the statutory surplus or RBC ratios can vary based on individual factors and may be compounded in extreme scenarios or if multiple factors occur at the same time. At times the impact of changes in certain market factors or a combination of multiple factors on RBC ratios can be counterintuitive. Factors include: In general, as equity market levels decline, our reserves for death and living benefit guarantees associated with variable annuity contracts increases, sometimes at a greater than linear rate, reducing statutory surplus levels. In addition, as equity market levels increase, generally surplus levels will increase. RBC ratios will also tend to increase when equity markets increase. However, as a result of a number of factors and market conditions, including the level of hedging costs and other risk transfer activities, reserve requirements for death and living benefit guarantees and RBC requirements could increase resulting in lower RBC ratios. As the value of certain fixed-income and equity securities in our investment portfolio decreases, due in part to credit spread widening, statutory surplus and RBC ratios may decrease. As the value of certain derivative instruments that do not get hedge accounting decreases, statutory surplus and RBC ratios may decrease. Life exposure to foreign currency exchange risk exists with respect to non-U.S. dollar denominated assets and liabilities. Assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies are accounted for at their U.S. dollar equivalent values using exchange rates at the balance sheet date. As foreign currency exchange rates strengthen in comparison to the U.S. dollar, the remeasured value of those non-dollar denominated assets or liabilities will increase causing an increase or decrease to statutory surplus, respectively. In addition, certain of our Life products offer guaranteed benefits which could substantially increase our potential obligation and statutory capital exposure should the yen strengthen versus other currencies. Our statutory surplus is also impacted by widening credit spreads as a result of the accounting for the assets and liabilities in our fixed market value adjusted ( MVA ) annuities. Statutory separate account assets supporting the fixed MVA annuities are recorded at fair value. In determining the statutory reserve for the fixed MVA annuities, we are required to use current crediting rates in the U.S. and Japanese LIBOR in Japan. In many capital market scenarios, current crediting rates in the U.S. are highly correlated with market rates implicit in the fair value of statutory separate account assets. As a result, the change in statutory reserve from period to period will likely substantially offset the change in the fair value of the statutory separate account assets. However, in periods of volatile credit markets, such as we are now experiencing, actual credit spreads on investment assets may increase sharply for certain sub-sectors of the overall credit market, resulting in statutory separate account asset market value losses. As actual credit spreads are not fully reflected in the current crediting rates in the U.S. or Japanese LIBOR in Japan, the calculation of statutory reserves will not substantially offset the change in fair value of the statutory separate account assets resulting in reductions in statutory surplus. This has resulted and may continue to result in the need to devote significant additional capital to support the product. Most of these factors are outside of the Company control. The Company financial strength and credit ratings are significantly influenced by the statutory surplus amounts and RBC ratios of our insurance company subsidiaries. In addition, rating agencies may implement changes to their internal models that have the effect of increasing or decreasing the amount of statutory capital we must hold in order to maintain our current ratings. The Company has reinsured approximately 25% of its risk associated with U.S. GMWB and 44% of its risk associated with the aggregate GMDB exposure. These reinsurance agreements serve to reduce the Company exposure to changes in the statutory reserves and the related capital and RBC ratios associated with changes in the equity markets. The Company also continues to explore other solutions for mitigating the capital market risk effect on surplus, such as internal and external reinsurance solutions, migrating towards a more statutory based hedging program, changes in product design, increasing pricing and expense management. Statutory capital at the Property & Casualty subsidiaries has historically been maintained at or above the capital level required to meet AA level ratings from rating agencies. The amount of statutory capital can increase or decrease depending on a number of factors affecting Property & Casualty results including, among other factors, the level of catastrophe claims incurred, the amount of reserve development, the effect of changes in interest rates on investment income and the discounting of loss reserves, and the effect of realized gains and losses on investments. In addition, the Company can access the $500 Glen Meadow trust contingent capital facility and maintains the ability to access $1.9 billion of capacity under its revolving credit facility. Contingencies Legal Proceedings For a discussion regarding contingencies related to The Hartford legal proceedings, please see the information contained under Litigation and Asbestos and Environmental Claims, in Note 12 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, which is incorporated herein by reference. Regulatory Developments For a discussion regarding contingencies related to regulatory developments that affect The Hartford, please see the information contained under Regulatory Developments in Note 12 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. Legislative Initiatives. 142 Table of Contents For a discussion of terrorism reinsurance legislation and how it affects The Hartford, see Terrorism within the Property & Casualty Underwriting Risk Management section of the MD&A. Tax proposals and regulatory initiatives which have been or are being considered by Congress and/or Treasury could have a material effect on the insurance business. These proposals and initiatives include, or could include, new taxes or assessments on large financial institutions, changes pertaining to the income tax treatment of insurance companies and life insurance products and annuities, repeal or reform of the estate tax and comprehensive federal tax reform, and changes to the regulatory structure for financial institutions. The nature and timing of any Congressional or regulatory action with respect to any such efforts is unclear. Guaranty Fund and Other Insurance-related Assessments For a discussion regarding Guaranty Fund and Other Insurance-related Assessments, see Note 12 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. IMPACT OF NEW ACCOUNTING STANDARDS For a discussion of accounting standards, see Note 1 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 
