CIK: 874716
Company Name: IDEXX LABORATORIES INC DE
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2013-02-19


ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS Description of Segments . During 2012, we operated primarily through three business segments: diagnostic and information technology-based products and services for the veterinary and bioresearch markets, which we refer to as the Companion Animal Group ( CAG ), water quality products ( Water ) and products for livestock and poultry health, which we refer to as Livestock and Poultry Diagnostics ( LPD ). Prior to the second quarter of 2010, we referred to our LPD segment as our Production Animal Segment. We also operate two smaller segments that comprise products for milk quality and safety ( Dairy ) and products for the human point-of-care medical diagnostic market ( OPTI Medical ). Financial information about the Dairy and OPTI Medical operating segments and about a product line and out-licensing arrangements remaining from our pharmaceutical business is combined and presented in an Other category because they do not meet the quantitative or qualitative thresholds for reportable segments. See Note 15 to the consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2012 included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for financial information about our segments, including geographic information, and about our product and service categories. Items that are not allocated to our operating segments are as follows: a portion of corporate support function and personnel-related expenses; certain manufacturing costs; corporate research and development expenses that do not align with one of our existing business or service categories; the difference between estimated and actual share-based compensation expense; and certain foreign currency exchange gains and losses. In our segment disclosure, these amounts are shown under the caption Unallocated Amounts. The following is a discussion of the strategic and operating factors that we believe have the most significant effect on the performance of our business. Companion Animal Group CAG offers a set of discrete products and services as described below. However, our strategy is to provide these products and services as integrated diagnostic and information management solutions to veterinary practices that collectively create more value for the customer than the value derived from individual products and services, and that provide strong incentives for the customer to adopt full IDEXX solutions and to remain long-term users of our products and services. The breadth and complementary nature of our products and services permit us to offer integrated disease-management diagnostic solutions that leverage the advantages of both point-of-care and outside laboratory testing, facilitate the flow of medical and business information in the veterinary practice and between the veterinary practice and its clients, and provide us with scale in sales and distribution. Our objective is to provide veterinarians with the tools and services to enhance the pet owner experience with veterinary medical care, while also growing veterinary practice revenues and improving staff efficiencies. Instruments and Consumables . Within the IDEXX VetLab instrument line of business, we seek to provide veterinarians with an integrated set of instruments that, individually and together, provide superior diagnostic information and performance features, enabling veterinarians to practice better medicine and improve practice efficiency and, in doing so, achieve their practice economic objectives, including growth and profitability. We derive substantial revenues and margins from the sale of consumables that are used in these instruments and the multi-year consumable revenue stream is significantly more valuable than the placement of the instrument. Additionally, we offer extended maintenance agreements in connection with the sale of our instruments. During the early stage of an instrument life cycle, we derive relatively greater revenues from instrument placements, while consumable sales become relatively more significant in later stages as the installed base of instruments increases and instrument placement revenues begin to decline. Instrument sales have significantly lower gross margins than sales of consumables, and therefore the mix of instrument and consumable sales in a particular period will impact our gross margins in this line of business. In the early stage of an instrument life cycle, placements are made primarily through sales transactions. As the market for the product matures, an increasing percentage of placements are made in transactions, sometimes referred to as reagent rentals , in which instruments are placed at customer sites at little or no cost in exchange for a long-term customer commitment to purchase instrument consumables. 31 Our Catalyst Dx analyzer is our latest g eneration chemistry analyzer, which was launched in 2008. We place our Catalyst Dx analyzer through sales, leases, rental and other programs. In addition, we continue to place VetTest instruments through sales, lease, rental and other programs, with substantially all of our revenues from that product line currently derived from consumable sales. As of December 31, 2012, these two chemistry analyzers provided for a combined active installed base of approximately 33,000 units. A substantial portion of 2012 Catalyst Dx analyzer placements were to customers who had been using instruments from one of our competitors, sometimes referred to as competitive accounts. Generally, placement of an instrument with a competitive account is more attractive as the entire consumable stream associated with that placement represents incremental revenue, whereas the consumable stream associated with a Catalyst Dx placement at a VetTest customer substitutes a Catalyst Dx consumable stream for a VetTest consumable stream. Nonetheless, we have found that the consumables revenues increase when a customer upgrades from a VetTest analyzer to a Catalyst Dx analyzer due to the superior capability and flexibility of the Catalyst Dx , which leads to additional testing by the customer. The ProCyte Dx analyzer is our latest generation hematology analyzer, which we launched in the third quarter of 2010. In addition we sell the LaserCyte analyzer and VetAutoread analyzer. As of December 31, 2012 these three hematology analyzers provided for a combined active installed base of approximately 24,000 units. A substantial portion of ProCyte Dx analyzer placements continue to be made at veterinary clinics that elect to upgrade from their LaserCyte analyzer to a ProCyte Dx analyzer. However, an increasing number of placements have been made at competitive accounts since the launch of this instrument in 2010. While customers continue to upgrade from their LaserCyte analyzer to a ProCyte Dx analyzer, we continue to place a substantial number of LaserCyte instruments, both new and refurbished, as trade-ups from the VetAutoread analyzer and at new and competitive accounts. In 2012, a significant number of LaserCyte instruments that were placed were refurbished instruments that had been received in trade in the sale of a ProCyte Dx analyzer. As we continue to experience growth in placements of ProCyte Dx analyzers and in sales of related consumables, we expect this growth to be partly offset by a decline in placements of LaserCyte and VetAutoread analyzers and in sales of related consumables. Our long-term success in this area of our business is dependent upon new customer acquisition, customer loyalty and retention and customer utilization of existing and new assays introduced for use on our analyzers. We continuously seek opportunities to enhance the care that veterinary professionals give to their patients and clients through supporting the implementation of real-time care testing workflows, which is performing tests and sharing test results with the client at the time of the patient visit. Our latest generation of chemistry and hematology instruments demonstrates this commitment by offering enhanced ease of use, faster time to results, greater sample throughput, broader test menu and connectivity to various information technology platforms that enhance the value of the diagnostic information generated by the instruments. Utilization can increase due to a greater number of patient samples being run or to an increase in the number of tests being run per patient sample. Our strategy is to increase both drivers. To increase utilization, we seek to educate veterinarians about best medical practices that emphasize the importance of chemistry and hematology testing at the point-of-care for a variety of diagnostic purposes. In connection with the purchase of instruments, we also offer protocol-based rebate incentives when customers utilize the broad testing functionality of our analyzers. In addition, we provide marketing tools and consultative services that help drive efficiencies in veterinary practice processes and allow practices to increase the number of clients they see on a daily basis. With all of our instrument product lines, we seek to differentiate our products from our competitors products based on time-to-result, ease-of-use, throughput, breadth of diagnostic menu, flexibility of menu selection, accuracy, reliability, ability to handle compromised samples, analytical capability of software, integration with the IDEXX VetLab Station, client communications capabilities, education and training, and superior sales and customer service. Our success depends, in part, on our ability to differentiate our products in a way that justifies a premium price. 32 Rapid Assay Products . Our rapid assay strategy is to develop, manufacture, market and sell proprietary tests that address important medical needs for particular diseases prevalent in the companion animal population. We seek to differentiate our tests from those of other in-clinic test providers and reference laboratory diagnostic service providers through ease-of-use and superior performance, including by providing our customers with combination tests that test a single sample for multiple analytes. We further augment our product development and customer service efforts with sales and marketing programs that enhance medical awareness and understanding regarding certain diseases and the importance of diagnostic testing. We also seek to enhance the attractiveness of our tests by providing the SNAPshot Dx analyzer, which automatically reads certain SNAP test results, and records those results in the electronic medical record. This promotes practice efficiency by eliminating manual entry of test results in patient records and also helps ensure that the services are recorded and accurately invoiced. We continue to work on enhancing the functionality of the SNAPshot Dx analyzer to read the results of additional tests from our canine and feline family of rapid assay products. Reference Laboratory Diagnostic and Consulting Services . We believe that more than half of all diagnostic testing by U.S. veterinarians is provided by outside reference laboratories such as our IDEXX Reference Laboratories. In many markets outside the U.S., in-clinic testing is less prevalent and an even greater percentage of diagnostic testing is done in reference laboratories. We attempt to differentiate our reference laboratory testing services from those of our competitive reference laboratories and competitive in-clinic offerings primarily on the basis of test menu, technology employed, quality, customer service and tools such as VetConnect PLUS that demonstrate the complementary manner in which our laboratory services work with our point - of - care offerings. Revenue growth in this line of business is achieved both through increased sales to existing customers and through the acquisition of new customers, including through reference laboratory acquisitions, customer list acquisitions and the opening of new reference laboratories, including laboratories that are co-located with large practice customers. Our up-front loyalty programs have been a source of revenue growth in 2012, 2011 and 2010. Under these arrangements, we provide incentives to customers in the form of cash payments or IDEXX Points upon entering multi-year agreements to purchase annual minimum amounts of products or services in the future. In November 2011, we acquired the research and diagnostic laboratory ( RADIL ) business of the College of Veterinary Medicine from the University of Missouri. RADIL provides health monitoring and diagnostic testing services to bioresearch customers. We believe the acquisition of RADIL allows us to leverage our expertise in veterinary diagnostics and expand our integrated offering of reference laboratory diagnostic and consulting services and in-clinic testing solutions in an adjacent market. In 2012, we began to place ProCyte Dx Analyzers containing a more advanced and research focused user interface with customers in the bioresearch market. Profitability of our reference laboratory diagnostic and consulting services business is largely the result of our ability to achieve efficiencies from both volume and operational improvements. Start-up laboratories that we open typically will operate at a loss until testing volumes achieve sufficient scale. Acquired laboratories frequently operate less profitably than our existing laboratories and acquired laboratories may not achieve the profitability of our existing laboratory network for several years until we complete the implementation of operating improvements and efficiencies. Therefore, in the short term, new and acquired reference laboratories generally will have a negative effect on the operating margin of the reference laboratory diagnostic and consulting services line of business. Practice Management and Digital Imaging Systems and Services . Our strategy in the practice management systems line of business is to provide superior integrated information solutions, backed by superior customer support and education, to allow the veterinarian to practice better medicine and achieve the practice business objectives, including superior client experience, staff efficiency and practice profitability. We differentiate our practice management systems through enhanced functionality, ease of use and connectivity with in-house and reference laboratory test results. Pet Health Network Pro on-line client communication tools and services complement the entire IDEXX product offering by educating pet owners and building loyalty through engaging the pet owner before, during and after the visit thereby driving more patient visits. Our strategy in digital radiography is to offer a convenient system that provides superior image quality and software capability that enables sharing of these images with clients virtually anywhere and enhanced diagnostic features and customer workflow, backed by the same customer support provided for our other products and services in CAG. 33 Water Our strategy in the water testing business is to develop, manufacture, market and sell proprietary products with superior performance, supported by exceptional customer service. Our customers primarily consist of water utilities, government laboratories and private certified laboratories that highly value strong relationships and customer support. Sales of water testing products outside of the U.S. represented 51 % of total water product sales in 2012, and we expect that future growth in this business will be significantly dependent on our ability to increase international sales. Growth also will be dependent on our ability to enhance and broaden our product line. Most water microbiological testing is driven by regulation, and, in many countries, a test may not be used for compliance testing unless it has been approved by the applicable regulatory body. As a result, we maintain an active regulatory program that involves applying for regulatory approvals in a number of countries, primarily in Europe. Livestock and Poultry Diagnostics We develop, manufacture, market and sell a broad range of tests for various cattle, swine and poultry diseases and conditions, and have active research and development and in-licensing programs in this area. Our strategy is to offer proprietary tests with superior performance characteristics, with demand for tests primarily created by government programs to control or eradicate disease and disease outbreaks, and to a lesser degree disease and reproductive management programs initiated by livestock and poultry producers. Disease outbreaks are episodic and unpredictable, and certain diseases that are prevalent at one time may be substantially contained or eradicated at a later time. In response to outbreaks, testing initiatives may lead to exceptional demand for certain products in certain periods. Conversely, successful eradication programs may result in significantly decreased demand for certain products. In addition, increases in government funding may lead to increased demand for certain products and budgetary constraints may lead to decreased demand for certain products. The performance of this business, therefore, can fluctuate. In 2012, LPD revenues declined approximately 4%, resulting primarily from lower sales of bovine test products due to the changes in European Union testing requirements and declines in certain government programs. In 2012, approximately 88% of our sales in this business were from markets outside of the U.S. , most notably Europe. The performance of the business is particularly subject to the various risks that are associated with doing business internationally. See Part I, Item 1A. Risk Factors. Other Dairy . Our strategy in the dairy testing business is to develop, manufacture and sell antibiotic residue and contaminant testing products that satisfy applicable regulatory requirements for testing of milk by processors and producers and provide reliable field performance. The manufacture of these testing products leverages, almost exclusively, the SNAP platform as well as the production equipment of our rapid assay business, incorporating customized reagents for antibiotic and contaminant detection. The majority of our sales in this business are international. To successfully increase sales of dairy testing products, we believe that we need to increase penetration in the processor and producer segments of the dairy market, and to develop product line enhancements and extensions . In 2012, approximately 86% of our sales in this business were from markets outside of the U.S., most notably China and Europe. The performance of the business is particularly subject to the various risks that are associated with doing business internationally. See Part I, Item 1A. Risk Factors. OPTI Medical Systems . Our strategy in the OPTI Medical Systems business for the human market is to develop, manufacture, and sell electrolyte and blood gas analyzers and related consumable products for the medical point-of-care diagnostics market worldwide, with a focus on small to mid-sized hospitals. W e seek to differentiate our products based on ease of use, convenience, international distribution and service, and instrument reliability. Similar to our veterinary instruments and consumables strategy, a substantial portion of the revenues from this product line is derived from the sale of consumables for use on the installed base of electrolyte and blood gas analyzers. During the early stage of an instrument life cycle, relatively greater revenues are derived from instrument placements, while consumable sales become relatively more significant in later stages as the installed base of instruments increases and instrument placement revenues begin to decline. Our long-term success in this area of our business is dependent upon new customer acquisition, customer retention and increased customer utilization of existing and new assays introduced on these instruments. 34 Our strategy in the OPTI Medical Systems business for the veterinary market is to utilize this unit know-how, intellectual property and manufacturing capability to continue to expand the menu and instrument capability of the VetStat and Catalyst Dx platforms for veterinary applications while reducing our cost of consumables by leveraging experience and economies of scale. In 2012, approximately 81% of our sales in the OPTI Medical Systems business were from markets outside of the U.S., most notably Europe, the Middle-East and Asia. The performance of the business is particularly subject to the various risks that are associated with doing business internationally. See Part I, Item 1A. Risk Factors. CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America ( U.S. GAAP ) . The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates. Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K describes the significant accounting policies used in preparation of these consolidated financial statements. We believe the following critical accounting estimates and assumptions may have a material impact on reported financial condition and operating performance and involve significant levels of judgment to account for highly uncertain matters or are susceptible to significant change. Revenue Recognition We recognize revenue when four criteria are met: (i) persuasive evidence that an arrangement exists; (ii) delivery has occurred or services have been rendered; (iii) the sales price is fixed or determinable; and (iv) collectability is reasonably assured. See Note 2(i) to the consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2012 included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information about our revenue recognition policy and criteria for recognizing revenue. Multiple element arrangements ( MEAs ) . Arrangements to sell products to customers frequently include multiple deliverables. Our most significant MEAs include the sale of one or more of the instruments from the IDEXX VetLab suite of analyzers, digital radiography systems or practice management software , combined with one or more of the following products: extended maintenance agreements ( EMAs ), consumables and reference laboratory diagnostic and consulting services. Practice management software is frequently sold with post-contract customer support and implementation services. Delivery of the various products or performance of services within the arrangement may or may not coincide. Delivery of our IDEXX VetLab instruments, digital radiography systems, and practice management software generally occurs at the onset of the arrangement. EMAs, consumables, and reference laboratory diagnostic and consulting services typically are delivered over future periods, generally one to six years. In certain arrangements , revenue recognized is limited to the amount invoiced or received that is not contingent on the delivery of products and services in the future. We allocate revenue to each element based on the relative selling price and recognize revenue when the elements have standalone value and the four criteria for revenue recognition, as discussed above, have been met for each element. If available, we establish the selling price of each element based on vendor-specific objective evidence ( VSOE ), which represents the price charged for a deliverable when it is sold separately. We use third-party evidence ( TPE ) if VSOE is not available or best estimate of selling price ( BESP ) if neither VSOE nor TPE is available. We generally determine selling price based on amounts charged separately for the delivered and undelivered elements to similar customers in standalone sales of the specific elements. When these arrangements include a separately-priced EMA, we recognize revenue related to the EMA at the stated contractual price on a straight-line basis over the life of the agreement to the extent the separately stated price is substantive. If there is no stated contractual price for an EMA, or the separately stated price is not substantive, we recognize revenue according to the MEA policy stated above. 35 When arrangements within the scope of software revenue recognition guidance include multiple elements, we allocate revenue to each element based on relative fair value, when VSOE exists for all elements, or by using the residual method when there is VSOE for the undelivered elements but no such evidence for the delivered elements. Under the residual method, the fair value of the undelivered elements is deferred and the residual revenue is allocated to the delivered elements. Revenue is recognized on any delivered elements when the four criteria for revenue recognition have been met for each element. If VSOE does not exist for the undelivered element, all revenue from the arrangement is deferred until the earlier of the point at which such sufficient VSOE does exist or all elements of the arrangement have been delivered. We determine fair value based on amounts charged separately for the delivered and undelivered elements to similar customers in standalone sales of the specific elements. Certain arrangements with customers include discounts on future sales of products and services. We apply judgment in determining whether future discounts are significant and incremental. When the future discount offered is not considered significant and incremental, we do not account for the discount as an element of the original arrangement. If the future discount is significant and incremental, we recognize that discount as an element of the original arrangement and allocate the discount to the other elements of the arrangement based on relative selling price. To determine whether a discount is significant and incremental, we look to the discount provided in comparison to standalone sales of the same product or service to similar customers, the level of discount provided on other elements in the arrangement and the significance of the discount to the overall arrangement. If the discount in the MEA approximates the discount typically provided in standalone sales, that discount is not considered incremental. Customer programs . We record reductions to revenue related to customer marketing and incentive programs, which include end-user rebates and other volume-based incentives. Incentives may be provided in the form of IDEXX Points, credits or cash and are earned by end-users upon achieving defined volume purchases or utilization levels or upon entering an agreement to purchase products or services in future periods. Our most significant customer programs are categorized as follows: Customer Loyalty Programs . Our customer loyalty programs offer customers the opportunity to earn incentives on a variety of IDEXX products and services as those products and services are purchased and utilized. Revenue reductions related to customer loyalty programs are recorded based on the actual issuance of incentives, incentives earned but not yet issued and estimates of incentives to be earned in the future based on applicable product inventories held by distributors at the end of the period. Up-Front Customer Loyalty Programs . Our up-front loyalty programs provide incentives to customers in the form of cash payments or IDEXX Points upon entering multi-year agreements to purchase annual minimum amounts of future products or services. If a customer breaches its agreement, it is required to refund a prorated portion of the up-front cash or IDEXX Points. These incentives are considered to be customer acquisition costs and are capitalized and recognized as a reduction to revenue over the term of the customer agreement. If these up-front incentives are subsequently utilized to purchase IDEXX VetLab instruments, digital radiography systems or Cornerstone practice management systems, product revenue and cost is deferred and recognized over the term of the customer agreement as products and services are provided to the customer. We monitor customer purchases over the term of their agreement to assess the realizability of our capitalized customer acquisition costs. For the years ended December 31, 2012, 2011 and 2010, impairments of customer acquisition costs were immaterial. IDEXX VetLab Instrument Marketing Programs . Our instrument marketing programs require the customer to enroll at the time of instrument purchase and offer customers the opportunity to earn incentives in future periods based on the volume of the products they purchase and utilize over the term of the program. These arrangements are considered MEAs in accordance with our revenue recognition policy stated above. Revenue reductions related to instrument marketing programs are recorded based on an estimate of customer purchase and utilization levels and the incentive the customer will earn over the term of the program. Our estimates are based on historical experience and the specific terms and conditions of the marketing program and require us to apply judgment to approximate future product purchases and utilization. Differences between our estimates and actual incentives earned are accounted for as a change in estimate. These differences were not material for the years ended December 31, 2012, 2011 and 2010. At 36 December 31, 2012, a 5% change in our estimate of future customer utilization would increase or reduce revenue by approximately $0.3 million. Reagent Rental Programs . Our reagent rental programs provide our customers the right to use our instruments in consideration for multi-year agreements to purchase annual minimum amounts of consumables. No instrument revenue is recognized at the time of instrument installation. We recognize a portion of the revenue allocated to the instrument concurrent with the future sale of consumables. We determine the amount of revenue allocated from the consumable to the instrument based on VSOE and determine the rate of instrument revenue recognition in proportion to the customer minimum volume commitment. The cost of the instrument is reclassified from inventory to equipment and charged to cost of product revenue on a straight-line basis over the term of the rental agreement. IDEXX Points may be applied against the purchase price of IDEXX products and services purchased in the future or applied to trade receivables due to us. IDEXX Points that have not yet been used by customers are classified as a liability until use or expiration occurs. We estimate the amount of IDEXX Points expected to expire, or breakage, based on historical expirations and we recognize the estimated benefit of breakage as IDEXX Points are issued to customers. On November 30 of each year, unused IDEXX Points earned before January 1 of the prior year generally expire and any variance from the breakage estimate is accounted for as a change in estimate. This variance was not material for the years ended December 31, 2012, 2011 and 2010. Future market conditions and changes in product offerings may cause us to change marketing strategies to increase or decrease customer incentive offerings, possibly resulting in incremental reductions of revenue in future periods as compared to reductions in the current or prior periods. Additionally, certain customer programs require us to estimate, based on historical experience, and apply judgment to approximate the number of customers who will actually redeem the incentive. In determining estimated revenue reductions we utilize data supplied from distributors and collected directly from end-users, which includes the volume of qualifying products purchased and the number of qualifying tests run as reported to us by end-users via IDEXX SmartService TM , a secure I nternet link that enables us to extract data and provide diagnostic service and support for certain IDEXX VetLab instruments through remote access. Differences between estimated and actual customer participation in programs may impact the amount and timing of revenue recognition. Following is a summary of revenue reductions , net recorded in connection with our customer programs for the years ended December 31, 2012, 2011 and 2010 ( in thousands ): For the Years Ended December 31, 2012 2011 2010 Revenue Reductions Recorded, Net Customer Loyalty Programs $ 17,332 $ 16,591 $ 17,467 Up-Front Customer Loyalty Programs 8,704 3,954 921 IDEXX VetLab Instrument Marketing Programs 15,686 11,137 4,304 Other Customer Programs 578 1,513 1,474 Total revenue reductions, net $ 42,300 $ 33,195 $ 24,166 37 At December 31, 2012, 2011 and 2010, the total accrued revenue reductions were $36.6 million, $37.8 million and $23.3 million, respectively. Accrued customer programs are included within accrued liabilities and other long-term liabilities, depending on the anticipated settlement date, in the consolidated balance sheets included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Following is a summary of changes in the accrual for estimated revenue reductions attributable to customer marketing and incentive programs and the ending accrued customer programs balance for the years ended December 31, 2012, 2011 and 2010 ( in thousands ): For the Years Ended December 31, 2012 2011 2010 Accrued Customer Programs: Balance, beginning of the year $ 37,767 $ 23,321 $ 18,265 Revenue reductions for Customer Loyalty Programs, net 17,332 16,591 17,467 Up-Front Customer Loyalty Program Awards issued as IDEXX Points 8,215 21,259 6,037 Revenue reductions for IDEXX VetLab Instrument Marketing Programs, net 15,686 11,137 4,304 Revenue reductions for Other Customer Programs, net 578 1,513 1,474 IDEXX Points redeemed and credits issued (41,832 ) (35,629 ) (23,859 ) Breakage (1,135 ) (325 ) (334 ) Exchange impact on balances denominated in foreign currency 14 (100 ) (33 ) Balance, end of year $ 36,625 $ 37,767 $ 23,321 Inventory Valuation We write down the carrying value of inventory for estimated obsolescence by an amount equal to the difference between the cost of inventory and the estimated market value when warranted based on assumptions of future demand, market conditions, remaining shelf life, or product functionality. If actual market conditions or results of estimated functionality are less favorable than those we estimated, additional inventory write-downs may be required, which would have a negative effect on results of operations. Valuation of Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets A significant portion of the purchase price for acquired businesses is generally assigned to intangible assets. Intangible assets other than goodwill are initially valued at fair value. If a quoted price in an active market for the identical asset is not readily available at the measurement date, the fair value of the intangible asset is estimated based on discounted cash flows using market participant assumptions, which are assumptions that are not specific to IDEXX. The selection of appropriate valuation methodologies and the estimation of discounted cash flows require significant assumptions about the timing and amounts of future cash flows, risks, appropriate discount rates, and the useful lives of intangible assets. When material, we utilize independent valuation experts to advise and assist us in allocating the purchase prices for acquired businesses to the fair values of the identified intangible assets and in determining appropriate amortization methods and periods for those intangible assets. Goodwill is initially valued based on the excess of the purchase price of a business combination over the fair values of acquired net assets, including intangible assets. Contingent consi deration is included within the acquisition cost and is recognized at its fair value on acquisition date. A liability resulting from contingent consideration is remeasured to fair value at each reporting date until the contingency is resolved. Changes in fair value of contingent consideration are recognized in earnings. 38 We assess goodwill for impairment annually, at the reporting unit level, in the fourth quarter and whenever events or circumstances indicate impairment may exist. An impairment charge is recorded for the amount, if any, by which the carrying amount of goodwill exceeds its implied fair value. Our reporting units are the individual product and service categories that comprise our CAG operating segment, our Water and LPD operating segments and goodwill remaining from the restructuring of our pharmaceutical business in the fourth quarter of 2008, referred to herein as the Technology reporting unit. A substantial portion of the goodwill remaining from the pharmaceutical business, included in our Other Segment , is associated with products that have been, or that we expect to be, licensed to third parties. Realization of this goodwill is dependent upon the success of those third parties in developing and commercializing products, which will result in our receipt of royalties and other payments. Our Dairy and OPTI Medical businesses, for which there is no goodwill associated, are also presented in our Other segment. On January 1, 2012, we adopted an amendment to the accounting guidance for goodwill which simplified how companies test goodwill for impairment. The amendment provides an entity the option to first assess the qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying amount as a basis for determining whether it is necessary to perform the two-step goodwill impairment test. The more-likely-than-not threshold is defined as having a likelihood of more than 50 percent. If, after assessing the totality of events or circumstances, an entity determines that it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, it would then perform the two-step impairment test; otherwise, no further impairment test would be required. As part of our goodwill qualitative testing process, we evaluate factors specific to a reporting unit as well as industry and macroeconomic factors that are reasonably likely to have a material impact on the fair value of a reporting unit. Examples of the qualitative factors considered in assessing the fair value of a reporting unit include: the results of the most recent impairment test, the competitive environment, anticipated changes in product or labor costs, revenue growth trends, the consistency of operating margins and cash flows, and current and long-range financial forecasts. The long-range financial forecasts of the reporting units, which are based upon management long-term view of our markets, are used by senior management and the Board of Directors to evaluate operating performance. In the fourth quarter of 2012, we elected to assess the qualitative factors discussed above and determined that it was more likely than not that the fair value of the reporting units comprising our CAG, Water, and LPD operating segments exceeded the respective carrying amounts. Therefore, we did not perform the two-step impairment test for these reporting units. A prolonged economic downturn resulting in lower long-term growth rates and reduced long-term profitability may reduce the fair value of our reporting units. Industry specific events or circumstances could have a negative impact on our reporting units and may also reduce the fair value of our reporting units. Should such events occur and it becomes more likely than not that a reporting unit fair value has fallen below its carrying value, we will perform an interim goodwill impairment test(s), in addition to the annual impairment test. Future impairment tests may result in an impairment of goodwill, depending on the outcome of a qualitative assessment and, if necessary, the two-step impairment test. An impairment of goodwill would be reported as a non-cash charge to earnings. We did not elect to use the simplified qualitative approach to assess goodwill in our Technology reporting unit due to the nature of these products that are dependent on the success of third parties to develop and commercialize. Therefore, we performed the first step of the two-step goodwill impairment test, using an income approach based on discounted forecasted cash flows to estimate the fair value of the Technology reporting unit. Valuation assumptions reflect our projections and best estimates, based on significant assumptions about the extent and timing of future cash flows, growth rates and discount rates. The results of the Technology reporting unit goodwill impairment test indicated the estimated fair value of the reporting unit was in excess of its carrying value of $7 million by approximately 160%. 39 While we believe that the assumptions used to determine the estimated fair value of our Technology reporting unit are reasonable, a change in assumptions underlying these estimates or the inability of third parties to successfully develop or commercialize these products could result in a material negative effect on the estimated fair value of the reporting unit. Our fair value estimate assumes the achievement of future financial results contemplated in our forecasted cash flows, and there can be no assurance that we will realize that value. We use forecasts to estimate future cash flows and include an estimate of long-term future growth rates based on our most recent views of the long-term outlook for this reporting unit. Actual results may differ from those assumed in our forecasts. The discount rate is based on a weighted average cost of capital ( WACC ) derived from industry peers. Changes in market conditions, interest rates, growth rates, tax rates, costs, pricing, or the discount rate would affect the estimated fair values of a reporting unit and could result in a goodwill impairment charge in a future period. No goodwill impairments were identified during the years ended December 31, 2012, 2011 or 2010. We assess the realizability of intangible assets other than goodwill whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable. If an impairment review is triggered, we evaluate the carrying value of intangible assets based on estimated undiscounted future cash flows over the remaining useful life of the primary asset of the asset group and compare that value to the carrying value of the asset group. The cash flows that are used contain our best estimates, using appropriate and customary assumptions and projections at the time. If the net carrying value of an intangible asset exceeds the related estimated undiscounted future cash flows, an impairment to write the intangible asset to its fair value would be reported as a non-cash charge to earnings. If necessary, we would calculate the fair value of an intangible asset using the present value of the estimated future cash flows to be generated by the intangible asset, using a risk-adjusted discount rate. As a result of recent operating losses incurred by our OPTI Medical Systems business in the human market, we tested the related asset group, including intangible assets, for impairment in the third quarter of 2012. Simultaneously, we also reviewed the estimated useful lives of these intangible assets and determined that based on investments in our next generation OPTI analyzer it is likely we will experience a reduction in revenues from the existing products based on the acquired technologies sooner than previously estimated. As a result, we reduced the estimated useful lives for certain OPTI Medical Systems intangible assets resulting in increased amortization in the fourth quarter of 2012 and future periods. The impact of this change in estimated useful lives is not expected to have a material impact on our future financial results. We determined the future net undiscounted cash flow for our OPTI Medical Systems business in the human market, which is comprised of those cash flows that are directly associated with and that are expected to arise as a direct result of the use of the asset group, exceeded the $17 million carrying value of the related asset group, including intangible assets of $5 million, by approximately 60%. Inherent in our development of cash flow projections are assumptions and estimates derived from a review of our operating results, approved business plans, expected growth rates, and tax rates. Many of the factors used in assessing future cash flows are outside the control of management and changes in the assumptions or estimates could materially affect the future cash flows of an asset group, and therefore could affect the amount of potential future impairment of the asset. In addition, the performance of the business is subject to the various risks described above that are associated with our limited experience and small scale in the human point-of-care market. See Part I, Item 1A. Risk Factors. No impairments of intangible assets were identified during the years ended December 31, 2012, 2011 and 2010. Share-Based Compensation Our share-based compensation programs provide for grants of stock options, restricted stock units and deferred stock units, along with the issuance of employee stock purchase rights. The total fair value of future awards may vary significantly from past awards based on a number of factors, including our share-based award practices. Therefore, share-based compensation expense is likely to fluctuate, possibly significantly, from year to year. 40 We use the Black-Scholes-Merton option-pricing model to determine the fair value of options granted. Option-pricing models require the input of highly subjective assumptions, particularly for the expected stock price volatility and the expected term of options. The risk-free interest rate is based on the U.S. Treasury yield for a duration similar to the expected term at the date of grant. We have never paid any cash dividends on our common stock and we have no present intention to pay a dividend; therefore, we assume that no dividends will be paid over the expected terms of option awards. We determine the assumptions to be used in the valuation of option grants as of the date of grant. As such, we use different assumptions during the year if we grant options at different dates. However, substantially all of our options granted during the years ended December 31, 2012, 2011 and 2010 were granted in the first quarter of each year. The weighted average of each of the valuation assumptions used to determine the fair value of each option grant during each of the previous three years is as follows: For the Years Ended December 31, 2012 2011 2010 Expected stock price volatility 34 % 33 % 31 % Expected term, in years (1) 4.6 4.8 4.9 Risk-free interest rate 0.8 % 2.3 % 2.3 % (1) Options granted after January 1, 2006 have contractual terms of seven years. Options granted prior to January 1, 2006 have contractual terms of 10 years. Changes in the subjective input assumptions, particularly for the expected stock price volatility and the expected term of options, can materially affect the fair value estimate. Our expected stock price volatility assumption is based on the historical volatility of our stock over a period similar to the expected term and other relevant factors. Lower estimated volatility reduces the fair value of a stock option, while higher estimated volatility has the opposite effect. The total fair value of stock options granted during the year ended December 31, 2012 was $8.0 million. If the weighted average of the stock price volatility assumption was increased or decreased by 1%, the total fair value of stock options awarded during the year ended December 31, 2012 would have increased or decreased by approximately 3% and the total expense recognized for the year ended December 31, 2012 for options awarded during the same period would have increased or decreased by less than $0.1 million. We derive the expected term assumption for stock options based on historical experience and other relevant factors concerning expected behavior with regard to option exercises. The expected term is determined using a consistent method at each grant date. A longer expected term assumption increases the fair value of stock option awards, while a shorter expected term assumption has the opposite effect . If the weighted average of the expected term was increased or decreased by one year, the total fair value of stock options awarded during the year ended December 31, 2012 would have increased by 10% or decreased by 11%, respectively, and the total expense recognized for the year ended December 31, 2012 for options awarded during 2012 would have increased or decreased by $0.2 million. Share-based compensation expense is recognized on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period, which ranges from one to five years, depending on the award. Share-based compensation expense is based on the number of awards ultimately expected to vest and is, therefore, reduced for an estimate of the number of awards that are expected to be forfeited. The forfeiture estimates are based on historical data and other factors, and compensation expense is adjusted for actual results. Total share-based compensation expense for the year ended December 31, 2012 was $15.9 million, which is net of a reduction of $2.9 million for actual and estimated forfeitures. Changes in estimated forfeiture rates and differences between estimated forfeiture rates and actual experience may result in significant, unanticipated increases or decreases in share-based compensation expense from period to period. The termination of employment of certain employees who hold large numbers of share-based compensation instruments may also have a significant, unanticipated impact on forfeiture experience and, therefore, on share-based compensation expense. Modifications of the terms of outstanding options may result in significant increases or decreases in share-based compensation. There were no modifications to the terms of outstanding options, restricted stock units or deferred stock units during 2012, 2011 or 2010. The fair value of stock options, restricted stock units, deferred stock units, and employee stock purchase rights issued during the years ended December 31, 2012, 2011 and 2010 totaled $18.2 million, $25.5 million and $16.3 million, respectively. The total unrecognized compensation expense, net of estimated forfeitures, for unvested share-based compensation awards outstanding at December 31, 2012 was $33.3 million, which will be recognized over a weighted average period of approximately 1.6 years. 41 Income Taxes We recognize a current tax liability or asset for current taxes payable or refundable, respectively, and a deferred tax liability or asset, as the case may be, for the estimated future tax effects of temporary differences between book and tax treatment of assets and liabilities and carryforwards to the extent they are realizable. The future tax benefit arising from net deductible temporary differences and tax carryforwards, net of valuation allowances, was $4.3 million and $0.5 million at December 31, 2012 and 2011, respectively. On a quarterly basis, we assess our current and projected earnings by jurisdiction to determine whether or not our earnings during the periods when the temporary differences become deductible will be sufficient to realize the related future tax benefits. Should we determine that we would not be able to realize all or part of our net deferred tax asset in the future, an adjustment to the deferred tax asset would be charged to income in the period such determination was made. A reduction of net income before taxes in each subsidiary equal to 5% of revenue, compared to the corresponding reported amounts for the year ended December 31, 2012, would not result in the recognition of incremental valuation allowances. For those jurisdictions where tax carryforwards are likely to expire unused or the projected operating results indicate that realization is not more likely than not, a valuation allowance is recorded to offset the deferred tax asset within that jurisdiction. In assessing the need for a valuation allowance, we consider future taxable income and ongoing prudent and feasible tax planning strategies. Alternatively, in the event that we were to determine that we would be able to realize our deferred tax assets in the future in excess of the net recorded amount, an adjustment to the deferred tax asset would increase income in the period such determination was made. Our net deductible temporary differences and tax carryforwards are recorded using the enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the periods in which the deferred tax liability or asset is expected to be settled or realized. Should the expected applicable tax rates change in the future, an adjustment to the net deferred tax asset would be credited or charged, as appropriate, to income in the period such determination was made. For example, an increase of one percentage point in our anticipated U.S. state income tax rate would cause us to increase our net deferred tax asset balance by $0.3 million. This increase in the net deferred asset would increase net income in the period that our rate was adjusted. Likewise, a decrease of one percentage point to our anticipated U.S. state income tax rate would have the opposite effect. We periodically assess our exposures related to our worldwide provision for income taxes and believe that we have appropriately accrued taxes for contingencies. Any reduction of these contingent liabilities or additional assessment would increase or decrease income, respectively, in the period such determination was made. We consider the majority of the operating earnings of non-United States subsidiaries to be indefinitely invested outside the U.S. The cumulative earnings of these subsidiaries were $314.5 million at December 31, 2012, of which approximately $222.4 million was held in cash and cash equivalents as of December 31, 2012. No provision has been made for U.S. federal and state, or international taxes that may result from future remittances of these undistributed earnings of non-United States subsidiaries. Should we repatriate these earnings in the future, we would have to adjust the income tax provision in the period in which the decision to repatriate earnings is made. A determination of related tax liability that would be paid on these undistributed earnings if eventually repatriated is not practicable. For the operating earnings not considered to be indefinitely invested outside the United States we have accounted for the tax impact on a current basis. We record a liability for uncertain tax positions that do not meet the more likely than not standard as prescribed by the authoritative guidance for income tax accounting. We record tax benefits for only those positions that we believe will more likely than not be sustained. For positions that we believe that it is more likely than not that we will prevail, we record a benefit considering the amounts and probabilities that could be realized upon ultimate settlement. If our judgment as to the likely resolution of the uncertainty changes, if the uncertainty is ultimately settled or if the statute of limitation related to the uncertainty expires, the effects of the change would be recognized in the period in which the change, resolution or expiration occurs. Our net liability for uncertain tax positions was $6.3 million and $5.6 million as of December 31, 2012 and 2011, respectively, which includes estimated interest expense and penalties. 42 RESULTS OF OPERATIONS AND TRENDS Effects of Certain Factors on Results of Operations Distributor Purchasing and Inventories . The instrument consumables and rapid assay products in our CAG segment are sold in the U.S. and certain other geographies by third party distributors, who purchase products from us and sell them to veterinary practices, which are the end users. As a result, distributor purchasing dynamics have an impact on our reported sales of these products. Distributor purchasing dynamics may be affected by many factors and in a given period may not be directly related to underlying end-user demand for our products. Consequently, reported results may reflect fluctuations in inventory levels held at distributors and not necessarily reflect changes in underlying end-user demand. Therefore, we believe it is important to track distributor sales to end users and to distinguish between the impact of end-user demand and the impact of distributor purchasing dynamics on reported revenue. Where growth rates are affected by changes in end-user demand, we refer to this as the impact of practice-level sales on growth. Where growth rates are affected by distributor purchasing dynamics, we refer to this as the impact of changes in distributors inventories on growth. If during the current year, distributors inventories grew by less than those inventories grew in the comparable period of the prior year, then changes in distributors inventories have an unfavorable impact on our reported sales growth in the current period. Conversely, if during the current year, distributors inventories grew by more than those inventories grew in the comparable period of the prior year, then changes in distributors inventories have a favorable impact on our reported sales growth in the current period. At the end of a quarter, we believe that our U.S. CAG distributors typically hold inventory equivalent to approximately four weeks of the anticipated end-user demand for instrument consumables and rapid assay products. Currency Impact . For the years ended December 31, 2012, 2011 and 2010, approximately 26%, 26% and 25%, respectively, of IDEXX consolidated revenues were derived from products manufactured in the U.S. and sold internationally in local currencies . Strengthening of the rate of exchange for the U.S. dollar relative to other currencies has a negative impact on our revenues derived in currencies other than the U.S. dollar and on profits of products manufactured in the U.S. and sold internationally, and a weakening of the U.S. dollar has the opposite effect. Similarly, to the extent that the U.S. dollar is stronger in current or future periods relative to the exchange rates in effect in the corresponding prior periods, our growth rate will be negatively affected. The impact of foreign currency denominated operating expenses and foreign currency denominated supply contracts partly offset this exposure. The impact on revenue resulting from changes in foreign currency exchange rates is not a measure defined by U.S. GAAP, otherwise referred to herein as a non-U.S. GAAP measure. We calculate the impact on revenue resulting from changes in foreign currency exchange rates by applying the difference between the weighted average exchange rates during the current year period and the comparable previous year period to foreign currency denominated revenues for the current year period. During the twelve months ended December 31, 2012, compared to the twelve months ended December 31, 2011, changes in foreign currency exchange rates reduced total company revenue by approximately $19.0 million, due primarily to the strengthening of the U.S. dollar against the Euro. During the twelve months ended December 31, 2011, compared to the twelve months ended December 31, 2010, changes in foreign currency exchange rates increased total company revenue by approximately $27.1 million, due primarily to the weakening of the U.S. dollar against the Euro and, to a lesser extent, the Australian dollar, Japanese yen, Canadian dollar, British pound and Swiss franc. 43 Effects of Economic Conditions . Demand for many of our products and services has been negatively affected by economic conditions since mid-2008. In our CAG segment, we believe that low economic growth and relatively high unemployment have led to negative or cautious consumer sentiment, which has affected the number of patient visits to veterinary clinics. Based on data provided by a subset of our customers that use our practice management systems, we observed patient visits were flat to slightly down beginning in 2009, with a slight improvement in the growth of patient visits beginning in the fourth quarter of 2011 and further improvement during 2012 over the previous year periods, although the rate of improvement has not been steady. We believe that this data, though limited, provides a fair and meaningful representation of the trend in patient visit activity in the U.S. that is consistent with trends in the U.S. economic environment and consumer sentiment. In contrast, economic conditions in certain European countries remain challenging, which continues to negatively impact our CAG segment in particular. We believe that the overall trend in patient visits since the beginning of the economic downturn has had a slightly negative impact on the growth rate of sales of rapid assay tests, instrument consumables and reference laboratory diagnostic and consulting services. In addition, we believe the rate of growth of sales of our instruments and digital radiography systems, which are larger capital purchases for veterinarians, has also been affected by continued caution among veterinarians regarding economic conditions. Weaker economic conditions since mid-2008 have also caused our customers to remain sensitive to the pricing of our products and services resulting in lower revenue growth due to limited price increases for certain products. We also believe that current economic conditions have affected purchasing decisions of our Water and LPD business customers. Lower water testing volumes have resulted from a decline in discretionary testing and a decline in mandated testing as a result of lower home and commercial construction. Fiscal difficulties in certain European countries have also reduced government funding for some water and livestock testing programs. We believe that the diversity of our products and services and the geographic diversity of our markets have partially mitigated the effects of the economic environment and negative consumer sentiment on our revenue growth rates. Looking forward, we are cautiously optimistic that the improvements we began to see in the U.S. commencing in the fourth quarter of 2011 and continuing in 2012 are reflective of a gradual improvement in the macroeconomic environment that over time will further reduce these effects. Twelve Months Ended December 31, 2012 Compared to Twelve Months Ended December 31, 2011 Revenue The following revenue analysis and discussion reports on organic revenue growth. Organic revenue growth should be considered in addition to, and not as a replacement for or as a superior measure to, revenues reported in accordance with U.S. GAAP, and may not be comparable to similarly titled measures reported by other companies. Management believes that reporting organic revenue growth provides useful information to investors by facilitating easier comparisons of our revenue performance with prior and future periods and to our peers. We exclude the effect of changes in foreign currency exchange rates because changes in foreign currency exchange rates are not under management control, are subject to volatility and can obscure underlying business trends. We exclude the effect of acquisitions because the nature, size and number of acquisitions can vary dramatically from period to period and therefore can also obscure underlying business trends. Organic revenue growth and the percentage changes in revenue from currency and acquisitions are non-U.S. GAAP measures. See the subsection above titled Effects of Certain Factors on Results of Operations for a description of the calculation of the percentage change in revenue resulting from changes in foreign currency exchange rates. The percentage change in revenue resulting from acquisitions represents incremental revenues attributable to acquisitions that have occurred since the beginning of the prior year period. 44 Total Company. The following table presents revenue by operating segment: Net Revenue (dollars in thousands) For the Year Ended December 31, 2012 For the Year Ended December 31, 2011 Dollar Change Percentage Change Percentage Change from Currency Percentage Change from Acquisitions Organic Revenue Growth CAG $ 1,072,211 $ 999,722 $ 72,489 7.3 % (1.4 % ) 1.2 % 7.5 % Water 84,680 82,125 2,555 3.1 % (1.4 % ) - 4.5 % LPD 86,724 94,112 (7,388 ) (7.9 % ) (3.8 % ) - (4.1 %) Other 49,723 42,730 6,993 16.4 % (0.8 % ) - 17.2 % Total $ 1,293,338 $ 1,218,689 $ 74,649 6.1 % (1.6 % ) 1.0 % 6.7 % Companion Animal Group. The following table presents revenue by product and service category for CAG. The VetLab instruments and consumables product and service category has been disaggregated into its three VetLab components: Net Revenue (dollars in thousands) For the Year Ended December 31, 2012 For the Year Ended December 31, 2011 Dollar Change Percentage Change Percentage Change from Currency Percentage Change from Acquisitions Organic Revenue Growth VetLab instruments $ 90,177 $ 93,655 $ (3,478 ) (3.7 % ) (1.9 % ) - (1.8 %) VetLab consumables 278,818 255,848 22,970 9.0 % (1.7 % ) - 10.7 % VetLab service and accessories 48,056 45,083 2,973 6.6 % (0.4 % ) - 7.0 % Rapid assay products 162,232 154,342 7,890 5.1 % (0.7 % ) - 5.8 % Reference laboratory diagnostic and consulting services 407,343 373,919 33,424 8.9 % (1.8 % ) 3.1 % 7.6 % Practice management and digital imaging systems and services 85,585 76,875 8,710 11.3 % (0.1 % ) - 11.4 % Net CAG revenue $ 1,072,211 $ 999,722 $ 72,489 7.3 % (1.4 % ) 1.2 % 7.5 % The decrease in VetLab instruments revenue was due primarily to lower sales of our Catalyst Dx and LaserCyte instruments, partly offset by increased sales of our ProCyte Dx instrument. Lower sales of our Catalyst Dx instrument were due primarily to lower average unit sales prices, a decrease in volumes during the year ended December 31, 2012 as compared to the prior year as result of the initial launch of a Catalyst Dx instrument marketing program in North America during the third quarter of 2011 and the impact of fourth quarter placements in 2012 under the reagent rental customer program where instrument revenue is recognized over the term of the rental agreement . VetLab service and accessories revenue growth was primarily a result of the increase in our active installed base of instruments. VetLab consumables revenue growth was due primarily to higher sales volumes of consumables used with our Catalyst Dx instrument, partly offset by lower sales of consumables used with our VetTest chemistry instrument. The increase in consumables used with our Catalyst Dx instrument resulted primarily from growth of our install base as a result of customer acquisitions, as well as an increase in testing for customers who upgrade from our VetTest to our Catalyst Dx instrument. Higher sales volumes of consumables used with our ProCyte Dx instrument also contributed to the increase in consumables revenue. The impact of changes in distributors inventory levels contributed 1% to reported consumables growth. The increase in rapid assay revenue was due primarily to higher sales of our canine combination test products driven primarily by higher average unit sales prices. The impact of changes in distributors inventory levels was not significant to rapid assay revenue growth. The increase in reference laboratory diagnostic and consulting services revenue resulted primarily from the impact of higher testing volumes and, to a lesser extent, price increases. Higher testing volumes were driven by the acquisition of new customers due, in part, to geographic expansion and our customer loyalty programs in which customers are provided incentives in exchange for agreements to purchase services in future periods. 45 The increase in practice management and digital imaging systems and services revenue resulted primarily from an increase in placements of our practice management systems, an increase in support and service revenue and incremental revenue recognized under customer loyalty programs where revenue had been deferred at the time of systems placement. Water. The increase in Water revenue resulted primarily from higher Colilert product sales volumes due to new account acquisitions. Livestock and Poultry Diagnostics. The decrease in LPD revenue resulted primarily from lower bovine test sales resulting from the changes in European Union testing requirements and declines in certain government programs. Effective July 1, 2011, the age at which healthy cattle to be slaughtered are required to be tested for Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy ( BSE or mad cow disease ) in the European Union was increased from 48 months to 72 months, which is reducing the population of cattle tested for this disease. Effective March 2013, European Union ( EU ) member states will have the option to eliminate BSE testing of healthy cattle at slaughter. Instead of eliminating testing, certain EU governments have elected to further increase the age at which healthy cattle are to be tested in 2013. Revenue from BSE testing products was less than $ 10 million during the twelve months ended December 31, 2012. Other. The increase in Other revenue was due primarily to higher sales volumes of our Dairy SNAP tests used for the detection of antibiotic residue and the contaminant Aflatoxin M1 in milk. Higher sales of our OPTI Medical instruments and related consumables also contributed to the increase in revenue. In 2013, we anticipate reduced sales of Dairy SNAP tests used for the detection of the contaminant Aflatoxin M1 in milk due to lower testing volumes in China compared to testing that was performed in 2012 in response to an outbreak. Gross Profit Total Company. The following table presents gross profit and gross profit percentages by operating segment: Gross Profit (dollars in thousands) For the Year Ended December 31, 2012 Percent of Revenue For the Year Ended December 31, 2011 Percent of Revenue Dollar Change Percentage Change CAG $ 561,043 52.3 % $ 515,656 51.6 % $ 45,387 8.8 % Water 56,133 66.3 % 51,555 62.8 % 4,578 8.9 % LPD 57,594 66.4 % 63,619 67.6 % (6,025 ) (9.5 %) Other 19,217 38.6 % 17,231 40.3 % 1,986 11.5 % Unallocated amounts 5,161 N/A (1,555 ) N/A 6,716 N/A Total Company $ 699,148 54.1 % $ 646,506 53.0 % $ 52,642 8.1 % Companion Animal Group. Gross profit for CAG increased due to higher sales and an increase in the gross profit percentage. The increase in the gross profit percentage was due primarily higher average unit sales prices of our canine combination rapid assay tests, lower unit costs for consumables used in our VetLab instruments and the favorable impact of currency. The net effect of currency was positive because the net unfavorable impact of changes in foreign currency exchange rates was more than offset by hedging gains during the year ended December 31, 2012 compared to hedging losses during the same period of the prior year. Water. Gross profit for Water increased due to higher sales and an increase in the gross profit percentage to 66% from 63%. The increase in the gross profit percentage was due primarily to lower overall manufacturing costs during the year ended December 31, 2012, the timing of certain manufacturing costs during the year ended December 31, 2011 and the favorable impact of currency. The net effect of currency was positive because the net unfavorable impact of changes in foreign currency exchange rates was more than offset by hedging gains during the year ended December 31, 2012 compared to hedging losses during the same period of the prior year. 46 Livestock and Poultry Diagnostics. Gross profit for LPD decreased due to lower sales and a decrease in the gross profit percentage to 66% from 68%. The decrease in the gross profit percentage was due primarily to higher overall manufacturing costs driven by lower production volumes, partly offset by the favorable impact of currency. The net effect of currency was positive because the net unfavorable impact of changes in foreign currency exchange rates was more than offset by hedging gains during the year ended December 31, 2012 compared to hedging losses during the same period of the prior year. Other. Gross profit for Other increased due to higher sales, partly offset by a decrease in the gross profit percentage to 39% from 40%. The decrease in the gross profit percentage was due primarily to lower average unit sales prices in our OPTI Medical line of business and higher freight and distribution costs in our Dairy line of business. These unfavorable factors were partly offset by lower overall manufacturing costs in our Dairy line of business driven by increased production volumes of our SNAP tests. Unallocated Amounts. Gross profit for Unallocated Amounts increased due primarily to a decrease in certain manufacturing costs. The manufacturing costs reported in our operating segments include our standard cost for products sold and any variances from standard cost for products purchased or manufactured within the period. We capitalize these variances for inventory on hand at the end of the period to record inventory in accordance with U.S. GAAP. We then record these variances as cost of product revenue as that inventory is sold. The impact to cost of product revenue resulting from this variance capitalization and subsequent recognition is reported within the caption Unallocated Amounts. The decrease in certain manufacturing costs is due primarily to the recognition of previously favorable production volume variances incurred in our LPD business. Operating Expenses and Operating Income Total Company. The following tables present operating expenses and operating income by operating segment: Operating Expenses (dollars in thousands) For the Year Ended December 31, 2012 Percent of Revenue For the Year Ended December 31, 2011 Percent of Revenue Dollar Change Percentage Change CAG $ 357,807 33.4 % $ 325,822 32.6 % $ 31,985 9.8 % Water 18,446 21.8 % 17,711 21.6 % 735 4.1 % LPD 38,335 44.2 % 39,880 42.4 % (1,545) (3.9 %) Other 14,766 29.7 % 14,675 34.3 % 91 0.6 % Unallocated amounts 7,231 N/A 12,193 N/A (4,962) (40.7 %) Total Company $ 436,585 33.8 % $ 410,281 33.7 % $ 26,304 6.4 % Operating Income (dollars in thousands) For the Year Ended December 31, 2012 Percent of Revenue For the Year Ended December 31, 2011 Percent of Revenue Dollar Change Percentage Change CAG $ 203,236 19.0 % $ 189,834 19.0 % $ 13,402 7.1 % Water 37,687 44.5 % 33,844 41.2 % 3,843 11.4 % LPD 19,259 22.2 % 23,739 25.2 % (4,480) (18.9 %) Other 4,451 9.0 % 2,556 6.0 % 1,895 74.1 % Unallocated amounts (2,070) N/A (13,748) N/A 11,678 84.9 % Total Company $ 262,563 20.3 % $ 236,225 19.4 % $ 26,338 11.1 % 47 Companion Animal Group. The following table presents CAG operating expenses by functional area: Operating Expenses (dollars in thousands) For the Year Ended December 31, 2012 Percent of Revenue For the Year Ended December 31, 2011 Percent of Revenue Dollar Change Percentage Change Sales and marketing 186,287 17.4 % 173,679 17.4 % 12,608 7.3 % General and administrative 115,266 10.8 % 102,699 10.3 % 12,567 12.2 % Research and development 56,254 5.2 49,444 5.0 6,810 13.8 % Total operating expenses $ 357,807 33.4 % $ 325,822 32.6 % $ 31,985 9.8 % The increase in sales and marketing expense resulted primarily from higher personnel-related costs, partly offset by the favorable impact from changes in foreign currency exchange rates. The increase in general and administrative expense was due primarily to higher personnel-related costs, higher amortization expense of our intangible assets and an increase in costs attributable to investments in information technology. These unfavorable impacts were partly offset by the favorable impact of changes in foreign currency exchange rates. The increase in research and development expense resulted primarily from higher personnel-related costs and increased external consulting and development costs. Water. The following table presents Water expenses by functional area: Operating Expenses (dollars in thousands) For the Year Ended December 31, 2012 Percent of Revenue For the Year Ended December 31, 2011 Percent of Revenue Dollar Change Percentage Change Sales and marketing $ 9,398 11.1 % $ 8,906 10.8 % $ 492 5.5 % General and administrative 6,546 7.7 % 6,443 7.8 % 103 1.6 % Research and development 2,502 3.0 % 2,362 2.9 % 140 5.9 % Total operating expenses $ 18,446 21.8 % $ 17,711 21.6 % $ 735 4.1 % The increase in sales and marketing expense resulted primarily from higher personnel-related costs, partly offset by the favorable impact of changes in foreign currency exchange rates. General and administrative expense was generally consistent with the same period of the prior year. The increase in research and development expense resulted primarily from higher personnel-related costs. Livestock and Poultry Diagnostics. The following table presents LPD operating expenses by functional area: Operating Expenses (dollars in thousands) For the Year Ended December 31, 2012 Percent of Revenue For the Year Ended December 31, 2011 Percent of Revenue Dollar Change Percentage Change Sales and marketing $ 14,934 17.2 % $ 15,933 16.9 % $ (999 ) (6.3 %) General and administrative 12,003 13.8 % 12,079 12.8 % (76 ) (0.6 %) Research and development 11,398 13.1 % 11,868 12.6 % (470 ) (4.0 %) Total operating expenses $ 38,335 44.2 % $ 39,880 42.4 % $ (1,545 ) (3.9 %) The decrease in sales and marketing expense resulted primarily from the favorable impact of changes in foreign currency exchange rates and lower personnel-related costs. General and administrative expense was generally consistent with the same period of the prior year. The decrease in research and development expense was due primarily to lower personnel-related costs and the favorable impact of changes in foreign currency exchange rates. 48 Other. Operating expenses for Other, which totaled $14.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2012, were generally consistent with the same period of the prior year as higher personnel-related costs in our OPTI Medical line of business were offset by a final $3.5 million milestone payment earned related to the 2008 sale of product rights previously included in our pharmaceutical product line earned during the year ended December 31, 2012 that was incremental to a similar $3.0 million milestone payment earned during the year ended December 31, 2011. Unallocated Amounts. Operating expenses that are not allocated to our operating segments decreased $5.0 million to $7.2 million for the year months ended December 31, 2012 due primarily to lower personnel-related costs, lower legal and other professional fees incurred in connection with the U.S. Federal Trade Commission ( FTC ) investigation and the absence of legal and other fees incurred in connection with the U.K. Office of Fair Trading ( OFT ) investigation, which concluded in November 2011. These favorable factors were partly offset by the absence of a payment related to the sale of certain raw material inventory in connection with the restructuring of our pharmaceutical business in 2008 that was recognized during the year ended December 31, 2011. We estimate certain personnel-related costs and allocate the estimated expense to the operating segments. This allocation differs from the actual expense and consequently yields a difference that is reported under the caption Unallocated Amounts. The FTC investigation is discussed in more detail under the heading Part I. Item 1A. Risk Factors in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Interest Income and Interest Expense Interest income of $1.9 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2012 was generally consistent with interest income of $1.7 million for the same period of the prior year. Interest expense was $3.8 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2012 compared to $3.5 million for the same period of the prior year. The increase in interest expense was due primarily to higher average balances outstanding on our unsecured revolving credit facility, partly offset by lower effective interest rates. Provision for Income Taxes Our effective income tax rate was 31.6% for the year ended December 31, 2012 and 31.0% for the year ended December 31, 2011. The increase in the tax rate is primarily due to federal research and development tax credits that were not available during 2012 but were available during 2011, partly offset by higher relative earnings subject to international tax rates that are lower than domestic tax rates. On January 2, 2013, the American Taxpayer Relief Act of 2012 was signed into law which retroactively reinstated and extended the federal research and development (R&D) tax credit from January 1, 2012 to December 31, 2013. As a result, the Company expects its income tax provision for the first quarter of 2013 will reflect the entire benefit of the R&D tax credit attributable to 2012. We expect the federal R&D tax credit reinstatement to contribute approximately a 2% reduction in our effective income tax rate for 2013, as compared to our effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2012. In 2013, it is reasonably possible that we could recognize up to $1.1 million of income tax benefits that have not been recognized at December 31, 2012. The income tax benefits are primarily due to the lapse in the statutes of limitations for various U.S. and international tax jurisdictions. Twelve Months Ended December 31, 2011 Compared to Twelve Months Ended December 31, 2010 The following revenue analysis and discussion reports on organic revenue growth. Organic revenue growth should be considered in addition to, and not as a replacement for or as a superior measure to, revenues reported in accordance with U.S. GAAP, and may not be comparable to similarly titled measures reported by other companies. Management believes that reporting organic revenue growth provides useful information to investors by facilitating easier comparisons of our revenue performance with prior and future periods and to our peers. We exclude the effect of changes in foreign currency exchange rates because changes in foreign currency exchange rates are not under management control, are subject to volatility and can obscure underlying business trends. We exclude the effect of acquisitions because the nature, size and number of acquisitions can vary dramatically from period to period and therefore can also obscure underlying business trends. 49 Organic revenue growth and the percentage changes in revenue from currency and acquisitions are non-U.S. GAAP measures. See the subsection above titled Effects of Certain Factors on Results of Operations for a description of the calculation of the percentage change in revenue resulting from changes in foreign currency exchange rates. The percentage change in revenue resulting from acquisitions represents incremental revenues attributable to acquisitions that have occurred since the beginning of the prior year period. Revenue Total Company. The following table presents revenue by operating segment: Net Revenue (dollars in thousands) For the Year Ended December 31, 2011 For the Year Ended December 31, 2010 Dollar Change Percentage Change Percentage Change from Currency Percentage Change from Acquisitions Organic Revenue Growth CAG $ 999,722 $ 905,655 $ 94,067 10.4 % 2.3 % 0.3 % 7.8 % Water 82,125 76,514 5,611 7.3 % 2.5 % - 4.8 % LPD 94,112 81,177 12,935 15.9 % 4.5 % - 11.4 % Other 42,730 40,046 2,684 6.7 % 2.1 % - 4.6 % Total $ 1,218,689 $ 1,103,392 $ 115,297 10.4 % 2.4 % 0.2 % 7.8 % Companion Animal Group. The following table presents revenue by product and service category for CAG. The VetLab instruments and consumables product and service category has been disaggregated into its three VetLab components: Net Revenue (dollars in thousands) For the Year Ended December 31, 2011 For the Year Ended December 31, 2010 Dollar Change Percentage Change Percentage Change from Currency Percentage Change from Acquisitions Organic Revenue Growth VetLab instruments $ 93,655 $ 85,540 $ 8,115 9.5 % 2.7 % - 6.8 % VetLab consumables 255,848 227,974 27,874 12.2 % 2.5 % - 9.7 % VetLab service and accessories 45,083 40,725 4,358 10.7 % 3.5 % - 7.2 % Rapid assay products 154,342 146,538 7,804 5.3 % 1.2 % - 4.1 % Reference laboratory diagnostic and consulting services 373,919 329,666 44,253 13.4 % 2.7 % 0.8 % 9.9 % Practice management and digital imaging systems and services 76,875 75,212 1,663 2.2 % 0.4 % - 1.8 % Net CAG revenue $ 999,722 $ 905,655 $ 94,067 10.4 % 2.3 % 0.3 % 7.8 % VetLab instruments revenue growth was due primarily to sales of ProCyte Dx , the hematology analyzer that we began shipping during the third quarter of 2010, and higher sales volumes of our Catalyst Dx instrument. These favorable impacts were partly offset by lower average unit sales prices driven primarily by discounts associated with our IDEXX VetLab instrument marketing programs. VetLab service and accessories revenue growth was primarily a result of the increase in our active installed base of instruments. VetLab consumables revenue growth was due primarily to higher sales of consumables used with our Catalyst Dx instrument, partly offset by lower sales of consumables used with our VetTest chemistry instrument as customers continue to upgrade from our VetTest instrument to our Catalyst Dx instrument. Higher sales of consumables used with our ProCyte Dx instrument also contributed to the increase in consumables revenue. The impact of changes in distributors inventory levels contributed 1% to reported consumables growth. 50 The increase in rapid assay revenue was due primarily to an increase in U.S. practice-level sales of our canine combination test products and, to a lesser extent, sales of our feline pancreatitis test products, which we began shipping during the second quarter of 2011. The impact of changes in distributors inventory levels was not significant to rapid assay revenue growth. The increase in reference laboratory diagnostic and consulting services revenue resulted primarily from the impact of higher testing volumes and, to a lesser extent, price increases. Higher testing volumes were driven by the acquisition of new customers due, in part, to geographic expansion and our customer loyalty programs in which customers are provided incentives in the form of IDEXX Points or cash in exchange for agreements to purchase services in future periods. The increase in practice management and digital imaging systems and services revenue resulted primarily from an increase in service and support revenue and an increase in sales volumes of our practice management systems. The increase in service and upport revenue was due primarily to an increase in our active installed base of digital radiography systems and, to a lesser extent, practice management systems. Higher sales volumes of our digital radiography systems also contributed to the overall increase in revenue. These favorable factors were partly offset by an increase in placements of digital radiography systems and practice management systems under our customer loyalty programs for which the related revenue is recognized in future periods. Water. The increase in Water revenue resulted primarily from higher sales volumes of Colilert test products, partly offset by the unfavorable impact of higher relative sales of Colilert test products in geographies where these products are sold at lower average unit sales prices. Livestock and Poultry Diagnostics. The increase in LPD revenue resulted primarily from higher sales volumes of certain bovine tests and, to a lesser extent, higher sales volumes of certain swine and poultry tests. The increased sales volume of certain bovine tests was driven primarily by sales in Germany where we have won several government tenders for testing in connection with a country-wide eradication program for a virus impacting beef and dairy production yields. Other. The increase in Other revenue was primarily attributable to higher sales volumes of our OPTI Medical consumables and, to a lesser extent, instruments, partly offset by lower sales volumes of our Dairy SNAP tests used for the detection of antibiotic residue in milk and lower average unit sales prices in our OPTI Medical line of business due, in part, to higher relative sales in geographies where products are sold at lower average unit sales prices. Gross Profit Total Company. The following table presents gross profit and gross profit percentages by operating segment: Gross Profit (dollars in thousands) For the Year Ended December 31, 2011 Percent of Revenue For the Year Ended December 31, 2010 Percent of Revenue Dollar Change Percentage Change CAG $ 515,656 51.6 % $ 458,491 50.6 % $ 57,165 12.5 % Water 51,555 62.8 % 48,231 63.0 % 3,324 6.9 % LPD 63,619 67.6 % 55,187 68.0 % 8,432 15.3 % Other 17,231 40.3 % 17,732 44.3 % (501 ) (2.8 %) Unallocated amounts (1,555 ) N/A (1,018 ) N/A (537 ) N/A Total Company $ 646,506 53.0 % $ 578,623 52.4 % $ 67,883 11.7 % 51 Companion Animal Group. Gross profit for CAG increased due to higher sales and an increase in the gross profit percentage to 52% from 51%. The increase in the gross profit percentage was due primarily to improvements in costs to manufacture our IDEXX VetLab instruments, higher relative sales of products that yield higher margins and an overall increase in average unit sales prices, driven by our reference laboratory diagnostic and consulting services line of business. These favorable impacts were partly offset by the unfavorable impact of currency as the net favorable impact of changes in foreign currency exchange rates was more than offset by the impact of increased hedging losses during the year ended December 31, 2011 compared to the year ended December 31, 2010. Water. Gross profit for Water increased as higher sales were partly offset by a slight decrease in the gross profit percentage. The decrease in the gross profit percentage was due primarily to lower average unit sales prices of our Colilert products and higher freight costs as a result of rising fuel surcharges. These unfavorable impacts were partly offset by higher relative sales of our Colilert products that yield higher margins and lower manufacturing costs driven by cost improvement initiatives. Livestock and Poultry Diagnostics. Gross profit for LPD increased as higher sales were partly offset by a slight decrease in the gross profit percentage. The decrease in the gross profit percentage was due primarily to the net unfavorable impact of currency as the net favorable impact of changes in foreign currency exchange rates was more than offset by hedging losses during the year ended December 31, 2011 compared to hedging gains during the year ended December 31, 2010. This unfavorable impact was partly offset by lower manufacturing costs and higher relative sales of products that yield higher margins. Lower manufacturing costs were driven largely by benefits achieved from economies of scale as a result of the increase in production volume. Other. Gross profit for Other decreased as higher sales were more than offset by a decrease in the gross profit percentage to 40% from 44%. The decrease in the gross profit percentage was due primarily to lower average unit sales prices in our OPTI Medical line of business and higher freight costs in our Dairy line of business that were due, in part, to rising fuel surcharges. Unallocated Amounts. Gross profit for Unallocated Amounts decreased due primarily to the unfavorable impact of certain manufacturing costs that we do not expect to continue at this level, partly offset by a decrease in certain personnel-related costs. With respect to manufacturing costs, the costs reported in our operating segments include our standard cost for products sold and any variances from standard cost for products purchased or manufactured within the period. We capitalize these variances for inventory on hand at the end of the period to record inventory in accordance with U.S. GAAP. We then record these costs as cost of product revenue as that inventory is sold. The impact to cost of product revenue resulting from this variance capitalization and subsequent expense recognition is reported within the caption Unallocated Amounts. With respect to personnel-related costs, we estimate certain personnel-related costs and allocate the estimated expenses to the operating segments. This allocation differs from actual expense and consequently yields a difference that is reported under the caption Unallocated Amounts. The decrease in certain personnel-related costs for Unallocated Amounts is due primarily to lower self-insured healthcare costs during the year ended December 31, 2011 compared to the same period of the prior year . Operating Expenses and Operating Income Total Company. The following tables present operating expenses and operating income by operating segment: Operating Expenses (dollars in thousands) For the Year Ended December 31, 2011 Percent of Revenue For the Year Ended December 31, 2010 Percent of Revenue Dollar Change Percentage Change CAG $ 325,822 32.6 % $ 293,278 32.4 % $ 32,544 11.1 % Water 17,711 21.6 % 16,618 21.7 % 1,093 6.6 % LPD 39,880 42.4 % 35,584 43.8 % 4,296 12.1 % Other 14,675 34.3 % 13,607 34.0 % 1,068 7.8 % Unallocated amounts 12,193 N/A 15,655 N/A (3,462 ) (22.1 %) Total Company $ 410,281 33.7 % $ 374,742 34.0 % $ 35,539 9.5 % 52 Operating Income (dollars in thousands) For the Year Ended December 31, 2011 Percent of Revenue For the Year Ended December 31, 2010 Percent of Revenue Dollar Change Percentage Change CAG $ 189,834 19.0 % $ 165,213 18.2 % $ 24,621 14.9 % Water 33,844 41.2 % 31,613 41.3 % 2,231 7.1 % LPD 23,739 25.2 % 19,603 24.2 % 4,136 21.1 % Other 2,556 6.0 % 4,125 10.3 % (1,569 ) (38.0 %) Unallocated amounts (13,748 ) N/A (16,673 ) N/A 2,925 17.5 % Total Company $ 236,225 19.4 % $ 203,881 18.5 % $ 32,344 15.9 % Companion Animal Group. The following table presents CAG operating expenses by functional area: Operating Expenses (dollars in thousands) For the Year Ended December 31, 2011 Percent of Revenue For the Year Ended December 31, 2010 Percent of Revenue Dollar Change Percentage Change Sales and marketing $ 173,679 17.4 % $ 151,652 16.7 % $ 22,027 14.5 % General and administrative 102,699 10.3 % 97,721 10.8 % 4,978 5.1 % Research and development 49,444 5.0 % 43,905 4.9 % 5,539 12.6 % Total operating expenses $ 325,822 32.6 % $ 293,278 32.4 % $ 32,544 11.1 % The increase in sales and marketing expense resulted primarily from an increase in personnel-related costs, the unfavorable impact of changes in foreign currency exchange rates and higher sales commission expenses attributable to the increase in sales volume. The increase in general and administrative expense resulted primarily from higher personnel-related costs, the unfavorable impact of changes in foreign currency exchange rates and an increase in costs attributable to investments in information technology. These increases were partly offset by a certain bad debt expense in 2010 that was absent in 2011 and payments that were earned during 2011 pursuant to certain product development arrangements and a license agreement. The bad debt expense in 2010 was in connection with the bankruptcy of one of our U.S. distributors, Professional Veterinary Products, Inc. The increase in research and development expense was due primarily to increased personnel-related costs and higher external consulting and development costs. Water. The following table presents Water expenses by functional area: Operating Expenses (dollars in thousands) For the Year Ended December 31, 2011 Percent of Revenue For the Year Ended December 31, 2010 Percent of Revenue Dollar Change Percentage Change Sales and marketing $ 8,906 10.8 % $ 7,898 10.3 % $ 1,008 12.8 % General and administrative 6,443 7.8 % 6,328 8.3 % 115 1.8 % Research and development 2,362 2.9 % 2,392 3.1 % (30 ) (1.3 %) Total operating expenses $ 17,711 21.6 % $ 16,618 21.7 % $ 1,093 6.6 % The increase in sales and marketing expense resulted primarily from increased personnel-related costs and the unfavorable impact of changes in foreign currency exchange rates. The increase in general and administrative expense resulted primarily from the unfavorable impact of changes in foreign currency exchange rates, partly offset by a decrease in personnel-related costs. The slight decrease in research and development expense resulted primarily from lower personnel-related costs. 53 Livestock and Poultry Diagnostics. The following table presents LPD operating expenses by functional area: Operating Expenses (dollars in thousands) For the Year Ended December 31, 2011 Percent of Revenue For the Year Ended December 31, 2010 Percent of Revenue Dollar Change Percentage Change Sales and marketing $ 15,933 16.9 % $ 13,820 17.0 % $ 2,113 15.3 % General and administrative 12,079 12.8 % 12,025 14.8 % 54 0.4 % Research and development 11,868 12.6 % 9,739 12.0 % 2,129 21.9 % Total operating expenses $ 39,880 42.4 % $ 35,584 43.8 % $ 4,296 12.1 % The increase in sales and marketing expense resulted primarily from higher personnel-related costs and the unfavorable impact of changes in foreign currency exchange rates. The increase in personnel-related costs was due primarily to an increase in sales personnel to support growth in developing markets. The slight increase in general and administrative expense resulted primarily from the unfavorable impact of changes in foreign currency exchange rates, partly offset by a decrease in personnel-related costs. The increase in research and development expense was due primarily to an increase in personnel-related costs and, to a lesser extent, the unfavorable impact of changes in foreign currency exchange rates. Other. Operating expenses for Other increased $1.1 million to $14.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2011. This increase was due primarily to increased research and development costs in our OPTI Medical line of business driven, in part, by higher personnel-related costs and increased consulting and external development costs. Unallocated Amounts. Operating expenses that are not allocated to our operating segments decreased $3.5 million to $12.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2011 due primarily to a decrease in certain personnel-related costs, receipt of a payment related to the sale of certain raw material inventory in connection with the restructuring of our pharmaceutical business in the fourth quarter of 2008, an impairment charge in 2010 that was absent in 2011, a decrease in legal and other professional fees incurred in connection with the FTC and OFT investigations and decreased foreign exchange losses during the year ended December 31, 2011 compared to the year ended December 31, 2010. The FTC investigation is discussed in more detail under the heading Part I. Item 1A. Risk Factors . We estimate certain personnel-related costs and allocate the estimated expenses to the operating segments. This allocation differs from actual expense and consequently yields a difference that is reported under the caption Unallocated Amounts. The decrease in certain personnel-related costs for Unallocated Amounts is due primarily to lower self-insured healthcare costs during the year ended December 31, 2011 compared to the same period of the prior year. The payment related to the sale of certain raw material inventory was not recorded in our results of operation until received due to uncertain collectability. The impairment charge in 2010 was to write off certain design costs related to a facilities project that had changed in scope. Interest Income and Interest Expense Interest income was $1.7 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2011 compared to $0.7 million for the same period of the prior year. The increase in interest income was due primarily to interest earned on a note issued in connection with a November 2010 strategic investment in a company that owns and operates veterinary hospitals and, to a lesser extent, from higher cash balances. 54 Interest expense was $3.5 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2011 compared to $2.4 million for the same period of the prior year. In July 2011, we refinanced our existing $200 million unsecured revolving credit facility by entering into an amended and restated credit agreement relating to a five-year unsecured revolving credit facility in the principal amount of $300 million with a syndicate of multinational banks, which matures on July 25, 2016 (the new credit facility and the previous credit facility are referred to collectively as the Credit Facility ) and requires no scheduled prepayments before that date. The increase in interest expense during the year ended December 31, 2011 in comparison to the same period of the prior year was due primarily to higher debt balances outstanding on our Credit Facility and higher effective interest rates on borrowings under our Credit Facility. As a result of the refinancing event in July 2011, applicable interest rates on borrowings under the Credit Facility generally range from 0.875 to 1.25 percentage points (the range of applicable interest rates on borrowing under the new credit facility and the previous credit facility are referred to collectively as the Credit Spread ) above the London interbank rate ( LIBOR ) or the Canadian Dollar-denominated bankers acceptance rate ( CDOR ) as opposed to a Credit Spread of 0.375 to 0.875 under the pre-existing Credit Facility. Because the Credit Spread increased as a result of the refinancing event, interest expense during the year ended December 31, 2011 increased in comparison to the same period of the prior year. Provision for Income Taxes Our effective income tax rate was 31.0% for the year ended December 31, 2011 and 30.1% for the year ended December 31, 2010. The increase in the tax rate is primarily due to lower tax benefits recognized related to the federal research and development tax credits, lower benefits recognized in connection with the expiration of certain statutes of limitations and increased state tax. RECENT ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS A discussion of recent accounting pronouncements is included in Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2012 included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES We fund the capital needs of our business through cash on hand, funds generated from operations, and amounts available under our Credit Facility. At December 31, 2012 and December 31, 2011, we had $224.0 million and $183.9 million, respectively, of cash and cash equivalents, and working capital of $163.2 million and $87.3 million, respectively. Additionally, at December 31, 2012, we had remaining borrowing availability of $ 87 million under our $300 million Credit Facility. We believe that, if necessary, we could obtain additional borrowings at prevailing market interest rates to fund our growth objectives. We further believe that current cash and cash equivalents, funds generated from operations, and available borrowings will be sufficient to fund our operations, capital purchase requirements, and strategic growth needs for the next twelve months, and that these resources will be sufficient in the long term to fund our business as currently conducted. We consider the majority of the operating earnings of certain non-U.S. subsidiaries to be indefinitely invested outside the U.S. Changes to this position could have adverse tax consequences. We manage our worldwide cash requirements considering available funds among all of our subsidiaries. Our foreign cash balances are generally available without restrictions to fund ordinary business operations outside the U.S. Of our total cash and cash equivalents at December 31, 2012, approximately $222.4 million was held by our foreign subsidiaries and was subject to material repatriation tax effects. The amount of cash and cash equivalents held by foreign subsidiaries subject to other restrictions on the free flow of funds (primarily securing various obligations) was approximately $1.6 million. As of December 31, 2012, 36% of the cash and cash equivalents held by our foreign subsidiaries was invested in money market funds restricted to U.S. government and agency securities, 42% was held as bank deposits, 21% was invested in money market funds having investments in highly liquid investment-grade fixed-income securities. As of December 31, 2012, approximately 61% of the cash and cash equivalents held by our foreign subsidiaries was held in U.S. dollars. 55 Should we require more capital in the U.S. than is generated by our operations domestically, for example to fund significant discretionary activities, we could elect to repatriate future earnings from foreign jurisdictions or raise capital in the U.S. through debt or equity issuances. These alternatives could result in higher effective tax rates, increased interest expense, or other dilution of our earnings. We have borrowed funds domestically and continue to have the ability to borrow funds domestically at reasonable interest rates. The following table presents additional key information concern ing working capital: For the Three Months Ended December 31, 2012 September 30, 2012 June 30, 2012 March 31, 2012 December 31, 2011 Days sales outstanding (1) 39.9 41.7 41.9 42.7 41.0 Inventory turns (2) 1.8 1.7 1.8 1.8 1.8 (1) Days sales outstanding represents the average of the accounts receivable balances at the beginning and end of each quarter divided by revenue for that quarter, the result of which is then multiplied by 91.25 days. (2) Inventory turns represents inventory-related cost of product revenue for the 12 months preceding each quarter-end divided by the inventory balance at the end of the quarter. Sources and Uses of Cash The following table presents cash provided (used): For the Years Ended December 31, (dollars in thousands) 2012 2011 Dollar Change Net cash provided by operating activities $ 230,282 $ 220,700 $ 9,582 Net cash used by investing activities (66,005 ) (96,996 ) 30,991 Net cash used by financing activities (125,343 ) (97,657 ) (27,686 ) Net effect of changes in exchange rates on cash 1,157 933 224 Net increase in cash and cash equivalents $ 40,091 $ 26,980 $ 13,111 Operating Activities. Cash provided by operating activities was $230.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2012 compared to $220.7 million for the same period in 2011. The total of net income and net non-cash charges, excluding the impact of reclassifying the tax benefit from share-based compensation arrangements to a financing activity, was $242.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2012 compared to $230.4 million for the same period in 2011, resulting in incremental operating cash flows of $12.3 million driven primarily by the increase in net income. The total of changes in operating assets and liabilities and the tax benefit from share-based compensation arrangements decreased cash by $12.4 million and $9.7 million for the years ended December 31, 2012 and 2011, respectively, resulting in an incremental decrease in cash of $2.7 million. The following table presents cash flows from changes in operating assets and liabilities and the tax benefit from share-based compensation arrangements: For the Years Ended December 31, (dollars in thousands) 2012 2011 Dollar Change Accounts receivable $ 3,487 $ (24,809 ) $ 28,296 Inventories (13,752 ) (6,310 ) (7,442 ) Other assets 3,933 (1,339 ) 5,272 Accounts payable (1,304 ) 13,884 (15,188 ) Accrued liabilities 3,011 17,564 (14,553 ) Deferred revenue 6,888 7,341 (453 ) Tax benefit from share-based compensation arrangements (14,676 ) (16,007 ) 1,331 Total change in cash due to changes in operating assets and liabilities and the tax benefit from share-based compensation arrangements $ (12,413 ) $ (9,676 ) $ (2,737 ) 56 Incremental cash used by accounts payable and accrued liabilities was due primarily to the timing of vendor and income tax payments during the year ended December 31, 2012 compared to the prior year. The increase in inventories during the year ended December 31, 2012 was more than the increase during the year ended December 31, 2011 due primarily to the timing of inventory receipts, most significantly of slides used with our chemistry instruments. The amount and timing of revenues and customer payments was the primary driver of the cash used by accounts receivable during the year ended December 31, 2011. We historically have experienced proportionally lower net cash flows from operating activities during the first quarter and proportionally higher cash flows from operating activities for the remainder of the year and for the annual period driven primarily by the payment of annual bonuses in connection with employee incentive programs in the first quarter following the year for which the bonuses were earned and the seasonality of vector-borne disease testing, which has historically resulted in significant increases in accounts receivable balances during the first quarter of the year. Investing Activities. Cash used by investing activities was $66.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2012 compared to $97.0 million for the same period of the prior year. The decrease in cash used by investing activities was due primarily to lower cash payments to acquire businesses during the year ended December 31, 2012 compared to the prior year and the substantial completion in 2011 of investments in our Memphis, Tennessee facility, partly offset by increased investments in information technology and incremental investments during the year ended December 31, 2012 to expand our headquarters facility in Westbrook, Maine. Investments in information technology consisted of incremental costs to develop Pet Health Network Pro and increased purchases of computer hardware during the year ended December 31, 2012 as compared to the prior year. During the year December 31, 2012, we paid an aggregate of $2.7 million in cash to acquire three businesses, compared to $46.8 million paid in cash to acquire three businesses during the prior year. We accounted for all of the businesses acquired in 2012 and 2011 as business combinations. Our total capital expenditure plan for 2013 is estimated to be approximately $75 million, which includes approximately $21 million for the expansion of our headquarters facility in Westbrook, Maine, $16 million of investments in internal use software and information technology infrastructure, $12 million of capital investments in manufacturing equipment and $10 million for investments in our reference laboratory equipment and facilities. Financing Activities. Cash used by financing activities was $125.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2012 compared to cash used of $97.7 million for the same period in 2011. The increase in cash used by financing activities was due primarily to net payments under the Credit Facility for the year ended December 31, 2012 compared to net borrowing for the same period of the prior year and a decrease in cash received from the exercise of stock options and employee stock purchase plans and the related tax benefit, partly offset by a decrease in cash used to repurchase common stock. Cash used to repurchase shares of our common stock decreased by $123.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2012 compared to the prior year. From the inception of our share repurchase program in August 1999 to December 31, 2012, we have repurchased 45.1 million shares. During the year ended December 31, 2012, we purchased 1.5 million shares for an aggregate cost of $132.3 million compared to purchases of 3.4 million shares for an aggregate cost of $255.5 million during 2011. We believe that the repurchase of our common stock is a favorable investment and we also repurchase to offset the dilutive effect of our share-based compensation programs. Repurchases of our common stock may vary depending upon the level of other investing activities and the share price. See Note 18 to the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information about our share repurchases. Cash proceeds from the exercise of stock options and share purchases under employee stock purchase plans and the related tax benefits decreased by $6.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2012 compared to the prior year due primarily to a decrease in the number of stock options exercised. 57 Net borrowing and repayment activity under our Credit Facility resulted in incremental cash used of $144.9 million during the year ended December 31, 2012 compared to the prior year. At December 31, 2012, we had $212.0 million outstanding under the Credit Facility. The general availability of funds under the Credit Facility was further reduced by $1.0 million for a letter of credit issued related to our worker compensation policy covering claims for the years ending 2009 through 2012. The obligations under the Credit Facility may be accelerated upon the occurrence of an event of default under the Credit Facility, which includes customary events of default including, without limitation, payment defaults, defaults in the performance of affirmative and negative covenants, the inaccuracy of representations or warranties, bankruptcy and insolvency related defaults, defaults relating to judgments, certain events related to employee pension benefit plans under the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, the failure to pay specified indebtedness, and a change of control default. The Credit Facility contains affirmative, negative and financial covenants customary for financings of this type. The negative covenants include restrictions on liens, indebtedness of subsidiaries of the Company, fundamental changes, investments, transactions with affiliates and certain restrictive agreements. The financial covenant is a consolidated leverage ratio test that requires our ratio of debt to earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization, defined as the consolidated leverage ratio under the terms of the Credit Facility, not to exceed 3-to-1. At December 31, 2012, we were in compliance with the covenants of the Credit Facility . Other Commitments, Contingencies and Guarantees Under our worker compensation insurance policies for U.S. employees since January 1, 2003, we have retained the first $250,000 in claim liability per incident with aggregate maximum claim liabilities per year of $2.0 million in 2012 and 2011 and $2.9 million in 2010. The insurance company provides for insurance claims above the individual occurrence and aggregate limits. We have recognized cumulative expenses of $0.7 million, $0.4 million, and $0.8 million for claims incurred during the years ended December 31, 2012, 2011 and 2010, respectively. Our estimated liability for worker compensation as of December 31, 2012 and 2011 was $1.2 million and $0.7 million, respectively. Claims incurred during the years ended December 31, 2012 and 2011 are relatively undeveloped as of December 31, 2012. Therefore, it is possible that we could incur additional healthcare and wage indemnification costs beyond those previously recognized up to our aggregate liability for each of the respective claim years. For the eight years ended on or prior to December 31, 2010, based on our retained claim liability per incident and our aggregate claim liability per year, our maximum liability at December 31, 2012 in excess of the amounts deemed probable and previously recognized is not material. In connection with these policies, we have outstanding letters of credit totaling $1.3 million to the insurance companies as security for these claims. We have contingent commitments outstanding of up to $7.5 million related primarily to the acquisition of an intangible asset in 2008 and due to the seller upon our achievement of certain revenue and other milestones. We have not accrued for the commitments related to this intangible asset acquisition as we do not deem them to be probable of occurring as of December 31, 2012. The remaining commitments are not material. We are contractually obligated to make the following payments in the years below: Contractual obligations (in thousands) Total Less than 1 year 1-3 years 3-5 years More than 5 years Long-term debt obligations (1) $ 2,501 $ 1,107 $ 1,394 $ - $ - Operating leases 70,929 13,013 21,179 15,411 21,326 Purchase obligations (2) 128,035 116,494 5,613 2,968 2,960 Minimum royalty payments 4,833 883 1,445 1,080 1,425 Total contractual cash obligations $ 206,298 $ 131,497 $ 29,631 $ 19,459 $ 25,711 (1) Long-term debt amounts include interest payments associated with long-term debt. (2) Purchase obligations include agreements and purchase orders to purchase goods or services that are enforceable and legally binding and that specify all significant terms, including fixed or minimum quantities, pricing, and approximate timing of purchase transactions. These commitments do not reflect unrecognized tax benefits of $5.9 million and deferred compensation liabilities of $2.3 million as of December 31, 2012 as the timing of recognition is uncertain. Refer to Note 12 of the consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2012 included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional discussion of unrecognized tax benefits. 58 
