CIK: 874761
Company Name: AES CORP
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2012-02-27


ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS Overview of Our Business We are a global power company. We operate two primary lines of business. The first is our Generation business, where we own and/or operate power plants to generate and sell power to wholesale customers such as utilities, other intermediaries and certain end-users. The second is our Utilities business, where we own and/or operate utilities which distribute, transmit and sell electricity to end-user customers in the residential, commercial, industrial and governmental sectors within a defined service area and in certain circumstances, generate and sell electricity on the wholesale market. For the year ended December 31, 2011, our Generation and Utilities businesses comprised approximately 45% and 55% of our consolidated revenue, respectively. For additional information regarding our business, see Item 1. Business of this Form 10-K. Our wind and solar businesses are not material contributors to our operating results. For additional information regarding our business, see Item 1. Business of this Form 10-K. Our Organization and Segments. The Company current management reporting structure is organized along our two lines of business (Generation and Utilities) and three regions: (1) Latin America & Africa; (2) North America; and (3) Europe, Middle East & Asia (collectively EMEA ). The financial reporting segment structure uses the Company management reporting structure as its foundation and reflects how the Company manages the business internally. In October 2011, the Company announced a plan to redefine its operational management and organizational structure. The reporting structure will remain organized along two lines of business Generation and Utilities, each led by a Chief Operating Officer; however, we are continuing to evaluate both the timing and impact, if any, that the realignment will have on our reportable segments. For the year ended December 31, 2011, the Company applied the segment reporting accounting guidance, which provides certain quantitative thresholds and aggregation criteria, and concluded that it has the following six reportable segments: Latin America Generation; Latin America Utilities; North America Generation; North America Utilities; Europe Generation; and Asia Generation. Corporate and Other . The Company Europe Utilities, Africa Utilities, Africa Generation, Wind Generation operating segments and climate solutions and other renewables projects are reported within Corporate and Other because they do not meet the criteria to allow for aggregation with another operating segment or the quantitative thresholds that would require separate disclosure under segment reporting accounting guidance. None of these operating segments are currently material to our financial statement presentation of reportable segments, individually or in the aggregate. Corporate and Other also includes costs related to corporate overhead which are not directly associated with the operations of our six reportable segments and other intercompany charges such as self-insurance premiums which are fully eliminated in consolidation. Components of Revenue and Cost of Sales. Revenue includes revenue earned from the sale of energy from our utilities and the production of energy from our generation plants, which are classified as regulated and non-regulated on the Consolidated Statements of Operations, respectively. Revenue also includes the gains or losses on derivatives (including embedded derivatives other than foreign currency embedded derivatives) associated with the sale of electricity. Cost of sales includes costs incurred directly by the businesses in the ordinary course of business. Examples include electricity and fuel purchases, maintenance, operations, non-income taxes and bad debt expense and recoveries as well as depreciation and general and administrative 116 Table of Contents and support costs, including employee-related costs, that are directly associated with the operations of a particular business. Cost of sales also includes the gains or losses on derivatives (including embedded derivatives other than foreign currency embedded derivatives) associated with the purchase of electricity or fuel. Key Drivers of Our Results. Our Generation and Utilities businesses are distinguished by the nature of their customers, operational differences, cost structure, regulatory environment and risk exposure. As a result, each line of business has different drivers which affect operating results. Performance drivers for our Generation businesses include, among other things, plant reliability and efficiency, power prices, volume, management of fixed and variable operating costs, management of working capital including collection of receivables, and the extent to which our plants have hedged their exposure to currency and commodities such as fuel. For our Generation businesses which sell power under short-term contracts or in the spot market, the most crucial factors are the current market price of electricity and the marginal costs of production. Growth in our Generation business is largely tied to securing new PPAs, expanding capacity in our existing facilities and building or acquiring new power plants. Performance drivers for our Utilities businesses include, but are not limited to, reliability of service; management of working capital, including collection of receivables; negotiation of tariff adjustments; compliance with extensive regulatory requirements; management of pension assets; and in developing countries, reduction of commercial and technical losses. The operating results of our Utilities businesses are sensitive to changes in inflation, economic growth and weather conditions in areas in which they operate. In addition to these drivers, as explained below, the Company also has exposure to currency exchange rate fluctuations. One of the key factors which affect our Generation business is our ability to enter into contracts for the sale of electricity and the purchase of fuel used to produce that electricity. Long-term contracts are intended to reduce the exposure to volatility associated with fuel prices in the market and the price of electricity by fixing the revenue and costs for these businesses. The majority of the electricity produced by our Generation businesses is sold under long-term contracts, or PPAs, to wholesale customers. In turn, most of these businesses enter into long-term fuel supply contracts or fuel tolling arrangements where the customer assumes full responsibility for purchasing and supplying the fuel to the power plant. While these long-term contractual agreements reduce exposure to volatility in the market price for electricity and fuel, the predictability of operating results and cash flows vary by business based on the extent to which a facility generation capacity and fuel requirements are contracted and the negotiated terms of these agreements. Entering into these contracts exposes us to counterparty credit risk. For further discussion of these risks, see Supplier and/or customer concentration may expose the Company to significant financial credit or performance risks. in Item 1A. Risk Factors of this Form 10-K. When fuel costs increase, many of our businesses are able to pass these costs on to their customers. Generation businesses with long-term contracts in place do this by including fuel pass-through or fuel indexing arrangements in their contracts. Utilities businesses can pass costs on to their customers through increases in current or future tariff rates. Therefore, in a rising fuel cost environment, the increased fuel costs for these businesses often result in an increase in revenue to the extent these costs can be passed through (though not necessarily on a one-for-one basis). Conversely, in a declining fuel cost environment, the decreased fuel costs can result in a decrease in revenue. Increases or decreases in revenue at these businesses that have the ability to pass through costs to the customer have a corresponding impact on cost of sales, to the extent the costs can be passed through, resulting in a limited impact on gross margin, if any. Although these circumstances may not have a large impact on gross margin, they can significantly affect gross margin as a percentage of revenue. As a result, gross margin as a percentage of revenue is a less relevant measure when evaluating our operating performance. To the extent our businesses are unable to pass through fuel cost increases to their customers, gross margin may be adversely affected. Global diversification also helps us mitigate risk. Our presence in mature markets helps mitigate the exposure associated with our businesses in emerging markets. Additionally, our portfolio employs a broad range of fuels, including coal, gas, fuel oil, water (hydroelectric power), wind and solar, which reduces the risks associated with dependence on any one fuel source. However, to the extent the mix of fuel sources enabling our generation capabilities in any one market is not diversified, the spread in costs of different fuels may also 117 Table of Contents influence the operating performance and the ability of our subsidiaries to compete within that market. For example, in a market where gas prices fall to a low level compared to coal prices, power prices may be set by low gas prices which can affect the profitability of our coal plants in that market. In certain cases, we may attempt to hedge fuel prices to manage this risk, but there can be no assurance that these strategies will be effective. We also attempt to limit risk by hedging much of our interest rate and commodity risk, and by matching the currency of most of our subsidiary debt to the revenue of the underlying business. However, we only hedge a portion of our currency and commodity risks, and our businesses are still subject to these risks, as further described in Item 1A. Risk Factors of this Form 10-K, We may not be adequately hedged against our exposure to changes in commodity prices or interest rates . Commodity and power price volatility could continue to impact our financial metrics to the extent this volatility is not hedged. For a discussion of our sensitivities to commodity, currency and interest rate risk, see Item 7A. Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk of this Form 10-K. Due to our global presence, the Company has significant exposure to foreign currency fluctuations. The exposure is primarily associated with the impact of the translation of our foreign subsidiaries operating results from their local currency to U.S. dollars that is required for the preparation of our consolidated financial statements. Additionally, there is a risk of transaction exposure when an entity enters into transactions, including debt agreements, in currencies other than their functional currency. These risks are further described in Item 1A. Risk Factors of this Form 10-K, Our financial position and results of operations may fluctuate significantly due to fluctuations in currency exchange rates experienced at our foreign operations . In the year ended December 31, 2011, changes in foreign currency exchange rates have had a significant impact on our operating results. If the current foreign currency exchange rate volatility continues, our gross margin and other financial metrics could be affected. Another key driver of our results is our ability to bring new businesses into commercial operations successfully and to integrate acquisitions. We currently have approximately 2,391 MW of projects under construction in nine countries. Our prospects for increased operating results and cash flows are dependent upon successful completion of these projects on time and within budget. However, as disclosed in Item 1A. Risk Factors of this Form 10-K, Our business is subject to substantial development uncertainties , construction is subject to a number of risks, including risks associated with site identification, financing and permitting and our ability to meet construction deadlines. Delays or the inability to complete projects and commence commercial operations can result in increased costs, impairment of assets and other challenges involving partners and counterparties to our construction agreements, PPAs and other agreements. Similarly, failure to integrate acquisitions and manage market risk, including the Company recent acquisition of DPL, could impact our future operating results as disclosed in Item 1A. Risk Factors of this Form 10-K, After completion of the DPL acquisition, the Company, may fail to realize the anticipated benefits and cost savings of the acquisition, which could adversely affect the value of the Company common stock and Key Trends and Uncertainties Goodwill , below. Our gross margin is also impacted by the fact that in each country in which we conduct business, we are subject to extensive and complex governmental regulations such as regulations governing the generation and distribution of electricity, and environmental regulations which affect most aspects of our business. Regulations differ on a country by country basis (and even at the state and local municipality levels) and are based upon the type of business we operate in a particular country, and affect many aspects of our operations and development projects. Our ability to negotiate tariffs, enter into long-term contracts, pass through costs related to capital expenditures and otherwise navigate these regulations can have an impact on our revenue, costs and gross margin. Environmental and land use regulations, including existing and proposed regulation of GHG emissions, could substantially increase our capital expenditures or other compliance costs, which could in turn have a material adverse effect on our business and results of operations. For a further discussion of the Regulatory Environment, see Item 1. Business Regulatory Matters Environmental and Land Use Regulations and Item 1A. Risk Factors Risks Associated with Government Regulation and Laws of this Form 10-K. 118 Table of Contents Management Priorities Management has re-evaluated its priorities following the appointment of its new CEO in September 2011. Management is focused on the following priorities: Execution of our geographic concentration strategy to maximize shareholder value through disciplined capital allocation including: platform expansion in Brazil, Chile, Colombia, and the United States, platform development in Turkey, Poland, and the United Kingdom, corporate debt reduction, and a return of capital to shareholders, including our intent to initiate a dividend in 2012; Closing the sales of businesses for which we have signed agreements with counterparties and prudently exiting select non-strategic markets; Optimizing profitability of operations in the existing portfolio; Integration of DPL into our portfolio; Implementing a management realignment of our businesses under two business lines: Utilities and Generation, and achieving cost savings through the alignment of overhead costs with business requirements, systems automation and optimal allocation of business development spending; and Completion of an approximately 2,400 MW construction program and the integration of new projects into existing businesses. During the year ended December 31, 2011, the following projects commenced commercial operations: Project Location Fuel Gross MW AES Equity Interest (Percent, Rounded) AES Solar (1) Various Solar 62 50 % Angamos Chile Coal 545 71 % Changuinola Panama Hydro 223 100 % Kumkoy (2) Turkey Hydro 18 51 % Laurel Mountain US-WV Wind 98 100 % Maritza Bulgaria Coal 670 100 % Sao Joaquim Brazil Hydro 3 24 % Trinidad (3) Trinidad Gas 394 10 % (1) AES Solar Energy Ltd. is a Joint Venture with Riverstone Holdings and is accounted for as an equity method investment. Plants that came online during the year include: Kalipetrovo, Ugento, Soemina, Francavilla Fontana, Latina, Cocomeri, Francofonte, Scopeto, Sabaudia, Aprilla-1, Siracusa 1-3 Complex, Manduria Apollo and Rinaldone. (2) Joint Venture with I.C. Energy. (3) An equity method investment held by AES. Key Trends and Uncertainties Our operations continue to face many risks as discussed in Item 1A. Risk Factors of this Form 10-K. Some of these challenges are also described below in Key Drivers of Results in 2011 . We continue to monitor our operations and address challenges as they arise. Operations In August 2010, the Esti power plant, a 120 MW run-of-river hydroelectric power plant in Panama, was taken offline due to damage to its tunnel infrastructure. AES Panama is partially covered for business 119 Table of Contents interruption losses and property damage under existing insurance programs. The Esti power plant is currently being repaired and is projected to resume operations by the second quarter of 2012. However, due to the inherent uncertainties associated with construction, it is possible that commercial operations may resume after this timeframe which could impact our results for 2012. Regulatory tariff revisions have a potential to adversely impact the results of our utility businesses. For example, Eletropaulo, our utility business in Brazil, is currently billing its customers under the pre-existing tariff as required by the regulator. In July 2011, the regulator postponed the review and reset of Eletropaulo regulated tariff, which includes a tariff component that determines the margin Eletropaulo is allowed to earn. The review and reset of the regulated tariff is performed every four years. Management believes that it is probable that the new tariff rate will be lower than the current tariff rate, resulting in future refunds to customers, and based on its best estimate continues to record the amount of estimated future refunds as a reduction of revenue and a regulatory liability. The estimate is sensitive to the key assumption regarding the regulatory asset base that will be used by the regulator to determine the return included in the revised tariff. This assumption is subject to ongoing discussions with the regulator. As the periodic review and reset process progresses with the regulator into 2012, it is at least reasonably possible that the estimated amount of refunds will change in amounts that could require more refunds than we currently expect, in amounts that could be material. See Item 1 Business Regulatory Matters United States The Dayton Power and Light Company included in this Form 10-K for further information regarding DPL expected filing with PUCO to propose either a new ESP or MRO to be effective January 1, 2013. The outcome of the proceeding could have a material impact on our results. Global Economic Considerations During the past few years, economic conditions in some countries where our subsidiaries conduct business have deteriorated. Global economic conditions remain volatile and could have an adverse impact on our businesses in the event these recent trends continue. Our business or results of operations could be impacted if we or our subsidiaries are unable to access the capital markets on favorable terms or at all, are unable to raise funds through the sale of assets or are otherwise unable to finance or refinance our activities. At this time, the Euro Zone continues to face a sovereign debt crisis, the impacts of which are described below. The Company could also be adversely affected if capital market disruptions result in increased borrowing costs (including with respect to interest payments on the Company or our subsidiaries variable rate debt) or if commodity prices affect the profitability of our plants or their ability to continue operations. In addition, in recent months, global economic sentiment has indicated that there is a possibility of global economic slowdown in the coming months. The Company could be adversely affected if general economic or political conditions in the markets where our subsidiaries operate deteriorate, resulting in a reduction in cash flow from operations, a reduction in the availability and/or an increase in the cost of capital, or if the value of our assets remain depressed or declines further. Any of the foregoing events or a combination thereof could have a material impact on the Company, its results of operations, liquidity, financial covenants, and/or its credit rating. Our subsidiaries are subject to credit risk, which includes risk related to the ability of counterparties (such as parties to our PPAs, fuel supply agreements, hedging agreements and other contractual arrangements) to deliver contracted commodities or services at the contracted price or to satisfy their financial or other contractual obligations. The Company has not suffered any material effects related to its counterparties during the year ended December 31, 2011. However, if macroeconomic conditions impact our counterparties, they may be unable to meet their commitments which could result in the loss of favorable contractual positions, which could have a material impact on our business. 120 Table of Contents Euro Zone Debt Crisis. During the past year, certain European Union countries have continually faced a sovereign debt crisis and it is possible that this crisis could spread to other countries. This crisis has resulted in an increased risk of default by governments and the implementation of austerity measures in certain countries. If the crisis continues, worsens, or spreads, there could be a material adverse impact on the Company. Our businesses may be impacted if they are unable to access the capital markets, face increased taxes or labor costs, or if governments fail to fulfill their obligations to us or adopt austerity measures which adversely impact our projects. At December 31, 2011, the Company had unfunded commitments from European banks for our corporate revolver and for certain project finance debt totaling $142 million and $728 million, respectively. Approximately 7% of the non-recourse debt held by subsidiaries was denominated in Euros and 15% of our variable rate debt was indexed to Euribor at December 31, 2011. In addition, as discussed in Item 1A. Risk Factors Our renewable energy projects and other initiatives face considerable uncertainties including development, operational and regulatory challenges of this Form 10-K, our renewables businesses are dependent on favorable regulatory incentives, including subsidies, which are provided by sovereign governments, including European governments. If these subsidies or other incentives are reduced or repealed, or sovereign governments are unable or unwilling to fulfill their commitments or maintain favorable regulatory incentives for renewables, in whole or in part, this could impact the ability of the affected businesses to continue to sustain and/or grow their operations. For example, in 2011, tariffs for certain of our European solar businesses were reduced, and could be reduced further. The Company investment in AES Solar Energy Ltd., whose primary operations are in Europe, was $225 million at December 31, 2011. During the year ended December 31, 2011, in connection with the tariff decreases, AES Solar Energy Ltd. recognized an impairment charge of $20 million on its assets, of which AES share was $10 million. In addition, any of the foregoing could also impact contractual counterparties of our subsidiaries in core power or renewables. If such counterparties are adversely impacted, then they may be unable to meet their commitments to our subsidiaries. For example, our investments in Bulgaria rely on offtaker contracts from NEK, a fully state-owned entity. The Company has assets of $1.2 billion in Bulgaria. For further information on the importance of long-term contracts and our counterparty credit risk, see Item 1A. Risk Factors We may not be able to enter into long-term contracts, which reduce volatility in our results of operations of this Form 10-K. As a result of any of the foregoing events, we may have to provide loans or equity to support affected businesses or projects, restructure them, write down their value and/or face the possibility that these projects cannot continue operations or provide returns consistent with our expectations, any of which could have a material impact on the Company. As noted in Item 1A Risk Factors We may not be adequately hedged against our exposure to changes in commodity prices or interest rates , Item 7 Management Discussion and Analysis, Key Drivers of Results in 2011 , and Item 7A. Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk Commodity Price Risk of this Form 10-K, the Company North American businesses continue to face pressure as a result of high coal prices relative to natural gas, which has affected the results of certain of our coal plants in the region, particularly those which are merchant plants that are exposed to market risk and those that have hybrid merchant risk, meaning those businesses that have a PPA in place, but purchase fuel at market prices or under short term contracts. In 2011, AES Thames, LLC ( Thames ), our 208 MW coal-fired plant in Connecticut, and Eastern Energy, our coal-fired plants in New York; filed for bankruptcy and are no longer in our portfolio of businesses. In connection with the recent Eastern Energy bankruptcy filing, it is possible that creditors may attempt to bring claims against Eastern Energy and or directly against the AES Corporation. While we believe Eastern Energy and The AES Corporation would have meritorious defenses against any such claims, there can be no assurance that Eastern Energy or the AES Corporation would prevail in such claims. At this time, AES Deepwater has been idled to mitigate operating risks caused by high fuel costs and other competitive pressures. If the conditions described above continue or worsen, our North American businesses with market or hybrid merchant exposure may need to restructure their obligations or seek additional funding (including from the Parent) or face the possibility that they may be unable to meet their obligations and continue operations, which could result in the loss of earnings or cash flow or result in a write down in the value of these assets, any of which could have a material impact on the Company. For further discussion of the risks associated with commodity prices, see Item 1A. Risk Factors We may not be adequately hedged against our exposure to changes in commodity prices or interest rates . of this Form 10-K. 121 Table of Contents If global economic conditions worsen, it could also affect the prices we receive for the electricity we generate or transmit. Utility regulators or parties to our generation contracts may seek to lower our prices based on prevailing market conditions as PPAs, concession agreements or other contracts come up for renewal or reset. In addition, rising fuel and other costs coupled with contractual price or tariff decreases could restrict our ability to operate profitably in a given market. Each of these factors, as well as those discussed above, could result in a decline in the value of our assets including those at the businesses we operate, our equity investments and projects under development and could result in asset impairments that could be material to our operations. We continue to monitor our projects and businesses. Impairments Long-lived assets . The global economic conditions and other adverse factors discussed above heighten the risk of significant asset impairment. The Company continues to evaluate the impact of economic conditions on the fair value of our long-lived assets on an ongoing basis. Examples of conditions that could be indicative of impairment which would require us to evaluate the recovery of a long-lived asset or asset group include: current period operating or cash flow losses combined with a history of operating or cash flow losses or a projection that demonstrates continuing losses associated with the use of a long-lived asset group; a significant adverse change in legal factors, including changes in environmental or other regulations or in the business climate that could affect the value of a long-lived asset group, including an adverse action or assessment by a regulator; a significant adverse change in the extent or manner in which a long-lived asset group is being used or in its physical condition; and a current expectation that, more likely than not, a long-lived asset (asset group) will be sold or otherwise disposed of significantly before the end of its previously estimated useful life. During the third quarter of 2011, the Company evaluated the future use of certain wind turbines held in storage pending their installation and turbine deposits. Due to reduced wind turbine market pricing and advances in turbine technology, the Company determined that it was more likely than not the turbines would be sold before the end of their previously estimated useful lives. At the same time, the Company also concluded that it was more likely than not non-refundable deposits that it had made in prior years to a turbine manufacturer for the purchase of wind turbines were not recoverable. The Company determined it was more likely than not that it would not proceed with the purchase of these turbines due to the availability of more advanced and lower cost turbines in the market. In October 2011, the Company determined that an impairment had occurred as of September 30, 2011 and wrote down the aggregate carrying amount of $161 million of these assets to their estimated fair value of $45 million by recognizing asset impairment expense of $116 million. In January 2012, the Company forfeited the deposits for which a full impairment charge was recognized in the third quarter of 2011, and there is no obligation for further payments under the related turbine supply agreement. Additionally, the Company sold some of the turbines held in storage during the fourth quarter of 2011 and is continuing to evaluate the future use of the turbines held in storage. The Company determined it is more likely than not that they will be sold, however they are not being actively marketed for sale at this time as the Company is reconsidering the potential use of the turbines in light of recent development activity at one of its advance stage development projects. It is reasonably possible that the turbines could incur further loss in value due to changing market conditions and advances in technology. We have continued to evaluate the recoverability of our long-lived assets at Kelanitissa, our diesel-fired generation plant in Sri Lanka, as a result of both the existing government regulation which may require the government to acquire an ownership interest and the current expectation of future losses. In 2011, our evaluations indicated that the long-lived assets were not recoverable and accordingly, they were written down to their estimated fair value of $24 million based on a discounted cash flow analysis. Kelanitissa is a Build-operate-transfer ( BOT ) generation facility and payments under its PPA are scheduled to decline over the PPA term. It is possible that further impairment charges may be required in the future as Kelanitissa gets closer to the BOT date. 122 Table of Contents Equity method investments . Adverse changes in economic and business conditions could also impact the value of our equity method investments. For example, Yangcheng International Power Generating Co. Ltd ( Yangcheng ), our 2,100 MW coal-fired plant in China, which is accounted for under the equity method of accounting, continues to experience lower operating margin due to higher coal prices. The coal prices trended upward during the nine months ended September 30, 2011 and it is unlikely that the trend will reverse in the next several years. Due to the tight governmental control on the tariff, it is also difficult to pass through the increase in fuel costs to customers. At the end of the venture in 2016, AES is required to surrender its interest to other venture partners without additional compensation. During the third quarter of 2011, an other-than-temporary-impairment of $74 million was recognized to write down Yangcheng to its estimated fair value of $26 million. It is reasonably possible that further impairment expense may be required on Yangcheng or any other equity method investments if adverse changes occur in economic or business environments. Goodwill. The Company seeks business acquisitions as one of its growth strategies. We have achieved significant growth in the past as a result of several business acquisitions, which also resulted in the recognition of goodwill. As noted in Item 1A. Risk Factors of this Form 10-K, there is always a risk that Our acquisitions may not perform as expected . One of the primary factors contributing to goodwill is the synergies expected from an acquisition that follow the integration of the acquired business with the existing operations of an entity. Thus, an entity ability to realize benefits of goodwill depends on the successful integration of the acquired business. If such integration efforts are not successful, it could be difficult to realize the benefits of goodwill, which could result in impairment of goodwill. As described in Note 23 Acquisitions and Dispositions included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K, the Company completed the acquisition of DPL on November 28, 2011, which resulted in the provisional recognition of $ 2.5 billion of goodwill. Efforts to integrate DPL into the Company existing operations are ongoing and the Company ability to realize the benefit of DPL goodwill will depend on our ability to realize the expected operating synergies and manage the market risks of DPL as further described in Item 1A. Risk Factors of this Form 10-K After completion of the DPL acquisition, the Company may fail to realize the anticipated benefits and cost savings of the acquisition, which could adversely affect the value of the Company common stock. Additionally, utilities in Ohio continue to face downward pressure on operating margins due to the evolving regulatory environment, which is moving towards a market-based competitive pricing mechanism. At the same time, the declining energy prices are also reducing operating margins across the utility industry. These competitive forces could adversely impact the future operating performance of DPL and may result in impairment of its goodwill. The value of goodwill is also positively correlated with the economic environments in which our acquired businesses operate and a severe economic downturn could negatively impact the value of goodwill. Also, the evolving environmental regulations, including GHG regulations, around the globe continue to increase the operating costs of our generation businesses. In extreme situations, the environmental regulations could even make a once profitable business uneconomical. In addition, most of our generation businesses have a finite life and as the acquired businesses reach the end of their finite lives, the carrying amount of goodwill is gradually realized through their periodic operating results. The accounting guidance, however, prohibits the systematic amortization of goodwill and rather requires an annual impairment evaluation. Thus, as some of our acquired businesses approach the end of their finite lives, they may incur goodwill impairment charges even if there are no discrete adverse changes in the economic environment. In the fourth quarter of 2011, the Company completed its annual goodwill impairment evaluation and did not have any reporting units that were considered at risk . A reporting unit is considered at risk when its fair value is not higher than its carrying amount by more than 10%. While there were no potential impairment indicators at that time that could result in the recognition of goodwill impairment at our reporting units, it is possible we may incur goodwill impairment at our reporting units in future periods if any of the following events occur: a deterioration in general economic conditions (e.g., a recession), or the environment in which a business operates; an increased competitive environment (e.g., a new plant in the grid); a change in the market for a business products or services; or a regulatory or political development (e.g., changing environmental regulations on coal consumption and water intake); increases in raw materials, labor, or other costs that have a negative 123 Table of Contents effect on earnings (e.g., where a business cannot pass through the increase in input costs); negative or declining cash flows or a decline in actual or planned revenue or earnings (e.g., where recent results have been worse than previously expected); a more-likely-than-not expectation of selling or disposing all, or a portion of, a reporting unit; the testing for recoverability of a significant asset group within a reporting unit; or a business reaches the end of its finite life. The likelihood of the occurrence of these events may increase if global economic conditions remain volatile or deteriorate further. For example, during the third quarter of 2011, the Company identified higher coal prices and the resulting reduced operating margins in China as an impairment indicator of goodwill at Chigen, our wholly-owned subsidiary that holds AES interests in Chinese ventures. An interim evaluation of goodwill was performed at September 30, 2011 and its entire carrying amount of $17 million was recognized as a goodwill impairment. See Note 20 Impairment Expense included in Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this Form 10-K for further information. Recent Events Cartagena On February 9, 2012, a subsidiary of the Company completed the sale of 80% of its interest in the wholly-owned holding company of AES Energia Cartagena S.R.L. ( AES Cartagena ), a 1,199 MW gas-fired generation business in Spain. AES owned approximately 71% of AES Cartagena through this holding company structure. Net proceeds from the sale were approximately 172 million ($229 million). The Company expects to recognize a gain on the sale transaction in the range of $163 million to $179 million during the first quarter of 2012. Under the terms of the sale agreement, Electrabel International Holdings B.V., the buyer (a subsidiary of GDF SUEZ S.A. or GDFS ), has an option to purchase AES remaining 20% interest in the holding company for a fixed price of 28 million ($36 million) during a five month period beginning 13 months from February 9, 2012. Concurrent with the sale, GDFS settled the outstanding arbitration between the parties regarding certain emissions costs and other taxes that AES Cartagena sought to recover from GDFS as energy manager under the existing commercial arrangements. GDFS agreed to pay 71 million ($92 million) to AES Cartagena for such costs incurred by AES Cartagena for the 2008 2010 period and for 2011 through the date of sale close, of which 28 million ($38 million) was paid at closing. See Item 3 Legal Proceedings of this Form 10-K for further information. Due to the Company expected continuing ownership interest extending beyond one year from the completion of the sale of its 80% interest, prior period operating results of AES Cartagena have not been reclassified as discontinued operations. Red Oak On February 10, 2012, a subsidiary of the Company signed a sale agreement with a newly-formed portfolio company of Energy Capital Partners II, LP for the sale of 100% of its membership interest in AES Red Oak, LLC and AES Sayreville, two wholly-owned subsidiaries, that hold the Company interest in Red Oak, an 832 MW gas-fired generation business in New Jersey, for $147 million, subject to customary purchase price adjustments. Under the terms of the sale agreement, the buyer will assume the existing net indebtedness of Red Oak. The sale is expected to close by the end of the first quarter of 2012 and the Company does not expect to recognize a loss on the sale. Red Oak is reported in the North America Generation segment. Ironwood On February 23, 2012, a subsidiary of the Company signed a sale agreement with an indirect wholly-owned subsidiary of PPL Corporation for the sale of 100% of its equity interest in AES Ironwood, Inc., a wholly-owned subsidiary, that holds the Company interest in Ironwood, a 710 MW gas-fired generation business in Pennsylvania, for $87 million, subject to customary purchase price adjustments. Under the terms of the sale agreement, the buyer will assume the existing net indebtedness of Ironwood. The sale is expected to close by the end of the first quarter of 2012 and the Company does not expect to recognize a loss on the sale. Ironwood is reported in the North America Generation segment. 124 Table of Contents Key Drivers of Results in 2011 In 2011, the Company gross margin increased $198 million, net income attributable to The AES Corporation increased $49 million and cash flow from operations decreased $581 million compared to the prior year. During the year ended December 31, 2011, the Company benefited from new businesses including a full year of operations from Ballylumford, in Northern Ireland, which was acquired in August 2010 and the impact of Angamos I, in Chile, and Maritza, in Bulgaria, which commenced commercial operations in April and June 2011, respectively. Gener, our generation business in Chile, saw improvements over the prior year due to higher generation at the Electrica Santiago plant running on liquefied natural gas and higher contract and spot sales. These favorable results were partially offset by an unfavorable adjustment to regulatory liabilities at Eletropaulo related to the estimated impact of the July 2011 tariff reset as discussed above. In 2012, we expect to face continued challenges at certain of our businesses. The determination of the 2011 tariff reset in Brazil has not been finalized. Although we expect the tariff to decrease, the impact on the regulatory asset base and its potential impact on our Brazilian utility, Eletropaulo, remain uncertain at this time. Over the course of the second half of 2011, the marginal cost in the SING market in Chile has been impacted by the entrance of four new base load generation plants with approximately 800MW of capacity and local fuel price dynamics, negatively impacting our margin by reducing spot revenues. Furthermore, demand growth remained flat at a 3.5% growth rate similar to 2010. Marginal costs and demand projections are expected to remain at similar levels through most of 2012. The Company will continue to see the adverse effects of relatively lower gas prices and a decline in power prices relative to coal. See Item 7A. Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk of this Form 10-K for more information. The Company faces uncertainty over the U.S. taxation of earnings from its foreign subsidiaries following the expiration of a favorable tax provision in 2011 and expects its effective tax rate to increase, by amounts that could be material, if such provision is not renewed. Additional items that could impact our 2012 results are discussed in Key Trends and Uncertainties above, along with the risk factors included in Item 1A. Risk Factors of this Form 10-K. However, management expects that improved operating performance at certain businesses, growth from newly acquired businesses and global cost reduction initiatives may lessen or offset the impact of the challenges described above. If these favorable effects do not occur, or if the challenges described above and elsewhere in this section impact us more significantly than we currently anticipate, or if volatile foreign currencies and commodities move unfavorably, then these adverse factors (or other adverse factors unknown to us) may impact our gross margin, net income attributable to The AES Corporation and cash flows. The following briefly describes the key changes in our reported revenue, gross margin, net income attributable to The AES Corporation, net cash provided by operating activities, diluted earnings per share from continuing operations and Adjusted Earnings per Share (a non-GAAP measure) for the year ended December 31, 2011 compared to 2010 and 2009 and should be read in conjunction with our Consolidated Results of Operations and Segment Analysis discussion within Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition . 125 Table of Contents Performance Highlights Year Ended December 31, 2011 2010 2009 (in millions, except per share amounts) Revenue $ 17,274 $ 15,828 $ 13,110 Gross margin $ 4,134 $ 3,936 $ 3,357 Net income attributable to The AES Corporation $ 58 $ 9 $ 658 Net cash provided by operating activities $ 2,884 $ 3,465 $ 2,211 Diluted earnings per share from continuing operations $ 0.59 $ 0.63 $ 1.08 Adjusted earnings per share (a non-GAAP measure) (1) $ 1.04 $ 0.98 $ 1.06 (1) See reconciliation and definition below under Non-GAAP Measure . Year Ended December 31, 2011 Revenue increased $1.4 billion, or 9%, to $17.3 billion in 2011 compared with $15.8 billion in 2010. Key drivers of the increase included: the favorable impact of foreign currency of $466 million; the impact of new businesses including Ballylumford, in Northern Ireland and DPL in the United States, acquired in August 2010 and late November 2011, respectively, and Angamos I, in Chile, and Maritza, in Bulgaria, that commenced commercial operations in April and June 2011, respectively; increased prices at our generation businesses in Argentina and at Gener, in Chile; increased volume at our Brazilian utilities, driven by increased market demand; and increased prices at our utility business in El Salvador due to higher fuel prices and drier weather. These increases were partially offset by: lower prices at Eletropaulo, our utility business in Brazil, primarily related to the estimated impact of the July 2011 tariff reset which is expected to be finalized by the Brazilian energy regulatory agency in 2012; and lower volume at Cartagena, in Spain. Gross margin increased $198 million, or 5%, to $4.1 billion in 2011 compared with $3.9 billion in 2010. Key drivers of the increase included: the favorable impact of foreign currency of $112 million; the impact of new businesses discussed above; increased volume at Gener; increased volume at our Brazilian utilities, driven by increased market demand; and increased volume and prices in the Dominican Republic. These increases were partially offset by: lower prices at Eletropaulo, as discussed above; the unfavorable impact of an unrealized mark-to-market derivative loss at Sonel, in Cameroon; lower volume and rate in Hungary; lower rate and volume at Kilroot, in Northern Ireland; and 126 Table of Contents an increase in global fixed costs, particularly at our Latin American generation businesses. Net income attributable to The AES Corporation increased $49 million to $58 million in 2011, compared to $9 million in 2010. Key drivers of the increase included: an increase in gross margin as described above; a decrease in asset impairment expense due to higher prior year impairments related to the Southland generation facility offset primarily by current year impairments on wind turbines and deposits; and a decrease in losses from discontinued operations primarily related to a gain on sale of Brazil Telecom in 2011 partially offsetting a loss on disposal of our Argentina distribution businesses and losses at other discontinued businesses compared to a significant impairment recorded at New York in 2010. This increase was partially offset by: an increase in interest expense due to increased debt and fees related to the DPL acquisition, reduced interest capitalization at Maritza due to commencement of operations in June 2011, and an unfavorable impact of foreign currency translation in Brazil; and a decrease in net equity in earnings of affiliates partially offset by income tax expense related to the sale of the Company indirect investment in Companhia Energ tica de Minas Gerais ( CEMIG ). Net cash provided by operating activities decreased $581 million, or 17%, to $2.9 billion in 2011 compared with $3.5 billion in 2010. This net decrease was primarily due to the following: a decrease of $354 million at our Latin American utilities businesses primarily driven by our businesses in Brazil due to higher income tax payments of which $84 million is due to the sale of Brazil Telecom in October 2011, for which the pre-tax net sales proceeds of $890 million are recorded in cash flows from investing activities, and a one-time cash savings of $107 million mainly related to the utilization of a tax credit received as a result of the REFIS program in 2010, lower accounts receivable collections at Eletropaulo and higher payments for energy purchases, operation and maintenance expenses and pension contributions. These impacts were partially offset by higher accounts receivable collections at Sul; a decrease of $145 million at our North America generation businesses primarily due to reduced operations in New York prior to its deconsolidation in December 2011 and higher working capital requirements at Puerto Rico, partially offset by the deconsolidation of Thames; and a decrease of $56 million at Masinloc in the Philippines due to lower gross margin. Although net income for the period increased $471 million for 2011, net cash provided by operating activities decreased $581 million during 2011. Included in net income for each period are items such as impairments and losses from discontinued operations, which have both decreased in 2011 and have contributed to the increase in net income for the period, but are largely excluded from net cash provided by operating activities because they either are non-cash in nature or the underlying cash activity is appropriately classified as an investing or financing activity. Also, net cash provided by operating activities in 2010 was impacted by certain non-recurring items, as discussed above, which were not expected to recur in 2011. The Company does not expect a further decrease in net cash provided by operating activities to continue in 2012, when compared to 2011, however, it can provide no assurance that such trend will not continue. Year Ended December 31, 2010 Revenue increased $2.7 billion, or 21%, to $15.8 billion in 2010 compared with $13.1 billion in 2009. Key drivers of the increase included: the favorable impact of foreign currency of $802 million; 127 Table of Contents increased volume and rates at our Brazilian utilities attributable to increased demand due to the recovery of the local economy and the favorable impact of the June 2009 tariff reset; the impact of the consolidation of Cartagena, in Spain, in accordance with the new consolidation accounting guidance which became effective January 1, 2010; the favorable impact of rates at our generation businesses in Argentina; higher generation rates and volume at Masinloc in the Philippines; higher demand at Gener in Chile; the impact of the Company new business in Northern Ireland, acquired in August 2010; higher demand and rates at Indianapolis Power and Light; and higher volume in Ukraine. Gross margin increased $579 million, or 17%, to $3.9 billion in 2010 compared with $3.4 billion in 2009. Key drivers of the increase included: the favorable impact of foreign currency of $212 million; an increase in demand at our generation and utilities businesses in Latin America; higher generation rates and volume at Masinloc in the Philippines; and the impact of the consolidation of Cartagena, in Spain, in accordance with the new consolidation accounting guidance which became effective January 1, 2010. These increases were partially offset by an increase in fixed costs in Latin America, largely driven by bad debt recoveries and a reduction in bad debt expense in Brazil in 2009 that did not recur. Net income attributable to The AES Corporation decreased $649 million to $9 million in 2010, compared to $658 million in 2009. Key drivers of the decrease included: impairment losses in New York related to our Eastern Energy facilities (whose results of operations are included in discontinued operations), in California related to our Southland (Huntington Beach) generation facility, in Hungary related to our Tisza II generation facility and in Texas related to our Deepwater facility; a decrease in gain on sale of investments due to the sale of our businesses in Northern Kazakhstan which occurred in 2009; and a decrease in other income due to the reduction in interest and penalties in 2009 associated with federal tax debts at Eletropaulo and Sul as a result of the Programa de Recuperacao Fiscal ( REFIS ) program and a favorable court decision in 2009 enabling Eletropaulo to receive reimbursement of excess non-income taxes paid from 1989 to 1992 in the form of tax credits to be applied against future tax liabilities. These decreases were partially offset by: the gain on sale of discontinued operations related to the sale of Barka which occurred in August 2010; an increase in net equity in earnings of affiliates partially offset by income tax expense related to the sale of the Company indirect investment in CEMIG; goodwill impairment of our business in Kilroot that occurred in 2009; lower income tax expense due to 2010 asset impairments primarily recorded at certain U.S subsidiaries as referenced above; and 128 Table of Contents an increase in gross margin as described above. Net cash provided by operating activities increased $1.3 billion, or 57%, to $3.5 billion in 2010 compared with $2.2 billion in 2009. This net increase was primarily due to the following: an increase of $837 million at our Latin American utilities due to a one-time increase in tax payments in 2009 associated with a tax amnesty program of $326 million, higher working capital requirements during 2009 related to payments on the settlement of swap agreements of $65 million and in 2010, net cash provided by operating activities benefited from the one-time cash savings related to the utilization of tax credits received as a result of the REFIS program, as well as a $50 million decrease in employer contributions to pension plans and lower payments for contingencies; an increase of $215 million at our Latin American generation businesses due to the higher gross margin in 2010 combined with improved working capital mainly as a result of higher collections of value added taxes and accounts receivable; an increase of $99 million at Masinloc in the Philippines due to higher gross margin; and an increase of $22 million as a result of the acquisition of Ballylumford in Northern Ireland. These increases were partially offset by a decrease of $191 million in operating cash flows from discontinued operations compared to 2009. In 2010, net cash provided by operating activities of discontinued and held for sale businesses was $82 million, including $33 million from businesses sold in 2010. Non-GAAP Measure We define adjusted earnings per share ( Adjusted EPS ) as diluted earnings per share from continuing operations excluding gains or losses of the consolidated entity due to (a) mark-to-market amounts related to derivative transactions, (b) unrealized foreign currency gains or losses, (c) significant gains or losses due to dispositions and acquisitions of business interests, (d) significant losses due to impairments, and (e) costs due to the early retirement of debt. The GAAP measure most comparable to Adjusted EPS is diluted earnings per share from continuing operations. AES believes that Adjusted EPS better reflects the underlying business performance of the Company and is considered in the Company internal evaluation of financial performance. Factors in this determination include the variability due to mark-to-market gains or losses related to derivative transactions, currency gains or losses, losses due to impairments and strategic decisions to dispose or acquire business interests or retire debt, which affect results in a given period or periods. Adjusted EPS should not be construed as an alternative to diluted earnings per share from continuing operations, which is determined in accordance with GAAP. Year Ended December 31, Reconciliation of Adjusted Earnings Per Share 2011 2010 2009 Diluted earnings per share from continuing operations $ 0.59 $ 0.63 $ 1.08 Derivative mark-to-market (gains) losses (1) 0.01 0.01 Currency transaction (gains) losses (2) 0.04 (0.05 ) (0.05 ) Disposition/acquisition (gains) losses (3) (0.19 ) (4) Impairment losses 0.36 (5) 0.37 (6) 0.21 (7) Debt retirement (gains) losses 0.04 (8) 0.03 (9) Adjusted earnings per share $ 1.04 $ 0.98 $ 1.06 (1) Derivative mark-to-market (gains) losses were net of income tax per share of $0.01, $0.00 and $0.00 in 2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively. (2) Unrealized foreign currency transaction (gains) losses were net of income tax per share of $0.00, ($0.01) and $0.01 in 2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively. 129 Table of Contents (3) The Company did not adjust for the gain or the related tax effect from the sale of its indirect investment in CEMIG, disclosed in Note 7 Investments in and Advances to Affiliates included in Item 8 of this form 10-K, in its determination of Adjusted EPS because the gain was recognized by an equity method investee. The Company does not adjust for transactions of its equity method investees in its determination of adjusted EPS. (4) Amount includes: Kazakhstan gain of $98 million, or $0.15 per share, related to the termination of a management agreement as well as a gain of $13 million, or $0.02 per share, related to the reversal of a withholding tax contingency. In addition, there was a gain on sale associated with the shutdown of the Hefei plant in China of $14 million, or $0.02 per share. There were no taxes associated with any of these transactions. (5) Amount includes asset impairments, equity method investment impairments and a goodwill impairment. Asset impairments primarily includes impairments of wind turbines and deposits of $116 million ($75 million, or $0.10 per share, net of income taxes), Tisza II of $52 million ($50 million, or $0.06 per share, net of income taxes), Kelanitissa of $42 million ($38 million, or $0.05 per share, net of non-controlling interest), and Bohemia of $9 million, or $0.01 per share. Equity method investment impairments primarily included the impairments at Chigen, including Yangcheng, of $79 million, or $0.10 per share. Goodwill impairment at Chigen of $17 million, or $0.02 per share. (6) Amount primarily includes asset impairments at Southland (Huntington Beach) of $200 million, Tisza II of $85 million, and Deepwater of $79 million ($130 million, or $0.17 per share, $69 million, or $0.09 per share, and $51 million, or $0.07 per share, net of income tax, respectively) and goodwill impairment at Deepwater of $18 million (or $0.02 per share, with no income tax impact). (7) Amount includes: goodwill impairments at Kilroot of $118 million, or $0.18 per share, and in the Ukraine of $4 million, or $0.01 per share; write-off of development project costs in Latin America and Asia of $19 million ($11 million net of noncontrolling interests, or $0.01 per share) and an impairment of $10 million, or $0.01 per share, of the Company investment in a company developing blue gas (coal to gas) technology. There was no income tax impact associated with any of these transactions. (8) Amount includes loss on retirement of debt at Gener of $38 million ($22 million, or $0.03 per share, net of income taxes and noncontrolling interests) and at IPL of $15 million ($10 million, or $0.01 per share, net of income taxes). (9) Amount includes loss on retirement of debt at the Parent Company of $15 million, at Andres of $10 million, and at Itabo of $8 million ($10 million, or $0.01 per share, net of income tax at the Parent Company, $10 million, or $0.01 per share at Andres net of income tax, and $4 million, or $0.01 per share, net of noncontrolling interest at Itabo). 130 Table of Contents Consolidated Results of Operations Year Ended December 31, Results of operations 2011 2010 2009 $ change 2011 vs. 2010 $ change 2010 vs. 2009 (in millions, except per share amounts) Revenue: Latin America Generation $ 4,982 $ 4,281 $ 3,651 $ 701 $ 630 Latin America Utilities 7,374 6,987 5,877 387 1,110 North America Generation 1,465 1,453 1,381 12 72 North America Utilities 1,326 1,145 1,068 181 77 Europe Generation 1,550 1,318 762 232 556 Asia Generation 625 618 375 7 243 Corporate and Other (1) 1,106 1,045 858 61 187 Eliminations (2) (1,154 ) (1,019 ) (862 ) (135 ) (157 ) Total Revenue $ 17,274 $ 15,828 $ 13,110 $ 1,446 $ 2,718 Gross Margin: Latin America Generation $ 1,840 $ 1,497 $ 1,357 $ 343 $ 140 Latin America Utilities 1,035 1,023 866 12 157 North America Generation 400 410 404 (10 ) 6 North America Utilities 220 249 239 (29 ) 10 Europe Generation 359 310 244 49 66 Asia Generation 178 240 93 (62 ) 147 Corporate and Other (3) 75 190 134 (115 ) 56 Eliminations (4) 27 17 20 10 (3 ) General and administrative expenses (391 ) (392 ) (339 ) 1 (53 ) Interest expense (1,603 ) (1,503 ) (1,461 ) (100 ) (42 ) Interest income 400 408 344 (8 ) 64 Other expense (156 ) (234 ) (104 ) 78 (130 ) Other income 149 100 459 49 (359 ) Gain on sale of investments 8 131 8 (131 ) Goodwill impairment (17 ) (21 ) (122 ) 4 101 Asset impairment expense (225 ) (389 ) (20 ) 164 (369 ) Foreign currency transaction gains (losses) (38 ) (33 ) 35 (5 ) (68 ) Other non-operating expense (82 ) (7 ) (12 ) (75 ) 5 Income tax expense (636 ) (579 ) (557 ) (57 ) (22 ) Net equity in earnings (losses) of affiliates (2 ) 184 93 (186 ) 91 Income from continuing operations 1,541 1,470 1,804 71 (334 ) Income (loss) from operations of discontinued businesses (97 ) (475 ) 101 378 (576 ) Gain (loss) from disposal of discontinued businesses 86 64 (150 ) 22 214 Net income 1,530 1,059 1,755 471 (696 ) Noncontrolling interests: Income from continuing operations attributable to noncontrolling interests (1,083 ) (986 ) (1,080 ) (97 ) 94 Income from discontinued operations attributable to noncontrolling interests (389 ) (64 ) (17 ) (325 ) (47 ) Net income attributable to The AES Corporation $ 58 $ 9 $ 658 $ 49 $ (649 ) Per Share Data: Basic earnings per share from continuing operations $ 0.59 $ 0.63 $ 1.09 $ (0.04 ) $ (0.46 ) Diluted earnings per share from continuing operations $ 0.59 $ 0.63 $ 1.08 $ (0.04 ) $ (0.45 ) (1) Corporate and Other includes revenue from our generation and utilities businesses in Africa, utilities businesses in Europe, Wind Generation and other renewables initiatives. (2) Represents inter-segment eliminations of revenue related to transfers of electricity from Tiet (generation) to Eletropaulo (utility). ( 3 ) Corporate and Other gross margin includes gross margin from our generation and utilities businesses in Africa, utilities businesses in Europe, Wind Generation and other renewables initiatives. ( 4 ) Represents inter-segment eliminations of gross margin related to corporate charges for self insurance premiums. 131 Table of Contents Segment Analysis Latin America Generation The following table summarizes revenue and gross margin for our Generation segment in Latin America for the periods indicated: For the Years Ended December 31, 2011 2010 2009 % Change 2011 vs. 2010 % Change 2010 vs. 2009 ($ in millions) Latin America Generation Revenue $ 4,982 $ 4,281 $ 3,651 16 % 17 % Gross Margin $ 1,840 $ 1,497 $ 1,357 23 % 10 % Fiscal Year 2011 versus 2010 Excluding the favorable impact of foreign currency translation and remeasurement of $13 million, primarily in Brazil partially offset by Argentina, generation revenue for 2011 increased $688 million, or 16%, from 2010 primarily due to: higher energy prices of $210 million in Argentina attributable to a price adjustment for consuming an alternate fuel; new business of $175 million at Angamos in Chile; higher contract and spot prices of $150 million at Gener as a result of lower water inflows in the Central Interconnected System and PPA price indexation; higher volume of $113 million in Colombia and Panama due to higher water inflows in the system during 2011; higher contract prices and volume of $80 million at Tiet as a result of the combined effect of higher spot sales and PPA indexation to CPI in the second half of 2011; and higher ancillary services and third party gas sales of $57 million higher as well as contract prices of $53 million primarily from PPAs indexed to coal in the Dominican Republic. These increases were partially offset by: lower spot prices of $128 million in Colombia due to higher water inflows in the system during 2011; a decrease of $32 million related to the final settlement of the power sales agreement between Uruguaiana and Sul in the second quarter of 2010; and a net decrease of $19 million related to the forced outage in Panama. Excluding the favorable impact of foreign currency translation and remeasurement of $34 million, primarily in Brazil, generation gross margin for 2011 increased $309 million, or 21%, from 2010 primarily due to: higher volume of $158 million at Gener Electrica Santiago due to improved fuel availability; higher volume of $110 million in Colombia as a result of higher water inflows in the system during 2011; higher contract prices and volume of $84 million at Tiet , as discussed above; new business of $51 million at Angamos; higher ancillary services and gas sales of $36 million and higher energy prices of $27 million in the Dominican Republic; and 132 Table of Contents higher volume and price of $26 million at our coal generation businesses in Argentina as a result of low hydrology. These increases were partially offset by: lower spot prices of $92 million in Colombia due to higher water inflows in the system during 2011; higher fixed and operating costs of $71 million across the region, primarily attributable to higher employee costs, maintenance costs, an increase in non-income taxes in Argentina and Colombia, and higher depreciation at Tiet due to the change in useful lives and salvage values of property, plant and equipment, as a result of new regulatory information received; a decrease of $39 million related to higher spot purchases and the forced outage in Panama; and a decrease of $32 million related to the final settlement of the power sales agreement between Uruguaiana and Sul as discussed above. For the year ended December 31, 2011, revenue increased 16% while gross margin increased 23%, primarily due to the lower energy purchases at Gener due to higher generation. Fiscal Year 2010 versus 2009 Excluding the favorable impact of foreign currency translation and remeasurement of $133 million, generation revenue for 2010 increased $497 million, or 14%, from 2009 primarily due to: higher spot prices of $221 million associated with increased fuel prices in Argentina; higher volume of $139 million at Gener in Chile due to higher demand; higher volume and ancillary services of $115 million, higher contract prices from PPAs indexed to gas and higher spot prices of $27 million in the Dominican Republic; higher contract prices of $58 million in Colombia and Tiet in Brazil; the positive impact of $28 million resulting from the final settlement of the power sales agreement between Sul and Uruguaiana, our businesses in Brazil; and higher volume of $21 million in Panama due to higher water inflows into the system. These increases were partially offset by: lower volume sold at Uruguaiana of $53 million as a result of renegotiation of its power sales agreements; lower volume due to unfavorable hydrology in Colombia and Argentina of $41 million; lower contract prices at Gener of $32 million; and lower contract prices on PPAs indexed to international coal prices in the Dominican Republic of $22 million. Excluding the favorable impact of foreign currency translation and remeasurement of $106 million, generation gross margin for 2010 increased $34 million, or 3%, from 2009 primarily due to: higher spot prices in Argentina of $69 million; higher volume and ancillary services in the Dominican Republic of $55 million; higher contract prices of $33 million in Colombia; the positive impact of $28 million resulting from the final settlement of the power sales agreement between Sul and Uruguaiana, as mentioned above; and 133 Table of Contents higher volume of $23 million in Panama. These increases were partially offset by: higher fuel and purchased energy prices at Gener of $48 million; the net effect of lower PPA prices and higher fuel costs in the Dominican Republic of $38 million; the impact of a reversal of bad debt expense during the first quarter of 2009 of $36 million at Uruguaiana as a result of the renegotiation of one of its power sales agreements; and higher fixed costs of $30 million at Gener primarily due to higher employee costs, increased maintenance expenses and costs incurred due to construction delays at Campiche. For the year ended December 31, 2010, revenue increased by 17% while gross margin increased 10%, primarily due to higher spot purchases and fuel prices at Gener and the reversal of bad debt expense as a result of the renegotiation of one of the power sales agreements at Uruguaiana in the first quarter of 2009. Latin America Utilities The following table summarizes revenue and gross margin for our Utilities segment in Latin America for the periods indicated: For the Years Ended December 31, 2011 2010 2009 % Change 2011 vs. 2010 % Change 2010 vs. 2009 ($ in millions) Latin America Utilities Revenue $ 7,374 $ 6,987 $ 5,877 6 % 19 % Gross Margin $ 1,035 $ 1,023 $ 866 1 % 18 % Fiscal Year 2011 versus 2010 Excluding the favorable impact of foreign currency translation of $362 million in Brazil, utilities revenue for 2011 increased $25 million, or flat to 2010 primarily due to: higher volume of $277 million due to increased market demand in Brazil; higher tariffs of $95 million in El Salvador due to increased energy prices related to higher fuel prices and drier weather which are pass-through to customers; and higher tariffs of $27 million at Sul in Brazil due to higher volume of energy purchases which are pass-through to customers. These increases were partially offset by: lower tariffs of $207 million at Eletropaulo in Brazil, related to the estimated impact of the July 2011 tariff reset which is expected to be finalized by the Brazilian energy regulatory agency in 2012; and lower tariffs of $139 million at Eletropaulo due to lower energy prices associated with energy purchases and pass-through transmission costs. Excluding the favorable impact of foreign currency translation of $63 million in Brazil, utilities gross margin for 2011 decreased $51 million, or 5%, from 2010 primarily due to: lower tariffs of $190 million at Eletropaulo, primarily related to the estimated impact of the July 2011 tariff reset as discussed above; and 134 Table of Contents higher depreciation of $50 million primarily in Brazil mainly due to the change in estimates of the useful lives and salvage values of property, plant and equipment, as a result of new regulatory information. These decreases were partially offset by: higher volume of $117 million in Brazil due to increased market demand; and lower fixed costs of $67 million primarily due to contingency reversals and a non-recurring reduction in bad debt expense in Brazil. For the year ended December 31, 2011, revenue increased 6% while gross margin increased 1%, primarily due to higher pass-through costs to customers and higher depreciation. Fiscal Year 2010 versus 2009 Excluding the favorable impact of foreign currency translation of $690 million, primarily in Brazil, utilities revenue for 2010 increased $420 million, or 7%, from 2009 primarily due to: increased volume of $300 million, primarily in Brazil, due to increased market demand; and higher tariffs of $111 million primarily related to the July 2009 tariff reset in Brazil partially offset by the unfavorable impact on rates at Eletropaulo in Brazil of a cumulative adjustment to regulatory liabilities and higher energy prices across our Latin America utility businesses associated with energy purchases passed through to customers of $97 million. Excluding the favorable impact of foreign currency translation of $100 million, primarily in Brazil, utilities gross margin for 2010 increased $57 million, or 7%, from 2009 primarily due to: increased volume of $147 million, primarily in Brazil, due to the increased market demand; and lower contingencies of $142 million in Eletropaulo primarily related to labor contingencies which included a one-time reversal, reflecting an agreement with Funda o CESP, the pension plan administrator, of $51 million associated with claims for past benefit obligations which will now be accounted for as a component of the pension plan. These increases were partially offset by: higher fixed costs of $224 million primarily due to the recovery in 2009 of a municipality receivable previously written off in Brazil and higher salaries and other employee related costs, provisions for commercial losses, regulatory penalties and maintenance costs; and $28 million related to the final settlement of the power sales agreement between Sul and Uruguaiana. North America Generation The following table summarizes revenue and gross margin for our Generation segment in North America for the periods indicated: For the Years Ended December 31, 2011 2010 2009 % Change 2011 vs. 2010 % Change 2010 vs. 2009 ($ in millions) North America Generation Revenue $ 1,465 $ 1,453 $ 1,381 1 % 5 % Gross Margin $ 400 $ 410 $ 404 -2 % 1 % 135 Table of Contents Fiscal Year 2011 versus 2010 Excluding the favorable impact of foreign currency translation of $9 million, generation revenue for 2011 increased $3 million, or flat compared to 2010 primarily due to: an increase in Puerto Rico of $23 million primarily due to a prior year forced outage and the related penalty and $20 million due to higher rates; and higher volume of $8 million at TEG/TEP in Mexico. These increases were offset by: a decrease in volume of $21 million at Deepwater in Texas due to the layup of the plant in January 2011 caused by high fuel costs and diminishing power prices; and decreases at Merida in Mexico of $18 million due to lower rates and volume and $7 million due to a combination of forced and scheduled outages. Generation gross margin for 2011 decreased $10 million, or 2%, from 2010 primarily due to: a decrease of $12 million at TEG/TEP due to a combination of forced and scheduled outages and higher fuel costs; higher fuel costs and lower volume at Hawaii of $11 million; higher fuel costs at Shady Point in Oklahoma of $10 million; a decrease in volume of $6 million at Deepwater as discussed above; and a decrease of $5 million at Merida due to a combination of forced and scheduled outages. These decreases were partially offset by: an increase of $15 million in Hawaii due to a favorable impact of prior year mark-to-market derivative adjustments; lower fixed costs at Deepwater of $10 million as discussed above; and an increase in Puerto Rico of $9 million primarily due to a prior year forced outage and the related penalty. Fiscal Year 2010 versus 2009 Excluding the favorable impact of foreign currency translation of $19 million, generation revenue for 2010 increased $53 million, or 4%, from 2009 primarily due to: increased rates, volume and an availability bonus at TEG/TEP in Mexico of $41 million; higher volume, primarily due to fewer outages and higher rates, of $22 million at Merida in Mexico; and higher volume of $19 million at Warrior Run in Maryland due to fewer outages. These increases were partially offset by: a net decrease of $18 million at Deepwater in Texas primarily due to lower volume; and a net decrease of $14 million in Puerto Rico primarily due to a penalty from a forced outage. Excluding the favorable impact of foreign currency translation of $3 million, generation gross margin for 2010 increased $3 million, or 1%, from 2009 primarily due to: a net increase of $26 million at TEG/TEP due to a current year availability bonus and fewer outages partially offset by higher fuel prices; and 136 Table of Contents higher volume of $14 million at Warrior Run due to fewer outages. These increases were partially offset by: a decrease of $16 million at Deepwater due to lower volume and rates; a net decrease of $11 million in Puerto Rico primarily due to a forced outage; and a decrease of $9 million in Hawaii due to an unfavorable impact of mark-to-market derivatives. North America Utilities The following table summarizes revenue and gross margin for our Utilities segment in North America for the periods indicated: For the Years Ended December 31, 2011 2010 2009 % Change 2011 vs. 2010 % Change 2010 vs. 2009 ($ in millions) North America Utilities Revenue $ 1,326 $ 1,145 $ 1,068 16 % 7 % Gross Margin $ 220 $ 249 $ 239 -12 % 4 % Fiscal Year 2011 versus 2010 Utilities revenue for 2011 increased $181 million, or 16%, from 2010 primarily due to: an increase of $154 million from the operations of DPL, in Ohio, which was acquired on November 28, 2011; and higher prices of $67 million, primarily due to higher fuel adjustment charges of $57 million at IPL in Indiana. These increases were partially offset by the following at IPL: lower retail volume of $21 million, primarily due to unfavorable weather and economic conditions; and lower wholesale volume of $16 million, primarily due to increased generating unit outages. Utilities gross margin for 2011 decreased $29 million, or 12%, from 2010 primarily due to the following at IPL: lower wholesale margin of $12 million, primarily due to increased generating unit outages; lower retail margin of $11 million, primarily due to unfavorable volume as discussed above; and higher salaries, wages and benefits of $7 million, primarily due to increased overtime and higher pay rates in 2011. These decreases were partially offset by: increase of $6 million from the operations of DPL, which was acquired on November 28, 2011. For the year ended December 31, 2011, revenue increased by 16% while gross margin decreased 12%, primarily due to the positive impact of higher-pass through on revenue at IPL, which had no corresponding impact on gross margin and the unfavorable impact on gross margin from one-time acquisition charges of $16 million related to DPL. 137 Table of Contents Fiscal Year 2010 versus 2009 Utilities revenue for 2010 increased $77 million, or 7%, from 2009 primarily due to: higher retail demand of $64 million as a result of warmer weather and higher fuel adjustment charges; and increased wholesale revenue of $11 million primarily due to higher prices. Utilities gross margin for 2010 increased $10 million, or 4%, from 2009 primarily due to: higher retail margin of $20 million due to increased demand; lower pension expense of $12 million; and lower emission allowance expense of $5 million. These increases were partially offset by: increased maintenance expenses of $16 million due to the timing of major generating unit overhauls; and increased fixed costs of $14 million. For the year ended December 31, 2010, revenue increased by 7% while gross margin increased 4%, primarily due to increased fuel and maintenance costs. Europe Generation The following table summarizes revenue and gross margin for our Generation segment in Europe for the periods indicated: For the Years Ended December 31, 2011 2010 2009 % Change 2011 vs. 2010 % Change 2010 vs. 2009 ($ in millions) Europe Generation Revenue $ 1,550 $ 1,318 $ 762 18 % 73 % Gross Margin $ 359 $ 310 $ 244 16 % 27 % Fiscal Year 2011 versus 2010 Excluding the favorable impact of foreign currency translation of $47 million, generation revenue for 2011 increased $185 million, or 14%, from 2010 primarily due to: $256 million from the operations at Ballylumford which was acquired in August 2010, driven by $224 million resulting from the acquisition and $32 million primarily from better availability due to a planned outage in 2010; and new business of $182 million at Maritza, which commenced commercial operations in June 2011. These increases were partially offset by: lower revenue of $160 million at Cartagena primarily due to lower pass-through energy costs; lower revenue of $54 million in Hungary primarily from lower contract sales, lower spot market sales and lower volume on ancillary services, partially offset by higher capacity prices; and 138 Table of Contents lower revenue of $46 million at Kilroot, in Northern Ireland, primarily resulting from the cancellation of the long-term PPA and supplementary agreements in November 2010. Excluding the favorable impact of foreign currency translation of $12 million, generation gross margin for 2011 increased $37 million, or 12%, from 2010 primarily due to: $77 million from the operations at Ballylumford, acquired in August 2010, driven by $64 million resulting from the acquisition and $13 million primarily from better availability due to a planned outage in 2010; and $66 million at Maritza, which commenced operations in June 2011. These increases were partially offset by: lower gross margin of $68 million at Kilroot, primarily resulting from cancellation of the long-term PPA and supplementary agreements in November 2010, lower capacity factor due to a decline in market demand, partially offset by CO2 costs passed through in the market price; and lower gross margin of $55 million in Hungary primarily due to decreased market demand, lower ramp-up ancillary services and lower spark spread, partially offset by higher capacity prices. In February 2012, the Company completed the sale of 80% of our interest in Cartagena. Due to the Company continuing involvement in the business subsequent to the sale, Cartagena is presented as held for sale on the Consolidated Balance Sheets, but presented in continuing operations on the Consolidated Income Statements. Accordingly, 2012 revenue and gross margin will be negatively impacted by the sale. Fiscal Year 2010 versus 2009 Excluding the unfavorable impact of foreign currency translation of $37 million, generation revenue for 2010 increased $593 million, or 78%, from 2009 primarily due to: $409 million from the adoption of new accounting guidance on the consolidation of variable interest entities ( VIEs ) which resulted in the consolidation of Cartagena in Spain, a generation business previously accounted for under the equity method of accounting; $117 million from the operations of Ballylumford in the United Kingdom, which was acquired in August 2010; higher tariffs of $16 million at Altai in Kazakhstan; $15 million from a full year of combined cycle operations at our Amman East plant in Jordan, which was single cycle until August 2009; and higher volume of $15 million at Kilroot in the United Kingdom largely driven by coal pass-through and increased demand, partially offset by lower capacity revenue due to the termination of the long term PPA and related supplementary agreements. Generation gross margin for 2010 increased $66 million, or 27%, from 2009 primarily due to: $62 million from the consolidation of Cartagena as discussed above; higher tariffs and lower fixed costs at Altai of $29 million; and $13 million from the operations of Ballylumford since its acquisition. These increases were partially offset by: lower gross margin of $28 million primarily from the termination of the long-term PPA at Kilroot; and 139 Table of Contents lower gross margin of $11 million in Hungary primarily attributable to higher fuel costs that could not be passed through and lower sales of emission allowances. For the year ended December 31, 2010, revenue increased 73% while gross margin increased 27%, primarily due to the consolidation of Cartagena and acquisition of Ballylumford that had a larger positive impact on revenue than gross margin, and the positive impact of higher energy revenue at Kilroot, which as a pass-through had no corresponding impact on gross margin. Asia Generation The following table summarizes revenue and gross margin for our Generation segment in Asia for the periods indicated: For the Years Ended December 31, 2011 2010 2009 % Change 2011 vs. 2010 % Change 2010 vs. 2009 ($ in millions) Asia Generation Revenue $ 625 $ 618 $ 375 1 % 65 % Gross Margin $ 178 $ 240 $ 93 -26 % 158 % Fiscal Year 2011 versus 2010 Excluding the favorable impact of foreign currency translation of $20 million, generation revenue for 2011 decreased $13 million, or 2%, from 2010 primarily due to: a decrease of $39 million at Masinloc in the Philippines primarily due to lower generation prices and volume. Spot volume and prices were lower due to flat electricity demand and higher available capacity in the grid; a decrease of $12 million due to the closure of Aixi in China in November 2010; and outages of $9 million at Kelanitissa in Sri Lanka resulting in lower plant availability in 2011. These decreases were partially offset by: higher generation rates of $18 million due to higher pass-through fuel costs and higher generation volume of $29 million at Kelanitissa due to higher offtaker demand as a result of lower hydrology. Excluding the favorable impact of foreign currency translation of $8 million, generation gross margin for 2011 decreased $70 million, or 29%, from 2010 primarily due to: decrease of $59 million at Masinloc primarily attributable to a combination of flat market demand, lower spot prices, higher coal prices and increased fixed costs. For the year ended December 31, 2011, revenue increased 1% while gross margin decreased 26%, primarily due to higher pass-through fuel costs at Kelanitissa which had a positive impact on revenue but no corresponding impact on gross margin and the negative influence on gross margin arising from lower spot prices at Masinloc, as well as increases in coal prices and fixed costs. Fiscal Year 2010 versus 2009 Excluding the favorable impact of foreign currency translation of $28 million, generation revenue for 2010 increased $215 million, or 57%, from 2009 primarily due to: favorable generation rates and volume of $210 million at Masinloc in the Philippines as a result of increased market demand and improved plant availability subsequent to the completion of its overhaul at the beginning of 2010; and 140 Table of Contents higher demand from both new and existing contract and spot customers as a result of lower supply shortages in the Philippines power market due to a strong energy growth rate. Excluding the favorable impact of foreign currency translation of $13 million, generation gross margin for 2010 increased $134 million, or 144%, from 2009 primarily due to: a combination of higher availability attributable to improved plant operations, higher market demand and favorable spot prices at Masinloc. For the year ended December 31, 2010, revenue increased 65% while gross margin increased 158%, primarily due to the positive influence on gross margin due to favorable spot rates and operational efficiencies resulting from the Masinloc plant overhauls in late 2009 and early 2010, which led to higher availability and allowed for more efficient operations that have materially improved the operating results for 2010 as compared to 2009. Corporate and Other Corporate and other includes the net operating results from our generation and utilities businesses in Africa, utilities businesses in Europe, Wind Generation and renewables projects which are immaterial for the purposes of separate segment disclosure. The following table excludes inter-segment activity and summarizes revenue and gross margin for Corporate and Other entities for the periods indicated: For the Years Ended December 31, 2011 2010 2009 % Change 2011 vs. 2010 % Change 2010 vs. 2009 ($ in millions) Revenue Europe Utilities $ 418 $ 356 $ 286 17 % 24 % Africa Utilities 386 422 370 -9 % 14 % Africa Generation 91 87 70 5 % 24 % Wind Generation 235 202 133 16 % 52 % Corp/Other 9 4 4 125 % 0 % Eliminations (33 ) (26 ) (5 ) -27 % -420 % Total Corporate and Other $ 1,106 $ 1,045 $ 858 6 % 22 % Gross Margin Europe Utilities $ 23 $ 21 $ 16 10 % 31 % Africa Utilities (59 ) 64 70 -192 % -9 % Africa Generation 45 52 39 -13 % 33 % Wind Generation 72 43 9 67 % 378 % Corp/Other (8 ) 6 (5 ) -233 % 220 % Eliminations 2 4 5 -50 % -20 % Total Corporate and Other $ 75 $ 190 $ 134 -61 % 42 % Fiscal Year 2011 versus 2010 Excluding the favorable impact of foreign currency translation of $16 million, Corporate and Other revenue increased $45 million for 2011, or 4% from 2010. The increase was primarily due to: higher tariff of $71 million at our utility businesses in the Ukraine; and $12 million from St. Nikola in Bulgaria that commenced commercial operations in March 2010. 141 Table of Contents These increases were partially offset by: a net decrease of $52 million at Sonel in Cameroon primarily due to the unfavorable impact of an unrealized mark-to-market derivative adjustment, partially offset by higher tariff and volume. Excluding the unfavorable impact of foreign currency translation of $4 million, Corporate and Other gross margin decreased $111 million for 2011, or 58% from 2010. The decrease was primarily due to: a decrease of $119 million at Sonel primarily due to the unfavorable impact of an unrealized mark-to-market derivative adjustment and higher fixed costs. a decrease of $16 million in the Ukraine primarily due to higher fixed costs. These decreases were partially offset by: gross margin of $10 million at St. Nikola, as discussed above. For the year ended December 31, 2011, revenue increased 6% while gross margin decreased 61%, primarily due to higher pass-through costs in the Ukraine which had a positive impact on revenue but no corresponding impact on gross margin and higher fixed costs at Sonel. Fiscal Year 2010 versus 2009 Excluding the unfavorable impact of foreign currency translation of $30 million, primarily in Cameroon, Corporate and Other revenue increased $217 million for 2009, or 25%, from 2009. The increase was primarily due to: higher volume at our utility businesses in Ukraine driven by an overall increase in market demand; higher volume and utility tariffs at Sonel in Cameroon driven by an increase in market demand; and incremental revenue from new wind generation projects that commenced operations during the year and an overall volume increase across our wind businesses. Excluding the unfavorable impact of foreign currency translation of $9 million, primarily in Cameroon, Corporate and Other gross margin increased $65 million for 2009, or 49%, from 2009. The increase was primarily due to: an increase in gross margin from our new wind generation projects and higher volume, as discussed above; and an increase in volume at Dibamba, our generation business, in Cameroon. These increases were partially offset by: an increase in fixed costs at Sonel. General and Administrative Expense General and administrative expense includes those expenses related to corporate and region staff functions and/or initiatives, executive management, finance, legal, human resources, information systems, and development costs. General and administrative expenses decreased $1 million to $391 million in 2011 from 2010. The decrease is primarily related to reduction of business development costs and SAP implementation costs offset by DPL transaction costs. General and administrative expenses increased $53 million, or 16%, to $392 million in 2010 from 2009. The increase is primarily related to business development costs associated with increased development efforts, primarily in Europe, Turkey and India. 142 Table of Contents Interest expense Interest expense increased $100 million, or 7%, to $1.6 billion in 2011 from 2010. This increase was primarily due to less interest capitalization at Maritza due to commencement of operations in June 2011, a monetary correction related to value-added tax on commercial losses at Eletropaulo, the unfavorable impact of foreign currency translation in Brazil, higher interest rates at Eletropaulo, and increased debt and fees related to the DPL acquisition. These increases were partially offset by lower interest rates at Tiet , and a fee on a non-exercised credit line was written off in Brazil in 2010. Interest expense increased $42 million, or 3%, to $1.5 billion in 2010 from 2009. This increase was primarily due to interest expense at Cartagena which is now a consolidated entity, higher interest rates at Tiet , increased debt principal at Eletropaulo and interest being expensed related to St. Nikola, our wind project in Bulgaria, due to commencement of operations in 2010. These increases were partially offset by reduced debt at the Parent Company. Interest income Interest income decreased $8 million, or 2%, to $400 million in 2011 from 2010. The decrease was primarily due to the settlement of a dispute related to inflation adjustments for energy sales at Tiet in 2010. The decrease was partially offset by favorable foreign currency translation in Brazil. Interest income increased $64 million, or 19%, to $408 million in 2010 from 2009. This increase was primarily due to a higher average balance in short term investments at Eletropaulo and the favorable impact of foreign currency translation in Brazil as well as the settlement of a dispute related to inflation adjustments for energy sales at Tiet . These increases were partially offset by reduced interest income from a loan to a wind development project in Brazil which was repaid in June 2010. Other income See discussion of the components of other income in Note 19 Other Income & Expense included in Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this Form 10-K. Other expense See discussion of the components of other expense in Note 19 Other Income & Expense included in Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this Form 10-K. Goodwill Impairment The Company recognized goodwill impairment of $17 million, $21 million and $122 million for the years ended December 31, 2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively. See Note 9 Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets included in Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this Form 10-K for further discussion on goodwill impairment. Asset Impairment Expense The Company recognized asset impairment expense of $225 million, $389 million and $20 million for the years ended December 31, 2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively. See Note 20 Impairment Expense included in Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this Form 10-K for further information. 143 Table of Contents Gain on sale of investments Gain on sale of investments of $8 million in 2011 consisted primarily of the gain related to the sale of Wuhu, an equity method investment in China. There was no gain on sale of investments in 2010. Gain on sale of investments of $131 million in 2009 consisted primarily of $98 million recognized in May 2009 related to the termination of the management agreement between the Company and Kazakhmys PLC for Ekibastuz and Maikuben, a gain of $14 million from the sale of the remaining assets associated with the shutdown of the Hefei plant in China and $13 million from the reversal of a contingent liability related to the Kazakhstan sale in 2008. Foreign currency transaction gains (losses) on net monetary position The following table summarizes the gains (losses) on the Company net monetary position from foreign currency transaction activities: Years Ended December 31, 2011 2010 2009 (in millions) AES Corporation $ (10 ) $ (50 ) $ 13 Chile (19 ) 8 65 Philippines 3 8 15 Brazil (12 ) (6 ) (9 ) Argentina 16 12 (10 ) Kazakhstan 1 (24 ) Colombia 1 (4 ) (11 ) Other (17 ) (2 ) (4 ) Total (1) $ (38 ) $ (33 ) $ 35 (1) Includes gains (losses) of $44 million, $(10) million and $(39) million on foreign currency derivative contracts for the years ended December 31, 2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively. The Company recognized foreign currency transaction losses of $38 million for the year ended December 31, 2011. These losses consisted primarily of losses in Chile, Brazil, and at The AES Corporation, partially offset by gains in Argentina. Losses of $19 million in Chile were primarily due to an 11% devaluation of the Chilean Peso, resulting in losses at Gener (a U.S. Dollar functional currency subsidiary) associated with net working capital denominated in Chilean Pesos, mainly cash, accounts receivable, tax receivables and a $5 million loss on foreign currency derivatives. Losses of $12 million in Brazil were primarily due to a 13% devaluation of the Brazilian Real resulting in losses mainly associated with U.S. Dollar denominated liabilities. Losses of $10 million at The AES Corporation were primarily due to decreases in the valuation of intercompany notes receivable denominated in foreign currencies, resulting from the weakening of the Euro and British Pound during the year, partially offset by gains related to foreign currency option purchases. Gains of $16 million in Argentina were primarily due to a gain on a foreign currency embedded derivative related to government receivables, partially offset by losses due to the 8% devaluation of the Argentine Peso, resulting in losses at Alicura (an Argentine Peso functional currency subsidiary) associated with its U.S. Dollar denominated debt. 144 Table of Contents The Company recognized foreign currency transaction losses of $33 million for the year ended December 31, 2010. These losses consisted primarily of losses at The AES Corporation partially offset by gains in Argentina. Losses of $50 million at The AES Corporation were primarily due to the devaluation of notes receivable resulting from the weakening of the Euro and British Pound, and losses on foreign exchange swaps and options, partially offset by gains on cash balances and debt denominated in British Pounds. Gains of $12 million in Argentina were primarily due to a gain on a foreign currency embedded derivative related to government receivables, partially offset by losses due to the devaluation of the Argentine Peso by 5%, resulting in losses at Alicura (an Argentine Peso functional currency subsidiary) associated with its U.S. Dollar denominated debt. The Company recognized foreign currency transaction gains of $35 million for the year ended December 31, 2009. These gains consisted primarily of gains in Chile, the Philippines and at The AES Corporation partially offset by losses in Kazakhstan, Colombia, Argentina and Brazil. Gains of $65 million in Chile were primarily due to the appreciation of the Chilean Peso of 20% resulting in gains at Gener (a U.S. Dollar functional currency subsidiary) associated with its net working capital denominated in Chilean Pesos, mainly cash and accounts receivables. This gain was partially offset by $14 million in losses on foreign currency derivatives. Gains of $15 million in the Philippines were primarily due to the appreciation of the Philippine Peso of 3%, resulting in gains at Masinloc (a Philippine Peso functional currency subsidiary) on the remeasurement of U.S. Dollar denominated debt. Gains of $13 million at The AES Corporation were primarily due to the settlement of the senior unsecured credit facility and the revaluation of notes receivable denominated in the Euro, partially offset by losses on debt denominated in British Pounds. Losses of $24 million in Kazakhstan were primarily due to net foreign currency transaction losses of $12 million related to energy sales denominated and fixed in the U.S. Dollar and $12 million of foreign currency transaction losses on debt and other liabilities denominated in currencies other than the Kazakh Tenge. Losses of $11 million in Colombia were primarily due to the appreciation of the Colombian Peso of 9%, resulting in losses at Chivor (a U.S. Dollar functional currency subsidiary) associated with its Colombian Peso denominated debt and losses on foreign currency derivatives. Losses of $10 million in Argentina were primarily due to the devaluation of the Argentine Peso of 10% in 2009, resulting in losses at Alicura (an Argentine Peso functional currency subsidiary) associated with its U.S. Dollar denominated debt, partially offset by derivative gains. Losses of $9 million in Brazil were primarily due to energy purchases made by Eletropaulo denominated in U.S. Dollar, resulting in foreign currency transaction losses of $18 million, partially offset by gains of $9 million due to the appreciation in 2009 of the Brazilian Real of 25%, resulting in gains at Sul and Uruguaiana associated with U.S. Dollar denominated liabilities. Other non-operating expense Other non-operating expense was $82 million, $7 million and $12 million for the years ended December 31, 2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively. See Note 8 Other Non-operating Expense included in Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this Form 10-K for further information. 145 Table of Contents Income taxes Income tax expense on continuing operations increased $57 million, or 10%, to $636 million in 2011. The Company effective tax rates were 29% for 2011 and 31% for 2010. The net decrease in the 2011 effective tax rate was primarily due to a tax benefit related to partial release of a valuation allowance against certain deferred tax assets at one of our Brazilian subsidiaries in the current period and tax expense recorded in the second quarter of 2010 relating to the CEMIG sale transaction. These items were offset by the impact of impairments recorded in the current period at certain foreign subsidiaries and the tax benefit related to a reversal of a Chilean withholding tax liability recorded in the third quarter of 2010. See Notes 8 Other Non-Operating Expense and 20 Impairment Expense for additional information regarding the current period impairments. Income tax expense on continuing operations increased $22 million, or 4%, to $579 million in 2010. The Company effective tax rates were 31% for 2010 and 25% for 2009. The net increase in the 2010 effective tax rate was primarily due to expense recorded in the second quarter of 2010 relating to the CEMIG sale transaction, tax benefit recorded in 2009 upon the release of valuation allowances at certain U.S. and Brazilian subsidiaries, and $165 million of non-taxable income recorded in 2009 at Brazil as a result of the REFIS program. These items were offset by income tax benefit related to a reversal of a Chilean withholding tax liability recorded in the third quarter of 2010. Included in the net tax expense related to the CEMIG sale transaction is tax expense on the equity earnings associated with the reversal of the net long-term liability and tax benefit related to release of a valuation allowance against certain deferred tax assets. Net equity in earnings of affiliates Net equity in earnings of affiliates decreased $186 million, or 101%, to $(2) million in 2011. This decrease was primarily due to the sale of our interest in CEMIG during the second quarter of 2010 which resulted in a significant gain, and $72 million of impairments at AES Solar in 2011, of which our share was $36 million. Net equity in earnings of affiliates increased $91 million, or 98%, to $184 million in 2010. This increase was primarily due to a gain recognized upon the sale of our interest in CEMIG during the second quarter of 2010, partially offset by 2009 equity in earnings of Cartagena which was accounted for as a consolidated entity in 2010 and thus reported directly within revenues and expenses. Income from continuing operations attributable to noncontrolling interests Income from continuing operations attributable to noncontrolling interests increased $97 million, or 10%, to $1.1 billion in 2011. This increase was primarily due to the appreciation of the Brazilian Real and increased gross margin at Gener due to increased volume. This was partially offset by lower prices at Eletropaulo primarily related to the estimated impact of the July 2011 tariff reset and lower gross margin at Sonel mainly due to the unfavorable impact of an unrealized mark-to-market derivative loss. Income from continuing operations attributable to noncontrolling interests decreased $94 million, or 9%, to $1.0 billion in 2010. This decrease was primarily due to decreased earnings at Eletropaulo as a result of the absence of legal settlement income realized in 2009, a loss on legal settlement at Gener and reduced revenues due to decreased coal prices along with higher electricity purchases at Itabo. These decreases were partially offset by the appreciation of the Brazilian Real. 146 Table of Contents Discontinued operations Total discontinued operations was a net loss of $11 million, $411 million and $49 million for the years ended December 31, 2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively. See Note 22 Discontinued Operations and Held for Sale Businesses included in Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this Form 10-K for further information. Critical Accounting Estimates The Consolidated Financial Statements of AES are prepared in conformity with GAAP, which requires the use of estimates, judgments and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the periods presented. AES significant accounting policies are described in Note 1 General and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K. An accounting estimate is considered critical if: the estimate requires management to make assumptions about matters that were highly uncertain at the time the estimate was made; different estimates reasonably could have been used; or the impact of the estimates and assumptions on financial condition or operating performance is material. Management believes that the accounting estimates employed are appropriate and the resulting balances are reasonable; however, actual results could materially differ from the original estimates, requiring adjustments to these balances in future periods. Management has discussed these critical accounting policies with the Audit Committee, as appropriate. Listed below are the Company most significant critical accounting estimates and assumptions used in the preparation of the Consolidated Financial Statements. Income Taxes We are subject to income taxes in both the United States and numerous foreign jurisdictions. Our worldwide income tax provision requires significant judgment and is based on calculations and assumptions that are subject to examination by the Internal Revenue Service and other taxing authorities. The Company and certain of its subsidiaries are under examination by relevant taxing authorities for various tax years. The Company regularly assesses the potential outcome of these examinations in each tax jurisdiction when determining the adequacy of the provision for income taxes. Accounting guidance for uncertainty in income taxes prescribes a more-likely-than-not recognition threshold. Tax reserves have been established, which the Company believes to be adequate in relation to the potential for additional assessments. Once established, reserves are adjusted only when there is more information available or when an event occurs necessitating a change to the reserves. While the Company believes that the amounts of the tax estimates are reasonable, it is possible that the ultimate outcome of current or future examinations may exceed current reserves in amounts that could be material. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of the existing assets and liabilities, and their respective income tax bases. The Company establishes a valuation allowance when it is more likely than not that all or a portion of a deferred tax asset will not be realized. The Company provision for income taxes could be adversely impacted by changes to the U.S. taxation of earnings of our foreign subsidiaries. Since 2006, the Company has benefitted from the Controlled Foreign Corporation look-through rule, originally enacted for the 2006 through 2009 tax years in the Tax Increase 147 Table of Contents Prevention and Reconciliation Act ( TIPRA ) of 2005 and retroactively reinstated for the 2010 and 2011 tax years via the Tax Relief, Unemployment Insurance Reauthorization, and Job Creation Act of 2010. This provision provided an exception from current U.S. taxation of certain un-repatriated cross-border payments of subsidiary dividends, interest, rents, and royalties. In determining the Company effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2011, the Company has included the benefits of this provision. However, the Controlled Foreign Corporation look-through rule has not been reinstated, retroactively or otherwise, for 2012 or subsequent tax years and there can be no assurance that this provision will continue to be extended. Accordingly, if this provision is not renewed, we expect our effective tax rate to increase by amounts that could be material. Impairments Our accounting policies on goodwill and long-lived assets are described in detail in Note 1 General and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies , included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K. Goodwill is tested annually for impairment at the reporting unit level on October 1 and whenever events or circumstances indicate that it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit has been reduced below its carrying amount. A long-lived asset (asset group) will be tested for recoverability whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that its carrying amount may not be recoverable, i.e., the future undiscounted cash flows associated with the asset are less than its carrying amount. In the event that the carrying amount of the long-lived asset (asset group) is not recoverable, an impairment evaluation is performed, in which the fair value of the asset is estimated and compared to the carrying amount. Examples of indicators that would result in an impairment test for goodwill and a recoverability test for long-lived assets include, but are not limited to, a significant adverse change in the business climate, legislation changes or a change in the extent or manner in which a long-lived asset is being used or in its physical condition. Throughout the impairment evaluation process, management makes considerable judgments; however, the fair value determination is typically the most judgmental part of an impairment evaluation. The Company determines the fair value of a reporting unit or a long-lived asset (asset group) by applying the approaches prescribed under the fair value measurement accounting framework. Generally, the market approach and income approach are most relevant in the fair value measurement of our reporting units and long-lived assets; however, due to the lack of available relevant observable market information in many circumstances, the Company often relies on the income approach. The Company may engage an independent valuation firm to assist management with the valuation. The decision to engage an independent valuation firm considers all relevant facts and circumstances, including a cost/benefit analysis and the Company internal valuation knowledge of the long-lived asset (asset group) or business. The Company develops the underlying assumptions consistent with its internal budgets and forecasts for such valuations. Additionally, the Company uses an internal discounted cash flow valuation model (the DCF model ), based on the principles of present value techniques, to estimate the fair value of its reporting units or long-lived assets under the income approach. The DCF model estimates fair value by discounting our internal budgets and cash flow forecasts, adjusted to reflect market participant assumptions, to the extent necessary, at an appropriate discount rate. Management applies considerable judgment in selecting several input assumptions during the development of our internal budgets and cash flow forecasts. Examples of the input assumptions that our budgets and forecasts are sensitive to include macroeconomic factors such as growth rates, industry demand, inflation, exchange rates, power prices and commodity prices. Whenever appropriate, management obtains these input assumptions from observable market data sources (e.g., Economic Intelligence Unit) and extrapolates the market information if an input assumption is not observable for the entire forecast period. Many of these input assumptions are dependent on other economic assumptions, which are often derived from statistical economic models with inherent limitations such as estimation differences. Further, several input assumptions are based on historical trends which often do not recur. The input assumptions most significant to our budgets and cash flows are based on expectations of macroeconomic factors which have been volatile recently. It is not uncommon that different market data sources have different views of the macroeconomic factors expectations and related assumptions. As a result, macroeconomic factors and related assumptions are often available in a narrow range; however, in some situations these ranges become wide and the use of a different set of input assumptions could produce significantly different budgets and cash flow forecasts. 148 Table of Contents A considerable amount of judgment is also applied in the estimation of the discount rate used in the DCF model. To the extent practical, inputs to the discount rate are obtained from market data sources (e.g., Bloomberg, Capital IQ, etc.). The Company selects and uses a set of publicly traded companies from the relevant industry to estimate the discount rate inputs. Management applies judgment in the selection of such companies based on its view of the most likely market participants. It is reasonably possible that the selection of a different set of likely market participants could produce different input assumptions and result in the use of a different discount rate. Fair value of a reporting unit or a long-lived asset (asset group) is sensitive to both input assumptions to our budgets and cash flow forecasts and the discount rate. Further, estimates of long-term growth and terminal value are often critical to the fair value determination. As part of the impairment evaluation process, management analyzes the sensitivity of fair value to various underlying assumptions. The level of scrutiny increases as the gap between fair value and carrying amount decreases. Changes in any of these assumptions could result in management reaching a different conclusion regarding the potential impairment, which could be material. Our impairment evaluations inherently involve uncertainties from uncontrollable events that could positively or negatively impact the anticipated future economic and operating conditions. Further discussion of the impairment charges recognized by the Company can be found within Note 9 Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets, Note 20 Impairment Expense and Note 8 Other Non-operating Expense to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K. Fair Value Fair Value Hierarchy The Company uses valuation techniques and methodologies that maximize the use of observable inputs and minimize the use of unobservable inputs. Where available, fair value is based on observable market prices or parameters or derived from such prices or parameters. Where observable prices are not available, valuation models are applied to estimate the fair value using the available observable inputs. The valuation techniques involve some level of management estimation and judgment, the degree of which is dependent on the price transparency for the instruments or market and the instruments complexity. To increase consistency and enhance disclosure of the fair value of financial instruments, the fair value measurement standard includes a fair value hierarchy to prioritize the inputs used to measure fair value into three categories. An asset or liability level within the fair value hierarchy is based on the lowest level of input significant to the fair value measurement, where Level 1 is the highest and Level 3 is the lowest. For more information regarding the fair value hierarchy, see Note 1 General and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies included in Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this Form 10-K. Fair Value of Financial Instruments A significant number of the Company financial instruments are carried at fair value with changes in fair value recognized in earnings or other comprehensive income each period. The Company makes estimates regarding the valuation of assets and liabilities measured at fair value in preparing the Consolidated Financial Statements. These assets and liabilities include short and long-term investments in debt and equity securities, included in the balance sheet line items Short-term investments and Other assets (Noncurrent) , derivative assets, included in Other current assets and Other assets (Noncurrent) and derivative liabilities, included in Accrued and other liabilities (current) and Other long-term liabilities . Investments are generally fair valued based on quoted market prices or other observable market data such as interest rate indices. The Company investments are primarily certificates of deposit, government debt securities and money market funds. Derivatives are valued using observable data as inputs into internal valuation models. The Company derivatives primarily consist of interest rate swaps, foreign currency instruments, and commodity and embedded derivatives. Additional discussion regarding the nature of these financial instruments and valuation techniques can be found in Note 4 Fair Value included in Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this Form 10-K. 149 Table of Contents Fair Value of Nonfinancial Assets and Liabilities Significant estimates are made in determining the fair value of long-lived tangible and intangible assets (i.e., property, plant and equipment, intangible assets and goodwill) during the impairment evaluation process. In addition, the majority of assets acquired and liabilities assumed in a business combination are required to be recognized at fair value under the relevant accounting guidance. In determining the fair value of these items, management makes several assumptions discussed in the Impairments section. Accounting for Derivative Instruments and Hedging Activities We enter into various derivative transactions in order to hedge our exposure to certain market risks. We primarily use derivative instruments to manage our interest rate, commodity and foreign currency exposures. We do not enter into derivative transactions for trading purposes. In accordance with the accounting standards for derivatives and hedging, we recognize all derivatives as either assets or liabilities in the balance sheet and measure those instruments at fair value except where derivatives qualify and are designated as normal purchase/normal sale transactions. Changes in fair value of derivatives are recognized in earnings unless specific hedge criteria are met. Income and expense related to derivative instruments are recognized in the same category as that generated by the underlying asset or liability. See Note 6 Derivative instruments and hedging activity included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K for further information on the classification. The accounting standards for derivatives and hedging enable companies to designate qualifying derivatives as hedging instruments based on the exposure being hedged. These hedge designations include fair value hedges and cash flow hedges. Changes in the fair value of a derivative that is highly effective and is designated and qualifies as a fair value hedge, are recognized in earnings as offsets to the changes in fair value of the exposure being hedged. The Company has no fair value hedges at this time. Changes in the fair value of a derivative that is highly effective and is designated as and qualifies as a cash flow hedge, are deferred in accumulated other comprehensive income and are recognized into earnings as the hedged transactions occur. Any ineffectiveness is recognized in earnings immediately. For all hedge contracts, the Company provides formal documentation of the hedge and effectiveness testing in accordance with the accounting standards for derivatives and hedging. The fair value measurement accounting standard provides additional guidance on the definition of fair value and defines fair value as the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date, or exit price. The fair value measurement standard requires the Company to consider and reflect the assumptions of market participants in the fair value calculation. These factors include nonperformance risk (the risk that the obligation will not be fulfilled) and credit risk, both of the reporting entity (for liabilities) and of the counterparty (for assets). Due to the nature of the Company interest rate swaps, which are typically associated with non-recourse debt, credit risk for AES is evaluated at the subsidiary level rather than at the Parent Company level. Nonperformance risk on the Company derivative instruments is an adjustment to the initial asset/liability fair value position that is derived from internally developed valuation models that utilize observable market inputs. As a result of uncertainty, complexity and judgment, accounting estimates related to derivative accounting could result in material changes to our financial statements under different conditions or utilizing different assumptions. As a part of accounting for these derivatives, we make estimates concerning nonperformance, volatilities, market liquidity, future commodity prices, interest rates, credit ratings (both ours and our counterparty s) and exchange rates. The fair value of our derivative portfolio is generally determined using internal valuation models, most of which are based on observable market inputs including interest rate curves and forward and spot prices for currencies and commodities. The Company derives most of its financial instrument market assumptions from 150 Table of Contents market efficient data sources (e.g., Bloomberg, Reuters and Platt s). In some cases, where market data is not readily available, management uses comparable market sources and empirical evidence to derive market assumptions to determine a financial instrument fair value. In certain instances, the published curve may not extend through the remaining term of the contract and management must make assumptions to extrapolate the curve. Additionally, in the absence of quoted prices, we may rely on indicative pricing quotes from financial institutions to input into our valuation model for certain of our foreign currency swaps. These indicative pricing quotes do not constitute either a bid or ask price and therefore are not considered observable market data. For individual contracts, the use of different valuation models or assumptions could have a material effect on the calculated fair value. Regulatory Assets and Liabilities The Company accounts for certain of its regulated operations in accordance with the regulatory accounting standards. As a result, AES recognizes assets and liabilities that result from the regulated ratemaking process that would not be recognized under GAAP for non-regulated entities. Regulatory assets generally represent incurred costs that have been deferred because such costs are probable of future recovery through customer rates. Regulatory liabilities generally represent obligations to make refunds to customers for previous collections for costs that are not likely to be incurred or included in future rate initiatives. Management continually assesses whether the regulatory assets are probable of future recovery by considering factors such as applicable regulatory changes, recent rate orders applicable to other regulated entities and the status of any pending or potential deregulation legislation. If future recovery of costs ceases to be probable, any asset write-offs would be required to be recognized in operating income. New Accounting Pronouncements Adopted In 2011, the Company adopted certain new accounting pronouncements as they became effective or when we were allowed to early adopt. The adoption of these new accounting pronouncements did not have a material impact on the Company financial position or results of operations. See Note 1 General and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K for further information. Accounting Pronouncements Issued But Not Yet Effective See Note 1 General and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K for accounting pronouncements, which were issued, but not yet effective as of December 31, 2011. The Company does not expect to have a material impact on its financial condition or results of operations as a result of the adoption of the new accounting pronouncements, which were issued, but not yet effective. Capital Resources and Liquidity Overview As of December 31, 2011, the Company had unrestricted cash and cash equivalents of $1.7 billion, of which approximately $0.2 billion was held at the Parent Company and qualified holding companies, and short term investments of $1.4 billion. In addition, we had restricted cash and debt service reserves of $1.4 billion. The Company also had non-recourse and recourse aggregate principal amounts of debt outstanding of $16.1 billion and $6.5 billion, respectively. Of the approximately $2.2 billion of our short-term non-recourse debt, $900 million was presented as current because it is due in the next twelve months and $1.3 billion relates to defaulted debt. We expect such current maturities will be repaid from net cash provided by operating activities of the subsidiary to which the debt relates or through opportunistic refinancing activity or some combination thereof. Approximately $305 million of our recourse debt matures within the next twelve months, which we expect to repay using cash on hand at the Parent Company or through net cash provided by operating activities. See further discussion of Parent Company Liquidity below. 151 Table of Contents The Company has two types of debt reported on its consolidated balance sheet: non-recourse and recourse debt. Non-recourse debt is used to fund investments and capital expenditures for construction and acquisition of our electric power plants, wind projects and distribution facilities at our subsidiaries. Non-recourse debt is generally secured by the capital stock, physical assets, contracts and cash flows of the related subsidiary. The default risk is limited to the respective business and is without recourse to the Parent Company and other subsidiaries. Recourse debt is direct borrowings by the Parent Company and is used to fund development, construction or acquisitions, including funding for equity investments or to provide loans to the Parent Company subsidiaries or affiliates. This Parent Company debt is with recourse to the Parent Company and is structurally subordinated to the debt of the Parent Company subsidiaries or affiliates, except to the extent such subsidiaries or affiliates guarantee the Parent Company debt. We rely mainly on long-term debt obligations to fund our construction activities. We have, to the extent available at acceptable terms, utilized non-recourse debt to fund a significant portion of the capital expenditures and investments required to construct and acquire our electric power plants, distribution companies and related assets. Our non-recourse financing is designed to limit cross default risk to the Parent Company or other subsidiaries and affiliates. Our non-recourse long-term debt is a combination of fixed and variable interest rate instruments. Generally, a portion or all of the variable rate debt is fixed through the use of interest rate swaps. In addition, the debt is typically denominated in the currency that matches the currency of the revenue expected to be generated from the benefiting project, thereby reducing currency risk. In certain cases, the currency is matched through the use of derivative instruments. The majority of our non-recourse debt is funded by international commercial banks, with debt capacity supplemented by multilaterals and local regional banks. Given our long-term debt obligations, the Company is subject to interest rate risk on debt balances that accrue interest at variable rates. When possible, the Company will borrow funds at fixed interest rates or hedge its variable rate debt to fix its interest costs on such obligations. In addition, the Company has historically tried to maintain at least 70% of its consolidated long-term obligations at fixed interest rates, including fixing the interest rate through the use of interest rate swaps. These efforts apply to the notional amount of the swaps compared to the amount of related underlying debt. Presently, the Parent Company only material un-hedged exposure to variable interest rate debt relates to indebtedness under its senior secured credit facility. On a consolidated basis, of the Company $16.1 billion of total non-recourse debt outstanding as of December 31, 2011, approximately $4.2 billion bore interest at variable rates that were not subject to a derivative instrument which fixed the interest rate. In addition to utilizing non-recourse debt at a subsidiary level when available, the Parent Company provides a portion, or in certain instances all, of the remaining long-term financing or credit required to fund development, construction or acquisition of a particular project. These investments have generally taken the form of equity investments or intercompany loans, which are subordinated to the project non-recourse loans. We generally obtain the funds for these investments from our cash flows from operations, proceeds from the sales of assets and/or the proceeds from our issuances of debt, common stock and other securities. Similarly, in certain of our businesses, the Parent Company may provide financial guarantees or other credit support for the benefit of counterparties who have entered into contracts for the purchase or sale of electricity, equipment or other services with our subsidiaries or lenders. In such circumstances, if a business defaults on its payment or supply obligation, the Parent Company will be responsible for the business obligations up to the amount provided for in the relevant guarantee or other credit support. At December 31, 2011, the Parent Company had provided outstanding financial and performance-related guarantees or other credit support commitments to or for the benefit of our businesses, which were limited by the terms of the agreements, of approximately $351 million in aggregate (excluding investment commitments and those collateralized by letters of credit and other obligations discussed below). As a result of the Parent Company below investment grade rating, counterparties may be unwilling to accept our general unsecured commitments to provide credit support. Accordingly, with respect to both new and existing commitments, the Parent Company may be required to provide some other form of assurance, such as a 152 Table of Contents letter of credit, to backstop or replace our credit support. The Parent Company may not be able to provide adequate assurances to such counterparties. To the extent we are required and able to provide letters of credit or other collateral to such counterparties, this will reduce the amount of credit available to us to meet our other liquidity needs. At December 31, 2011, we had $12 million in letters of credit outstanding, provided under the senior secured credit facility, and $261 million in cash collateralized letters of credit outstanding outside of the senior secured credit facility. These letters of credit operate to guarantee performance relating to certain project development activities and business operations. During the quarter ended December 31, 2011, the Company paid letter of credit fees ranging from 0.250% to 3.250% per annum on the outstanding amounts. We expect to continue to seek, where possible, non-recourse debt financing in connection with the assets or businesses that we or our affiliates may develop, construct or acquire. However, depending on local and global market conditions and the unique characteristics of individual businesses, non-recourse debt may not be available on economically attractive terms or at all. See Global Economic Conditions discussion above. If we decide not to provide any additional funding or credit support to a subsidiary project that is under construction or has near-term debt payment obligations and that subsidiary is unable to obtain additional non-recourse debt, such subsidiary may become insolvent, and we may lose our investment in that subsidiary. Additionally, if any of our subsidiaries lose a significant customer, the subsidiary may need to withdraw from a project or restructure the non-recourse debt financing. If we or the subsidiary choose not to proceed with a project or are unable to successfully complete a restructuring of the non-recourse debt, we may lose our investment in that subsidiary. Many of our subsidiaries depend on timely and continued access to capital markets to manage their liquidity needs. The inability to raise capital on favorable terms, to refinance existing indebtedness or to fund operations and other commitments during times of political or economic uncertainty may have material adverse effects on the financial condition and results of operations of those subsidiaries. In addition, changes in the timing of tariff increases or delays in the regulatory determinations under the relevant concessions could affect the cash flows and results of operations of our businesses. As of December 31, 2011, the Company had approximately $376 million of trade accounts receivable related to certain of its generation and utility businesses in Latin America classified as other long-term assets. These consist primarily of trade accounts receivable that, pursuant to amended agreements or government resolutions, have collection periods that extend beyond December 31, 2012, or one year past the balance sheet date. The Company is actively collecting these receivables and believes such amounts are collectible based on collection history and performance under agreements. Additionally, the current portion of these trade accounts receivable was $24 million at December 31, 2011. Capital Expenditures The Company spent $2.5 billion, $2.3 billion and $2.5 billion on capital expenditures in 2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively. A significant majority of these costs were funded with non-recourse debt consistent with our financial strategy. At December 31, 2011, the Company had a total of $1.4 billion of availability under long-term non-recourse construction credit facilities. As more fully described in Key Trends and Uncertainties above, we have taken steps to decrease the amount of new discretionary capital spending. We expect to continue funding projects that are currently in the construction phase using existing capital provided by these non-recourse credit facilities as supplemented by internally generated cash flows, Parent Company liquidity, contribution from existing or new partners and other funding sources. As a result, property, plant and equipment and long-term non-recourse debt are expected to increase over the next few years even though the rate of discretionary spending has decreased. While we believe we have the resources to continue funding the projects in construction, there can be no assurances that we will continue to fund all these existing construction efforts. As of December 31, 2011, the Company had $9 million of commitments to invest in subsidiaries under construction and to purchase related equipment that were not included in the letters of credit discussed above. The Company expects to fund these net investment commitments in 2012. The exact payment schedules will be 153 Table of Contents dictated by the construction milestones. We expect to fund these commitments from a combination of current liquidity and internally generated Parent Company cash flow. Environmental Capital Expenditures The Company continues to assess the possible need for capital expenditures associated with international, federal, regional and state regulation of GHG emissions from electric power generation facilities. Currently in the United States there is no Federal legislation establishing mandatory GHG emissions reduction programs (including CO 2 ) affecting the electric power generating facilities of the Company subsidiaries. There are numerous state programs regulating GHG emissions from electric power generation facilities and there is a possibility that federal GHG legislation will be enacted within the next several years. Further, the EPA has adopted regulations pertaining to GHG emissions and has announced its intention to propose new regulations for electric generating units under Section 111 of the CAA. The EPA regulations and any subsequent Federal legislation, if enacted, may place significant costs on GHG emissions from fossil fuel-fired electric power generation facilities, particularly coal-fired facilities, and in order to comply, CO 2 emitting facilities may be required to purchase additional GHG emissions allowances or offsets under cap-and-trade programs, pay a carbon tax or install new emission reduction equipment to capture or reduce the amount of GHG emitted from the facilities, in the event that reliable technology to do so is developed. The capital expenditures required to comply with any future GHG legislation or any GHG regulations could be significant and unless such costs can be passed on to customers or counterparties, such regulations could impair the profitability of some of the electric power generation facilities operated by our subsidiaries or render certain of them uneconomical to operate, either of which could have a material adverse effect on our consolidated results of operations and financial condition. With respect to our operations outside the United States, certain of the businesses operated by the Company subsidiaries are subject to compliance with EU ETS and the Kyoto Protocol in certain countries and other country-specific programs to regulate GHG emissions. To date, compliance with the Kyoto Protocol and EU ETS has not had a material adverse effect on the Company consolidated results of operations, financial condition and cash flows because of, among other factors, the cost of GHG emission allowances and/or the ability of our businesses to pass the cost of purchasing such allowances on to customers or counterparties. However, in the event that such counterparties or regulatory authorities challenge our ability to pass these costs on, there can be no assurance that the Company and/or the relevant subsidiary would prevail in any such dispute. Furthermore, even if the Company and/or the relevant subsidiary does prevail, it would be subject to the cost and administrative burden associated with such dispute. As discussed in Item 1. Business Regulatory Matters Environmental and Land Use Regulations in this Form 10-K, in the United States there presently is no federal legislation establishing mandatory GHG emission reduction programs. In 2011, the Company subsidiaries operated businesses which had total approximate CO 2 emissions of 74 million metric tons (ownership adjusted). Approximately 37.5 million metric tons of the 74 million metric tons were emitted in the U.S. (both figures ownership adjusted). Approximately 8.3 million metric tons were emitted in U.S. states participating in the RGGI. We believe that legislative or regulatory actions, if enacted, may require a material increase in capital expenditures at our subsidiaries. In the future the actual impact on our subsidiaries capital expenditures from any potential federal program to regulate and reduce GHG emissions, if enacted, and the state and regional programs developed or in the process of development, or any EPA regulation of GHG emissions, will depend on a number of factors, including among others, the GHG reductions required under any such legislation or regulations, the cost of emissions reduction equipment, the price and availability of offsets, the extent to which our subsidiaries would be entitled to receive GHG emission allowances without having to purchase them, the quantity of allowances which our subsidiaries would have to purchase, the price of allowances, and our subsidiaries ability to recover or pass-through costs incurred to comply with any legislative or regulatory requirements that are ultimately imposed and the use of market-based compliance options such as cap-and-trade programs. 154 Table of Contents Income Taxes We recognized tax expense of $636 million for the year ended December 31, 2011, while our cash payments for income taxes, net of refunds, totaled $971 million. The difference resulted primarily from cash payments related to the sale of two telecommunication companies in Brazil, the tax expense on which was recorded in gain from disposal of discontinued businesses. Tax expense was further impacted by a partial valuation allowance release at one of our Brazilian subsidiaries. Consolidated Cash Flows At December 31, 2011, cash and cash equivalents decreased $815 million from December 31, 2010 to $1.7 billion. The decrease in cash and cash equivalents was due to $2.9 billion of cash provided by operating activities, $4.9 billion of cash used for investing activities, $1.4 billion of cash provided by financing activities, an unfavorable effect of foreign currency exchange rates on cash of $122 million and an $83 million increase in cash of discontinued and held for sale businesses. At December 31, 2010, cash and cash equivalents increased $766 million from December 31, 2009 to $2.5 billion. The increase in cash and cash equivalents was due to $3.5 billion of cash provided by operating activities, $2.0 billion of cash used for investing activities, $706 million of cash used for financing activities, favorable effect of foreign currency exchange rates on cash of $8 million and a $39 million decrease in cash of discontinued and held for sale businesses. $ Change 2011 2010 2009 2011 vs. 2010 2010 vs. 2009 (in millions) Net cash provided by (used in) operating activities $ 2,884 $ 3,465 $ 2,211 $ (581 ) $ 1,254 Net cash provided by (used in) investing activities $ (4,906 ) $ (2,040 ) $ (1,917 ) $ (2,866 ) $ (123 ) Net cash provided by (used in) financing activities $ 1,412 $ (706 ) $ 610 $ 2,118 $ (1,316 ) Operating Activities Net cash provided by operating activities decreased $581 million, or 17%, to $2.9 billion during 2011 compared to 2010. This net decrease was primarily due to the following: a decrease of $354 million at our Latin American utilities businesses primarily driven by our businesses in Brazil due to higher income tax payments of which $84 million is due to the sale of Brazil Telecom in October 2011, for which the pre-tax net sales proceeds of $890 million are recorded in cash flows from investing activities, and a one-time cash savings of $107 million mainly related to the utilization of a tax credit received as a result of the REFIS program in 2010, lower accounts receivable collections at Eletropaulo and higher payments for energy purchases, operation and maintenance expenses and pension contributions. These impacts were partially offset by higher accounts receivable collections at Sul; a decrease of $145 million at our North America generation businesses primarily due to reduced operations in New York prior to its deconsolidation in December 2011 and higher working capital requirements at Puerto Rico, partially offset by the deconsolidation of Thames; and a decrease of $56 million at Masinloc in the Philippines due to lower gross margin. Although net income for the period increased $471 million for 2011, net cash provided by operating activities decreased $581 million during 2011. Included in net income for each period are items such as impairments and losses from discontinued operations, which have both decreased in 2011, which have contributed to the increase in net income for the period, but are largely excluded from net cash provided by operating activities because they are non-cash in nature or the underlying cash activity is appropriately classified 155 Table of Contents as an investing or financing activity. Also, net cash provided by operating activities in 2010 was impacted by certain non-recurring items, as discussed above, which were not expected to recur in 2011. The Company does not expect a further decrease in net cash provided by operating activities to continue in 2012, when compared to 2011, however, it can provide no assurance that such trend will not continue. Investing Activities Net cash used for investing activities increased $2.9 billion, or 140%, to $4.9 billion during 2011 compared to 2010. This increase was largely attributable to the following: an increase of $3.3 billion in acquisitions, net of cash acquired, primarily due to the $3.4 billion acquisition of DPL in November 2011 and the $149 million acquisition of our equity investment in Entek in February and May 2011. These increases were offset by the acquisitions of Ballylumford in Northern Ireland and our equity investment in JHRH for $138 million and $35 million, respectively, during 2010; an increase of $228 million in debt service reserves and other assets during 2011 compared to the 2010. During 2011, $284 million of funds were transferred to debt service reserves and other assets primarily related to the collateralization for a letter of credit of $222 million at the Parent Company for the Mong Duong project in Vietnam, $32 million for a construction retainage fee at Panama and $22 million at Kilroot. These increases were partially offset by a transfer out of debt service reserves and other assets for payment of rent of $33 million in New York; a decrease of $132 million in proceeds from loan repayments during 2011. In 2010, we received $132 million in proceeds related to the repayment of the loan receivable from a wind development project in Brazil. There were no proceeds from loan repayments in 2011; and an increase of $120 million in capital expenditures to $2.4 billion primarily due to increases in capital expenditures of $135 million for the Mong Duong project, and net increases of $128 million and $32 million at our Brazilian and African subsidiaries, respectively. These increases were partially offset by decreases in capital expenditures of $110 million at Maritza in Bulgaria and $86 million at Gener. These increases were partially offset by: an increase of $332 million in proceeds from the sale of businesses primarily due to the $890 million in net cash received for the Brazil Telecom sale in October 2011 and $36 million received from the sale of a 49% equity interest in Mong Duong. These were offset by a decrease in proceeds of $496 million related to the 2010 sale of our businesses in the Middle East as well as the final settlement proceeds of $99 million received in January 2010 from the termination of a management agreement with Kazakhmys PLC in Kazakhstan related to the 2008 sale of Ekibastuz and Maikuben; an increase of $224 million from the sale of short-term investments, net of purchases, during 2011, primarily due to the increase of $135 million and $92 million at Gener and our Brazilian subsidiaries, respectively, due to the use of such investments to fund dividend distributions; and an increase of $199 million of proceeds received from collection of a performance bond to compensate for construction delays at Maritza in Bulgaria. There were no proceeds from performance bonds in 2010. Financing Activities Net cash provided by financing activities increased $2.1 billion, or 300%, to $1.4 billion during 2011 compared to net cash used for financing activities of $706 million during 2010. This increase was primarily attributable to the following: an increase of $3.3 billion in proceeds from issuances of recourse and non-recourse debt, primarily due to a $3.3 billion increase at the Parent Company used to partially fund the acquisition of DPL, as well as $625 million at IPALCO mostly used to refinance debt, offset by a decrease of $895 million at our Brazilian subsidiaries; 156 Table of Contents an increase of $359 million of net borrowings under revolving credit facilities primarily due to increases of $295 million at the Parent Company to fund, in part, the acquisition of DPL, $35 million at Alicura, $14 million at IPALCO and a net increase of $11 million attributable to discontinued operations; a decrease of $166 million in repayments of recourse and non-recourse debt, attributable to decreases of $437 million at the Parent Company, $294 million at our Brazilian subsidiaries, $171 million at Andres, $133 million at Itabo, $103 million at Chigen, $42 million in New York, $23 million at our European Wind generation projects and $19 million at Kilroot. These decreases were partially offset by increases of $559 million at IPALCO, $337 million at Gener, $133 million at Sonel, $55 million at Maritza, and $20 million at Southland; and a decrease of $157 million in distributions to noncontrolling interests, primarily due to $97 million related to distributions in connection with the sale of discontinued operations in the Middle East made in 2010, $69 million at our Armenia Mountain wind generation project, $53 million at our Brazilian subsidiaries, offset by an increase of $48 million at Gener. These increases were partially offset by: a $1.6 billion issuance of common stock net of transaction costs to China Investment Corporation in 2010; an increase of $180 million in purchases of treasury stock under the Company common stock repurchase plan; and an increase of $141 million in payments for financing fees primarily due to the issuance of debt at the Parent Company, Mong Duong and Gener. Contractual Obligations A summary of our contractual obligations, commitments and other liabilities as of December 31, 2011 is presented in the table below, which excludes any businesses classified as discontinued operations or held-for-sale (in millions): Contractual Obligations Total Less than 1 year 1-3 years 4-5 years 5 years and more Other Footnote Reference (9) Debt Obligations (1) $ 22,501 $ 2,446 $ 3,557 $ 4,226 $ 12,272 $ 11 Interest Payments on Long-Term Debt (2) 10,786 1,502 2,755 2,233 4,296 n/a Capital Lease Obligations (3) 178 14 21 18 125 12 Operating Lease Obligations (4) 1,007 57 112 108 730 12 Electricity Obligations (5) 35,107 2,800 4,446 3,974 23,887 12 Fuel Obligations (6) 10,156 1,980 1,977 1,324 4,875 12 Other Purchase Obligations (7) 16,075 1,853 2,708 1,896 9,618 12 Other Long-term Liabilities Reflected on AES Consolidated Balance Sheet under GAAP (8) 887 7 225 90 390 175 n/a Total $ 96,697 $ 10,659 $ 15,801 $ 13,869 $ 56,193 $ 175 (1) Includes recourse and non-recourse debt presented on the Consolidated Balance Sheet. Non-recourse debt borrowings are not a direct obligation of AES, the Parent Company. Recourse debt represents the direct borrowings of AES, the Parent Company. See Note 11 Debt to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K which provides additional disclosure regarding these obligations. These amounts exclude capital lease obligations which are included in the capital lease category, see (3) below. 157 Table of Contents (2) Interest payments are estimated based on final maturity dates of debt securities outstanding at December 31, 2011 and do not reflect anticipated future refinancing, early redemptions or new debt issuances. Variable rate interest obligations are estimated based on rates as of December 31, 2011. (3) Several AES subsidiaries have leases for operating and office equipment and vehicles that are classified as capital leases within Property, Plant and Equipment. Minimum contractual obligations include $106 million of imputed interest. (4) The Company was obligated under long-term noncancelable operating leases, primarily for office rental and site leases. ( 5 ) Operating subsidiaries of the Company have entered into contracts for the purchase of electricity from third parties. ( 6 ) Operating subsidiaries of the Company have entered into fuel purchase contracts subject to termination only in certain limited circumstances. ( 7 ) Amounts relate to other contractual obligations where the Company has an enforceable and legally binding agreement to purchase goods or services that specifies all significant terms, including: quantity, pricing, and approximate timing. These amounts include planned capital expenditures that are contractually obligated. ( 8 ) These amounts do not include current liabilities on the Consolidated Balance Sheet except for the current portion of uncertain tax obligations. Noncurrent uncertain tax obligations are reflected in the Other column of the table above as the Company is not able to reasonably estimate the timing of the future payments. In addition, the amounts do not include: (1) regulatory liabilities (See Note 10 Regulatory Assets and Liabilities ), (2) contingencies (See Note 13 Contingencies ), (3) pension and other post retirement employee benefit liabilities (see Note 14 Benefit Plans ) or (4) any taxes (See Note 21 Income Taxes) except for uncertain tax obligations, as the Company is not able to reasonably estimate the timing of future payments. See the indicated notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K for additional information on the items excluded. Derivatives (See Note 6 Derivative Instruments and Hedging Activities ) and incentive compensation are excluded as the Company is not able to reasonably estimate the timing or amount of the future payments. ( 9 ) For further information see the note referenced below in Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data . Parent Company Liquidity The following discussion of Parent Company Liquidity has been included because we believe it is a useful measure of the liquidity available to The AES Corporation, or the Parent Company, given the non-recourse nature of most of our indebtedness. Parent Company liquidity as outlined below is a non-GAAP measure and should not be construed as an alternative to cash and cash equivalents which are determined in accordance with GAAP, as a measure of liquidity. Cash and cash equivalents are disclosed in the Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows and the Parent Only Unconsolidated Statements of Cash Flows in Schedule I of this Form 10-K. Parent Company liquidity may differ from similarly titled measures used by other companies. The principal sources of liquidity at the Parent Company level are: dividends and other distributions from our subsidiaries, including refinancing proceeds; proceeds from debt and equity financings at the Parent Company level, including availability under our credit facilities; and proceeds from asset sales. Cash requirements at the Parent Company level are primarily to fund: interest; principal repayments of debt; acquisitions; construction commitments; 158 Table of Contents other equity commitments; equity repurchases; taxes; Parent Company overhead and development costs; and dividends on our common stock. The Company defines Parent Company Liquidity as cash available to the Parent Company plus available borrowings under existing credit facilities. The cash held at qualified holding companies represents cash sent to subsidiaries of the Company domiciled outside of the U.S. Such subsidiaries have no contractual restrictions on their ability to send cash to the Parent Company. Parent Company Liquidity is reconciled to its most directly comparable U.S. GAAP financial measure, cash and cash equivalents at December 31, 2011 and 2010 as follows: Parent Company Liquidity 2011 2010 (in millions) Cash and cash equivalents $ 1,710 $ 2,525 Less: Cash and cash equivalents at subsidiaries (1,510 ) (1,403 ) Parent and qualified holding companies cash and cash equivalents 200 1,122 Commitments under Parent credit facilities 800 800 Less: Letters of credit under the credit facilities (12 ) (85 ) Less: Borrowings under the credit facilities (295 ) Borrowings available under Parent credit facilities 493 715 Total Parent Company Liquidity $ 693 $ 1,837 The decrease in Parent Company Liquidity is primarily driven by the closing of the DPL Inc. acquisition in the fourth quarter of 2011 as well as new investments in Vietnam and Turkey. Recourse Debt Transactions: During the year ended December 31, 2011, the Company issued recourse debt of $2.05 billion as outlined below. The proceeds of the debt were used to partially finance the Company acquisition of DPL as discussed further in Note 23 Acquisitions and Dispositions . On May 27, 2011, the Company secured a $1.05 billion term loan under a senior secured credit facility (the senior secured term loan ). The senior secured term loan bears annual interest, at the Company option, at a variable rate of LIBOR plus 3.25% or Base Rate plus 2.25%, and matures in 2018. The senior secured term loan is subject to certain customary representations, covenants and events of default. On June 15, 2011, the Company issued $1 billion aggregate principal amount of 7.375% senior unsecured notes maturing July 1, 2021 (the 7.375% 2021 Notes ). Upon a change of control, the Company must offer to repurchase the 7.375% 2021 Notes at a price equal to 101% of principal, plus accrued and unpaid interest. The 7.375% 2021 Notes are also subject to certain covenants restricting the ability of the Company to incur additional secured debt; to enter into sale-lease back transactions; to consolidate, merge, convey or transfer substantially all of its assets; as well as other covenants and events of default that are customary for debt securities similar to the 7.375% 2021 Notes. The Company entered into interest rate locks in May 2011 to hedge the risk of changes in LIBOR until the issuance of the 7.375% 2021 Notes. The Company paid $24 million to settle those interest rate locks as of June 15, 2011. The payment was recognized in accumulated other comprehensive loss and is being amortized over the life of the 7.375% 2021 Notes as an adjustment to interest expense using the effective yield method. 159 Table of Contents Recourse Debt: Our recourse debt at year-end was approximately $6.5 billion and $4.6 billion in 2011 and 2010, respectively. The following table sets forth our Parent Company contingent contractual obligations as of December 31, 2011: Contingent contractual obligations Amount Number of Agreements Maximum Exposure Range for Each Agreement (in millions) (in millions) Guarantees $ 351 22 <$1 - $53 Letters of credit under the senior secured credit facility 12 11 <$1 - $7 Cash collateralized letters of credit 261 13 <$1 - $221 Total $ 624 46 As of December 31, 2011, the Company had $9 million of commitments to invest in subsidiaries under construction and to purchase related equipment that were not included in the letters of credit discussed above. The Company expects to fund these net investment commitments in 2012. The exact payment schedules will be dictated by the construction milestones. We expect to fund these commitments from a combination of current liquidity and internally generated Parent Company cash flow. We have a diverse portfolio of performance related contingent contractual obligations. These obligations are designed to cover potential risks and only require payment if certain targets are not met or certain contingencies occur. The risks associated with these obligations include change of control, construction cost overruns, subsidiary default, political risk, tax indemnities, spot market power prices, sponsor support and liquidated damages under power sales agreements for projects in development, in operation and under construction. While we do not expect that we will be required to fund any material amounts under these contingent contractual obligations during 2012 or beyond, many of the events which would give rise to such obligations are beyond our control. We can provide no assurance that we will be able to fund our obligations under these contingent contractual obligations if we are required to make substantial payments thereunder. We have indicated our intent to declare a dividend in 2012. While we believe we will have sufficient liquidity to do so, we can provide no assurance we will be able to declare a dividend at the amount indicated, if at all. While we believe that our sources of liquidity will be adequate to meet our needs for the foreseeable future, this belief is based on a number of material assumptions, including, without limitation, assumptions about our ability to access the capital markets (see Key Trends and Uncertainties and Global Economic Conditions ), the operating and financial performance of our subsidiaries, currency exchange rates, power market pool prices, and the ability of our subsidiaries to pay dividends. In addition, our subsidiaries ability to declare and pay cash dividends to us (at the Parent Company level) is subject to certain limitations contained in loans, governmental provisions and other agreements. We can provide no assurance that these sources will be available when needed or that the actual cash requirements will not be greater than anticipated. We have met our interim needs for shorter-term and working capital financing at the Parent Company level with our senior secured credit facility. See Item 1A. Risk Factors, The AES Corporation is a holding company and its ability to make payments on its outstanding indebtedness, including its public debt securities, is dependent upon the receipt of funds from its subsidiaries by way of dividends, fees, interest, loans or otherwise . of this Form 10-K. Various debt instruments at the Parent Company level, including our senior secured credit facility, contain certain restrictive covenants. The covenants provide for, among other items: limitations on other indebtedness, liens, investments and guarantees; limitations on dividends, stock repurchases and other equity transactions; 160 Table of Contents restrictions and limitations on mergers and acquisitions, sales of assets, leases, transactions with affiliates and off-balance sheet and derivative arrangements; maintenance of certain financial ratios; and financial and other reporting requirements. As of December 31, 2011, we were in compliance with these covenants at the Parent Company level. Non-Recourse Debt: While the lenders under our non-recourse debt financings generally do not have direct recourse to the Parent Company, defaults thereunder can still have important consequences for our results of operations and liquidity, including, without limitation: reducing our cash flows as the subsidiary will typically be prohibited from distributing cash to the Parent Company during the time period of any default; triggering our obligation to make payments under any financial guarantee, letter of credit or other credit support we have provided to or on behalf of such subsidiary; causing us to record a loss in the event the lender forecloses on the assets; and triggering defaults in our outstanding debt at the Parent Company. For example, our senior secured credit facilities and outstanding debt securities at the Parent Company include events of default for certain bankruptcy related events involving material subsidiaries. In addition, our revolving credit agreement at the Parent Company includes events of default related to payment defaults and accelerations of outstanding debt of material subsidiaries. Some of our subsidiaries are currently in default with respect to all or a portion of their outstanding indebtedness. The total non-recourse debt classified as current in the accompanying Consolidated Balance Sheets amounts to $2.2 billion. The portion of current debt related to such defaults was $1.3 billion at December 31, 2011, all of which was non-recourse debt related to three subsidiaries Maritza, Sonel and Kelanitissa. None of the subsidiaries that are currently in default are subsidiaries that met the applicable definition of materiality under AES corporate debt agreements as of December 31, 2011 in order for such defaults to trigger an event of default or permit acceleration under such indebtedness. However, as a result of additional dispositions of assets, other significant reductions in asset carrying values or other matters in the future that may impact our financial position and results of operations or the financial position of the individual subsidiary, it is possible that one or more of these subsidiaries could fall within the definition of a material subsidiary and thereby upon an acceleration trigger an event of default and possible acceleration of the indebtedness under the AES Parent Company outstanding debt securities. Non-Recourse Debt Transactions: On October 3, 2011, Dolphin Subsidiary II, Inc. ( Dolphin II ), a newly formed, wholly-owned special purpose indirect subsidiary of AES, entered into an indenture (the Indenture ) with Wells Fargo Bank, N.A. (the Trustee ) as part of its issuance of $450 million aggregate principal amount of 6.50% senior notes due 2016 (the 2016 Notes ) and $800 million aggregate principal amount of 7.25% senior notes due 2021 (the 7.25% 2021 Notes , together with the 2016 Notes, the notes ) to finance the acquisition (the Acquisition ) of DPL. Upon closing of the acquisition on November 28, 2011, Dolphin II was merged into DPL with DPL being the surviving entity and obligor. The 2016 Notes and the 7.25% 2021 Notes are included under Notes and bonds in the non-recourse detail table above. See Note 23 Acquisitions and Dispositions for further information. 161 Table of Contents Interest on the 2016 Notes and the 7.25% 2021 Notes accrues at a rate of 6.50% and 7.25% per year, respectively, and is payable on April 15 and October 15 of each year, beginning April 15, 2012. Prior to September 15, 2016 with respect to the 2016 Notes and July 15, 2021 with respect to the 7.25% 2021 Notes, DPL may redeem some or all of the 2016 Notes or 7.25% 2021 Notes at par, plus a make-whole amount set forth in the Indenture and accrued and unpaid interest. At any time on or after September 15, 2016 or July 15, 2021 with respect to the 2016 Notes and 7.25% 2021 Notes, respectively, DPL may redeem some or all of the 2016 Notes or 7.25% 2021 Notes at par plus accrued and unpaid interest. The proceeds from issuance of the notes were used to partially finance the DPL acquisition. 162 Table of Contents 
