CIK: 874716
Company Name: IDEXX LABORATORIES INC DE
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2012-02-17


ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS Description of Segments . During 2011, we operated primarily through three business segments: diagnostic and information technology-based products and services for the veterinary market, which we refer to as the Companion Animal Group ( CAG ), water quality products ( Water ) and products for livestock and poultry health, which we refer to as Livestock and Poultry Diagnostics ( LPD ). Prior to the second quarter of 2010, we referred to LPD as our Production Animal Segment. We also operate two smaller segments that comprise products for milk quality and safety ( Dairy ) and products for the human point-of-care medical diagnostic market ( OPTI Medical ). Financial information about the Dairy and OPTI Medical operating segments and about a product line and out-licensing arrangements remaining from our pharmaceutical business is combined and presented in an Other category because they do not meet the quantitative or qualitative thresholds for reportable segments. See Note 15 to the consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2011 included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for financial information about our segments, including geographic information, and about our product and service categories. Effective January 1, 2011, we changed the measure of profitability of our reportable segments, which resulted in the movement of certain expenses from our operating segments to the caption Unallocated Amounts. See Note 15 to the consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2011 included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information regarding this change in the measure of profitability of our reportable segments. The segment income (loss) from operations discussed within this report for the years ended December 31, 2010 and 2009 have been restated to conform to our new measure of segment profitability. This change in measure of segment profitability did not have a material impact on the results of operations for any of our individual segments. There was no change to the business composition of our reportable segments or to our consolidated results of operations. The following is a discussion of the strategic and operating factors that we believe have the most significant effect on the performance of our business. Companion Animal Group In the CAG segment, we believe we have developed a strategic advantage over companies with more narrow product or service offerings. The breadth and complementary nature of our products and services give us scale in sales and distribution, permit us to offer integrated disease-management diagnostic solutions that leverage the advantages of both point-of-care and outside laboratory testing, and facilitate the flow of medical and business information in the veterinary practice by connecting practice management systems with reference laboratory test data, in-clinic test data from our IDEXX VetLab suite of analyzers and rapid assay tests and radiographic data from the IDEXX-PACS and IDEXX EquiView PACS software generated by our digital radiography systems. Our real-time care strategy aims to provide veterinarians with the tools and services to enhance the pet owner experience with veterinary medical care, while also growing veterinary practice revenues and improving staff efficiencies. Instruments and Consumables . Our strategy in our IDEXX VetLab instrument line of business is to provide veterinarians in many countries around the world with an integrated set of instruments that, individually and together, provide superior diagnostic information and performance features, enabling veterinarians to practice better medicine and improve practice efficiency and, in doing so, achieve their practice economic objectives, including growth and profitability. We derive substantial revenues and margins from the sale of consumables that are used in these instruments. Additionally, we offer extended maintenance agreements in connection with the sale of our instruments. During the early stage of an instrument life cycle, we derive relatively greater revenues from instrument placements, while consumable sales become relatively more significant in later stages as the installed base of instruments increases and instrument placement revenues begin to decline. Instrument sales have significantly lower gross margins than sales of consumables, and therefore the mix of instrument and consumable sales in a particular period will impact our gross margins in this line of business. 27 Our Catalyst Dx analyzer is our latest generation chemistry analyzer, which was launched in 2008. In addition, we continue to place VetTest instruments through sales, lease, rental and other programs, with substantially all of our revenues from that product line currently derived from consumable sales. As of December 31, 2011, these two chemistry analyzers provided for a combined active installed base of approximately 32,000 units. A substantial portion of 2011 Catalyst Dx analyzer placements were to veterinary clinics that elected to upgrade from their VetTest analyzer to a Catalyst Dx analyzer, however, a number of placements were also to competitive accounts. As we continue to experience growth in placements of Catalyst Dx analyzers and sales of related consumables, we expect this growth to be partly offset by a decline in placements of VetTest instruments and in sales of related VetTest consumables. The ProCyte Dx analyzer is our latest generation hematology analyzer, which we launched in the third quarter of 2010. In addition we sell the LaserCyte analyzer and VetAutoread analyzer. As of December 31, 2011 these three hematology analyzers provided for a combined active installed base of approximately 23,000 units. A substantial portion of ProCyte Dx analyzer placements continue to be made at veterinary clinics that elect to upgrade from their LaserCyte analyzer to a ProCyte Dx analyzer. However, a number of placements have been made at competitive accounts since the launch of this instrument in 2010. While customers continue to upgrade from their LaserCyte analyzer to a ProCyte analyzer, we continue to place a substantial number of LaserCyte instruments, both new and refurbished, as trade-ups from the VetAutoread analyzer and at new and competitive accounts. In 2011, a significant number of LaserCyte instruments that were placed were refurbished instruments that had been received in trade in the sale of a ProCyte Dx analyzer. As we continue to experience growth in placements of ProCyte and LaserCyte analyzers and in sales of related consumables, we expect this growth to be partly offset by a decline in placements of VetAutoread analyzers and in sales of related VetAutoread consumables. Our long-term success in this area of our business is dependent upon new customer acquisition, customer loyalty and retention and customer utilization of existing and new assays introduced for use on our analyzers. We continuously seek opportunities to enhance the care that veterinary professionals give to their patients and clients through supporting the implementation of real-time care testing workflows. Our latest generation of chemistry and hematology instruments demonstrates this commitment by offering enhanced ease of use, faster time to results and greater sample throughput. Utilization can increase due to a greater number of patient samples being run or to an increase in the number of tests being run per patient sample. Our strategy is to increase both drivers. To increase utilization, we seek to educate veterinarians about best medical practices that emphasize the importance of chemistry and hematology testing at the point of care for a variety of diagnostic purposes. We also can offer protocol-based rebates when customers utilize the broad testing functionality of our analyzers. In addition, we provide marketing tools and consultative services that help drive efficiencies in veterinary practice processes and allow practices to increase the number of clients they see on a daily basis. With all of our instrument product lines, we seek to differentiate our products from our competitors products based on time-to-result, ease-of-use, throughput, breadth of diagnostic menu, flexibility of menu selection, accuracy, reliability, ability to handle compromised samples, analytical capability of software, integration with the IDEXX VetLab Station, education and training, and superior sales and customer service. Our success depends, in part, on our ability to differentiate our products in a way that justifies a premium price. Rapid Assay Products . Our rapid assay line of business consists primarily of single-use kits for point-of-care testing and, to a limited degree, microwell-based kits for laboratory testing for canine and feline diseases and conditions. Our rapid assay strategy is to develop, manufacture, market and sell proprietary tests that address important medical needs for particular diseases prevalent in the companion animal population. We seek to differentiate our tests from those of other in-clinic test providers and reference laboratory diagnostic service providers through ease-of-use and superior performance, including by providing our customers with combination tests that test a single sample for multiple analytes. We further augment our product development and customer service efforts with sales and marketing programs that enhance medical awareness and understanding regarding certain diseases and the importance of diagnostic testing. We also seek to enhance the attractiveness of our tests by providing the SNAPshot Dx analyzer, which automatically reads certain SNAP test results, and records those results in the electronic medical record. We continue to work on enhancing the functionality of the SNAPshot Dx analyzer to read the results of additional tests from our canine and feline family of rapid assay products. 28 Reference Laboratory Diagnostic and Consulting Services . We believe that more than half of all diagnostic testing by U.S. veterinarians is provided by outside reference laboratories such as our IDEXX Reference Laboratories. In many markets outside the U.S., in-clinic testing is less prevalent and an even greater percentage of diagnostic testing is done in reference laboratories. We attempt to differentiate our reference laboratory testing services from those of our competitive reference laboratories and competitive in-clinic offerings primarily on the basis of test menu, technology employed, quality, customer service and the complementary manner in which our laboratory services work with our point of care offerings. Revenue growth in this line of business is achieved both through increased sales to existing customers and through the acquisition of new customers, including through reference laboratory acquisitions, customer list acquisitions and the opening of new reference laboratories, including laboratories that are co-located with large practice customers. In November 2011, we acquired the research and diagnostic laboratory ( RADIL ) business of the College of Veterinary Medicine from the University of Missouri. RADIL provides health monitoring and diagnostic testing services to bioresearch customers. We believe the acquisition of RADIL allows us to leverage our expertise in veterinary diagnostics and expand our integrated offering of reference laboratory diagnostic and consulting services and in-clinic testing solutions in an adjacent market. Profitability of our reference laboratory diagnostic and consulting services business is largely the result of our ability to achieve efficiencies from both volume and operational improvements. Start-up laboratories that we open typically will operate at a loss until testing volumes reach a level that permits profitability. Acquired laboratories frequently operate less profitably than our existing laboratories and acquired laboratories may not achieve the profitability of our existing laboratory network for several years until we complete the implementation of operating improvements and efficiencies. Therefore, in the short term, new and acquired reference laboratories generally will have a negative effect on the operating margin of the reference laboratory diagnostic and consulting services line of business. Practice Management Systems and Digital Radiography . Our strategy in the practice management systems line of business is to provide superior integrated information solutions, backed by superior customer support and education, to allow the veterinarian to practice better medicine and achieve the practice business objectives, including superior client experience, staff efficiency and practice profitability. We differentiate our practice management systems through enhanced functionality and ease of use. Our veterinary-specific digital radiography systems allow veterinarians to capture digital radiographs with ease and without the use of hazardous chemicals. Our strategy in digital radiography is to offer a convenient system that provides superior image quality and software capability at a competitive price, backed by the same customer support provided for our other products and services in CAG. Water Our strategy in the water testing business is to develop, manufacture, market and sell proprietary products with superior performance, supported by exceptional customer service. Our customers primarily consist of water utilities, government laboratories and private certified laboratories that highly value strong relationships and customer support. Sales of water testing products outside of the U.S. represented 51% of total water product sales in 2011, and we expect that future growth in this business will be significantly dependent on our ability to increase international sales. Growth also will be dependent on our ability to enhance and broaden our product line. Most water microbiological testing is driven by regulation, and, in many countries, a test may not be used for compliance testing unless it has been approved by the applicable regulatory body. As a result, we maintain an active regulatory program that involves applying for regulatory approvals in a number of countries, primarily in Europe. Livestock and Poultry Diagnostics We develop, manufacture, market and sell a broad range of tests for various cattle, swine and poultry diseases and conditions, and have an active research and development, and in-licensing program in this area. Our strategy is to offer proprietary tests with superior performance characteristics, with growth primarily coming from disease outbreaks and emerging markets. Disease outbreaks are episodic and unpredictable, and certain diseases that are prevalent at one time may be substantially contained or eradicated at a later time. In response to outbreaks, testing initiatives may lead to exceptional demand for certain products in certain periods. Conversely, successful eradication programs may result in significantly decreased demand for certain products. The performance of this business, therefore, can fluctuate. In 2011, approximately 90% of our sales in this business were from markets outside of the U.S., and in particular Europe. Because of the significant dependence of this business on international sales, the performance of the business is particularly subject to the various risks described above that are associated with doing business internationally. See Part I, Item 1A. Risk Factors. 29 Other Dairy . Our strategy in the dairy testing business is to develop, manufacture and sell antibiotic residue testing products that satisfy applicable regulatory requirements for testing of milk by processors and producers and provide reliable field performance. The manufacture of these testing products leverages, almost exclusively, the SNAP platform as well as the production equipment of our rapid assay business, incorporating customized reagents for antibiotic detection. The majority of our sales in this business are international. To successfully increase sales of dairy testing products, we believe that we need to increase penetration in the processor and producer segments of the dairy market, and to develop product line enhancements and extensions. Because of the significant dependence of this business on international sales, the performance of the business is particularly subject to the various risks described above that are associated with doing business internationally. See Part I, Item 1A. Risk Factors. OPTI Medical Systems . Our strategy in the OPTI Medical Systems business for the human market is to develop, manufacture, and sell electrolyte and blood gas analyzers and related consumable products for the medical point-of-care diagnostics market worldwide, with a focus on small- to mid-sized hospitals. We seek to differentiate our products based on ease of use, menu, convenience, international distribution and service, and instrument reliability. Similar to our veterinary instruments and consumables strategy, a substantial portion of the revenues from this product line is derived from the sale of consumables for use on the installed base of electrolyte and blood gas analyzers. During the early stage of an instrument life cycle, relatively greater revenues are derived from instrument placements, while consumable sales become relatively more significant in later stages as the installed base of instruments increases and instrument placement revenues begin to decline. Our long-term success in this area of our business is dependent upon new customer acquisition, customer retention and increased customer utilization of existing and new assays introduced on these instruments. OPTI Medical Systems also manufactures our VetStat analyzer, an instrument and consumable system that is a member of the IDEXX VetLab suite for the veterinary market. In addition, OPTI Medical Systems provides the electrolyte module and dry slide reagents that make up the electrolyte testing functionality of the Catalyst Dx analyzer. Our strategy in the OPTI Medical Systems business for the veterinary market is to utilize this unit know-how, intellectual property and manufacturing capability to continue to expand the menu and instrument capability of the VetStat and Catalyst Dx platforms for veterinary applications while reducing our cost of consumables by leveraging experience and economies of scale. Other Activities . We have developed certain proprietary technology that we believe may have application in areas that do not align with one of our existing business or service categories. Our strategy is to out-license these technologies to partners that are best positioned to complete the development and commercialization of products utilizing these technologies. To the extent we are successful in doing so, we may receive one-time or recurring payments based on the achievement of development or sales milestones or royalties. Our ability to succeed in this area of our business depends on our ability to attract and retain qualified scientific personnel to develop proprietary products or technology and our ability to identify suitable third parties to complete the commercialization of these technologies. CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America ( U.S. GAAP ). The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates. Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K describes the significant accounting policies used in preparation of these consolidated financial statements. 30 We believe the following critical accounting estimates and assumptions may have a material impact on reported financial condition and operating performance and involve significant levels of judgment to account for highly uncertain matters or are susceptible to significant change. Revenue Recognition We recognize revenue when four criteria are met: (i) persuasive evidence that an arrangement exists; (ii) delivery has occurred or services have been rendered; (iii) the sales price is fixed or determinable; and (iv) collectability is reasonably assured. See Note 2(i) to the consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2011 included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information about our revenue recognition policy and criteria for recognizing revenue. Multiple element arrangements ( MEAs ) . Arrangements to sell products to customers frequently include multiple deliverables. Our most significant MEAs include the sale of one or more of the instruments from the IDEXX VetLab suite of analyzers or digital radiography systems, combined with one or more of the following products: extended maintenance agreements ( EMAs ), consumables, reference laboratory diagnostic and consulting services and practice management software. Practice management software is frequently sold with post-contract customer support and implementation services. Delivery of the various products or performance of services within the arrangement may or may not coincide. Delivery of our IDEXX VetLab instruments, digital radiography systems, and practice management software generally occurs at the onset of the arrangement. EMAs, consumables, and reference laboratory diagnostic and consulting services typically are delivered over future periods, generally one to six years. In certain arrangements revenue recognized is limited to the amount invoiced or received that is not contingent on the delivery of future products and services. On January 1, 2010, we adopted amendments to authoritative guidance that modified the revenue recognition guidance for establishing separate units of accounting in arrangements outside of the scope of software that contain multiple elements. We allocate revenue to each element based on the relative selling price and recognize revenue when the elements have standalone value and the four criteria for revenue recognition have been met for each element. We establish the selling price of each element based on vendor-specific objective evidence ( VSOE ) if available, third-party evidence ( TPE ) if VSOE is not available, or best estimate of selling price ( BESP ) if neither VSOE nor TPE is available. We generally determine selling price based on amounts charged separately for the delivered and undelivered elements to similar customers in standalone sales of the specific elements. When these arrangements include a separately-priced EMA, we recognize revenue related to the EMA at the stated contractual price on a straight-line basis over the life of the agreement to the extent the separately stated price is substantive. If there is no stated contractual price for an EMA, or the separately stated price is not substantive, we recognize revenue according to the MEA policy stated above. We elected prospective adoption of these amendments. The impact of adopting these amendments to authoritative guidance did not have a material impact on our financial position, results of operations or cash flows. When arrangements within the scope of software revenue recognition guidance include multiple elements, we allocate revenue to each element based on relative fair value, when VSOE exists for all elements, or by using the residual method when there is VSOE for the undelivered elements but no such evidence for the delivered elements. Under the residual method, the fair value of the undelivered elements is deferred and the residual revenue is allocated to the delivered elements. Revenue is recognized on any delivered elements when the four criteria for revenue recognition have been met for each element. If VSOE does not exist for the undelivered element, all revenue from the arrangement is deferred until the earlier of the point at which such sufficient VSOE does exist or all elements of the arrangement have been delivered. We determine fair value based on amounts charged separately for the delivered and undelivered elements to similar customers in standalone sales of the specific elements. Certain arrangements with customers include discounts on future sales of products and services. We apply judgment in determining whether future discounts are significant and incremental. When the future discount offered is not considered significant and incremental, we do not account for the discount as an element of the original arrangement. If the future discount is significant and incremental, we recognize that discount as an element of the original arrangement and allocate the discount to the other elements of the arrangement based on relative selling price. To determine whether a discount is significant and incremental, we look to the discount provided in comparison to standalone sales of the same product to similar customers, the level of discount provided on other elements in the arrangement, and the significance of the discount to the overall arrangement. If the discount in the MEA approximates the discount typically provided in standalone sales, that discount is not considered incremental. 31 Customer programs . We record reductions to revenue related to customer marketing and incentive programs, which include end-user rebates and other volume based incentives. Incentives may be provided in the form of IDEXX Points, credits or cash and are earned by end-users upon achieving defined volume purchase or utilization levels or upon entering an agreement to purchase products or services in future periods. Our most significant customer programs are categorized as follows: Customer Loyalty Programs . Our customer loyalty programs offer customers the opportunity to earn incentives on a variety of IDEXX products and services as those products and services are purchased and utilized. Revenue reductions related to customer loyalty programs are recorded based on the actual issuance of incentives, incentives earned but not yet issued and estimates of incentives to be earned in the future based on applicable product inventories held by distributors at the end of the period. Up-Front Customer Loyalty Programs . Our up-front loyalty programs provide incentives to customers upon entering agreements to purchase products or services in future periods. These incentives are considered to be customer acquisition costs and are capitalized and recognized as a reduction to revenue over the term of the customer agreement. If these up-front incentives are subsequently utilized to purchase IDEXX VetLab instruments, digital radiography systems or Cornerstone practice management systems, product revenue and cost is deferred and recognized over the term of the customer agreement as products and services are provided to the customer. We monitor customer purchases over the term of their agreement to assess the realizability of our capitalized customer acquisition costs. For the years ended December 31, 2011, 2010 and 2009, we did not have any impaired customer acquisition costs. IDEXX VetLab Instrument Marketing Programs . Our instrument marketing programs require the customer to enroll at the time of instrument purchase and offer customers the opportunity to earn incentives in future periods based on the volume of the products they purchase and utilize over the term of the program. These arrangements are considered MEAs in accordance with our revenue recognition policy stated above. Revenue reductions related to instrument marketing programs are recorded based on an estimate of customer purchase and utilization levels and the incentive the customer will earn over the term of the program. Our estimates are based on historical experience and the specific terms and conditions of the marketing program and require us to apply judgment to approximate future product purchases and utilization. Differences between our estimates and actual incentives earned are accounted for as a change in estimate. These differences were not material for the years ended December 31, 2011, 2010 and 2009. At December 31, 2011, a 5% change in our estimate of future customer utilization would increase or reduce revenue by approximately $0.2 million. IDEXX Points may be applied against the purchase price of IDEXX products and services purchased in the future or applied to trade receivables due to us. IDEXX Points that have not yet been used by customers are classified as a liability until use or expiration occurs. We estimate the amount of IDEXX Points expected to expire, or breakage, based on historical expirations and we recognize the benefit of breakage as IDEXX Points are redeemed. On November 30 of each year, unused IDEXX Points earned before January 1 of the prior year generally expire and any variance from the breakage estimate is accounted for as a change in estimate. This variance was not material for the years ended December 31, 2011, 2010 and 2009. Future market conditions and changes in product offerings may cause us to change marketing strategies to increase or decrease customer incentive offerings, possibly resulting in incremental reductions of revenue in future periods as compared to reductions in the current or prior periods. Additionally, certain customer programs require us to estimate, based on historical experience, and apply judgment to approximate the number of customers who will actually redeem the incentive. In determining estimated revenue reductions we utilize data supplied from distributors and collected directly from end-users, which includes the volume of qualifying products purchased and the number of qualifying tests run as reported to us by end-users via IDEXX SmartService TM , a secure internet link that enables us to extract data and provide diagnostic service and support for certain IDEXX VetLab instruments through remote access. Differences between estimated and actual customer participation in programs may impact the amount and timing of revenue recognition. 32 Following is a summary of revenue reductions recorded in connection with our customer programs for the years ended December 31, 2011, 2010 and 2009 ( in thousands ): For the Years Ended December 31, 2011 2010 2009 Revenue Reductions Recorded Customer Loyalty Programs $ 16,591 $ 17,467 $ 17,067 Up-Front Customer Loyalty Programs 3,954 921 74 IDEXX VetLab Instrument Marketing Programs 11,137 4,304 2,335 Other Customer Programs 1,513 1,474 1,536 Total revenue reductions $ 33,195 $ 24,166 $ 21,012 At December 31, 2011, 2010 and 2009, the total accrued revenue reductions were $37.8 million, $23.3 million and $18.3 million, respectively. Accrued customer programs are included within accrued liabilities and other long-term liabilities, depending on the anticipated settlement date, in the consolidated balance sheets included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Following is a summary of changes in the accrual for estimated revenue reductions attributable to customer marketing and incentive programs and the ending accrued revenue reductions balance for the years ended December 31, 2011, 2010 and 2009 ( in thousands ): For the Years Ended December 31, 2011 2010 2009 Accrued Customer Programs: Balance, beginning of the year $ 23,321 $ 18,265 $ 15,697 Current provision for Customer Loyalty Programs 16,591 17,467 17,067 Up-Front Customer Loyalty Program Awards 21,259 6,037 100 Current provision for IDEXX VetLab Instrument Marketing Programs 11,137 4,304 2,335 Current provision for Other Customer Programs 1,513 1,474 1,536 IDEXX Points redeemed and credits issued (35,629 ) (23,859 ) (18,256 ) Breakage (325 ) (334 ) (367 ) Exchange impact on balances denominated in foreign currency (100 ) (33 ) 153 Balance, end of year $ 37,767 $ 23,321 $ 18,265 Inventory Valuation We write down inventory for estimated obsolescence when warranted by estimates of future demand, market conditions, remaining shelf life, or product functionality. If actual market conditions or results of estimated functionality are less favorable than those we estimated, additional inventory write-downs may be required, which would have a negative effect on results of operations. Valuation of Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets A significant portion of the purchase price for acquired businesses is generally assigned to intangible assets. Intangible assets other than goodwill are initially valued at fair value. If a market value is not readily available, the fair value of the intangible asset is estimated based on discounted cash flows using market participant assumptions, which are assumptions that are not specific to IDEXX. The selection of appropriate valuation methodologies and the estimation of discounted cash flows require significant assumptions about the timing and amounts of future cash flows, risks, appropriate discount rates, and the useful lives of intangible assets. When material, we utilize independent valuation experts to advise and assist us in allocating the purchase prices for acquired businesses to the fair values of the identified intangible assets and in determining appropriate amortization methods and periods for those intangible assets. Goodwill is initially valued based on the excess of the purchase price of a business combination over the fair values of acquired net assets, including intangible assets. 33 We assess goodwill for impairment annually, at the reporting unit level, in the fourth quarter and whenever events or circumstances indicate impairment may exist. An impairment charge is recorded for the amount, if any, by which the carrying amount of goodwill exceeds its implied fair value. Our reporting units are the individual product and service categories that comprise our CAG operating segment, our Water and LPD operating segments and goodwill remaining from the restructuring of our pharmaceutical business in the fourth quarter of 2008, referred to herein as the Technology reporting unit. A substantial portion of the goodwill remaining from the pharmaceutical business is associated with products that have been, or that we expect to be, licensed to third parties and is included in our Other segment. Realization of this goodwill is dependent upon the success of those third parties in developing and commercializing products, which will result in our receipt of royalties and other payments. Our Dairy and OPTI Medical businesses are also presented in our Other segment. There is no goodwill associated with those businesses. Contingent consideration is included within the acquisition cost and is recognized at its fair value on acquisition date. A liability resulting from contingent consideration is remeasured to fair value at each reporting date until the contingency is resolved. Changes in fair value are recognized in earnings. The fair values of the reporting units are estimated using an income approach based on discounted forecasted cash flows. We make significant assumptions about the extent and timing of future cash flows, growth rates and discount rates. Model assumptions are based on our projections and best estimates. As a measure to assess the reasonableness of the results of the income approach, we aggregate the calculated fair value of each of the reporting units and compare that aggregate amount to the overall market capitalization of the Company. As of November 30, 2011, the date that we performed our assessment of goodwill for impairment, the total aggregate fair value of the reporting units approximated the Company market capitalization. While we believe that the assumptions used to determine the estimated fair values of each of our reporting units are reasonable, a change in assumptions underlying these estimates could result in a material effect on the consolidated financial statements. Our fair value estimates assume the achievement of future financial results contemplated in our forecasted cash flows, and there can be no assurance that we will realize that value. We use our internal forecasts to estimate future cash flows and include an estimate of long-term future growth rates based on our most recent views of the long-term outlook for each business. Actual results may differ from those assumed in our forecasts. The discount rate is based on a weighted average cost of capital ( WACC ) derived from industry peers. Changes in market conditions, interest rates, growth rates, tax rates, costs, pricing, capital expenditures or the discount rate would affect the estimated fair values of reporting units and could result in a goodwill impairment charge in a future period. The results of the 2011 annual impairment test, completed in the fourth quarter, indicated the fair value of each reporting unit was substantially in excess of its carrying value. No goodwill impairments were identified as a result of the annual review during the years ended December 31, 2011, 2010 or 2009. A prolonged economic downturn resulting in lower long-term growth rates and reduced long-term profitability may reduce the fair value of our reporting units. Industry specific events or circumstances that have a negative impact to the valuation assumptions may also reduce the fair value of our reporting units. Should such events occur and it becomes more likely than not that a reporting unit fair value has fallen below its carrying value, we will perform an interim goodwill impairment test(s), in addition to the annual impairment test. Future impairment tests may result in an impairment of goodwill, depending on the outcome of both step one and step two of the impairment review process. An impairment of goodwill would be reported as a non-cash charge to earnings. We assess the realizability of intangible assets other than goodwill whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable. If an impairment review is triggered, we evaluate the carrying value of intangible assets based on estimated undiscounted future cash flows over the remaining useful life of the primary asset of the asset group and compare that value to the carrying value of the asset group. The cash flows that are used contain our best estimates, using appropriate and customary assumptions and projections at the time. No impairments of intangible assets other than goodwill were identified during the years ended December 31, 2011 and 2010. During 2009, we recognized an impairment charge of $1.5 million to write off an acquired intangible asset associated with our equine digital radiography business, which is part of our CAG segment. Based on changes in estimated future demand and market conditions, we determined that we would not fully realize our investment and, therefore, fully expensed this asset. No other impairments were identified during the year ended December 31, 2009. 34 Share-Based Compensation Our share-based compensation programs include grants of a mix of stock options, restricted stock units and deferred stock unit awards, along with the issuance of employee stock purchase rights. On January 1, 2006 we adopted amendments to the accounting provisions governing share-based payments and adopted the straight-line method to prospectively expense share-based awards granted subsequent to December 31, 2005. The graded-vesting, or accelerated, method was used to calculate the expense for stock options granted prior to January 1, 2006. Had the straight-line method been used for share-based awards granted prior to January 1, 2006, recorded expense for the years ended December 31, 2006 through 2010 would have been higher. The total fair value of future awards may vary significantly from past awards based on a number of factors, including our share-based award practices. Therefore, share-based compensation expense is likely to fluctuate, possibly significantly, from year to year. We use the Black-Scholes-Merton option-pricing model to determine the fair value of options granted. Option-pricing models require the input of highly subjective assumptions, particularly for the expected stock price volatility and the expected term of options. The risk-free interest rate is based on the U.S. Treasury yields for the expected term in effect at the approximate date of grant. We have never paid any cash dividends on our common stock and we have no present intention to pay a dividend; therefore, we assume that no dividends will be paid over the expected terms of option awards. We determine the assumptions to be used in the valuation of option grants as of the date of grant. As such, we may use different assumptions during the year if we grant options at different dates. However, substantially all of our options granted during the years ended December 31, 2011, 2010 and 2009 were granted in the first quarter of each year. The weighted average of each of the valuation assumptions used to determine the fair value of each option grant during each of the previous three years is as follows: For the Years Ended December 31, 2011 2010 2009 Expected stock price volatility 33 % 31 % 31 % Expected term, in years (1) 4.8 4.9 4.8 Risk-free interest rate 2.3 % 2.3 % 1.6 % (1) Options granted after January 1, 2006 have contractual terms of seven years. Options granted prior to January 1, 2006 have contractual terms of 10 years. Changes in the subjective input assumptions, particularly for the expected stock price volatility and the expected term of options, can materially affect the fair value estimate. Our expected stock price volatility assumption is based on the historical volatility of our stock over a period similar to the expected term and other relevant factors. Lower estimated volatility reduces the fair value of a stock option. The total fair value of stock options granted during the year ended December 31, 2011 was $13.6 million. If the weighted average of the stock price volatility assumption was increased or decreased by 10% to 36.2% or 29.6%, respectively, the total fair value of stock options awarded during the year ended December 31, 2011 would have increased or decreased by approximately 8% and the total expense recognized for the year ended December 31, 2011 for options awarded during the same period would have increased or decreased by approximately $0.2 million. We derive the expected term assumption for stock options based on historical experience and other relevant factors concerning expected behavior with regard to option exercise. The expected term is determined using a consistent method at each grant date. Longer expected term assumptions increase the fair value of stock option awards, and therefore increase the expense recognized per award. If the weighted average of the expected term was increased or decreased by one year, the total fair value of stock options awarded during the year ended December 31, 2011 would have increased by 10% or decreased by 12%, respectively, and the total expense recognized for the year ended December 31, 2011 for options awarded during 2011 would have increased or decreased by $0.3 million. Share-based compensation expense is based on the number of awards ultimately expected to vest and is, therefore, reduced for an estimate of the number of awards that are expected to be forfeited. The forfeiture estimates are based on historical data and other factors, and compensation expense is adjusted for actual results. Total share-based compensation expense for the year ended December 31, 2011 was $15.5 million, which is net of a reduction of $3.0 million for actual and estimated forfeitures. Changes in estimated forfeiture rates and differences between estimated forfeiture rates and actual experience may result in significant, unanticipated increases or decreases in share-based compensation expense from period to period. The termination of employment of certain employees who hold large numbers of share-based compensation instruments may also have a significant, unanticipated impact on forfeiture experience and, therefore, on share-based compensation expense. Modifications of the terms of outstanding options may result in significant increases or decreases in share-based compensation. There were no modifications to the terms of outstanding options, restricted stock units or deferred stock units with vesting conditions during 2011, 2010 or 2009. 35 The fair value of stock options, restricted stock units, deferred stock units, and employee stock purchase rights issued during the years ended December 31, 2011, 2010 and 2009 totaled $25.5 million, $16.3 million and $16.4 million, respectively. The total unrecognized compensation expense, net of estimated forfeitures, for unvested share-based compensation awards outstanding at December 31, 2011 was $31.1 million, which will be recognized over a weighted average of approximately 1.7 years. Income Taxes We recognize a current tax liability or asset for current taxes payable or refundable, respectively, and a deferred tax liability or asset, as the case may be, for the estimated future tax effects of temporary differences between book and tax treatment of assets and liabilities and carryforwards to the extent they are realizable. The future tax benefit arising from net deductible temporary differences and tax carryforwards, net of valuation allowances, was $0.5 million and $8.6 million at December 31, 2011 and 2010, respectively. On a quarterly basis, we assess our current and projected earnings by jurisdiction to determine whether or not our earnings during the periods when the temporary differences become deductible will be sufficient to realize the related future tax benefits. Should we determine that we would not be able to realize all or part of our net deferred tax asset in the future, an adjustment to the deferred tax asset would be charged to income in the period such determination was made. A reduction of net income before taxes in each subsidiary equal to 5% of revenue, compared to the corresponding reported amounts for the year ended December 31, 2011, would not result in the recognition of incremental valuation allowances except in one subsidiary where a 5% reduction could result in our recording a valuation allowance of $0.3 million for this subsidiary. For those jurisdictions where tax carryforwards are likely to expire unused or the projected operating results indicate that realization is not more likely than not, a valuation allowance is recorded to offset the deferred tax asset within that jurisdiction. In assessing the need for a valuation allowance, we consider future taxable income and ongoing prudent and feasible tax planning strategies. Alternatively, in the event that we were to determine that we would be able to realize our deferred tax assets in the future in excess of the net recorded amount, an adjustment to the deferred tax asset would increase income in the period such determination was made. Our net deductible temporary differences and tax carryforwards are recorded using the enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the periods in which the deferred tax liability or asset is expected to be settled or realized. Should the expected applicable tax rates change in the future, an adjustment to the net deferred tax asset would be credited or charged, as appropriate, to income in the period such determination was made. For example, an increase of one percentage point in our anticipated U.S. state income tax rate would cause us to increase our net deferred tax asset balance by $0.3 million. This increase in the net deferred asset would increase net income in the period that our rate was adjusted. Likewise, a decrease of one percentage point to our anticipated U.S. state income tax rate would have the opposite effect. We periodically assess our exposures related to our worldwide provision for income taxes and believe that we have appropriately accrued taxes for contingencies. Any reduction of these contingent liabilities or additional assessment would increase or decrease income, respectively, in the period such determination was made. We consider the majority of the operating earnings of non-United States subsidiaries to be indefinitely invested outside the U.S. The cumulative earnings of these subsidiaries were $275.2 million at December 31, 2011, of which approximately $180 million was held in cash and cash equivalents as of December 31, 2011. No provision has been made for U.S. federal and state, or international taxes that may result from future remittances of these undistributed earnings of non-United States subsidiaries. Should we repatriate these earnings in the future, we would have to adjust the income tax provision in the period in which the decision to repatriate earnings is made. For the operating earnings not considered to be indefinitely invested outside the United States we have accounted for the tax impact on a current basis. 36 We record a liability for uncertain tax positions that do not meet the more likely than not standard as prescribed by the authoritative guidance for income tax accounting. We record tax benefits for only those positions that we believe will more likely than not be sustained. For positions that we believe that it is more likely than not that we will prevail, we record a benefit considering the amounts and probabilities that could be realized upon ultimate settlement. If our judgment as to the likely resolution of the uncertainty changes, if the uncertainty is ultimately settled or if the statute of limitation related to the uncertainty expires, the effects of the change would be recognized in the period in which the change, resolution or expiration occurs. Our net liability for uncertain tax positions was $5.6 million and $5.5 million as of December 31, 2011 and 2010, respectively, which includes estimated interest expense and penalties. RESULTS OF OPERATIONS AND TRENDS Effects of Certain Factors on Results of Operations Distributor Purchasing and Inventories . The instrument consumables and rapid assay products in our CAG segment are sold in the U.S. and certain other geographies by third party distributors, who purchase products from us and sell them to veterinary practices, which are the end users. As a result, distributor purchasing dynamics have an impact on our reported sales of these products. Distributor purchasing dynamics may be affected by many factors and may be unrelated to underlying end-user demand for our products. Consequently, reported results may reflect fluctuations in distributors inventories and not necessarily reflect changes in underlying end-user demand. Therefore, we believe it is important to track distributor sales to end users and to distinguish between the impact of end-user demand and the impact of distributor purchasing dynamics on reported revenue. Where growth rates are affected by changes in end-user demand, we refer to this as the impact of practice-level sales on growth. Where growth rates are affected by distributor purchasing dynamics, we refer to this as the impact of changes in distributors inventories on growth. If during the current year, distributors inventories grew by less than those inventories grew in the comparable period of the prior year, then changes in distributors inventories have a negative impact on our reported sales growth in the current period. Conversely, if during the current year, distributors inventories grew by more than those inventories grew in the comparable period of the prior year, then changes in distributors inventories have a positive impact on our reported sales growth in the current period. At the end of a quarter, we believe that our U.S. CAG distributors typically hold inventory equivalent to approximately four weeks of our anticipated end-user demand for instrument consumables and rapid assay products. Currency Impact . For the years ended December 31, 2011, 2010 and 2009, approximately 26%, 25% and 24%, respectively, of IDEXX sales were derived from products manufactured in the U.S. and sold internationally in local currencies. Strengthening of the rate of exchange for the U.S. dollar relative to other currencies has a negative impact on our revenues derived in currencies other than the U.S. dollar and on profits of products manufactured in the U.S. and sold internationally, and a weakening of the U.S. dollar has the opposite effect. Similarly, to the extent that the U.S. dollar is stronger in current or future periods relative to the exchange rates in effect in the corresponding prior periods, our growth rate will be negatively affected. The impact of foreign currency denominated operating expenses and foreign currency denominated supply contracts partly offset this exposure. The impact on revenue resulting from changes in foreign currency exchange rates is a non-U.S. GAAP measure that is calculated by applying the difference between the average exchange rates during the current year period and the comparable previous year period to foreign currency denominated revenues for the current year period. During the twelve months ended December 31, 2011, compared to the twelve months ended December 31, 2010, changes in foreign currency exchange rates increased total company revenue by approximately $27.1 million, due primarily to the weakening of the U.S. dollar against the Euro and, to a lesser extent, the Australian dollar, Japanese yen, Canadian dollar, British pound and Swiss franc. 37 During the twelve months ended December 31, 2010, compared to the twelve months ended December 31, 2009, changes in foreign currency exchange rates increased total company revenue by approximately $2.9 million, due primarily to the weakening of the U.S. dollar against the Canadian dollar, Australian dollar and, to a lesser extent, the Japanese yen. These favorable impacts were partly offset by the strengthening of the U.S. dollar against the Euro between these two periods. Although the changes in foreign currency exchange rates had a net favorable impact on total company revenues for the twelve months ended December 31, 2010, our LPD segment was negatively impacted since the U.S. dollar strengthened against the Euro and, compared to our other segments, a larger portion of LPD sales are denominated in the Euro. Economic Conditions . Demand for many of our products and services has been negatively affected by economic conditions since mid-2008. In our CAG segment, we believe that low economic growth and relatively high unemployment have led to negative or cautious consumer sentiment, which has affected the number of patient visits to veterinary clinics. Based on data provided by a subset of our customers that use our practice management systems, we observed a decline in patient visits beginning in mid-2008 that continued throughout 2009. Patient visits have been flat to slightly down since 2009, until the fourth quarter of 2011, when we observed a slight improvement. We believe that this data, though limited, provides a fair and meaningful representation of patient visit activity in the U.S. We further believe that the overall decline in patient visits since the beginning of the economic downturn has had a slightly negative impact on the growth rate of sales of rapid assay tests, instrument consumables and reference laboratory diagnostic and consulting services. In addition, we believe the rate of growth of sales of our instruments and digital radiography systems, which are larger capital purchases for veterinarians, has been negatively affected by continued caution among veterinarians regarding economic conditions. Weaker economic conditions since mid-2008 have also caused our customers to remain sensitive to the pricing of our products and services resulting in lower growth due to limited price increases for certain products. We also believe that current economic conditions have affected purchasing decisions of our Water business customers. Lower water testing volumes have resulted from a decline in discretionary testing and a decline in mandated testing as a result of lower home and commercial construction. We believe that the diversity of our products and services, and the geographic diversity of our markets, has partially mitigated the effects of the economic environment and negative consumer sentiment on our revenue growth rates. Looking forward, we are cautiously optimistic that the improvements we began to see in the fourth quarter of 2011 are reflective of a gradual and steady improvement to the macroeconomic environment and that with this improvement the negative impact on our growth rates that we have experienced since mid-2008 will begin to lessen. Twelve Months Ended December 31, 2011 Compared to Twelve Months Ended December 31, 2010 Revenue Total Company. The following table presents revenue by operating segment: For the Year For the Year Ended Ended Percentage Percentage Organic Net Revenue December 31, December 31, Dollar Percentage Change from Change from Revenue (dollars in thousands) 2011 2010 Change Change Currency (1) Acquisitions (2) Growth (3) CAG $ 999,722 $ 905,655 $ 94,067 10.4 % 2.3 % 0.3 % 7.8 % Water 82,125 76,514 5,611 7.3 % 2.5 % - 4.8 % LPD 94,112 81,177 12,935 15.9 % 4.5 % - 11.4 % Other 42,730 40,046 2,684 6.7 % 2.1 % - 4.6 % Total $ 1,218,689 $ 1,103,392 $ 115,297 10.4 % 2.4 % 0.2 % 7.8 % (1) The percentage change from currency is a non-U.S. GAAP measure. It represents the percentage change in revenue resulting from the difference between the average exchange rates during the twelve months ended December 31, 2011 and the same period of the prior year applied to foreign currency denominated revenues for the twelve months ended December 31, 2011. (2) The percentage change from acquisitions is a non-U.S. GAAP measure. It represents the percentage change in revenue during the year ended December 31, 2011 compared to the year ended December 31, 2010 attributed to incremental revenues from businesses acquired subsequent to December 31, 2009. (3) Organic revenue growth is a non-U.S. GAAP measure and represents the percentage change in revenue during the year ended December 31, 2011 compared to the year ended December 31, 2010 net of acquisitions and the effect from changes in foreign currency exchange rates. 38 The following revenue analysis and discussion includes references to organic revenue growth. Organic revenue growth should be considered in addition to, and not as a replacement for or as superior to, revenues reported in accordance with U.S. GAAP, and may not be comparable to similarly titled measures reported by other companies. Management believes that discussing organic revenue growth provides useful information to investors by facilitating easier comparisons of our revenue performance with prior and future periods and to our peers. In determining organic revenue growth, we exclude the effect of changes in foreign currency exchange rates because changes in foreign currency exchange rates are not under management control, are subject to volatility and can obscure underlying business trends. We also exclude the effects of acquisitions and divestitures because the nature, size and number of acquisitions can vary dramatically from period to period and therefore can also obscure underlying business trends. Companion Animal Group. The following table presents revenue by product and service category for CAG: For the Year For the Year Ended Ended Percentage Percentage Organic Net Revenue December 31, December 31, Dollar Percentage Change from Change from Revenue (dollars in thousands) 2011 2010 Change Change Currency (1) Acquisitions (2) Growth (3) Instruments and consumables $ 394,586 $ 354,239 $ 40,347 11.4 % 2.7 % - 8.7 % Rapid assay products 154,342 146,538 7,804 5.3 % 1.2 % - 4.1 % Reference laboratory diagnostic and consulting services 373,919 329,666 44,253 13.4 % 2.7 % 0.8 % 9.9 % Practice management systems and digital radiography 76,875 75,212 1,663 2.2 % 0.4 % - 1.8 % Net CAG revenue $ 999,722 $ 905,655 $ 94,067 10.4 % 2.3 % 0.3 % 7.8 % (1) The percentage change from currency is a non-U.S. GAAP measure. It represents the percentage change in revenue resulting from the difference between the average exchange rates during the twelve months ended December 31, 2011 and the same period of the prior year applied to foreign currency denominated revenues for the twelve months ended December 31, 2011. (2) The percentage change from acquisitions is a non-U.S. GAAP measure. It represents the percentage change in revenue during the year ended December 31, 2011 compared to the year ended December 31, 2010 attributed to incremental revenues from businesses acquired subsequent to December 31, 2009. (3) Organic revenue growth is a non-U.S. GAAP measure and represents the percentage change in revenue during the year ended December 31, 2011 compared to the year ended December 31, 2010 net of acquisitions and the effect from changes in foreign currency exchange rates. Instruments revenue was $93.7 million and $85.5 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2011 and 2010, respectively. Consumables revenue was $256.0 million and $228.0 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2011 and 2010, respectively. Instrument service and accessories revenue was $43.8 million and $39.7 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2011 and 2010, respectively. The remaining sources of revenue are not significant to overall instruments and consumables revenue. Instruments revenue growth was due primarily to sales of ProCyte Dx , the hematology analyzer that we began shipping during the third quarter of 2010, and higher sales volumes of our Catalyst Dx instrument. These favorable impacts were partly offset by lower average unit sales prices driven primarily by discounts associated with our IDEXX VetLab instrument marketing programs. Consumables revenue growth was due primarily to higher sales of consumables used with our Catalyst Dx instrument, partly offset by lower sales of consumables used with our VetTest chemistry instrument as customers continue to upgrade from our VetTest instrument to our Catalyst Dx instrument. Higher sales of consumables used with our ProCyte Dx instrument also contributed to the increase in consumables revenue. Service and accessories revenue growth was primarily a result of the increase in our active installed base of instruments. The impact of changes in distributors inventory levels was not significant to instruments and consumables revenue growth. The increase in rapid assay revenue was due primarily to an increase in U.S. practice-level sales of our canine combination test products and, to a lesser extent, sales of our feline pancreatitis test products, which we began shipping during the second quarter of 2011. The impact of changes in distributors inventory levels was not significant to rapid assay revenue growth. 39 The increase in reference laboratory diagnostic and consulting services revenue resulted primarily from the impact of higher testing volumes and, to a lesser extent, price increases. Higher testing volumes were driven by the acquisition of new customers due, in part, to geographic expansion and our customer loyalty programs in which customers are provided incentives in the form of IDEXX Points or cash in exchange for agreements to purchase services in future periods. The increase in practice management systems and digital radiography revenue resulted primarily from an increase in service and support revenue and an increase in sales volumes of our practice management systems. The increase in service and support revenue was due primarily to an increase in our active installed base of digital radiography systems and, to a lesser extent, practice management systems. Higher sales volumes of our digital radiography systems also contributed to the overall increase in revenue. These favorable factors were partly offset by an increase in placements of digital radiography systems and practice management systems under our customer loyalty programs for which the related revenue is recognized in future periods. Water. The increase in Water revenue resulted primarily from higher sales volumes of Colilert test products, partly offset by the unfavorable impact of higher relative sales of Colilert test products in geographies where these products are sold at lower average unit sales prices. Livestock and Poultry Diagnostics. The increase in LPD revenue resulted primarily from higher sales volumes of certain bovine tests and, to a lesser extent, higher sales volumes of certain swine and poultry tests. The increased sales volume of certain bovine tests was driven primarily by sales in Germany where we have won several government tenders for testing in connection with a country-wide eradication program for a virus impacting beef and dairy production yields. Other. The increase in Other revenue was primarily attributable to higher sales volumes of our OPTI Medical consumables and, to a lesser extent, instruments, partly offset by lower sales volumes of our Dairy SNAP tests used for the detection of antibiotic residue in milk and lower average unit sales prices in our OPTI Medical line of business due, in part, to higher relative sales in geographies where products are sold at lower average unit sales prices. Gross Profit Total Company. The following table presents gross profit and gross profit percentages by operating segment: For the Year For the Year Ended Ended December 31, Percent of December 31, Percent of Dollar Percentage Gross Profit (dollars in thousands) 2011 Revenue 2010 Revenue Change Change CAG $ 515,656 51.6 % $ 458,491 50.6 % $ 57,165 12.5 % Water 51,555 62.8 % 48,231 63.0 % 3,324 6.9 % LPD 63,619 67.6 % 55,187 68.0 % 8,432 15.3 % Other 17,231 40.3 % 17,732 44.3 % (501 ) (2.8 %) Unallocated amounts (1,555 ) N/A (1,018 ) N/A (537 ) N/A Total Company $ 646,506 53.0 % $ 578,623 52.4 % $ 67,883 11.7 % Companion Animal Group. Gross profit for CAG increased due to higher sales and an increase in the gross profit percentage to 52% from 51%. The increase in the gross profit percentage was due primarily to improvements in costs to manufacture our IDEXX VetLab instruments, higher relative sales of products that yield higher margins and an overall increase in average unit sales prices, driven by our reference laboratory diagnostic and consulting services line of business. These favorable impacts were partly offset by the unfavorable impact of currency as the net favorable impact of changes in foreign currency exchange rates was more than offset by the impact of increased hedging losses during the year ended December 31, 2011 compared to the year ended December 31, 2010. Water. Gross profit for Water increased as higher sales were partly offset by a slight decrease in the gross profit percentage. The decrease in the gross profit percentage was due primarily to lower average unit sales prices of our Colilert products and higher freight costs as a result of rising fuel surcharges. These unfavorable impacts were partly offset by higher relative sales of our Colilert products that yield higher margins and lower manufacturing costs driven by cost improvement initiatives. 40 Livestock and Poultry Diagnostics. Gross profit for LPD increased as higher sales were partly offset by a slight decrease in the gross profit percentage. The decrease in the gross profit percentage was due primarily to the net unfavorable impact of currency as the net favorable impact of changes in foreign currency exchange rates was more than offset by hedging losses during the year ended December 31, 2011 compared to hedging gains during the year ended December 31, 2010. This unfavorable impact was partly offset by lower manufacturing costs and higher relative sales of products that yield higher margins. Lower manufacturing costs were driven largely by benefits achieved from economies of scale as a result of the increase in production volume. Other. Gross profit for Other decreased as higher sales were more than offset by a decrease in the gross profit percentage to 40% from 44%. The decrease in the gross profit percentage was due primarily to lower average unit sales prices in our OPTI Medical line of business and higher freight costs in our Dairy line of business that were due, in part, to rising fuel surcharges. Unallocated Amounts. Gross profit for Unallocated Amounts decreased due primarily to the unfavorable impact of certain manufacturing costs that we do not expect to continue at this level, partly offset by a decrease in certain personnel-related costs. With respect to manufacturing costs, the costs reported in our operating segments include our standard cost for products sold and any variances from standard cost for products purchased or manufactured within the period. We capitalize these variances for inventory on hand at the end of the period to record inventory in accordance with U.S. GAAP. We then record these costs as cost of product revenue as that inventory is sold. The impact to cost of product revenue resulting from this variance capitalization and subsequent expense recognition is reported within the caption Unallocated Amounts. With respect to personnel-related costs, we estimate certain personnel-related costs and allocate the estimated expenses to the operating segments. This allocation differs from actual expense and consequently yields a difference that is reported under the caption Unallocated Amounts. The decrease in certain personnel-related costs for Unallocated Amounts is due primarily to lower self-insured health care costs during the year ended December 31, 2011 compared to the same period of the prior year . Operating Expenses and Operating Income Total Company. The following tables present operating expenses and operating income by operating segment: For the Year For the Year Ended Ended Operating Expenses December 31, Percent of December 31, Percent of Dollar Percentage (dollars in thousands) 2011 Revenue 2010 Revenue Change Change CAG $ 325,822 32.6 % $ 293,278 32.4 % $ 32,544 11.1 % Water 17,711 21.6 % 16,618 21.7 % 1,093 6.6 % LPD 39,880 42.4 % 35,584 43.8 % 4,296 12.1 % Other 14,675 34.3 % 13,607 34.0 % 1,068 7.8 % Unallocated amounts 12,193 N/A 15,655 N/A (3,462 ) (22.1 %) Total Company $ 410,281 33.7 % $ 374,742 34.0 % $ 35,539 9.5 % Operating Income (dollars in thousands) For the Year Ended December 31, 2011 Percent of Revenue For the Year Ended December 31, 2010 Percent of Revenue Dollar Change Percentage Change CAG $ 189,834 19.0 % $ 165,213 18.2 % $ 24,621 14.9 % Water 33,844 41.2 % 31,613 41.3 % 2,231 7.1 % LPD 23,739 25.2 % 19,603 24.2 % 4,136 21.1 % Other 2,556 6.0 % 4,125 10.3 % (1,569 ) (38.0 %) Unallocated amounts (13,748 ) N/A (16,673 ) N/A 2,925 17.5 % Total Company $ 236,225 19.4 % $ 203,881 18.5 % $ 32,344 15.9 % 41 Companion Animal Group. The following table presents CAG operating expenses by functional area: Operating Expenses (dollars in thousands) For the Year Ended December 31, 2011 Percent of Revenue For the Year Ended December 31, 2010 Percent of Revenue Dollar Change Percentage Change Sales and marketing $ 173,679 17.4 % $ 151,652 16.7 % $ 22,027 14.5 % General and administrative 102,699 10.3 % 97,721 10.8 % 4,978 5.1 % Research and development 49,444 5.0 % 43,905 4.9 % 5,539 12.6 % Total operating expenses $ 325,822 32.6 % $ 293,278 32.4 % $ 32,544 11.1 % The increase in sales and marketing expense resulted primarily from an increase in personnel, the unfavorable impact of changes in foreign currency exchange rates and higher sales commission expenses attributable to the increase in sales volume. The increase in general and administrative expense resulted primarily from higher personnel-related costs, the unfavorable impact of changes in foreign currency exchange rates and an increase in costs attributable to investments in information technology. These increases were partly offset by a certain bad debt expense in 2010 that was absent in 2011 and payments that were earned during 2011 pursuant to certain product development arrangements and a license agreement. The bad debt expense in 2010 was in connection with the bankruptcy of one of our U.S. distributors, Professional Veterinary Products, Inc. ( PVP ). The increase in research and development expense was due primarily to increased personnel-related costs and higher external consulting and development costs. Water. The following table presents Water expenses by functional area: Operating Expenses (dollars in thousands) For the Year Ended December 31, 2011 Percent of Revenue For the Year Ended December 31, 2010 Percent of Revenue Dollar Change Percentage Change Sales and marketing $ 8,906 10.8 % $ 7,898 10.3 % $ 1,008 12.8 % General and administrative 6,443 7.8 % 6,328 8.3 % 115 1.8 % Research and development 2,362 2.9 % 2,392 3.1 % (30 ) (1.3 %) Total operating expenses $ 17,711 21.6 % $ 16,618 21.7 % $ 1,093 6.6 % The increase in sales and marketing expense resulted primarily from increased personnel-related costs and the unfavorable impact of changes in foreign currency exchange rates. The increase in general and administrative expense resulted primarily from the unfavorable impact of changes in foreign currency exchange rates, partly offset by a decrease in personnel-related costs. The slight decrease in research and development expense resulted primarily from lower personnel-related costs. Livestock and Poultry Diagnostics. The following table presents LPD operating expenses by functional area: For the Year For the Year Ended Ended Operating Expenses December 31, Percent of December 31, Percent of Dollar Percentage (dollars in thousands) 2011 Revenue 2010 Revenue Change Change Sales and marketing $ 15,933 16.9 % $ 13,820 17.0 % $ 2,113 15.3 % General and administrative 12,079 12.8 % 12,025 14.8 % 54 0.4 % Research and development 11,868 12.6 % 9,739 12.0 % 2,129 21.9 % Total operating expenses $ 39,880 42.4 % $ 35,584 43.8 % $ 4,296 12.1 % The increase in sales and marketing expense resulted primarily from higher personnel-related costs and the unfavorable impact of changes in foreign currency exchange rates. The increase in personnel-related costs was due primarily to an increase in sales personnel to support growth in developing markets. The slight increase in general and administrative expense resulted primarily from the unfavorable impact of changes in foreign currency exchange rates, partly offset by a decrease in personnel-related costs. The increase in research and development expense was due primarily to an increase in personnel-related costs and, to a lesser extent, the unfavorable impact of changes in foreign currency exchange rates. 42 Other. Operating expenses for Other increased $1.1 million to $14.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2011. This increase was due primarily to increased research and development costs in our OPTI Medical line of business driven, in part, by higher personnel-related costs and increased consulting and external development costs. Unallocated Amounts. Operating expenses that are not allocated to our operating segments decreased $3.5 million to $12.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2011 due primarily to a decrease in certain personnel-related costs, receipt of a payment related to the sale of certain raw material inventory in connection with the restructuring of our pharmaceutical business in the fourth quarter of 2008, an impairment charge in 2010 that was absent in 2011, a decrease in legal and other professional fees incurred in connection with the U.S. Federal Trade Commission ( FTC ) and United Kingdom Office of Fair Trading ( OFT ) investigations and decreased foreign exchange losses during the year ended December 31, 2011 compared to the year ended December 31, 2010. The FTC investigation is discussed in more detail under the heading Part I. Item 1A. Risk Factors . We estimate certain personnel-related costs and allocate the estimated expenses to the operating segments. This allocation differs from actual expense and consequently yields a difference that is reported under the caption Unallocated Amounts. The decrease in certain personnel-related costs for Unallocated Amounts is due primarily to lower self-insured health care costs during the year ended December 31, 2011 compared to the same period of the prior year. The payment related to the sale of certain raw material inventory was not recorded in our results of operation until received due to uncertain collectability. The impairment charge in 2010 was to write-off certain design costs related to a facilities project that had changed in scope. Interest Income and Interest Expense Interest income was $1.7 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2011 compared to $0.7 million for the same period of the prior year. The increase in interest income was due primarily to interest earned on a note issued in connection with a November 2010 strategic investment in a company that owns and operates veterinary hospitals and, to a lesser extent, from higher cash balances. Interest expense was $3.5 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2011 compared to $2.4 million for the same period of the prior year. In July 2011, we refinanced our existing $200 million unsecured revolving credit facility by entering into an amended and restated credit agreement relating to a five-year unsecured revolving credit facility in the principal amount of $300 million with a syndicate of multinational banks, which matures on July 25, 2016 (the new credit facility and the previous credit facility are referred to collectively as the Credit Facility ) and requires no scheduled prepayments before that date. The increase in interest expense during the year ended December 31, 2011 in comparison to the same period of the prior year was due primarily to higher debt balances outstanding on our Credit Facility and higher effective interest rates on borrowings under our Credit Facility. As a result of the refinancing event in July 2011, applicable interest rates on borrowings under the Credit Facility generally range from 0.875 to 1.25 percentage points (the range of applicable interest rates on borrowing under the new credit facility and the previous credit facility are referred to collectively as the Credit Spread ) above the London interbank rate ( LIBOR ) or the Canadian Dollar-denominated bankers acceptance rate ( CDOR ) as opposed to a Credit Spread of 0.375 to 0.875 under the pre-existing Credit Facility. Because the Credit Spread increased as a result of the refinancing event, interest expense during the year ended December 31, 2011 increased in comparison to the same period of the prior year and we expect that interest expense will continue to increase in 2012 in comparison 2011. Provision for Income Taxes Our effective income tax rate was 31.0% for the year ended December 31, 2011 and 30.1% for the year ended December 31, 2010. The increase in the tax rate is primarily due to lower tax benefits recognized related to the federal research and development tax incentives, lower benefits recognized in connection with the expiration of certain statutes of limitations and increased state tax. In 2012, it is reasonably possible that we could recognize up to $1.3 million of income tax benefits that have not been recognized at December 31, 2011. The income tax benefits are primarily due to the lapse in the statutes of limitations for various U.S. and international tax jurisdictions. 43 Twelve Months Ended December 31, 2010 Compared to Twelve Months Ended December 31, 2009 Revenue Total Company. The following table presents revenue by operating segment: For the Year For the Year Ended Ended Percentage Percentage Organic Net Revenue December 31, December 31, Dollar Percentage Change from Change from Revenue (dollars in thousands) 2010 2009 Change Change Currency (1) Acquisitions (2) Growth (3) CAG $ 905,655 $ 843,303 $ 62,352 7.4 % 0.5 % 0.5 % 6.4 % Water 76,514 73,214 3,300 4.5 % 0.8 % - 3.7 % LPD 81,177 77,208 3,969 5.1 % (2.5 %) - 7.6 % Other 40,046 37,908 2,138 5.6 % - - 5.6 % Total $ 1,103,392 $ 1,031,633 $ 71,759 7.0 % 0.3 % 0.4 % 6.3 % (1) The percentage change from currency is a non-U.S. GAAP measure. It represents the percentage change in revenue resulting from the difference between the average exchange rates during the twelve months ended December 31, 2010 and the same period of the prior year applied to foreign currency denominated revenues for the twelve months ended December 31, 2010. (2) The percentage change from acquisitions is a non-U.S. GAAP measure. It represents the percentage change in revenue during the year ended December 31, 2010 compared to the year ended December 31, 2009 attributed to incremental revenues from businesses acquired subsequent to December 31, 2008. (3) Organic revenue growth is a non-U.S. GAAP measure and represents the percentage change in revenue during the year ended December 31, 2010 compared to the year ended December 31, 2009 net of acquisitions and the effect from changes in foreign currency exchange rates. The following revenue analysis and discussion includes references to organic revenue growth. Organic revenue growth should be considered in addition to, and not as a replacement for or as superior to, revenues reported in accordance with U.S. GAAP, and may not be comparable to similarly titled measures reported by other companies. Management believes that discussing organic revenue growth provides useful information to investors by facilitating easier comparisons of our revenue performance with prior and future periods and to our peers. In determining organic revenue growth, we exclude the effect of changes in foreign currency exchange rates because changes in foreign currency exchange rates are not under management control, are subject to volatility and can obscure underlying business trends. We also exclude the effects of acquisitions and divestitures because the nature, size and number of acquisitions can vary dramatically from period to period and therefore can also obscure underlying business trends. Companion Animal Group. The following table presents revenue by product and service category for CAG: For the Year For the Year Ended Ended Percentage Percentage Organic Net Revenue December 31, December 31, Dollar Percentage Change from Change from Revenue (dollars in thousands) 2010 2009 Change Change Currency (1) Acquisitions (2) Growth (3) Instruments and consumables $ 354,239 $ 332,706 $ 21,533 6.5 % 0.1 % - 6.4 % Rapid assay products 146,538 147,078 (540 ) (0.4 %) 0.3 % - (0.7 %) Reference laboratory diagnostic and consulting services 329,666 298,410 31,256 10.5 % 1.0 % 1.2 % 8.3 % Practice management systems and digital radiography 75,212 65,055 10,157 15.6 % 0.9 % 0.5 % 14.2 % Pharmaceutical products - 54 (54 ) (100 %) - - (100 %) Net CAG revenue $ 905,655 $ 843,303 $ 62,352 7.4 % 0.5 % 0.5 % 6.4 % (1) The percentage change from currency is a non-U.S. GAAP measure. It represents the percentage change in revenue resulting from the difference between the average exchange rates during the twelve months ended December 31, 2010 and the same period of the prior year applied to foreign currency denominated revenues for the twelve months ended December 31, 2010. (2) The percentage change from acquisitions is a non-U.S. GAAP measure. It represents the percentage change in revenue during the year ended December 31, 2010 compared to the year ended December 31, 2009 attributed to incremental revenues from businesses acquired subsequent to December 31, 2008. (3) Organic revenue growth is a non-U.S. GAAP measure and represents the percentage change in revenue during the year ended December 31, 2010 compared to the year ended December 31, 2009 net of acquisitions and the effect from changes in foreign currency exchange rates. 44 Instruments revenue was $85.5 million and $77.3 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2010 and 2009, respectively. Consumables revenue was $228.0 million and $218.5 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2010 and 2009, respectively. Instrument service and accessories revenue was $39.7 million and $35.7 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2010 and 2009, respectively. The remaining sources of revenue are not significant to overall instruments and consumables revenue. Instruments revenue growth was due primarily to sales of our ProCyte Dx instrument, our hematology analyzer that we began shipping during the third quarter of 2010, and increased sales of our Catalyst Dx instrument and IDEXX VetLab Station . This increase in instrument revenue was partly offset by lower average unit sales prices and lower sales volumes of our LaserCyte instrument, due primarily to a shift in focus of our sales efforts to ProCyte Dx . Consumables revenue growth was due primarily to higher sales volumes of consumables used with our Catalyst Dx instrument, partly offset by lower sales of consumables used with our VetTest instrument as Catalyst Dx instruments continue to replace VetTest instruments at certain customers. Instrument service and accessories revenue growth was primarily a result of the growth of our active installed base of instruments. The impact of changes in distributors inventory levels was not significant to reported instruments and consumables revenue. The slight decrease in rapid assay revenue was due primarily to lower average unit sales prices of our SNAP tests resulting from competitive pressures and increased price sensitivity in certain segments of our customer base as a result of economic conditions and, to a lesser extent, lower U.S. practice-level sales primarily attributable to economic conditions. These decreases were partly offset by higher sales volumes outside of the U.S. and the favorable impact of changes in distributors inventory levels, which increased reported rapid assay revenue growth by 1%. The increase in reference laboratory diagnostic and consulting services revenue resulted primarily from the impact of higher testing volumes and, to a lesser extent, price increases. Higher testing volume was driven largely by the acquisition of new customers. The increase in practice management systems and digital radiography revenue resulted primarily from higher sales volumes of companion animal digital radiography systems as this market is transitioning from older film-based systems to digital as the standard of care. An increase in service and support revenue related to both digital radiography systems and practice management systems also contributed to revenue growth. These increases were partly offset by lower average unit sales prices of our digital radiography systems resulting from competitive conditions. Water. The increase in Water revenue resulted primarily from higher Colilert product sales volumes, partly offset by lower average unit sales prices. The lower average unit sales prices resulted primarily from higher relative sales of Colilert products in geographies where those products are sold at lower average unit sales prices. Livestock and Poultry Diagnostics. The increase in LPD revenue resulted primarily from higher sales volumes of certain bovine tests and, to a lesser extent, higher sales volumes of certain swine tests. The increased sales volumes of certain bovine tests was driven primarily by increased sales in Germany where we have won several government tenders for testing in connection with a country-wide eradication program for a virus impacting beef and dairy production yields. These increases were partly offset by lower average unit sales prices due to competitive conditions. Other. The increase in Other revenue was attributable primarily to higher sales volumes of our Dairy SNAP test for the detection of the chemical melamine and higher sales volumes of consumables used with our OPTI Medical instruments. These increases were partly offset by lower sales volumes of our Dairy SNAP Beta Lactam test used for the detection of antibiotic residue in milk. 45 Gross Profit Total Company. The following table presents gross profit and gross profit percentages by operating segment: For the Year For the Year Ended Ended Gross Profit December 31, Percent of December 31, Percent of Dollar Percentage (dollars in thousands) 2010 Revenue 2009 Revenue Change Change CAG $ 458,491 50.6 % $ 410, 033 48.6 % $ 48,458 11.8 % Water 48,231 63.0 % 46,793 63.9 % 1,438 3.1 % LPD 55,187 68.0 % 51,711 67.0 % 3,476 6.7 % Other 17,732 44.3 % 16,919 44.6 % 813 4.8 % Unallocated amounts (1,018 ) N/A 825 N/A (1,843 ) (223.4 %) Total Company $ 578,623 52.4 % $ 526,281 51.0 % $ 52,342 9.9 % Companion Animal Group. Gross profit for CAG increased due to higher sales and an increase in the gross profit percentage to 51% from 49%. The increase in the gross profit percentage was attributable primarily to improvements in the cost to manufacture and service our IDEXX VetLab instruments and increased volume leverage and other efficiency gains in our reference laboratory diagnostics and consulting services business. Lower depreciation on instruments placed at customer sites under usage agreements also contributed to the increase in the gross profit percentage, as we have reduced this type of placement activity and an increasing number of prior placements have become fully depreciated and ownership has transferred to the customer. These favorable impacts were partly offset by the unfavorable impact of currency driven primarily by hedging losses during the year ended December 31, 2010 compared to hedging gains during the year ended December 31, 2009. Water. Gross profit for Water increased as higher sales were partly offset by a decrease in the gross profit percentage to 63% from 64%. The decrease in the gross profit percentage for Water was driven primarily by hedging losses during the year ended December 31, 2010 compared to hedging gains during the year ended December 31, 2009. These unfavorable impacts were partly offset by higher relative sales of higher margin products and lower overall manufacturing costs. Livestock and Poultry Diagnostics. Gross profit for LPD increased due to higher sales and an increase in the gross profit percentage to 68% from 67%. The increase in the gross profit percentage was due primarily to lower overall manufacturing costs and higher relative sales of higher margin products. These increases were partly offset by lower overall average unit sales prices and the unfavorable impact of currency driven by the net unfavorable impact of changes in foreign currency exchange rates and lower hedging gains during the year ended December 31, 2010 compared to the year ended December 31, 2009. Other. Gross profit for Other increased as higher sales were partly offset by a slight decrease in the gross profit percentage. The slight decrease in the gross profit percentage was due primarily to increased overall manufacturing costs in our OPTI Medical and Dairy businesses and the unfavorable impact of currency driven by the net unfavorable impact of changes in foreign currency exchange rates and lower hedging gains during the year ended December 31, 2010 compared to the year ended December 31, 2009. These unfavorable impacts were partly offset by lower costs of service in our OPTI Medical and Dairy businesses. Unallocated Amounts. Gross profit for Unallocated Amounts decreased due primarily to an increase in certain personnel-related costs. We estimate certain personnel-related costs and allocate the estimated expenses to the operating segments. This allocation differs from actual expense and consequently yields a difference that is reported under the caption Unallocated Amounts. The increase in certain personnel-related costs for Unallocated Amounts is due primarily to higher self-insured health care costs during the year ended December 31, 2010 compared to the same period of the prior year . Operating Expenses and Operating Income Total Company. The following tables present operating expenses and operating income by operating segment: 46 For the Year For the Year Ended Ended Operating Expenses December 31, Percent of December 31, Percent of Dollar Percentage (dollars in thousands) 2010 Revenue 2009 Revenue Change Change CAG $ 293,278 32.4 % $ 278,295 33.0 % $ 14,983 5.4 % Water 16,618 21.7 % 15,950 21.8 % 668 4.2 % LPD 35,584 43.8 % 34,360 44.5 % 1,224 3.6 % Other 13,607 34.0 % 13,740 36.3 % (133 ) (1.0 %) Unallocated amounts 15,655 N/A 7,967 N/A 7,688 96.5 % Total Company $ 374,742 34.0 % $ 350,312 34.0 % $ 24,430 7.0 % For the Year For the Year Ended Ended Operating Income December 31, Percent of December 31, Percent of Dollar Percentage (dollars in thousands) 2010 Revenue 2009 Revenue Change Change CAG $ 165,213 18.2 % $ 131,738 15.6 % $ 33,475 25.4 % Water 31,613 41.3 % 30,843 42.1 % 770 2.5 % LPD 19,603 24.2 % 17,351 22.5 % 2,252 13.0 % Other 4,125 10.3 % 3,179 8.4 % 946 29.8 % Unallocated amounts (16,673 ) N/A (7,142 ) N/A (9,531 ) (133.5 %) Total Company $ 203,881 18.5 % $ 175,969 17.1 % $ 27,912 15.9 % Companion Animal Group. The following table presents CAG operating expenses by functional area: For the Year For the Year Ended Ended Operating Expenses December 31, Percent of December 31, Percent of Dollar Percentage (dollars in thousands) 2010 Revenue 2009 Revenue Change Change Sales and marketing $ 151,652 16.7 % $ 142,434 16.9 % $ 9,218 6.5 % General and administrative 97,721 10.8 % 95,305 11.3 % 2,416 2.5 % Research and development 43,905 4.9 % 40,556 4.8 % 3,349 8.3 % Total operating expenses $ 293,278 32.4 % $ 278,295 33.0 % $ 14,983 5.4 % The increase in sales and marketing expense resulted primarily from increased personnel-related costs, including an investment in field sales technical support personnel. The increase in general and administrative expense resulted primarily from higher personnel-related costs, the unfavorable impact of changes in foreign currency exchange rates, an increase in costs attributable to information technology investments and an increase in bad debt expense in connection with the bankruptcy of one of our U.S. distributors, PVP. These increases were partly offset by the absence of an impairment charge of $1.5 million that was recorded in the fourth quarter of 2009 to write off an acquired intangible asset associated with our equine digital radiography business. The increase in research and development expense resulted primarily from increased personnel-related costs. Water. The following table presents Water expenses by functional area: For the Year For the Year Ended Ended Operating Expenses December 31, Percent of December 31, Percent of Dollar Percentage (dollars in thousands) 2010 Revenue 2009 Revenue Change Change Sales and marketing $ 7,898 10.3 % $ 7,192 9.8 % $ 706 9.8 % General and administrative 6,328 8.3 % 6,108 8.3 % 220 3.6 % Research and development 2,392 3.1 % 2,650 3.6 % (258 ) (9.7 %) Total operating expenses $ 16,618 21.7 % $ 15,950 21.8 % $ 668 4.2 % The increase in sales and marketing expense resulted primarily from increased personnel-related costs. The increase in general and administrative expense resulted from an increase in costs attributable to information technology investments and increased personnel-related costs. The decrease in research and development expense was due primarily to decreased spending related to qualifying additional suppliers of certain raw materials and a reduction in personnel-related costs. 47 Livestock and Poultry Diagnostics. The following table presents LPD operating expenses by functional area: For the Year For the Year Ended Ended Operating Expenses December 31, Percent of December 31, Percent of Dollar Percentage (dollars in thousands) 2010 Revenue 2009 Revenue Change Change Sales and marketing $ 13,820 17.0 % $ 12,679 16.4 % $ 1,141 9.0 % General and administrative 12,025 14.8 % 13,173 17.1 % (1,148 ) (8.7 %) Research and development 9,739 12.0 % 8,508 11.0 % 1,231 14.5 % Total operating expenses $ 35,584 43.8 % $ 34,360 44.5 % $ 1,224 3.6 % The increase in sales and marketing expense resulted primarily from an increase in personnel-related costs. The decrease in general and administrative expense resulted primarily from decreased personnel-related costs and lower amortization on our existing intangible assets. These decreases were partly offset by the net unfavorable impact of changes in foreign currency exchange rates and an increase in costs attributable to information technology investments. The increase in research and development expense was due primarily to an increase in personnel-related costs. Other. Operating expenses for Other decreased $0.1 million to $13.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2010. This slight decrease was due primarily to an incremental milestone payment earned in 2010 related to the sale of product rights previously included in our pharmaceutical product lines, partly offset by higher personnel-related costs in our Dairy business attributable, in part, to the development of business in China. Milestone payments in the third and fourth quarters of 2010 totaling $3.0 million were earned due to the achievement of certain sales milestones by the third party that purchased the product rights. In the fourth quarter of 2009, we earned a milestone payment of $2.0 million from the same third party as the result of the achievement of certain development milestones for this product. Because we have no obligation to deliver product or services, or otherwise provide support to the third party under this agreement, and because collectability is reasonably assured, these milestone payments, and any other related milestone payments we earn in the future, are included in results of operations when earned, but are not classified as revenue because the transaction was accounted for as the sale of a business. Unallocated Amounts. Operating expenses that are not allocated to our operating segments increased $7.7 million to $15.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2010 due primarily to increased legal and other fees incurred in connection with our response to the FTC subpoena, discussed in more detail under the heading Part I, Item 1A. Risk Factors in this Annual Report on Form 10-K; foreign currency exchange losses during the year ended December 31, 2010 compared to gains during the year ended December 31, 2009; an increase in costs attributable to investments in information technology; and the write-off in 2010 of certain design costs related to a facilities project that changed in scope. These unfavorable impacts were partly offset by the absence of an impairment charge in 2010 compared to 2009 and lower research and development personnel-related costs. The impairment charge recorded in 2009 was to write-off software to manage the various aspects of product development and product lifecycles. Interest Income and Interest Expense Interest income was $0.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2010 compared to $0.5 million for the same period of the prior year. The increase in interest income was due primarily to higher average invested cash balances. Interest expense was $2.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2010 compared to $1.9 million for the same period of the prior year. The increase in interest expense was due primarily to higher effective interest rates and, to a lesser extent, higher average balances outstanding on our Credit Facility. With the commencement of our interest rate swap agreements on March 31, 2010, we effectively fixed our interest rate at 2% plus the Credit Spread on $80 million of funds borrowed under the Credit Facility through March 31, 2012. As the fixed rate under the interest rate swap agreements is higher than the weighted average interest rate of debt outstanding during 2009, interest expense was higher for the year ended December 31, 2010 compared to the same period of the prior year. 48 Provision for Income Taxes Our effective income tax rate was 30.1% for the year ended December 31, 2010 and 30.0% for the year ended December 31, 2009. The slight increase in the tax rate is due primarily to an increase in earnings taxed at domestic rates that are higher than international rates, partly offset by tax benefits related to U.S. manufacturing activities that were fully phased in effective January 1, 2010. RECENT ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS A discussion of recent accounting pronouncements is included in Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2011 included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES We fund the capital needs of our business through cash on hand, funds generated from operations, and amounts available under our Credit Facility. At December 31, 2011 and December 31, 2010, we had $183.9 million and $156.9 million, respectively, of cash and cash equivalents, and working capital of $87.3 million and $175.5 million, respectively. Additionally, at December 31, 2011, we had remaining borrowing availability of $56.0 million under our $300 million Credit Facility. We believe that, if necessary, we could obtain additional borrowings at prevailing market interest rates to fund our growth objectives. We further believe that current cash and cash equivalents, funds generated from operations, and available borrowings will be sufficient to fund our operations, capital purchase requirements, and strategic growth needs for the next twelve months, and that these resources will be sufficient in the long-term to fund our business as currently conducted. We consider the majority of the operating earnings of certain non-United States subsidiaries to be indefinitely invested outside the U.S. Changes to this position could have adverse tax consequences. We manage our worldwide cash requirements considering available funds among all of our subsidiaries. Our foreign cash balances are generally available without restrictions to fund ordinary business operations outside the U.S. Of our total cash and cash equivalents at December 31, 2011, approximately $180 million was held by our foreign subsidiaries and were subject to material repatriation tax effects. The amount of cash and cash equivalents held by foreign subsidiaries subject to other restrictions on the free flow of funds (primarily securing various obligations) was approximately $1.2 million. As of December 31, 2011, 51% of the cash and cash equivalents held by our foreign subsidiaries were held as bank deposits, 46% were invested in money market funds restricted to U.S. government and agency securities, and 3% were invested in money market funds restricted to non-U.S. government securities corresponding to the investment currency. Approximately 66% of the cash and cash equivalents held by our foreign subsidiaries were held in U.S. dollars. Should we require more capital in the U.S. than is generated by our operations domestically, for example to fund significant discretionary activities, we could elect to repatriate future earnings from foreign jurisdictions or raise capital in the U.S. through debt or equity issuances. These alternatives could result in higher effective tax rates, increased interest expense, or other dilution of our earnings. We have borrowed funds domestically and continue to have the ability to borrow funds domestically at reasonable interest rates. The following table presents additional key information concerning working capital: For the Three Months Ended December 31, September 30, June 30, March 31, December 31, 2011 2011 2011 2011 2010 Days sales outstanding (1) 41.0 43.1 41.2 40.2 38.7 Inventory turns (2) 1.8 1.7 1.7 1.8 1.8 (1) Days sales outstanding represents the average of the accounts receivable balances at the beginning and end of each quarter divided by revenue for that quarter, the result of which is then multiplied by 91.25 days. (2) Inventory turns represents inventory-related cost of product revenue for the 12 months preceding each quarter-end divided by the inventory balance at the end of the quarter. 49 Sources and Uses of Cash The following table presents cash provided (used): For the Years Ended December 31, (dollars in thousands) 2011 2010 Dollar Change Net cash provided by operating activities $ 220,700 $ 178,833 $ 41,867 Net cash used by investing activities (96,996 ) (43,190 ) (53,806 ) Net cash used by financing activities (97,657 ) (86,769 ) (10,888 ) Net effect of changes in exchange rates on cash 933 1,313 (380 ) Net increase in cash and cash equivalents $ 26,980 $ 50,187 $ (23,207 ) Operating Activities. Cash provided by operating activities was $220.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2011 compared to $178.8 million for the same period in 2010. The total of net income and net non-cash charges, excluding the impact of reclassifying the tax benefit from exercises of stock options and vesting of restricted stock units to a financing activity, was $230.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2011 compared to $200.1 million for the same period in 2010, resulting in incremental operating cash flows of $30.3 million driven primarily by the increase in net income. The total of changes in operating assets and liabilities and the tax benefit from share-based compensation arrangements decreased cash by $9.7 million and $21.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2011 and 2010, respectively, resulting in an incremental increase in cash of $11.6 million. The following table presents cash flows from changes in operating assets and liabilities and the tax benefit from share-based compensation arrangements: For the Years Ended December 31, (dollars in thousands) 2011 2010 Dollar Change Accounts receivable $ (24,809 ) $ (6,914 ) $ (17,895 ) Inventories (6,310 ) (19,469 ) 13,159 Other assets (1,339 ) (13,208 ) 11,869 Accounts payable 13,884 3,482 10,402 Accrued liabilities 17,564 30,604 (13,040 ) Deferred revenue 7,341 2,370 4,971 Tax benefit from share-based compensation arrangements (16,007 ) (18,126 ) 2,119 Total change in cash due to changes in operating assets and liabilities and the tax benefit from share-based compensation arrangements $ (9,676 ) $ (21,261 ) $ 11,585 The increase in inventory during the year ended December 31, 2011 was less than the increase during the year ended December 31, 2010 due primarily to the timing of inventory receipts, most significantly of slides used with our chemistry analyzers. Incremental cash provided by the change in other assets was due primarily to the use of prepaid tax amounts resulting in lower taxes paid during the year ended December 31, 2011 in comparison to the same period of the prior year. The increase in accounts payable during both the year ended December 31, 2011 and 2010 was due primarily to a combination of the timing of payments and the increase in expenses during both periods. Incremental cash provided by the changes in deferred revenue is the result of an increase in placements of IDEXX VetLab instruments, digital radiography systems and Cornerstone practice management systems under customer programs, discussed in more detail under the heading Part II, Item 7. Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates . Incremental cash used related to the changes in accounts receivable was driven primarily by higher revenues in the last month of the quarter ended December 31, 2011 and a slightly higher number of days sales outstanding as compared to the comparative periods in the prior year. Incremental cash used related to the changes in accrued liabilities was driven primarily by higher accelerated tax deductions as compared to the same period of the prior year. We historically have experienced proportionally lower net cash flows from operating activities during the first quarter and proportionally higher cash flows from operating activities for the remainder of the year and for the annual period driven primarily by the payment of annual bonuses in connection with management and non-management employee incentive programs in the first quarter following the year for which the bonuses were earned. 50 Investing Activities. Cash used by investing activities was $97.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2011 compared to cash used of $43.2 million for the same period of 2010. The increase in cash used by investing activities was due primarily to the acquisitions of three businesses, incremental investments in our facilities and information technology and the acquisition of a customer list intangible asset. During the year ended December 31, 2011, we paid an aggregate of $46.8 million in cash to acquire three businesses, each accounted for as separate business combinations. The incremental investments in our facilities were driven primarily by a $5.6 million investment in our Memphis, Tennessee location and a $4.3 million incremental investment in the renovation and expansion of our Westbrook, Maine location during the year ended December 31, 2011 in comparison to the same period of the prior year. The additional investments in information technology were driven primarily by a $4.1 million incremental investment in our suite of business software applications and related hardware during the year ended December 31, 2011 in comparison to the same period of the prior year. Also during the year ended December 31, 2011, we paid $1.0 million to acquire a customer list intangible asset unrelated to the aforementioned business acquisitions. This increase in cash used was partly offset by the receipt of milestone payments aggregating $3.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2011 in connection with the gain and receivable recorded in the third and fourth quarters of 2010 related to the achievement of certain sales milestones by the acquirer of our feline insulin product. Our total capital expenditure plan for 2012 is approximately $60 million, which includes approximately $11 million for the renovation and expansion of our headquarters facility. Financing Activities. Cash used by financing activities was $97.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2011 compared to cash used of $86.8 million for the same period in 2010. The increase in cash used by financing activities was due primarily to an increase in cash used to repurchase common stock, partly offset by higher net borrowings under the Credit Facility. Cash used to repurchase common stock increased by $112.4 million during the year ended December 31, 2011 compared to the year ended December 31, 2010. From the inception of our common stock repurchase program in August 1999 to December 31, 2011, we have repurchased 43.6 million shares. During the year ended December 31, 2011, we purchased 3.4 million shares for an aggregate cost of $255.5 million compared to purchases of 2.5 million shares for an aggregate cost of $143.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2010. We believe that the repurchase of our common stock is a favorable investment, and we also repurchase to offset the dilutive effect of our share-based compensation programs. Repurchases of our common stock may vary depending upon the level of other investing activities and the share price. See Note 18 to the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information about our share repurchases. Net borrowing and repayment activity under our Credit Facility resulted in incremental cash provided of $103.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2011 compared to the same period of the prior year. At December 31, 2011, we had $243.0 million outstanding under the Credit Facility. The general availability of funds under the Credit Facility is further reduced by $1.0 million for a letter of credit issued related to our workers compensation policy covering claims for the years 2009, 2010 and 2011. The obligations under the Credit Facility may be accelerated upon the occurrence of an event of default under the Credit Facility, which includes customary events of default including, without limitation, payment defaults, defaults in the performance of affirmative and negative covenants, the inaccuracy of representations or warranties, bankruptcy and insolvency related defaults, defaults relating to judgments, certain events related to employee pension benefit plans under the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, the failure to pay specified indebtedness, and a change of control default. The Credit Facility contains affirmative, negative and financial covenants customary for financings of this type. The negative covenants include restrictions on liens, indebtedness of subsidiaries of the Company, fundamental changes, investments, transactions with affiliates and certain restrictive agreements. The financial covenant is a consolidated leverage ratio test that requires our ratio of debt to earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization, defined as the consolidated leverage ratio under the terms of the Credit Facility, not to exceed 3-to-1. At December 31, 2011, we were in compliance with the covenants of the Credit Facility. 51 Other Commitments, Contingencies and Guarantees Under our worker compensation insurance policies for U.S. employees since January 1, 2003, we have retained the first $250,000 in claim liability per incident with aggregate maximum claim liabilities per year of $2.0 million in 2011 and $2.9 million in each of 2010 and 2009. The insurance company provides for insurance claims above the individual occurrence and aggregate limits. We have recognized cumulative expenses of $0.5 million, $0.6 million, and $0.4 million for claims incurred during the years ended December 31, 2011, 2010 and 2009. Our estimated liability for worker compensation as of December 31, 2011 and 2010 was $0.7 million and $1.1 million, respectively. Therefore, it is possible that we could incur additional healthcare and wage indemnification costs beyond those previously recognized up to our aggregate liability for each of the respective claim years. For the seven years ended on or prior to December 31 2009, based on our retained claim liability per incident and our aggregate claim liability per year, our maximum liability at December 31, 2011 in excess of the amounts deemed probable and previously recognized is not material. In connection with these policies, we have outstanding letters of credit totaling $1.6 million to the insurance companies as security for these claims. We have contingent commitments outstanding of up to $10.3 million related primarily to the acquisition of an intangible asset in 2008 and due to the seller upon our achievement of certain revenue and other milestones. We have not accrued for the commitments related to this intangible asset acquisition as we do not deem them to be probable of occurring as of December 31, 2011. The remaining commitments are not material. We are contractually obligated to make the following payments in the years below: (in thousands) Total 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 After 2016 Long-term debt obligations (1) $ 3,636 $ 1,091 $ 2,181 $ 364 $ - Operating leases 60,202 12,813 18,137 11,172 18,080 Purchase obligations (2) 110,130 106,814 3,316 - - Minimum royalty payments 5,689 914 1,720 1,140 1,915 Total contractual cash obligations $ 179,657 $ 121,632 $ 25,354 $ 12,676 $ 19,995 (1) Long-term debt amounts include interest payments associated with long-term debt. (2) Purchase obligations include agreements to purchase goods or services that are enforceable and legally binding and that specify all significant terms, including fixed or minimum quantities, pricing, and approximate timing of purchase transactions. These commitments do not reflect unrecognized tax benefits of $5.2 million and deferred compensation liabilities of $2.1 million as of December 31, 2011 as the timing of recognition is uncertain. Refer to Note 12 of the consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2011 included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional discussion of unrecognized tax benefits. 
