CIK: 874761
Company Name: AES CORP
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2006-04-04


ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS. The accompanying management discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations set forth in this Item 7 is restated to reflect the correction of errors that were contained in our consolidated financial statements and other financial information for the year ended December 31, 2004 as discussed below and in Note 1 of the Consolidated Financial Statements. The following management discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our restated consolidated financial statements and the related notes. RESTATEMENT OF CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Subsequent to filing its restated annual report on Form 10-K/A with the Securities Exchange Commission on January 19, 2006, the Company discovered its previously issued restated consolidated financial statements included certain errors in accounting for derivative instruments and hedging activities, minority interest expense and income taxes. The errors in accounting for derivative instruments and hedging activities resulted in differences in previously issued consolidated interim financial statements for certain quarterly periods in 2004 sufficient to require restatement of prior period interim results. The errors in accounting for income taxes and minority interest expense required restatement of previously issued consolidated annual financial statements. As a result of evaluating these adjustments, the Company reduced its stockholders equity by $12 million as of January 1, 2003 as the cumulative effect of the correction of errors for all periods proceeding January 1, 2003, and restated its consolidated statements of operations and cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2004 and 2003 and its consolidated balance sheet as of December 31, 2004. The restatement adjustments resulted in an increase to previously reported net income of $6 million for the year ended December 31, 2004 and in a decrease to previously reported net income of $17 million for the year ended December 31, 2003. There was no impact on gross margin or net cash flow from operating activities of the Company for any years presented. Based upon management review it has been determined that these errors were inadvertent and unintentional. The errors relate to the following areas: A. Accounting for Derivative Instruments and Hedging Activities The Company determined that it failed to perform adequate on-going effectiveness testing for three interest rate cash flow hedges and one foreign currency cash flow hedge during 2004 as required by SFAS No. 133. As a result, the Company should have discontinued hedge accounting and recognized changes in the fair value of the derivative instruments in earnings prospectively from the last valid effectiveness assessment until the earlier of either (1) the expiration of the derivative instrument or (2) the re-designation of the derivative instrument as a hedging activity. The net impact related to the correction of these errors to previously reported net income resulted in a decrease of $4 million and an increase of $2 million for the years ending December 31, 2004 and 2003, respectively. B. Income Tax and Minority Interest Adjustments As a result of the Company year end closing review process, the Company discovered certain other errors related to the recording of income tax liabilities and minority interest expense. The adjustments primarily include: An increase in income tax expense related to the recording of certain historical withholding tax liabilities at one of our El Salvador subsidiaries; An increase in minority interest expense related to a correction of the allocation of income tax expense to minority shareholders. This allocation pertained to certain deferred tax adjustments recorded in the original restatement at one of our Brazilian generating companies. In addition, 65 minority interest expense was also corrected at this subsidiary as a result of identifying differences arising from a more comprehensive reconciliation of prior year statutory financial records to U.S. GAAP financial statements. A reduction of 2004 income tax expense related to adjustments derived from 2004 income tax returns filed in 2005. The net impact related to the correction of these errors to previously reported net income resulted in an increase of $10 million and a decrease of $19 million for the years ending December 31, 2004 and 2003, respectively. In addition, the Company restated stockholders equity as of January 1, 2003 by $12 million as a correction for these errors in all periods preceding January 1, 2003. C. Other Balance Sheet Reclassifications Certain other balance sheet reclassifications were recorded at December 31, 2004 including a $45 million reclassification which reduced Accounts Receivables and increased Other Current Assets (regulatory assets). EXECUTIVE SUMMARY AND OVERVIEW The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our restated consolidated financial statements and notes to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K, and other information included in this report. Who Are We? AES is a global power company managed to meet the growing demand for electricity in ways that benefit all of our stakeholders. AES is a holding company that through its subsidiaries and affiliates owns and operates a portfolio of electricity generation and distribution businesses in 25 countries. We seek to capture the benefits of our global expertise and economies of scale in our operations. Predictable and growing cash flow, an efficient capital structure, operating and portfolio risk management, and world-class operating performance are the focus of our management efforts. W hat Businesses Are We In? We operate in two principal businesses. The first is the generation of power for sale to utilities and other wholesale customers. The second is the operation of electric utilities which distribute power to retail, commercial, industrial and governmental customers. Our financial results are reported as three business segments, two for the generation business and one for the utility business. Our businesses may be significantly affected by a number of risks, uncertainties and other factors. Important factors that could affect financial results are discussed under Section 1A, Risk Factors. What Are Our Reporting Segments? We report our generation business under two reporting segments, contract generation and competitive supply. These segments together consist of approximately 36.4 gigawatts of generating capacity from 107 power plants in 20 countries. Our contract generation businesses principally sell electricity to utilities or other wholesale customers under power purchase agreements ( PPA ) of generally five years or longer and for 75% or more of their capacity. These PPAs are designed to provide a predictable recovery of the costs of building and operating our plants as well as generating a return on our investment. Fuel supply cost risk is often limited contractually either through contract price escalation provisions or through tolling arrangements where we convert the customer fuel into electricity. Through these contractual agreements, the businesses generally reduce commodity and electricity price volatility and thereby increase the predictability of their gross margin, net income and cash flow. 66 Our competitive supply businesses sell electricity to wholesale customers through competitive markets and, as a result, the cash flows and earnings of such businesses are more sensitive to fluctuations in the market price of electricity, as well as natural gas, coal and other fuels. However, for our U.S. competitive supply business which includes a fleet of low-cost coal fired plants in New York, we typically hedge the majority of our fuel exposure on a rolling two year basis. Our regulated utilities consist of 14 distribution companies in seven countries with approximately 11 million end-user customers. Three of these utilities, in the U.S., Venezuela and Cameroon, are integrated utilities providing both power generation and distribution. The remaining utilities, located in Brazil, El Salvador, Argentina, and Ukraine, are solely transmission and distribution businesses. Only one of our regulated utilities, Indianapolis Power and Light (IPL), is located in the U.S. The largest part of our utility business portfolio operates in emerging markets, where electricity demand is expected to grow at a higher rate than in more developed countries. However, we are exposed to foreign currency, political, payment, and economic risks and significant electricity theft-related losses within developing countries. The challenge within all of these businesses is to provide dependable and quality service to a diverse customer base and achieve appropriate returns on investment through tariff increases, cost management and prudent capital investment. In 2005, we realigned our management reporting structure into four regions: North America; Latin America; Europe, Middle East and Africa ( EMEA ); and Asia, each led by a regional president who reports directly to the Chief Executive Officer ( CEO ). This realignment allowed us to place senior leaders and resources closer to the businesses to further improve operating performance and integrate operations and development on a more localized level. This structure will help us leverage regional market trends to enhance our competitiveness and identify and capitalize on key business development opportunities. The organizational changes are expected to streamline some corporate functions to more effectively support AES businesses around the globe. The Company also maintains a corporate Business Development group which manages large scale transactions such as mergers and acquisitions, and portfolio management, as well as targeted strategic initiatives. In addition to our primary business of operating a global power portfolio, we are engaged in exploring and promoting a set of related activities that include alternative energy businesses such as wind generation, the supply of liquefied natural gas to certain targeted North American markets, the production of greenhouse gas reduction activities and new energy technologies. At present, these initiatives represent growth opportunities for us but currently account for a de minimus amount of revenue and earnings. What Did We Focus On In 2005? In 2005, we focused on global operational excellence, deleveraging and credit improvement, and our growth strategies. Our operational focus included (a) safety, (b) plant and distribution system operational excellence and (c) customer service. Our deleveraging and credit improvement focus included (a) paying down $2.7 billion in debt, including $254 million at the parent company, (b) extending maturities of subsidiary debt, (c) improving parent liquidity, and (d) gaining improved parent and subsidiary credit quality and ratings. It was also a year to rebuild our growth development pipeline under a new organization structure implemented midyear. We completed the restatement of our prior year Form 10-K and are continuing to develop and implement action plans to address the material weaknesses within our financial reporting processes. How Did We Do? Revenue We achieved record revenues in 2005 of $11.1 billion, an increase of 17% from $9.5 billion last year. Favorable foreign currency trends and higher prices led the increase. Gross margin Gross margin increased 14% to $3.2 billion, driven by the higher revenues. 67 Net cash from operating activities Our cash flow increased 38% to $2.2 billion, driven by higher net earnings (adjusted for non-cash items), an increase in other assets net of other liabilities, and a decrease in working capital. Earnings per share Diluted earnings per share from continuing operations increased 132% to $0.95 in 2005 from $0.41 in 2004. Higher revenue and gross margin, together with favorable foreign currency transaction effects led the improvement. What Was The Restatement About? At the end of 2004, the Company identified a material weakness related to its accounting for deferred income taxes and embarked upon a global process to document the deferred income tax calculations and to perform more detailed reconciliations at its foreign subsidiaries. In July 2005 the Company determined that errors found during that process required a restatement, which was completed in January 2006. The restatement required that the Company re-file its 2004 Form 10-K and its previously issued Form 10-Q for the first quarter of 2005. The most significant adjustments involved areas of accounting that required a high degree of interpretation and/or judgment involving transactions which occurred during and prior to 2002. Management concluded that all errors were both inadvertent and unintentional. The income tax restatement errors identified primarily relate to: the calculation of deferred income taxes related to certain purchase accounting adjustments for acquisitions, the correct application of foreign currency translation of certain deferred income tax balances, and the correction of other income tax accounts related to a review and reconciliation of prior year income tax returns. As a result of extended review procedures, certain other adjustments related to the classification of cash versus short-term investments, consolidation, acquisition and translation accounting and revenue deferrals related to a Brazilian energy efficiency program, were identified and corrected. In addition, subsequent to the filing of the Company restated financial statements as described above, the Company identified certain other errors which led us to restate our 2003 and 2004 year end numbers and the quarterly periods for 2004. These adjustments related largely to the correction of income tax expense and minority interest expense upon additional year end review of certain calculations performed during the earlier restatement process. Additionally, we identified certain derivative adjustments related to the proper documentation and treatment of a cash flow foreign currency hedge and cash flow interest rate hedges at certain of our foreign businesses. How Are We Addressing Our Material Weaknesses? As of December 31, 2005, the Company reported material weaknesses related to the following areas: accounting for income taxes; an aggregation of control deficiencies at our Cameroonian subsidiary; a lack of U.S. GAAP expertise and review in our Brazilian businesses; the treatment of intercompany loans denominated in other than the functional currency; and, accounting for derivatives. Management, the Audit Committee and our Board of Directors are committed to the remediation of the material weaknesses and the continued improvement of the Company overall system of internal control over financial reporting. Over the last several years, in recognition of the decentralized and complex nature of our organization, management, the Audit committee and the Board of Directors have taken steps to improve the quality of the people, processes and systems within the Company income tax, accounting, financial reporting, internal control, compliance and internal audit functions. This included creating several new Corporate leadership positions as well as adding staffing to these functions. In response to the material weaknesses reported as of December 31, 2005, management has developed remediation plans for each of the weaknesses and is undergoing continued efforts to strengthen 68 the existing finance organization and systems across the Company. These efforts include the reorganization of the Company-wide accounting and tax functions to align the local business finance functions with teams at the Corporate office. In addition, the Company is continuing to further expand the number of accounting and tax personnel at the Corporate office who will provide technical support and oversight of our global financial processes, as well as adding additional finance resources to our subsidiaries. This accelerated hiring effort began in February 2006, and, once completed, is expected to result in approximately 50 additional personnel within the Corporate finance organization as well as additional personnel at our subsidiaries, particularly those subsidiaries where material weaknesses were found. While the recruiting and reorganization effort is underway, the Company will continue to use third parties to provide assistance in the performance of relevant accounting and tax procedures, as well as provide assistance in the development and execution of the remediation plans. In its effort to develop a world-class finance organization, the Company is preparing a finance leadership development program, in partnership with an international leader in management education, that is expected to begin offering courses for our finance professionals in June 2006. In addition, various levels of training programs on specific aspects of U.S. GAAP are being developed for distribution to our subsidiaries during 2006. In March 2006, the Company completed its first in-depth training related to Accounting for Income Taxes, with participation from approximately 100 AES professionals from our Corporate office, domestic, and international subsidiaries. While the Company continues to refine and execute its remediation efforts, it will utilize additional resources to assist in the program management aspect of each material weakness remediation plan and has committed to provide status reports to our external auditors and our Audit Committee of the Board of Directors on a monthly basis throughout 2006. What Key Growth Projects are Underway? Our largest growth project under construction remains a 1,200 MW gas-fired power plant in Cartagena, Spain. This project is scheduled for completion in 2006, and will provide power under long-term contract to Gaz de France which will sell into the Spanish merchant power market. Other important growth projects under construction include 120 MW diesel-fired peaking facility to serve the largest power market in Chile, and a 120 MW wind farm project in Texas. Both of these projects are scheduled to be on-line in 2006 as well. In addition, a multi-pollution control project is under construction at our Greenidge coal-fired plant in New York, which will extend the useful life of the project and allow for more economical power dispatch and the generation of additional air emission allowances, both leading to increased revenues.We also secured a 15 year PPA and matching fuel supply agreement, together with construction and long-term financing for a new 670 MW (gross) lignite-fired power plant near Galabovo, Bulgaria. This project is in final engineering and permitting stages and is expected to enter construction in the spring of 2006, with start-up planned in two phases in 2009 and 2010. We have also secured a 10 year PPA for a new 150 MW hydro-electric power plant in Panama. AES has begun the engineering and geo-technical work and plans to begin construction in 2007. The plant is scheduled to be operational by 2010. How Are We Positioning For Growth? AES strategy for growing its business involves utilizing a local management structure operating in local markets. AES believes this is the best method for identifying and capitalizing on growth opportunities. These opportunities generally happen in a variety of ways: (i) through platform expansions, which are investment opportunities in existing businesses or existing country markets; (ii) greenfield development, which typically means development and construction of a new facility; and (iii) privatizations, which involves the transfer of government-owned generation and distribution systems in the private sector. These opportunities are pursued by the Company regional organizations. These efforts are supplemented by targeted mergers and acquisitions, which can be on an individual basis or involve 69 more complex portfolios. These efforts are led by the Company corporate Business Development group, acting in conjunction with the appropriate regional organization. Our active development pipeline of potential growth investments includes opportunities in 38 countries. We have assessed country financial and operating risks in prioritizing those countries in which we would like to make investments, and look to develop a balanced geographic portfolio over time with increased presence in Eastern Europe and Asia in particular. We continue to devote significant resources at both the corporate and business level in support of these opportunities and are funding development related costs which could lead to significant new investments in 2006 and in future years. We signed a memorandum of understanding in 2005 to develop a 1,000 MW coal fired power plant in Vietnam in partnership with a Vietnamese coal producer. These agreements may or may not lead to a firm project, but provide the basis for improving the potential for a successful project, especially if the agreement is entered into on an exclusive basis. We continue to develop wind generation opportunities, a market we entered early in 2005. We quickly became a significant player in the U.S., with responsibility for the operation of 500 MW of wind facilities and 1,000 MW of wind projects in development. We also continue to develop stand-alone LNG regasification facilities, and have started development of two new projects on the U.S. east cost during the year. Our proposed Bahamas LNG regasification terminal and 95-mile natural gas pipeline from the terminal to serve south Florida, awaits final Bahamian government approval. The global power market is extremely large and offers multiple opportunities. In the European Union ( EU ), the market rules require a liberalized competitive wholesale power market as a condition for EU entry. However, there are a number of considerations that may limit the number of available near term opportunities in other markets. First, in the United States and, to a lesser extent, Western Europe there is limited need for new capacity, reducing the number of available greenfield opportunities in the most stable markets. Many states in the United States have slowed or reversed their trends towards liberalization, thereby reducing the number of available opportunities. Internationally, some planned privatization programs have been deferred for specific local reasons. In some of the markets outside of the United States that are liberalizing the rules, those rules are being designed such that the risks are too great to justify the level of returns currently available. Hence we have decided to either not participate in those markets or to only do so in a limited manner and wait for a more balanced set of rules or regulations to emerge. An adjunct part of our growth strategies is portfolio management. High valuations placed on generation assets in particular, which is noted below as a challenge to our growth strategies, is also an opportunity to monetize investments or a portion of one or more of our businesses where we see the marketplace placing a significantly higher value on assets than what our own valuation shows. We would likely use proceeds from such portfolio management transaction to fund new growth investments. The Company expects to fund these investments from our cash flows from operations and/or the proceeds from our issuance of debt, common stock, other securities and asset sales. We see sufficient value creating growth investment opportunities that may exceed available cash and cash flow from operations in future periods. What Are Our Key Challenges? There are several challenges we face in achieving our plans for 2006 and beyond. Global Competition We have seen increased global competition in our markets. In the United States and Europe multiple new financial sponsors are aggressively acquiring assets. Internationally, a number of new, regionally focused and aggressive competitors have emerged. This increased competition has led to an increase in the prices for assets in both secondary asset sales and privatizations. Prices for materials and engineering and 70 construction services are increasing, and there is a limited supply of certain key equipment components, especially in the wind generation marketplace, which may limit our ability to secure growth opportunities or achieve acceptable returns. Foreign Currency Risk A significant majority of our business portfolio is located outside of the U.S. and therefore usually subject to both currency translation and transaction risk. Our financial position and results of operations have been affected in the past by significant fluctuations in the value of the Argentine peso, Brazilian real and Venezuelan bolivar relative to the U.S. dollar. We hedge certain transaction exposures principally related to debt, and have restructured debt into local currency denomination to minimize risk when possible. Although these actions may have mitigated negative impacts in certain cases, movements within currencies are difficult to predict and continue to have a significant impact on our financial results. Political Environment Several of our businesses operate in politically unstable environments. The impact of governmental change and uncertainty impacts foreign currency volatility, our ability to maintain or attract needed financing, as well as our ability to effectively recover costs through routine tariff or regulatory reset proceedings. Regulatory Risk Due to the regulated nature of the utilities business, we are subject to regulatory risk related to changes in tariff agreements, and existing laws and provisions. Changes in regulation may impact our future operations, cash flows and financial condition. Long-term Contracts Several of our power generation plants operate on a long term contract basis with one or a limited number of contracts related to both the fuel supply and power demand. The remaining periods for these long-term contracts range from 1 to 26 years. The ability of our customers and suppliers to perform under these contracts and our ability to negotiate new contracts upon expiration may have a significant impact on our results of operations in the future. Performance Improvement Although we continue to place significant effort on performance improvement initiatives, it remains difficult to measure the financial impact of such initiatives in our financial results, and the reported impact has not been significant in comparison to other important business drivers such as price, volume, and foreign currency movements. In addition, benefits from global sourcing include avoided costs, reduction in actual versus originally estimated capital project costs, and projected savings on assumed spend volume which may or may not actually be achieved. These benefits will not be fully reflected in our consolidated financial position, results of operations and cash flows. Looking Ahead What Is Our Key Focus For 2006? Our focus in 2006 will be in several key areas, starting with safety, by building on two years of improvement in both lower lost workday cases and in reporting of accidents and near misses. Operational excellence will also continue to drive for improvements in both the generation and utility businesses. In addition, management is committed to the remediation of our material weaknesses in internal control over financial reporting as well as the continued improvement of the Company overall system of internal controls. The Company also will continue to strengthen its training and development programs for AES people at all levels. 71 We will continue to pursue growth opportunities, including platform expansion, greenfield projects, privatization and mergers and acquisitions, as well as our strategic initiatives in alternative energy businesses such as wind generation, LNG, and climate change. As we see an increase in projects under construction, we look to further strengthen our ability to manage and execute multiple construction projects. We want to ensure all the appropriate policies, work procedures, and accountability is in place to execute transactions with proper financial controls and tax and accounting determinations. To take advantage of these opportunities we intend to leverage our existing strengths and capitalize on favorable market conditions to deliver higher earnings and cash flow and improved credit quality. The catalysts to further growth, consistent with appropriate risk/reward profiles, include both external and internal factors such as: continued electricity demand growth in key markets; attraction of private and public capital for emerging markets; government policies that encourage the development of new areas of opportunity, including renewable energy; and experience with related areas that can lead to business opportunities such as LNG regasification, fossil fuel sourcing, non-power markets, and air emission allowance markets. CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES The consolidated financial statements of AES are prepared in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States of America, which requires the use of estimates, judgments, and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the periods presented. AES significant accounting policies are described in Note 1 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K. Critical accounting estimates are described in this section. An accounting estimate is considered critical if: the estimate requires management to make assumptions about matters that were highly uncertain at the time the estimate was made; different estimates reasonably could have been used; or if changes in the estimate that would have a material impact on the Company financial condition or results of operations are reasonably likely to occur from period to period. Management believes that the accounting estimates employed are appropriate and the resulting balances are reasonable; however, actual results could differ from the original estimates, requiring adjustments to these balances in future periods. Allowance for Doubtful Accounts The Company maintains an allowance for doubtful accounts for estimated uncollectible accounts receivable. The allowance is based on the Company assessment of known delinquent accounts, historical experience, and other currently available evidence of the collectability and aging of accounts receivable. There is an increased level of exposure related to the Company regulated utilities receivables in certain non U.S. locations which are due from local municipalities and other governmental agencies. These customers are often large and normally pay within extended timeframes. The amount of historical experience is limited in some cases due to the recent nature of AES acquisitions subsequent to privatization. In addition, local political and economic factors often play a part in a municipality current ability or willingness to pay. The Company monitors these situations closely and continues to refine its reserving policy based on both historical experience and current knowledge of the related political/economic environments. 72 Income Tax Reserves We are subject to income taxes in both the United States and numerous foreign jurisdictions. Our worldwide income tax provision requires significant judgment and is based on calculations and assumptions that are subject to examination by the Internal Revenue Service and other taxing authorities. The Company and certain of its subsidiaries are under examination by relevant taxing authorities for various tax years. The Company regularly assesses the potential outcome of these examinations in each of the taxing jurisdictions when determining the adequacy of the provision for income taxes. Tax reserves have been established, which the Company believes to be adequate in relation to the potential for additional assessments. Once established, reserves are adjusted only when there is more information available or when an event occurs necessitating a change to the reserves. While the Company believes that the amount of the tax estimates is reasonable, it is possible that the ultimate outcome of current or future examinations may exceed current reserves in amounts that could be material. A range of these amounts cannot be reasonably estimated at December 31, 2005, as they are primarily unasserted claims. On October 22, 2004, the American Jobs Creation Act ( the AJCA ) was signed into law. The AJCA includes a deduction of 85% of certain foreign earnings that are repatriated, as defined in the AJCA. The Company conducted an evaluation of the effects of the repatriation provision in accordance with recently issued Treasury Department guidance. As a result, the Company elected not to apply this provision to qualifying earnings repatriations in 2005. Long-Lived Assets In accordance with SFAS No. 144 Accounting for the Impairment or Disposal of Long-Lived Assets, we periodically review the carrying value of our long-lived assets held and used, other than goodwill and intangible assets with indefinite lives, and assets to be disposed of when circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of such assets may not be recoverable or the assets meet the held for sale criteria under SFAS No. 144. These events or circumstances may include the relative pricing of wholesale electricity by region and the anticipated demand and cost of fuel. If the carrying amount is not recoverable, an impairment charge is recorded for the amount by which the carrying value of the long-lived asset exceeds its fair value. For regulated assets, an impairment charge could be offset by the establishment of a regulatory asset, if rate recovery was probable. For non-regulated assets, an impairment charge would be recorded as a charge against earnings. The fair value of an asset is the amount at which that asset could be bought or sold in a current transaction between willing parties, that is, other than a forced or liquidation sale. Quoted market prices in active markets are the best evidence of fair value and are used as the basis for measurement, if available. In the absence of quoted market prices for identical or similar assets in active markets, fair value is estimated using various internal and external valuation methods including cash flow projections or other indicators of fair value such as bids received, comparable sales or independent appraisals. In connection with the periodic evaluation of long-lived assets in accordance with the requirements of SFAS No. 144, the fair value of the asset can vary if different estimates and assumptions would have been used in our applied valuation techniques. In cases of impairment described in Note 16 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K, we made our best estimate of fair value using valuation methods based on the most current information at that time. We have been in the process of divesting certain assets and their sales values can vary from the recorded fair value as described in Note 19 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K. Fluctuations in realized sales proceeds versus the estimated fair value of the asset are generally due to a variety of factors including differences in subsequent market conditions, the level of bidder interest, timing and terms of the transactions, and management analysis of the benefits of the transaction. 73 Goodwill We review the carrying value of our goodwill annually during the fourth quarter. We also review the carrying value of our goodwill periodically when events and circumstances warrant such a review. This review is performed using estimates of fair value and includes discounted future cash flows. If the carrying value of goodwill is considered impaired, an impairment charge is recorded. Pension and Postretirement Obligations Certain of our foreign and domestic subsidiaries maintain defined benefit pension plans which we refer to as the pension plans, or the plans, covering substantially all of their respective employees. Pension benefits are generally based on years of credited service, age of the participant and average earnings. Of the twenty one defined benefit pension plans existing at December 31, 2005, two exist at domestic subsidiaries and the remainder exists at foreign subsidiaries. The measurement of our pension obligations, costs and liabilities is dependent on a variety of assumptions used by our actuaries. These assumptions include estimates of the present value of projected future pension payments to all plan participants, taking into consideration the likelihood of potential future events such as salary increases and demographic experience. These assumptions may have an effect on the amount and timing of future contributions. The plan trustee conducts an independent valuation of the fair value of pension plan assets. The assumptions used in developing the required estimates include the following key factors: Discount rates Salary growth Retirement rates Inflation Expected return on plan assets Mortality rates The effects of actual results differing from our assumptions are accumulated and amortized over future periods and, therefore, generally affect our recognized expense in such future periods. Sensitivity of our pension funded status and stockholders equity to the indicated increase or decrease in the discount rate assumption is shown below. Although not an estimate, we ve also included sensitivity around the actual return on pension assets. Note that these sensitivities may be asymmetric, and are specific to the base conditions at year-end 2005. They also may not be additive, so the impact of changing multiple factors simultaneously cannot be calculated by combining the individual sensitivities shown. The December 31, 2005 funded status is affected by December 31, 2005 assumptions. Pension expense for 2005 is affected by December 31, 2004 assumptions . The impact on our funded status, equity and U.S. pension expense from a one percentage point change in these assumptions is shown below (in millions): Increase of 1% in the discount rate $ (16 ) Decrease of 1% in the discount rate $ 23 Increase of 1% in the long-term rate of return on plan assets $ (19 ) Decrease of 1% in the long-term rate of return on plan assets $ 19 Regulatory Assets and Liabilities The Company accounts for certain of its regulated operations under the provisions of SFAS No. 71, Accounting for the Effects of Certain Types of Regulation. As a result, AES records assets and liabilities that result from the regulated ratemaking process that would not be recorded under GAAP for non- 74 regulated entities. Regulatory assets generally represent incurred costs that have been deferred because such are probable of future recovery in customer rates. Regulatory liabilities generally represent obligations to make refunds to customers for previous collections for costs that are not likely to be incurred. Management continually assesses whether the regulatory assets are probable of future recovery by considering factors such as applicable regulatory changes, recent rate orders applicable to other regulated entities and the status of any pending or potential deregulation legislation. If future recovery of costs ceases to be probable, the asset write-offs would be required to be recognized in operating income. Accounting for Derivative Instruments and Hedging Activities We enter into various derivative transactions in order to hedge our exposure to certain market risks. We primarily use derivative instruments to manage our interest rate, commodity, and foreign currency exposures. We do not enter into derivative transactions for trading purposes. Under SFAS No. 133, Accounting for Derivative Instruments and Hedging Activities, as amended, we recognize all derivatives as either assets or liabilities in the balance sheet and measure those instruments at fair value. Changes in fair value of derivatives are recognized in earnings unless specific hedge criteria are met. Income and expense related to derivative instruments are recorded in the same category as generated by the underlying asset or liability. SFAS No. 133 enables companies to designate qualifying derivatives as hedging instruments based on the exposure being hedged. These hedge designations include fair value hedges and cash flow hedges. Changes in the fair value of a derivative that is highly effective as, and is designated and qualifies as a fair value hedge, are recognized in earnings as offsets to the changes in fair value of the exposure being hedged. Changes in the fair value of a derivative that is highly effective as, and is designated as and qualifies as a cash flow hedge, are deferred in accumulated other comprehensive income and are recognized into earnings as the hedged transactions occur. Any ineffectiveness is recognized in earnings immediately. For all hedge contracts, the Company provides formal documentation of the hedge and effectiveness testing in accordance with SFAS No. 133. If we deem that the derivative is not highly effective as a hedge, hedge accounting will be discontinued prospectively. As a result of uncertainty, complexity and judgment, accounting estimates related to derivative accounting could result in material changes to our financial statements under different conditions or utilizing different assumptions. As a part of accounting for these derivatives, we make estimates concerning volatilities, market liquidity, future commodity prices, interest rates, credit ratings, and exchange rates. AES generally uses quoted exchange prices to the extent they are available to determine the fair value of derivatives. In the absence of actively quoted market prices, we seek indicative price information from external sources, including broker quotes and industry publications. If pricing information from external sources is not available, AES will estimate prices, when possible, based on available historical and near-term future price information as well as utilizing statistical methods. When external valuation models are not available, the company utilizes internal models for valuation. For individual contracts, the use of different valuation models or assumptions could have a material effect on the calculated fair value. For cash flow hedges of forecasted transactions, AES must estimate the future cash flows represented by the forecasted transactions, as well as evaluate the probability of occurrence and timing of such transactions. Changes in conditions or the occurrence of unforeseen events could require discontinuance of hedge accounting or could affect the timing for the reclassification of gains or losses on cash flow hedges from accumulated other comprehensive loss ( AOCI ) into earnings. 75 NEW ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS Consolidation of Variable Interest Entities In January 2003, the Financial Accounting Standards Board ( FASB ) issued Financial Interpretation No. 46, Consolidation of Variable Interest Entities An Interpretation of ARB No. 51 ( FIN 46 or Interpretation ). FIN 46 is an interpretation of Accounting Research Bulletin 51 Consolidated Financial Statements, and addresses consolidation by business enterprises of variable interest entities ( VIE ). The primary objective of the Interpretation is to provide guidance on the identification of and financial reporting for, entities over which control is achieved through means other than voting rights; such entities are known as VIEs. The Interpretation requires an enterprise to consolidate a VIE if that enterprise has a variable interest that will absorb a majority of the entity expected losses if they occur, receive a majority of the entity expected residual returns if they occur or both. An enterprise shall consider the rights and obligations conveyed by its variable interests in making this determination. On December 24, 2003, the FASB issued Interpretation No. 46 (Revised 2003) Consolidation of Variable Interest Entities ( FIN 46(R) or Revised Interpretation ), which partially deferred the effective date of FIN 46 for certain entities and makes other changes to FIN 46, including a more complete definition of variable interest and an exemption for many entities defined as businesses. The Company applied FIN 46 in its financial statements relating to its interest in variable interest entities or potential variable interest entities as of December 31, 2003, and applied FIN 46(R) as of March 31, 2004. The application of FIN 46(R) did not have an impact on the Company condensed consolidated financial statements for any quarter through December 31, 2004. In March 2005, the FASB issued Staff Position ( FSP ) No. FIN 46(R)-5, Implicit Variable Interests under FASB Interpretation No. 46 (revised December 2003), Consolidation of Variable Interest Entities. This FSP clarifies that when applying the variable interest consolidation model, a reporting enterprise should consider whether it holds an implicit variable interest in a variable interest entity ( VIE ) or potential VIE. FSP No. FIN 46(R)-5 became effective as of April 1, 2005. Upon the adoption of FSP No. FIN 46(R)-5, the Company did not identify any potential or implicit VIEs. Share-Based Payment In December 2004, the Financial Accounting Standards Board ( FASB ) issued a revised Statement of Financial Accounting Standard ( SFAS ) No. 123, Share-Based Payment. SFAS 123R eliminates the intrinsic value method as an alternative method of accounting for stock-based awards under Accounting Principles Board ( APB ) No. 25 by requiring that all share-based payments to employees, including grants of stock options for all outstanding years, be recognized in the financial statements based on their fair values. It also revises the fair-value based method of accounting for share-based payment liabilities, forfeitures and modifications of stock-based awards and clarifies the guidance under SFAS No. 123 related to measurement of fair value, classifying an award as equity or as a liability and attributing compensation to reporting periods. In addition, SFAS No. 123R amends SFAS No. 95, Statement of Cash Flows, to require that excess tax benefits be reported as a financing cash flow rather than as an operating cash flow. Effective January 1, 2003, the Company adopted the fair value recognition provision of SFAS No. 123, as amended by SFAS No. 148, prospectively to all employee awards granted, modified or settled after January 1, 2003. We adopted SFAS No. 123R and related guidance on January 1, 2006, using the modified prospective transition method. Under this transition method, compensation cost will be recognized (a) based on the requirements of SFAS No. 123R for all share-based awards granted subsequent to January 1, 2006 and (b) based on the original provisions of SFAS No. 123 for all awards granted prior to January 1, 2006, but not vested as of this date. Results for prior periods will not be restated. Management is currently evaluating the effect of the adoption of SFAS No. 123R under the modified prospective application transition method, but does not expect the adoption to have a material effect on the Company financial condition, results of operations or cash flows. 76 Conditional Asset Retirement Obligations In March 2005, the FASB issued FASB Interpretation ( FIN ) No. 47 Accounting for Conditional Asset Retirement Obligations, an interpretation of FASB Statement No. 143, which clarifies the term conditional asset retirement obligation as used in SFAS No. 143 Accounting for Asset Retirement Obligations. Specifically, FIN 47 provides that an asset retirement obligation is conditional when the timing and/or method of settling the obligation is conditioned on a future event. Accordingly, an entity is required to recognize a liability for the fair value of a conditional asset retirement obligation if the fair value of the liability can be reasonably estimated. Uncertainty about the timing and/or method of settlement of a conditional asset retirement obligation should be factored into the measurement of the liability when sufficient information exists. This interpretation also clarifies when an entity would have sufficient information to reasonably estimate the fair value of an asset retirement obligation. FIN 47 is effective for fiscal years ending after December 15, 2005. The Company asset retirement obligations covered by FIN 47 primarily include conditional obligations to demolish assets or return assets in good working condition at the end of the contractual or concession term, and for the removal of equipment containing asbestos and other contaminants. As of December 31, 2005, the Company recorded additional asset retirement obligations in the amount of $18 million as a result of the implementation of FIN 47. The cumulative effect of the initial application of this Interpretation was recognized as a change in accounting principle in the amount of $2 million, net of income tax benefit of $1 million. The pro forma net income (loss) and earnings (loss) per share resulting from the adoption of FIN 47 for the years ended December 31, 2005, 2004 and 2003, is not materially different from the actual amounts reported in the accompanying consolidated statement of operations for those periods. Had FIN 47 been applied during all periods presented, the asset retirement obligations at December 31, 2003 and December 31, 2004 would have been approximately $14 million and $15 million, respectively. 77 RESULTS OF OPERATIONS For The Years Ended December 31, 2005 2004 2003 $ change 2005 vs. 2004 $ change 2004 vs. 2003 (in millions, except per share data) Gross Margin: Regulated utilities $ 1,237 $ 1,116 $ 976 $ 121 $ 140 Contract generation 1,603 1,428 1,262 175 166 Competitive supply 338 238 221 100 17 Total gross margin 3,178 2,782 2,459 396 323 General and administrative expenses(1) (221 ) (182 ) (157 ) (39 ) (25 ) Interest expense (1,896 ) (1,932 ) (1,984 ) 36 52 Interest income 391 282 280 109 2 Other income, net 19 12 65 7 (53 ) Loss on sale of investments, asset and goodwill impairment expense (45 ) (212 ) 45 167 Foreign currency transaction (losses) gains on net monetary position (89 ) (165 ) 99 76 (264 ) Equity in earnings (loss) of affiliates 76 70 94 6 (24 ) Income tax expense (465 ) (359 ) (211 ) (106 ) (148 ) Minority interest (expense) income (361 ) (199 ) (139 ) (162 ) (60 ) Income (loss) from continuing operations 632 264 294 368 (30 ) Income (loss) from operations of discontinued businesses 34 (787 ) (34 ) 821 Cumulative effect of accounting change (2 ) 41 (2 ) (41 ) Net income (loss) $ 630 $ 298 $ (452 ) $ 332 $ 750 PER SHARE DATA: Basic income (loss) per share from continuing operations $ 0.96 $ 0.41 $ 0.49 $ 0.55 $ (0.08 ) Diluted income (loss) per share from continuing operations $ 0.95 $ 0.41 $ 0.49 $ 0.54 $ (0.08 ) (1) General and administrative expenses are corporate and business development expenses. 78 Overview Revenue For the Years Ended December 31, 2005 2004 2003 Revenue % of Total Revenue Revenue % of Total Revenue Revenue % of Total Revenue Regulated Utilities $ 5,737 52% $ 4,897 52% $ 4,425 53% Contract Generation 4,137 37% 3,546 37% 3,108 37% Competitive Supply 1,212 11% 1,020 11% 880 10% Non-Regulated 5,349 48% 4,566 48% 3,988 47% Total $ 11,086 100% $ 9,463 100% $ 8,413 100% Revenues increased approximately $1.6 billion, or 17%, to $11.1 billion in 2005 from $9.5 billion in 2004, primarily in the Regulated Utilities and Contract Generation segments. Regulated utilities revenues increased $840 million, or 17%, mostly due to favorable exchange rates at our Brazilian utilities while contract generation revenues increased $591 million, or 17%, due to increased contract pricing and favorable foreign exchange rates at our businesses in Brazil, Chile and Mexico. Excluding the estimated impacts of foreign currency translation effect, revenues would have increased approximately 10% from 2004 to 2005. Excluding businesses that commenced commercial operations in 2005 or 2004, the revenue increase would remain at 17% in 2005. Revenues increased approximately $1.1 billion, or 12%, to $9.5 billion in 2004 from $8.4 billion in 2003, primarily in the Regulated Utilities and Contract Generation segments. Regulated utilities revenues increased $472 million, or 11%, mostly due to increased tariffs at our Latin American utilities while contract generation revenues increased $438 million, or 14%, mainly due to higher contract prices and new projects coming on line in Qatar, Oman and the Dominican Republic. Excluding the estimated impacts of foreign currency translation effect, revenues would have increased approximately 11% from 2003 to 2004. Excluding businesses that commenced commercial operations in 2004 or 2003, revenues increased 11% to $9.3 billion in 2004. Gross Margin For the Years Ended December 31, 2005 2004 2003 Gross Margin % of Total Gross Margin Gross Margin % of Total Gross Margin Gross Margin % of Total Gross Margin Regulated Utilities $ 1,237 39% $ 1,116 40% $ 976 40% Contract Generation 1,603 50% 1,428 51% 1,262 51% Competitive Supply 338 11% 238 9% 221 9% Non-Regulated 1,941 61% 1,666 60% 1,483 60% Total $ 3,178 100% $ 2,782 100% $ 2,459 100% Gross Margin as a % of Revenue 28.7% 29.4% 29.2% Gross margin increased $396 million, or 14%, to $3.2 billion in 2005 from $2.8 billion in 2004, with gross margin improvements in all segments during 2005 compared to 2004. Contract generation gross margin increased $175 million, or 12%, due to higher contract pricing while regulated utilities gross margin increased $121 million, or 11%, as a result of higher overall revenues and lower fixed expenses. Competitive supply gross margin increased $100 million, or 42%, due to higher prices and the sale of environmental allowances. Excluding businesses that commenced commercial operations in 2005 or 2004, 79 the gross margin increase in 2005 would remain at 14%. Gross margin as a percentage of revenues decreased to 28.7% in 2005 from 29.4% in 2004 due to higher fuel costs throughout most of our businesses, increased receivable reserves in our Brazilian utilities and higher unrecovered purchased electricity prices in our regulated utilities. Gross margin increased $323 million, or 13%, to $2.8 billion in 2004 from $2.5 billion in 2003, as gross margin for all segments improved in 2004 compared to 2003. Contract generation gross margin increased $166 million, or 13%, due to higher contract pricing and new projects coming on line while regulated utilities gross margin increased $140 million, or 14%, as a result of increased tariffs. Competitive supply gross margin increased $17 million, or 8%, due to higher prices slightly offset by higher fuel costs. Excluding businesses that commenced commercial operations in 2004 or 2003, gross margin increased 10% to $2.7 billion in 2004. Gross margin as a percentage of revenues increased to 29.4% in 2004 from 29.2% in 2003. Segment Analysis Regulated Utilities Revenue For the Years Ended December 31, 2005 2004 2003 Revenue % of Total Revenue Revenue % of Total Revenue Revenue % of Total Revenue North America $ 951 9% $ 884 9% $ 832 10% Latin America 4,276 38% 3,550 38% 3,219 38% EMEA 510 5% 463 5% 374 5% Total $ 5,737 52% $ 4,897 52% $ 4,425 53% Regulated utilities revenues increased $840 million, or 17%, to $5.7 billion in 2005 from $4.9 billion in 2004, primarily due to higher revenues in our Latin America utilities, which experienced an increase in revenues of $726 million, or 20%, in 2005. Excluding the estimated impacts of foreign currency translation, regulated utilities revenues would have increased 5% from 2004 to 2005. This increase in Latin America utilities revenues was due to favorable exchange rates at AES Eletropaulo and Sul in Brazil, only partially offset by the negative impacts of foreign currency remeasurement at EDC in Venezuela. The Brazilian real appreciated 12% in 2005 while the Venezuelan bolivar devalued almost 11% for the same period. Recognition of a retroactive tariff increase, as well as an increase in the average customer tariff due to a rate increase at AES Eletropaulo in Brazil in 2005, also contributed to the year over year revenue increase in Latin America utilities revenues. Regulated utilities revenues increased $472 million, or 11%, to $4.9 billion in 2004 from $4.4 billion in 2003, primarily due to higher revenues in our Latin America utilities, which experienced an increase in revenues of $331 million, or 10%, in 2004. Excluding the estimated impacts of foreign currency translation, regulated utilities revenues would have increased 10% from 2003 to 2004. This increase in Latin America utilities revenues was due to increased tariffs and favorable exchange rates at AES Eletropaulo and Sul in Brazil that were partially offset by lower sales volume. The average customer tariff at AES Eletropaulo increased in 2004 due to both a rate increase and an increase in residential consumption, although overall consumption decreased by 1%. Revenues at our Venezuelan subsidiary, EDC, also increased due to higher tariffs that were offset substantially by unfavorable exchange rates and reduced sales volumes. 80 Regulated Utilities Gross Margin For the Years Ended December 31, 2005 2004 2003 Gross Margin % of Total Gross Margin Gross Margin % of Total Gross Margin Gross Margin % of Total Gross Margin North America $ 305 10% $ 304 11% $ 282 11% Latin America 816 25% 754 27% 653 27% EMEA 116 4% 58 2% 41 2% Total $ 1,237 39% $ 1,116 40% $ 976 40% Regulated Utilities Gross Margin as a % of Regulated Utilities Revenue 21.6% 22.8% 22.1% Regulated utilities gross margin increased $121 million, or 11%, to $1.2 billion in 2005 from $1.1 billion in 2004, primarily due to higher gross margins in our Latin America and EMEA utilities. Gross margins in our Latin America utilities increased $62 million, or 8%, primarily as a result of higher overall revenues and favorable foreign currency translation impacts at AES Eletropaulo and Sul in Brazil offset by the recording of $192 million of gross bad debts reserve in the second quarter of 2005 related to the collectability of certain municipal receivables at our utilities in Brazil. Gross margins in our EMEA utilities increased $58 million, or 100%, as AES SONEL in Cameroon also showed positive results primarily due to higher revenues, better demand and lower fixed expenses. Gross margin for all regulated utilities as a percent of revenue decreased to 21.6% in 2005 compared to 22.8% in 2004 due to higher purchased electricity costs in all regions and the recording of the gross bad debts reserve mentioned earlier at our utilities in Brazil. Regulated utilities gross margin increased $140 million, or 14%, to $1.1 billion in 2004 from $1.0 billion in 2003, primarily due to higher gross margins in our Latin America utilities, which experienced an increase in gross margin of $101 million, or 15%, in 2004. The increase in Latin America utilities gross margin was due to the increased tariffs and the favorable effect of exchange rates on revenues at AES Eletropaulo in Brazil partially offset by increased costs related to purchased electricity and bad debt provisions. Gross margin decreased at EDC in Venezuela due to the unfavorable effect of exchange rates and lower demand coupled with higher fixed costs in 2004 compared to 2003. Gross margin for regulated utilities as a percent of revenue increased slightly to 22.8% in 2004 compared to 22.1% in 2003 primarily due to increased tariffs in Latin America. Contract Generation Revenue For the Years Ended December 31, 2005 2004 2003 Revenue % of Total Revenue Revenue % of Total Revenue Revenue % of Total Revenue North America $ 1,281 11% $ 1,258 13% $ 1,221 15% Latin America 1,755 16% 1,286 14% 1,070 13% EMEA 956 9% 882 9% 699 8% Asia 145 1% 120 1% 118 1% Total $ 4,137 37% $ 3,546 37% $ 3,108 37% Contract generation revenues increased $591 million, or 17%, to $4.1 billion in 2005 from $3.5 billion in 2004 primarily due to increases at our Latin America and EMEA businesses, while North America and Asia showed slight improvements. Excluding the estimated impacts of foreign currency translation, 81 revenues would have increased approximately 15% from 2004 to 2005. The increase in Latin America is primarily due to higher contract prices at Tiete (a group of hydro-electric plants providing electricity primarily to AES Eletropaulo) and Uruguaiana in Brazil, Gener in Chile and Los Mina in the Dominican Republic. In addition, the Latin America region was impacted by favorable foreign currency translation in Brazil and Chile. Andres in the Dominican Republic experienced increased volume in addition to higher prices. The increase in EMEA revenues is primarily due to higher contract prices at Tisza in Hungary and a full year of operations at Ras Laffan in Qatar. The increase in revenues in Asia is due to higher contract prices and availability at Kelanitissa in Sri Lanka. The increase in North America revenues is primarily due to higher contract prices and favorable foreign currency impacts at Merida in Mexico and higher prices at our business in Puerto Rico, along with the acquisition of the SeaWest wind business in the first quarter of 2005. These increases are partially offset by a decrease in contract price at Shady Point in Oklahoma and outages at Thames in Connecticut. Contract generation revenues increased $438 million, or 14%, to $3.5 billion in 2004 from $3.1 billion in 2003 primarily due to increases at our Latin America and EMEA businesses. Excluding the estimated impacts of foreign currency translation, revenues would have increased approximately 12% from 2003 to 2004. The increase in revenues in Latin America is primarily due to increased contract pricing at Tiete in Brazil and Gener in Chile, along with a full year operating results from Andres in the Dominican Republic. Additionally, the Latin America region was impacted by favorable foreign currency translation at Tiete and Gener. The increase in revenues in EMEA is primarily due to increased contract pricing at Kilroot in Northern Ireland and the completion of the Ras Laffan power and water desalination plant in Qatar, as well as the reporting of a full year operating results from Barka in Oman which came on line in 2003. These increases were slightly offset by lower volumes at Tisza in Hungary as a result of outages to perform plant upgrades in 2004. Additionally, the EMEA region was impacted favorably by foreign currency translation at Kilroot and Tisza. Slight increases in North America revenue is due to increased contract pricing at Merida in Mexico. Asia revenues remained fairly constant in 2003 and 2004. Contract Generation Gross Margin For the Years Ended December 31, 2005 2004 2003 Gross Margin % of Total Gross Margin Gross Margin % of Total Gross Margin Gross Margin % of Total Gross Margin North America $ 448 14% $ 511 18% $ 509 20% Latin America 705 22% 512 18% 416 17% EMEA 417 13% 380 14% 308 13% Asia 33 1% 25 1% 29 1% Total $ 1,603 50% $ 1,428 51% $ 1,262 51% Contract Generation Gross Margin as a % of Contract Generation Revenue 38.7% 40.3% 40.6% Contract generation gross margin increased $175 million, or 12%, to $1.6 billion in 2005 from $1.4 billion in 2004, with higher gross margin contributions from our Latin America businesses offset by lower gross margin contributions from our North American businesses. Gross margin in our Latin America generation businesses increased $193 million, or 38%, due to higher overall revenues at Tiete in Brazil and Gener in Chile and higher revenues and lower purchased electricity at Los Mina in the Dominican Republic. These increases were partially offset by unfavorable foreign currency translation and fixed costs at Tiete and higher fuel and variable costs at Gener. The North America gross margin decrease is primarily due to the decrease in the contract pricing at Shady Point in Oklahoma, outages incurred at Thames in 82 Connecticut and lower dispatch at Southland in California. The contract generation gross margin as a percentage of revenue decreased to 38.7% in 2005 from 40.3% in 2004. Contract generation gross margin increased $166 million, or 13%, to $1.4 billion in 2004 from $1.3 billion in 2003 with higher gross margin contributions from our Latin America and EMEA businesses. Gross margin in the Latin America businesses increased primarily due to increased contract pricing escalations at Tiet and Uruguaiana in Brazil slightly offset by higher fuel costs at Gener in Chile. The inclusion of a full year operating results for Andres in the Dominican Republic also contributed to the gross margin increase. The EMEA gross margin increase is primarily due to pricing escalations at Kilroot in Northern Ireland which were partially offset by higher fuel costs in that same business. Gross margin in EMEA was positively impacted further by the completion of Ras Laffan power and water desalination plant in Qatar, as well as the reporting of a full year operating results for Barka in Oman which came on line in 2003. Gross margin in North America and Asia remained fairly constant during the period. The contract generation gross margin as a percentage of revenues slightly decreased to 40.3% in 2004 from 40.6% in 2003. Competitive Supply Revenue For the Years Ended December 31, 2005 2004 2003 Revenue % of Total Revenue Revenue % of Total Revenue Revenue % of Total Revenue North America $ 544 5% $ 447 5% $ 459 5% Latin America 389 4% 300 4% 186 2% EMEA 121 1% 136 1% 132 2% Asia 158 1% 137 1% 103 1% Total $ 1,212 11% $ 1,020 11% $ 880 10% Competitive supply revenues increased $192 million, or 19%, to $1.2 billion in 2005 from $1.0 billion in 2004 primarily due to increases at our North America and Latin America businesses. Excluding the estimated impacts of foreign currency translation, revenues would have increased approximately 18% from 2004 to 2005. Asia showed slight increases in revenues which were almost entirely offset by declines from our businesses in EMEA. The increase in North America revenues is primarily due to higher prices and approximately $45 million in sales of emission allowances at our business in New York and higher prices obtained by Deepwater in Texas. The increase in Latin America revenues is due to higher prices and volume increases at Alicura and Parana in Argentina and higher prices at our business in Panama. Revenues from our Asia businesses showed slight increases due to a mix of higher prices and increased volume at Ekibastuz, Altai and Maikuben, all located in Kazakhstan. Decreases in revenues from our EMEA businesses are due primarily to the sale of Ottana in Italy during 2005 partially offset by higher prices at Borsod in Hungary. Competitive supply revenues increased $140 million, or 16%, to $1.0 billion in 2004 from $880 million in 2003 primarily due increases at our Latin America and EMEA businesses. Excluding the estimated impacts of foreign currency translation, revenues would have increased approximately 13% from 2003 to 2004. Asia also showed increases which were partially offset by declines at our North America businesses. The increase in Latin America is primarily due to higher prices and significantly higher than expected dispatch at CTSN in Argentina as a result of increased demand caused by gas shortages in Argentina and increased revenues from the completion of Esti, a greenfield hydroelectric project in Panama, along with the expansion of another hydroelectric project at Bayano in Panama. Additionally, higher competitive market prices for electricity sold at Parana in Argentina also contributed to the overall Latin America increase. The increase in Asia is primarily due to higher competitive prices at Ekibastuz in Kazakhstan and positive foreign currency impacts at Ekibastuz and Altai in Kazakhstan. The increase in revenues in 83 EMEA is mainly due to positive foreign currency impacts at Ottana in Italy and Borsod in Hungary. These increases were more than offset by declines in North America caused by lower revenues from our plants in New York. Competitive Supply Gross Margin For the Years Ended December 31, 2005 2004 2003 Gross Margin % of Total Gross Margin Gross Margin % of Total Gross Margin Gross Margin % of Total Gross Margin North America $ 145 5% $ 85 3% $ 110 5% Latin America 165 5% 113 4% 83 3% EMEA (12 ) 0% 4 0% 3 0% Asia 40 1% 36 2% 25 1% Total $ 338 11% $ 238 9% $ 221 9% Competitive Supply Gross Margin as a % of Competitive Supply Revenue 27.9% 23.3% 25.1% Competitive supply gross margin increased $100 million, or 42%, to $338 million in 2005 from $238 million in 2004 with higher gross margin contributions from the North America and Latin America businesses. Gross margin in our North America businesses increased primarily due to higher overall revenues at our businesses in New York which includes approximately $45 million in sales of emission allowances, and at Deepwater in Texas, offset slightly by higher fuel costs in New York and higher operating costs at Deepwater. Gross margin in our Latin America businesses increased due to higher overall revenues at Alicura and Parana in Argentina and lower purchased electricity costs at our business in Panama, offset slightly by higher fuel costs at Alicura and Parana and higher operating costs at Panama. Gross margin in our Asia region increased primarily due to higher overall revenues at Ekibastuz offset slightly by higher operating costs. Gross margin in the EMEA region decreased due to the sale of Ottana in Italy and higher fuel costs at Borsod which more than offset the higher overall revenues experienced. The competitive supply gross margin as a percentage of competitive supply revenues increased to 27.9% in 2005 from 23.3% in 2004. Competitive supply gross margin increased $17 million, or 8%, to $238 million in 2004 from $221 million in 2003 primarily due to higher gross margin contributions from our Latin America and Asia businesses offset slightly by lower gross margin contributions from our North America businesses. Latin America increased due to higher overall revenues from CTSN and Parana in Argentina and the new plant and expansion project in Panama. These increases were partially offset by higher depreciation and fixed costs at our new operations in Panama and higher fuel costs at Parana in Argentina. The increase in Asia gross margin is primarily due to the overall revenue increase at Ekibastuz in Kazakhstan. The decrease in gross margin in North America is primarily due to higher fuel costs at our plants in New York. The competitive supply gross margin as a percentage of competitive supply revenues decreased to 23.3% in 2004 from 25.1% in 2003. General and administrative expenses General and administrative expenses increased $39 million, or 21%, to $221 million in 2005 from $182 million 2004. General and administrative expenses as a percentage of total revenues remained at 2% in 2005 and 2004. The increases are primarily the result of higher professional and consulting fees associated with the restatement of the company financial statements as well as increased compensation costs. 84 General and administrative expenses increased $25 million, or 16%, to $182 million in 2004 from $157 million in 2003. General and administrative expenses as a percentage of total revenues remained at 2% in 2004 and 2003. The increases are a result of additional corporate personnel and expensing of annual awards of stock options and other long-term incentive compensation. Additional personnel had been added at the parent company to support our key initiatives related to strategy, safety, compliance, information systems and controls. In addition, a higher level of consulting costs were incurred in 2004 and 2003 respectively related to our internal controls reviews as a result of Sarbanes-Oxley and other consulting costs related to implementation of our new corporate initiatives. Interest expense Interest expense decreased $36 million, or 2%, to $1,896 million in 2005 from $1,932 million in 2004. Interest expense as a percentage of revenues decreased from 20% in 2004 to 17% for 2005. Interest expense decreased primarily due to the benefits of debt retirements principally in the U.S. and Venezuela and lower interest rate hedge related costs, offset by negative impacts from foreign currency translation in Brazil and higher interest rates at certain of our businesses. Interest expense decreased $52 million, or 3%, to $1,932 million in 2004 from $1,984 million in 2003. Interest expense as a percentage of revenues decreased from 24% in 2003 to 20% for 2004. Interest expense decreased primarily due to a reduction of debt associated with the Brazil debt restructuring completed at the end of 2003 and debt refinancings and paydowns offset by interest expense from new projects coming on-line in 2004, new project financings and unfavorable foreign currency translation and inflation adjustment impacts. Interest income Interest income increased $109 million, or 39%, to $391 million in 2005 from $282 million in 2004. Interest income as a percentage of revenues increased from 3% in 2004 to 4% in 2005. Interest income increased primarily due to favorable foreign currency translation due primarily to the Brazilian real and higher cash and short-term investment balances at certain of our subsidiaries combined with higher short-term interest rates. Interest income increased $2 million to $282 million in 2004 from $280 million in 2003. Interest income as a percentage of revenues remained constant at 3% in 2004 and 2003. Interest income increased primarily due to favorable foreign currency translation and higher interest on spot market and customer receivables offset by a reclassification adjustment associated with the AES Eletropaulo settlement of certain outstanding municipal receivables. Other income (expense), net Net other income increased $7 million to $19 million in 2005 from $12 million in 2004. The increase was primarily due to the reduction of a Brazilian business tax liability no longer required, the favorable impact of foreign currency translation due to the appreciation of the Brazilian real offset by lower gains on debt extinguishment, and increased losses on the sale or disposal of fixed assets. Net other income decreased $53 million to $12 million in 2004 from $65 million in 2003. The decrease was primarily due to lower gains on debt extinguishments and increased gains on settlement disputes, offset by decreased losses on the sale of assets. Loss on sale of investments and asset impairments There was no loss on sale of investments and asset impairment expense in 2005. Loss on sale of investments and asset impairment expense was $45 million in 2004 compared to $201 million in 2003 primarily from fewer impairment charges being taken in 2004. The amount of asset impairment expense for 2004 includes the write-off of $25 million of capitalized costs associated with a fertilizer development 85 project at our Deepwater facility in Texas. This project was terminated in the fourth quarter of 2004. It also includes a $15 million asset impairment charge taken to reflect the net realizable value of an investment in one of our Chinese businesses which we expect to sell. In 2003, the following actions were taken which led to the recording of impairment charges: In December 2003, we sold an approximate 39% ownership interest in AES Oasis Limited ( AES Oasis ) for cash proceeds of approximately $150 million. The loss realized on the transaction was approximately $36 million before income taxes. AES Oasis is an entity that owns an electric generation project in Oman (AES Barka) and two oil-fired generating facilities in Pakistan (AES Lal Pir and AES Pak Gen). AES Barka, AES Lal Pir, and AES Pak Gen are all contract generation businesses. During the fourth quarter of 2003, we decided to discontinue the development of ZEG, a contract generation plant under construction in Poland. In connection with this decision, we wrote-off our investment in ZEG of approximately $23 million before income taxes. In August 2003, we decided to discontinue the construction and development of AES Nile Power in Uganda ( Bujagali ). In connection with this decision, we wrote-off our investment in Bujagali of approximately $76 million before income taxes in the third quarter of 2003. During the second quarter of 2003, we wrote off capitalized costs of approximately $20 million associated with our development project in Honduras when we elected to offer the project for sale after consideration of existing business conditions and future opportunities. The project consisted of a 580 MW combined-cycle power plant fueled by natural gas, a liquefied natural gas import terminal with storage capacity of one million barrels and transmission lines and line upgrades. The project was sold in January 2004. Additionally, during 2003, we recorded $16 million of other losses which resulted from the sale of assets to third parties, and $29 million of other asset impairment charges taken to reflect the net realizable value of discontinued development projects and other non-recoverable assets. Goodwill impairment expense During 2003, we recorded a goodwill impairment charge of $11 million primarily related to all of the goodwill at Atlantis, an aragonite mining operation in the Caribbean. The write-off was due to a reduction in the fair value of the business below its carrying value due to a slow down of operations from the termination of sales contracts that have not been replaced. Foreign currency transaction (losses) gains on net monetary position Years Ended December 31, 2005 2004 2003 ($ in millions) Argentina $ (6 ) $ (7 ) $ 38 Brazil (96 ) (58 ) 124 Venezuela 54 (28 ) (40 ) Dominican Republic 1 (28 ) 3 Pakistan (22 ) (17 ) (15 ) Chile (20 ) (3 ) (16 ) Spain (18 ) Other (6 ) 5 Total(1) $ (89 ) $ (165 ) $ 99 86 (1) Includes $(122) million, $(114) million and $(15) million of (losses) gains on foreign currency derivative contracts for December 31, 2005, 2004 and 2003, respectively. The Company recognized foreign currency transaction losses of $89 million in 2005 compared to losses from foreign currency transactions of $165 million in 2004. The $76 million decrease in losses for 2005 as compared to 2004 was primarily related to gains in Venezuela and Dominican Republic partially offset by losses in Brazil and Chile. Foreign currency transaction losses decreased primarily due to lower annual depreciation in 2005 of the Venezuelan bolivar of 10.7% compared to 16.7% in 2004 contributing to $82 million of the change year over year. The Dominican peso depreciated 11.3% in 2005 as compared to a 31.2% appreciation in 2004 contributing to $29 million of the change year over year partially related to one of our Dominican businesses which has a net monetary liability position denominated in the Dominican peso. The Brazilian real appreciated 11.7% during 2005 compared to 7.5% in 2004 offsetting the overall decrease in foreign currency losses by $38 million. The Chilean peso appreciated 15.86% during 2005 compared to no change in 2004. The appreciation increased losses on foreign currency derivative contracts in our Chilean businesses offsetting the overall decrease in foreign currency losses by $14 million. The Company recognized foreign currency transaction losses of $165 million in 2004 compared to gains from foreign currency transactions of $99 million in 2003. The decrease of $264 million for 2004 as compared to 2003 was primarily related to losses in Brazil, Argentina, and the Dominican Republic. Foreign currency transaction losses increased primarily due to lower annual appreciation in 2004 of the Brazilian real of 7.5% compared to 23.7% in 2003 contributing to $182 million of the change year over year. The Argentine peso devalued 1.7% during 2004 thereby contributing $45 million of losses to the overall change. Additionally, the Dominican peso appreciated 31.2% during 2004. This is related to one of our Dominican businesses which has a net monetary liability position denominated in the Dominican peso. This appreciation in the Dominican peso contributed to the change year over year by $31 million in losses. Foreign currency transaction losses in Spain resulted from the prospective loss of cash flow hedge accounting on foreign currency derivative contracts substantially settling by the end of 2004. Equity in earnings (losses) of affiliates Equity in earnings of affiliates increased $6 million, or 9%, to $76 million in 2005 from $70 million in 2004. The increase was primarily due to a plant fire causing lower earnings in 2004 at our affiliate in Canada, improved operations from our affiliates in India and the Netherlands, partially offset by reduced earnings due to higher coal prices at our affiliates in China. Equity in earnings of affiliates decreased $24 million, or 26%, to $70 million in 2004 from $94 million in 2003. The decrease was primarily due to the sale of our ownership in Medway Power Ltd. in 2003 offset by slight increases from our affiliates in China. Income taxes Income tax expense related to continuing operations increased $106 million to $465 million in 2005 from $359 million in 2004. The Company effective tax rates were 32% for 2005 and 44% for 2004. The reduction in the 2005 effective tax rate is due, in part, to a reduction in the taxes imposed on earnings of and distributions from our foreign subsidiaries and adjustments derived from the Company 2004 income tax returns filed in 2005. Income tax expense related to continuing operations increased $148 million to $359 million in 2004 from $211 million in 2003. The Company effective tax rates were 44% for 2004 and 33% for 2003. The effective tax rate increased in 2004 due to the impact of increasing certain deferred tax valuation allowances and the treatment of unrealized foreign currency gains on U.S. dollar debt held by certain of our Latin American subsidiaries. 87 Minority interest Minority interest expense, net of tax, increased $162 million to $361 million in 2005 from $199 million in 2004. The increase is primarily due to higher earnings from our Brazilian companies, Cameroon subsidiaries and the 2004 sale of our interest in Oasis. Minority interest expense, net of tax, increased $60 million to $199 million in 2004 from $139 million in 2003. The increase is primarily due to the sale of stock by our subsidiary in Brazil, the sale of a portion of our interest in Oasis and higher earnings for Ras Laffan allocated to the minority interest since the project came on-line in 2004. Discontinued operations Income from operations of discontinued businesses, net of tax, was $34 million in 2004 related to the sales of Whitefield, AES Communications Bolivia, Colombia I, Ede Este, Wolf Hollow, Carbones Internacionales del Cesar S.A. and Granite Ridge. All of these entities had originally been recorded in discontinued operation in either 2003 or 2002. Additionally, in 2004, as a result of filing our 2003 tax returns, previously recorded estimates of the tax effect of the discontinued businesses were adjusted to reflect the final tax returns. As a result, favorable tax adjustments are reflected in the net income of discontinued operations. As of December 31, 2004, no further businesses were classified as discontinued operations. Loss from operations of discontinued businesses, net of tax, was $787 million in 2003. During 2003, we discontinued certain of our operations including Haripur, Meghnaghat, Barry, Telasi, Mtkvari, Khrami, Drax, Whitefield, AES Communications Bolivia, Granite Ridge, Ede Este, Wolf Hollow, and Colombia I. We closed the sale of Barry in September 2003, Telasi, Mtkvari, and Khrami in August 2003 and Haripur and Meghnaghat in December 2003. Change in accounting principle In March 2005, the FASB issued FASB Interpretation ( FIN ) No. 47 Accounting for Conditional Asset Retirement Obligations, an interpretation of FASB Statement No. 143, which clarifies the term conditional asset retirement obligation as used in SFAS No. 143 Accounting for Asset Retirement Obligations. The cumulative effect of the initial application of this Interpretation was recognized as a change in accounting principle in the amount of $2 million, net of income tax benefit of $1 million in 2005. On January 1, 2003, we adopted SFAS No. 143, Accounting for Asset Retirement Obligations which requires companies to record the fair value of a legal liability for an asset retirement obligation in the period in which it is incurred. The items that are part of the scope of SFAS No. 143 for our business primarily include active ash landfills, water treatment basins and the removal or dismantlement of certain plant and equipment. The adoption of SFAS No. 143 resulted in a cumulative reduction to income of $2 million, net of income tax effects, in 2003. On October 1, 2003, we adopted Derivative Implementation Group ( DIG ) Issue C-20 which superseded and clarified DIG Issue C-11 regarding the treatment of power sales contracts. As a result of this adoption, we had a Power Purchase Agreement ( PPA ) that was previously treated as a normal sales and purchase contract that was treated as a derivative instrument under SFAS No. 133 and marked-to-market upon adoption of DIG Issue C-20. The prospective method of accounting for this PPA requires no further mark-to-market treatment, and the initial mark-to-market adjustment will be subsequently amortized over the life of the contract. The adoption of DIG Issue C-20, effective October 1, 2003 resulted in a cumulative increase to income of $43 million, net of income tax effects, in 2003. CAPITAL RESOURCES AND LIQUIDITY Overview We are a holding company that conducts all of our operations through subsidiaries. We have, to the extent achievable, utilized non-recourse debt to fund a significant portion of the capital expenditures and 88 investments required to construct and acquire our electric power plants, distribution companies and related assets. This type of financing is non-recourse to other subsidiaries and affiliates and to us (as parent company), and is generally secured by the capital stock, physical assets, contracts and cash flow of the related subsidiary or affiliate. At December 31, 2005, we had $4.9 billion of recourse debt and $12.8 billion of non-recourse debt outstanding. For more information on our long-term debt see Note 8 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K/A. In addition to the non-recourse debt, if available, we, as the parent company, provide a portion, or in certain instances all, of the remaining long-term financing or credit required to fund development, construction or acquisition. These investments have generally taken the form of equity investments or loans, which are subordinated to the project non-recourse loans. We generally obtain the funds for these investments from our cash flows from operations and/or the proceeds from our issuances of debt, common stock, and other securities as well as proceeds from the sales of assets. For example in March 2006, AES sold its interest in Kingston for $110 million. Similarly, in certain of our businesses, we may provide financial guarantees or other credit support for the benefit of lenders or counterparties who have entered into contracts for the purchase or sale of electricity with our subsidiaries. In such circumstances, if a subsidiary defaults on its payment or supply obligation, we will be responsible for the subsidiary obligations up to the amount provided for in the relevant guarantee or other credit support. We intend to continue to seek where possible non-recourse debt financing in connection with the assets or businesses that our affiliates or we may develop, construct or acquire. However, depending on market conditions and the unique characteristics of individual businesses, non-recourse debt may not be available or available on economically attractive terms. If we decide not to provide any additional funding or credit support to a subsidiary that is under construction or has near-term debt payment obligations and that subsidiary is unable to obtain additional non-recourse debt, such subsidiary may become insolvent and we may lose our investment in such subsidiary. Additionally, if any of our subsidiaries lose a significant customer, the subsidiary may need to restructure the non-recourse debt financing. If such subsidiary is unable to successfully complete a restructuring of the non-recourse debt, we may lose our investment in such subsidiary. As a result of AES parent below-investment-grade rating, counter-parties may be unwilling to accept our general unsecured commitments to provide credit support. Accordingly, with respect to both new and existing commitments, we may be required to provide some other form of assurance, such as a letter of credit, to backstop or replace our credit support. We may not be able to provide adequate assurances to such counter-parties. In addition, to the extent we are required and able to provide letters of credit or other collateral to such counterparties, this will reduce the amount of credit available to us to meet our other liquidity needs. At December 31, 2005, we had provided outstanding financial and performance related guarantees or other credit support commitments to or for the benefit of our subsidiaries, which were limited by the terms of the agreements, in an aggregate of approximately $802 million (including those collateralized by letters of credit and other obligations discussed below). Management believes that cash on hand, along with cash generated through operations, and our financing availability will be sufficient to fund normal operations, capital expenditures, and debt service requirements. At December 31, 2005, we had $294 million in letters of credit outstanding, which operate to guarantee performance relating to certain project development activities and subsidiary operations. All of these letters of credit were provided under our revolver. We pay letter of credit fees ranging from 0.15% to 2.75% per annum on the outstanding amounts. In addition, we had $1 million in surety bonds outstanding at December 31, 2005. Many of our subsidiaries including those in Central and South America depend on timely and continued access to capital markets to manage their liquidity needs. The inability to raise capital on favorable terms, to refinance existing indebtedness or to fund operations and other commitments during times of political or economic uncertainty may adversely affect those subsidiaries financial condition and results of operations. In addition, changes in the timing of tariff increases or delays in the regulatory 89 determinations under the relevant concessions could affect the cash flows and results of operations of our businesses in Brazil and Venezuela. Capital Expenditures We spent $1.1 billion, $0.9 billion and $1.2 billion on capital expenditures in 2005, 2004 and 2003, respectively. We anticipate capital expenditures during 2006 to approximate between $1.7 billion and $1.8 billion. Planned capital expenditures include new project construction costs, environmental pollution control construction and expenditures for existing assets to increase their useful lives. Capital expenditures for 2006 are expected to be financed using internally generated cash provided by operations and project level financing and possibly debt or equity financing at the AES parent company. Cash Flows At December 31, 2005, we had $1,390 million of cash and cash equivalents representing an increase of $109 million from December 31, 2004. Operating Activities Net cash provided by operating activities totaled $2,165 million during 2005, which was $594 million greater than 2004 due to a $360 million increase in net earnings (adjusted for non-cash items), a $243 million increase in other assets and liabilities, and a decrease in working capital of $9 million. The $28 million increase in adjustments to net income (loss) from $1,457 million in 2004 to $1,485 million in 2005 is primarily due to increased depreciation and amortization, minority interest expense and a loss on discontinued operations in 2004 which did not occur in 2005. These increases were offset by decreases in the provision for deferred taxes and realized gains on investments in Venezuela and Brazil. There was a gain on the sale of emission allowances in New York and additional amortization of deferred financing costs due to new debt issuances. In addition, there was a reversal of a contingent liability in 2005 at Brazil due to the expiration of the statute of limitations. The $243 million increase in other assets and liabilities is primarily due to an increase in derivative liabilities, a decrease in a long-term receivable due to a reserve adjustment made in Brazil, and movements in regulatory liabilities. Regulatory liabilities increased due to lower costs than anticipated in the tariff as well as the market performance of the dollar. These increases were partially offset by settlement proceeds Gener received in 2004. The $9 million decrease in working capital is due increases in inventory and accounts payable and accrued liabilities offset by decreases in accounts receivable prepaid expenses and other current assets. 2005 2004 Change (in millions) Decrease (increase) in accounts receivable $ 26 $ (128 ) $ 154 Increase in inventory (73 ) (33 ) (40 ) Decrease in prepaid expenses and other current assets 41 7 34 (Increase) decrease in accounts payable and accrued liabilities (79 ) 78 (157 ) Total working capital $ (85 ) $ (76 ) $ (9 ) Accounts receivable decreased in the current year due to enhanced collection efforts at Eletropaulo and Ras Laffan, partially offset by an increase in accounts receivable at our New York plant due to higher energy prices. 90 Inventory increased in the current year due to the resumption of normal activity in the Dominican Republic in the current year after a period of inactivity in the prior year; an increase in the price of coal at IPALCO and an increase in the purchase of fuel at Tisza offset by a reduction of inventory at Alicura. Prepaid expenses and other current assets decreased due to greater amortization of regulatory assets at Eletropaulo as the pass through costs are collected from the customers and lower VAT accruals at Cartagena for contractor invoices partially offset by higher year end purchase levels at SONEL. Accounts payable and other liabilities declined in the current year mainly due to payments to Ras Laffan contractors, a reduction in payables to suppliers at SONEL and more timely payments at Barka. In addition, tax liabilities were reduced at IPALCO and other subsidiaries in the prior year due to our tax restatement. Investing Activities Net cash used in investing activities totaled $873 million during 2005 compared to $1,025 million during 2004. The cash used in investing activities includes $1,143 million for property additions and $85 million for acquisitions. This was offset by the proceeds from the sales of assets of $26 million, the proceeds from the sale of emission allowances of $41 million, the net sale of short term investments of $152 million and a decrease in restricted cash, debt service reserves and other assets and other investing of $136 million. Property additions increased $251 million during 2005 as compared to 2004 due to additional expenditures of $103 million at Cartagena, our construction project in Spain, $137 million for Buffalo Gap, our wind power project in Texas, and $50 million in Brazil for the purchase and capitalized costs associated with the implementation of the enterprise resource planning software. Offsetting the increase in property additions is decreased spending of $45 million at Ras Laffan in Qatar due to large capital expenditures incurred prior to going into commercial operations at the end of 2004. The increase in property additions is also offset by a reduction in spending on environmental compliance projects of approximately $42 million at IPALCO in the U.S. In the first quarter of 2005, we spent a total of $85 million related to the purchase of the SeaWest wind development business in the U.S., including $60 million for the existing net assets of the business and an additional $25 million advance payment for pre-construction costs for SeaWest's development of Buffalo Gap. The increase in the net sales of short-term investments of $136 million during 2005 as compared to 2004 was primarily due to the release of collateral at EDC in Venezuela of $145 million which was as a result of a repayment of approximately $264 million of related debt. This increase was offset by a decrease in sales of short-term investments at Gener of $29 million due to higher liquidations in the prior year to repay debt. The decrease in the net proceeds from the sale of assets of $37 million during 2005 as compared to 2004 was primarily due to the sale in the prior year of the Nacimiento power plant at Gener for $22 million, the sale of discontinued businesses (primarily Mountainview) in 2004 for $13 million, net of expenses, as well as the sale of a substation property at IPALCO for $13 million in 2004. These decreases were partially offset by increases at Brazil. The change in restricted cash balances decreased $90 million during 2005 as compared to 2004 primarily due to a decrease in restricted cash of $127 million at Ras Laffan for construction payments made to the contractor, of $17 million at EDC for the release of restricted cash associated with letters of credit which were paid in September 2005, of $23 million due to debt related repayments at Gener and of $16 million due to debt related repayments at Ebute. These decreases were offset by a $58 million increase 91 at the New York plants due to increased emission sales as well as $35 million increase at Barka due to major maintenance on their gas turbines planned for 2007. The change in debt service reserves and other assets decreased $219 million in 2005 as compared to 2004 primarily due to the payment of $254 million of construction costs from a reserve account related to our Cartagena construction project in Spain, offset by an increase of $20 million in debt service reserves at our Ebute plant in Nigeria required to satisfy the debt requirements on $120 million of financing. The change in other investing balances decreased $39 million primarily due to the collection of a receivable for a minority interest buyout in our contract generation segment in Asia. Financing Activities Net cash used in financing activities was $1,195 million for the year ended December 31, 2005 as compared to $936 million during the same period in 2004. The significant change was due to a decrease in debt, net of issuances, of $1,052 million in 2005 versus $734 million in 2004. Debt issuances decreased by $1,051 million during the twelve months ended December 31, 2005 primarily due to parent company recourse debt issuances of $491 million in 2004 compared to $5 million in 2005. The remaining decreases were attributable to our subsidiaries. At Gener in Chile, there were bond issuances of approximately $570 million in 2004 and other debt refinancings of approximately $253 million during 2004 compared to $119 million in the current year. At Cartagena in Spain, there was a $166 million decrease over the prior year in project debt financing. At EDC in Venezuela, there was a decrease of $353 million over the prior year at EDC due to the issuance of debt in local currency in 2004 as part of its debt restructuring. These reductions in debt issuances were offset by increased borrowings at Eletropaulo of $656 million. Brazil issued a $200 million U.S. dollar equivalent bond issuance in June 2005, $348 million and $109 million of debentures in September and December 2005, respectively. The issuances in 2005 were used to pay off higher interest-bearing debt. Debt repayments during the twelve months ended December 31, 2005 were $2,941 million compared to $3,674 million during the same period in 2004. The decrease of approximately $733 million was mainly due to repayment of corporate recourse debt of $1,140 million in 2004 compared to $259 million in 2005. The 2005 payments include the redemption of all of the Company 8.5% Senior Subordinated Notes and its 4.5% Convertible Junior Subordinated Debentures. In addition, Gener decreased debt repayments in 2005 by $907 million due to the completion of their debt restructuring and refinancing that occurred during 2004. This was offset by increased debt and debenture payments at Eletropaulo and Tiete in Brazil of $727 million in 2005 to pay off higher interest-bearing debt; increased debt repayments at Andres in the Dominican Republic of $112 million due to the debt restructuring in 2005 whereby the proceeds received were used to pay off short term debt; and increased debt repayments at EDC in Venezuela of $105 million due to the repayment of 200 million Euro debt in March 2005 and the repayment of debt in local currency of $66 million. Payments for deferred financing costs decreased $88 million during the twelve months ended December 31, 2005 due to parent company debt issuances in the prior year that did not occur at the same level in the current year, higher deferred financing costs at Gener due to the size of the debt offering in 2004, higher deferred financing costs in 2004 at Brazil due to their reprofiling of debt in 2004, and higher deferred financing costs at Ebute due to the $120 million refinancing arrangement in September 2004. 92 Contractual Obligations A summary of the Company contractual obligations, commitments and other liabilities as of December 31, 2005 is presented in the table below (in millions). Contractual Obligations Total Less than 1 year 2-3 years 4-5 years After 5 years Footnote Reference Debt Obligations(1) $ 17,706 $ 1,798 $ 2,733 $ 3,104 $ 10,071 8 Interest payments on long-term debt(2) 9,696 1,352 2,551 2,019 3,774 n/a Capital Lease Obligations(3) 75 5 9 7 54 10 Other Long-term Liabilities Reflected on AES Consolidated Balance Sheet under GAAP(4) 136 8 44 21 63 n/a Operating Lease Obligations(5) 146 12 22 20 92 10 Sale Leaseback Obligations(6) 1,376 61 125 128 1,062 10 Electricity Obligations(7) 7,809 1,088 2,412 2,766 1,543 10 Fuel Obligations(8) 7,605 803 1,269 982 4,551 10 Other(9) 1,009 196 180 142 491 Total $ 45,558 $ 5,123 $ 9,346 $ 9,188 $ 21,901 (1) Debt Obligations Debt obligations includes non-recourse debt and recourse debt presented on our consolidated financial statements. Non-recourse debt borrowings are not a direct obligation of The AES Corporation, the parent company, and are primarily collateralized by the capital stock of the relevant subsidiary and in certain cases the physical assets of, and all significant agreements associated with, such subsidiaries. These non-recourse financings include structured project financings, acquisition financings, working capital facilities and all other consolidated debt of the subsidiaries. Recourse debt borrowings are the borrowings of The AES Corporation, the parent company. Note 8 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K provides disclosure of these obligations. (2) Interest payments Interest payments are estimated based on final maturity dates of debt securities outstanding at December 31, 2005 and do not reflect anticipated future refinancing, early redemptions, new debt issuances or certain interest on liabilities other than debt. Variable rate interest obligations are estimated based on rates as of December 31, 2005. (3) Capital Lease Obligations One of AES subsidiaries, AES Indian Queens Power Limited, conducts a major part of its operations from leased facilities. The plant lease is for 25 years expiring in 2022. In addition, several AES subsidiaries lease operating and office equipment, and vehicles. The total capital lease obligation of $75 million represents the future minimum lease commitments. The present value of the capital lease obligations included in the consolidated balance sheet totals $44 million. Imputed interest for these obligations total $31 million. (4) Other long-term liabilities reflected on AES consolidated balance sheet under GAAP include only those amounts in long-term liabilities reflected on the Company consolidated balance sheet that are contractual obligations. These amounts do not include (1) current liabilities on the consolidated balance sheet, (2) any taxes or regulatory liabilities, (3) contingencies, (4) pension and other than pension employee benefit liabilities (see Note 12 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K). (5) As of December 31, 2005, the Company was obligated under long-term non-cancelable operating leases, primarily for office rental and site leases. These amounts exclude amounts related to the sale/leaseback discussed below in item (6). (6) In May 1999, a subsidiary of the Company acquired six electric generating stations from New York State Electric and Gas ( NYSEG ). Concurrently, the subsidiary sold two of the plants to an unrelated third party for $666 million and simultaneously entered into a leasing arrangement with the 93 unrelated party. This transaction has been accounted for as a sale/leaseback with operating lease treatment. (7) Some of our operating subsidiaries have entered into contracts for the purchase of electricity from third parties. (8) Some of our operating subsidiaries have entered into various contracts for the purchase of fuel subject to termination only in certain limited circumstances. (9) Amounts relate to other contractual obligations where the Company has an agreement to purchase goods or services that is enforceable and legally binding on the Company that specifies all significant terms, including: fixed or minimum quantities to be purchased; fixed, minimum or variable price provisions; and the approximate timing of the transaction. Included in the total amount is (1) $833 million of other contracts denoted in Note 10 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this Form 10-K, (2) $84 million of costs related to supply of spare parts and maintenance, and (3) $92 million related to other service and fuel contracts. These amounts also exclude planned capital expenditures that are not contractually obligated. Parent Company Liquidity Because of the non-recourse nature of most of our indebtedness, we believe that unconsolidated parent company liquidity is an important measure of liquidity. Our principal sources of liquidity at the parent company level are: dividends and other distributions from our subsidiaries, including refinancing proceeds; proceeds from debt and equity financings at the parent company level, including borrowings under our Revolving Bank Loan; and proceeds from asset sales. Our cash requirements at the parent company level are primarily to fund: interest and preferred dividends; principal repayments of debt; acquisitions; construction commitments; other equity commitments; taxes; and parent company overhead and development costs. Since 2002, the Company has undertaken various initiatives to improve the credit and risk profile of both the parent and the consolidated company while continuing to pursue disciplined growth. On June 1, 2005, the Company redeemed all outstanding 8.5% Senior Subordinated Notes due 2007, at a redemption price of 101.417%, and an aggregate principal amount of approximately $112 million. On June 23, 2005, the Company amended its $450 million Senior Secured Bank Facilities. The interest rate on the $450 million Revolving Bank Loan was reduced to the London Interbank Offered Rate ( LIBOR ) plus 1.75%. Previously, the rate was LIBOR plus 2.5%. In addition, the Revolving Bank Loan maturity was extended from 2007 to 2010. The interest rate on the term $200 million Senior Secured Term Loan was also reduced to LIBOR plus 1.75%, from LIBOR plus 2.25%, while its maturity in 2011 remains unchanged. On September 30, 2005, the Company upsized the Revolving Bank Loan to a total commitment amount of $650 million from $450 million. As of December 31, 2005, $356 million was available from the $650 million Revolving Bank Loan. As of March 31, 2006, we are in default under our 94 senior bank credit facility due to the restatement of our 2003 financial statements. As a result, the debt under our senior bank credit facility has been classified as current on our balance sheet as of December 31, 2005. In addition, we need to obtain a waiver of this default and an amendment of the representation relating to our 2003 financial statements before we will be able to borrow additional funds under our revolving credit facility. The Company is pursuing an amendment and waiver with its senior bank lenders and expects to obtain it in the near term. On August 15, 2005, the Company repaid at maturity all outstanding 4.5% Convertible Junior Subordinated Debentures ( the Debentures ) at par for an aggregate principal amount of $142 million. During the first half of 2005, the Company also funded the purchase of the SeaWest wind development business and posted letters of credit to support ongoing construction and operating activities. On March 3, 2006, the Company redeemed all of its outstanding 8.875% Senior Subordinated Debentures due 2027 (approximately $115 million aggregate principal amount). The redemption was made pursuant to the optional redemption provisions of the indenture governing the Debentures. The Debentures were redeemed at a redemption price equal to 100% of the principal amount thereof, plus a make-whole premium determined in accordance with the terms of the indenture, plus accrued and unpaid interest up to the redemption date. On March 31, 2006, AES entered into a $600 million senior unsecured credit facility agreement with a maturity date of March 31, 2010. The credit facility is a syndicated loan and letter of credit facility lead arranged by Merrill Lynch. The credit facility will be used for general corporate purposes and to provide letters of credit to support AES investment commitment as well as the underlying funding for the equity portion of its investment in AES Maritza East 1 on an intermediate-term basis. AES Maritza East 1 is a coal-fired generation project that is expected to begin construction soon. Additional non-recourse financing has been committed to begin construction of AES Maritza East 1. Parent liquidity was as follows at December 31, 2005, 2004 and 2003: 2005 2004 2003 (in millions) Cash and cash equivalents $ 1,390 $ 1,281 $ 1,663 Less: Cash and cash equivalents at subsidiaries 1,128 994 798 Parent cash and cash equivalents 262 287 865 Borrowing available under revolving credit facility 356 352 180 Cash at qualified holding companies 6 4 25 Total parent liquidity . $ 624 $ 643 $ 1,070 Our parent recourse debt at year-end was approximately $4.9 billion, $5.2 billion, and $5.9 billion in 2005, 2004 and 2003, respectively. Our contingent contractual obligations were $802 million, $559 million, and $605 million at the end of 2005, 2004 and 2003, respectively. The following table sets forth our parent company contingent contractual obligations as of December 31, 2005: Contingent contractual obligations Amount Number of Agreements Exposure Range for Each Agreement ($ in millions) Guarantees $ 507 34 <$1 - $100 Letters of credit under the Revolver 294 18 <$1 - $ 74 Surety bonds 1 1 $1 Total $ 802 53 95 We have a varied portfolio of performance related contingent contractual obligations. Amounts related to the balance sheet items represent credit enhancements made by us at the parent company level and by other third parties for the benefit of the lenders associated with the non-recourse debt recorded as liabilities in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets. These obligations are designed to cover potential risks and only require payment if certain targets are not met or certain contingencies occur. The risks associated with these obligations include change of control, construction cost overruns, political risk, tax indemnities, spot market power prices, supplier support and liquidated damages under power sales agreements for projects in development, under construction and operating. While we do not expect that we will be required to fund any material amounts under these contingent contractual obligations during 2006 or beyond that are not recorded on the balance sheet, many of the events which would give rise to such an obligation are beyond our control. We can provide no assurance that we will be able to fund our obligations under these contingent contractual obligations if we are required to make substantial payments thereunder. While we believe that our sources of liquidity will be adequate to meet our needs through the end of 2006, this belief is based on a number of material assumptions, including, without limitation, assumptions about our ability to access the capital markets, the operating and financial performance of our subsidiaries, exchange rates, power market pool prices, and the ability of our subsidiaries to pay dividends. In addition, our project subsidiaries ability to declare and pay cash dividends to us (at the parent company level) is subject to certain limitations contained in project loans, governmental provisions and other agreements. We can provide no assurance that these sources will be available when needed or that our actual cash requirements will not be greater than anticipated. We have met our interim needs for shorter-term and working capital financing at the parent company level with a Revolving Bank Loan of $650 million. We did not have any outstanding borrowings under the revolving credit facility at December 31, 2005. At December 31, 2005, we had $294 million of letters of credit outstanding under the Revolving Bank Loan. Various debt instruments at the parent company level, including our Senior Secured Credit Facilities contain certain restrictive covenants. The covenants provide for, among other items: limitations on other indebtedness, liens, investments and guarantees; restrictions on dividends and redemptions and payments of unsecured and subordinated debt and the use of proceeds; restrictions on mergers and acquisitions, sales of assets, leases, transactions with affiliates and off balance sheet and derivative arrangements; maintenance of certain financial ratios; and timely filing of reports with SEC (of which we had defaults with respect to our 2nd and 3rd quarter 2005 Form 10-Qs and this annual report on Form 10-K.) Non-Recourse Debt Financing While the lenders under our non-recourse debt financings generally do not have direct recourse to the parent company, defaults thereunder can still have important consequences for our results of operations and liquidity, including, without limitation: reducing our cash flows as the subsidiary will typically be prohibited from distributing cash to the parent level during the time period of any default; triggering our obligation to make payments under any financial guarantee, letter of credit or other credit support we have provided to or on behalf of such subsidiary; causing us to record a loss in the event the lender forecloses on the assets; and 96 triggering defaults in our outstanding debt at the parent level. For example, our Senior Secured Credit Facilities and outstanding debt securities at the parent level include events of default for certain bankruptcy related events involving material subsidiaries. In addition, our revolving credit agreement at the parent level includes events of default related to payment defaults and accelerations of outstanding debt of material subsidiaries. Some of our subsidiaries are currently in default with respect to all or a portion of their outstanding indebtedness. The total debt classified as current in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets related to such defaults was $138 million at December 31, 2005. None of the subsidiaries that are currently in default are owned by subsidiaries that currently meet the applicable definition of materiality in AES corporate debt agreements in order for such defaults to trigger an event of default or permit an acceleration under such indebtedness. However, as a result of additional dispositions of assets, other significant reductions in asset carrying values or other matters in the future that may impact our financial position and results of operations, it is possible that one or more of these subsidiaries could fall within the definition of a material subsidiary and thereby upon an acceleration trigger an event of default and possible acceleration of the indebtedness under the AES parent company outstanding debt securities. Off Balance Sheet Arrangements In May 1999, one of our subsidiaries acquired six electric generating plants from New York State Electric and Gas. Concurrently, the subsidiary sold two of the plants to an unrelated third party for $666 million and simultaneously entered into a leasing arrangement with the unrelated party. We have accounted for this transaction as a sale/leaseback transaction with operating lease treatment. Accordingly, we have not recorded these assets on our books and we expense periodic lease payments, which amounted to $54 million in 2005, as incurred. The lease obligations bear an imputed interest rate of approximately 9% which approximates fair market value. We are not subject to any additional liabilities or contingencies if the arrangement terminates, and we believe that the dissolution of the off-balance sheet arrangement would have minimal effects on our operating cash flows. The terms of the lease include restrictive covenants such as the maintenance of certain coverage ratios. As of December 31, 2005, we fulfilled a lease requirement on the subsidiary behalf by funding an additional liquidity account, as defined in the lease agreement, in the form of a $36 million letter of credit, issued under our Revolving Bank Loan. However, the subsidiary is required to replenish or replace this letter of credit in the event it is drawn upon or requires replacement. Historically, the plants have satisfied the restrictive covenants of the lease, and there are no known trends or uncertainties that would indicate that the lease will be terminated early. See Note 10 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K for a more complete discussion of this transaction. IPL, a subsidiary of the Company, formed IPL Funding Corporation ( IPL Funding ) in 1996 to purchase, on a revolving basis, up to $50 million of the retail accounts receivable and related collections of IPL. IPL Funding is not consolidated by IPL or IPALCO since it meets requirements set forth in SFAS No. 140, Accounting for Transfers and Servicing of Financial Assets and Extinguishments of Liabilities to be considered a qualified special-purpose entity. IPL Funding has entered into a purchase facility with unrelated parties ( the Purchasers ) pursuant to which the Purchasers agree to purchase from IPL Funding, on a revolving basis, up to $50 million of the receivables purchased from IPL. During 2005, this agreement was extended through May 30, 2006. As of December 31, 2005 and 2004, the aggregate amount of receivables IPL has sold to IPL Funding and IPL Funding has sold to the Purchasers pursuant to this facility was $50 million. Accounts receivable on the Company balance sheets are stated net of the $50 million sold. 97 The net cash flows between IPL and IPL Funding are limited to cash payments made by IPL to IPL Funding for interest charges and processing fees. These payments totaled approximately $2 million, $1 million and $1 million for each of the years ended December 31, 2005, 2004 and 2003, respectively. IPL retains servicing responsibilities through its role as a collection agent for the amounts due on the purchased receivables. IPL and IPL Funding provide certain indemnities to the Purchasers, including indemnification in the event that there is a breach of representations and warranties made with respect to the purchased receivables. IPL Funding and IPL each have agreed to indemnify the Purchasers on an after-tax basis for any and all damages, losses, claims, liabilities, penalties, taxes, costs and expenses at any time imposed on or incurred by the indemnified parties arising out of or otherwise relating to the purchase agreement, subject to certain limitations as defined in purchase agreement. The transfers of such accounts receivable from IPL to IPL Funding are recorded as sales; however, no gain or loss is recorded on the sale. Under the receivables purchase facility, if IPL fails to maintain certain financial covenants regarding interest coverage and debt to capital, it would constitute a termination event. As of December 31, 2005, IPL was in compliance with such covenants. As a result of IPL current credit rating, the facility agent has the ability to (i) replace IPL as the collection agent; and (ii) declare a lock-box event. Under a lock-box event or a termination event, the facility agent has the ability to require all proceeds of purchased receivables of IPL to be directed to lock-box accounts within 45 days of notifying IPL. A termination event would also (i) give the facility agent the option to take control of the lock-box account, and (ii) give the Purchasers the option to discontinue the purchase of new receivables and cause all proceeds of the purchased receivables to be used to reduce the Purchaser investment and to pay other amounts owed to the Purchasers and the facility agent. This would have the effect of reducing the operating capital available to IPL by the aggregate amount of such purchased receivables (currently $50 million). 
