CIK: 874716
Company Name: IDEXX LABORATORIES INC DE
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2010-02-19


ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS Description of Segments . During 2009, we operated primarily through three business segments: diagnostic and information technology products and services for the veterinary market, which we refer to as the Companion Animal Group ( CAG ), water quality products ( Water ) and products for production animal health, which we refer to as the Production Animal Segment ( PAS ). We also operate two smaller segments that comprise products for dairy quality ( Dairy ) and products for the human point-of-care medical diagnostic market ( OPTI Medical ). Financial information about the Dairy and OPTI Medical operating segments and other licensing arrangements are combined and presented in an Other category because they do not meet the quantitative or qualitative thresholds for reportable segments. See Note 13 to the consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2009 included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for financial information about our segments, including geographic information, and about our product and service categories. Items that are not allocated to our operating segments are comprised primarily of corporate research and development expenses that do not align with one of our existing business or service categories, a portion of share-based compensation expense, interest income and expense, and income taxes. In our segment disclosure of gross profit, operating expenses and operating income, these amounts are shown under the caption Unallocated Amounts. We estimate our share-based compensation expense for the year and allocate the estimated expense to the operating segments. This allocation differs from the actual expense and consequently yields a difference between the total allocated share-based compensation expense and the actual expense for the total company resulting in an unallocated amount reported under the Unallocated Category. The following is a discussion of the strategic and operating factors that we believe have the most significant effect on the performance of our business. Companion Animal Group In the CAG segment, we believe we have developed a strategic advantage over companies with more narrow product or service offerings. The breadth and complementary nature of our products and services give us scale in sales and distribution, permit us to offer integrated disease-management diagnostic solutions that leverage the advantages of both point-of-care and outside laboratory testing, and facilitate the flow of medical and business information in the veterinary practice by connecting practice information software systems with reference laboratory test data, in-clinic test data from our IDEXX VetLab suite of analyzers, and radiographic data from the IDEXX-PACS and IDEXX EquiView PACS software generated by our digital radiography systems. Instruments and Consumables . Our strategy in our IDEXX VetLab instrument line of business is to provide veterinarians with an integrated set of instruments that, individually and together, provide superior diagnostic information in the clinic, enabling veterinarians to practice better medicine and, in doing so, achieve their practice economic objectives, including growth and profitability. We derive substantial revenues and margins from the sale of consumables that are used in these instruments. The principal instruments used by veterinarians for in-clinic diagnostic testing are chemistry and hematology analyzers. In addition we sell instruments used for endocrinology, blood gas, electrolytes, urinalysis, and blood coagulation testing. Our IDEXX VetLab Station is an in-clinic laboratory information management system that records and integrates patient diagnostic information from our analyzers for better practice management. For customers that utilize our IVLS, we offer IDEXX SmartService Solutions, an electronic customer support and service tool that allows IDEXX technical support to remotely monitor instrument performance, troubleshoot issues and provide system updates. Additionally, we offer extended maintenance agreements in connection with the sale of our instruments. During the early stage of an instrument life cycle, we derive relatively greater revenues from instrument placements, while consumable sales become relatively more significant in later stages as the installed base of instruments increases and instrument placement revenues begin to decline. Instrument sales have significantly lower gross margins than sales of consumables, and therefore the mix of instrument and consumable sales in a particular period will impact our gross margins in this line of business. 26 Table of Contents Our Catalyst Dx analyzer is our latest generation chemistry analyzer, which was launched in the first quarter of 2008. In addition, we sell and have an active installed base of approximately 31,000 VetTest analyzers, with substantially all of our revenues from that product line currently derived from consumable sales. We continue to place VetTest instruments through sales, lease, rental and other programs. A substantial portion of 2009 Catalyst Dx analyzer placements have been made at veterinary clinics that already own our VetTest analyzer. As we continue to experience growth in sales of Catalyst Dx analyzers and the related consumables, we expect to see a decline in the sales of VetTest consumables. Based on projections of future sales volume and the average unit price of consumables used in the Catalyst Dx and VetTest analyzers, we do not expect a future shift to Catalyst Dx consumables to significantly impact gross margin. We do however expect near-term downward pressure on gross margin percentage due to higher relative instrument placement revenues as compared to consumables sales with continued penetration of the Catalyst Dx analyzer. Our long-term success in this area of our business is dependent upon new customer acquisition, customer retention and customer utilization of existing and new assays introduced for use on our analyzers. To increase utilization, we seek to educate veterinarians about best medical practices that emphasize the importance of blood and urine chemistry testing for a variety of diagnostic purposes. We purchase the chemistry consumables, other than electrolyte slides, used in our Catalyst Dx and VetTest analyzers from Ortho-Clinical Diagnostics, Inc. ( Ortho ) under a supply agreement that continues through 2025. This supply agreement provides us with a long-term source of slides at costs that improve over the term of the agreement as a result of increasing purchase volumes. Our principal hematology analyzer is the LaserCyte analyzer. In addition we sell the VetAutoread analyzer. A substantial portion of LaserCyte placements have been made at veterinary clinics that already own our VetAutoread analyzer. Although we have experienced growth in sales of hematology consumables, LaserCyte consumable sales have been partly offset by declines in sales of VetAutoread consumables. With all of our instrument lines, we seek to differentiate our products from those of other in-clinic instrument manufacturers and laboratory diagnostic service providers based on breadth of diagnostic menu, flexibility of menu selection, accuracy, reliability, ease-of-use, throughput, ability to handle compromised samples, time-to-result, analytical capability of software, integration with the IDEXX VetLab Station, education and training, and superior sales and customer service. Our success depends, in part, on our ability to differentiate our products in a way that justifies premium pricing. Rapid Assay Products . Our rapid assay line of business consists primarily of single-use kits for point-of-care testing and, to a limited degree, microwell-based kits for laboratory testing for canine and feline diseases and conditions. Our rapid assay strategy is to develop, manufacture, market and sell proprietary tests that address important medical needs for particular diseases prevalent in the companion animal population. We seek to differentiate our tests from those of other in-clinic test providers and laboratory diagnostic service providers through ease-of-use and superior performance, including by providing our customers with combination tests that test a single sample for multiple analytes. Where alternative point-of-care offerings exist, we seek to differentiate our tests with superior performance. As in our other lines of business, we also seek to differentiate our products through superior customer service. We further augment our product development and customer service efforts with sales and marketing programs that enhance medical awareness and understanding regarding our target diseases and the importance of diagnostic testing. We also seek to enhance efficiency and test result capture by providing our customers with the ability to have rapid assay tests read and results recorded into the patient record by our SNAPshot Dx analyzer. This functionality is currently available for use with our SNAP tests for evaluation of thyroid, adrenal and liver function; diagnosing canine pancreatitis, feline leukemia and feline immunodeficiency virus; and for screening for heartworm and three additional tick-borne diseases, ehrlichiosis, Lyme and anaplasmosis. We are currently developing this functionality across our canine and feline family of rapid assay products. 27 Table of Contents Veterinary Laboratory Diagnostic and Consulting Services . We believe that more than half of all diagnostic testing by U.S. veterinarians is done at outside reference laboratories such as our IDEXX Reference Laboratories. In markets outside the U.S., in-clinic testing is less prevalent and an even greater percentage of diagnostic testing is done in reference laboratories. We attempt to differentiate our laboratory testing services from those of our competitors and in-clinic offerings primarily on the basis of quality, customer service, technology employed and specialized test menu. Revenue growth in this line of business is achieved both through increased sales at existing laboratories and through the acquisition of new customers, including through laboratory acquisitions, customer list acquisitions and the opening of new laboratories. In 2009, we acquired a telemedicine and consulting services business located in the U.S. In 2008, we acquired a laboratory in Spain and acquired certain intellectual property and distribution rights associated with a diagnostic test product. In 2007, we acquired laboratories in the U.S. and Canada and acquired veterinary laboratory customer lists in the U.S., Switzerland, and the United Kingdom. Profitability of this business is largely the result of our ability to achieve efficiencies from both volume and operational improvements. New laboratories that we open typically will operate at a loss until testing volumes reach a level that permits profitability. Acquired laboratories frequently operate less profitably than our existing laboratories and those laboratories may not achieve profitability comparable to our existing laboratories for several years until we complete the implementation of operating improvements and efficiencies. Therefore, in the short term, new and acquired reference laboratories generally will have a negative effect on the operating margin of the laboratory diagnostic and consulting services line of business. Practice Information Systems and Digital Radiography . These lines of business consist of veterinary practice information systems including hardware and software and veterinary-specific digital radiography systems. Our strategy in the practice information systems line of business is to provide superior software and hardware integrated information solutions, backed by superior customer support and education, to allow the veterinarian to practice better medicine and achieve the practice business objectives. We differentiate our software systems through enhanced functionality and ease of use. Our veterinary-specific digital radiography systems allow veterinarians to capture digital radiographs with ease and without the use of hazardous chemicals. The digital radiography systems also incorporate IDEXX-PACS and IDEXX EquiView PACS picture archiving and communication software developed by IDEXX that allows for image enhancement, manipulation, storage and retrieval, and integration with the practice information software. Our strategy in digital radiography is to offer a system that provides superior image quality and software capability at a competitive price, backed by the same customer support provided for our other products and services in the Companion Animal Group. Water Our strategy in the water testing business is to develop, manufacture, market and sell proprietary products with superior performance, supported by exceptional customer service. Our customers are primarily water utilities, government laboratories and private certified laboratories that highly value strong relationships and customer support. International sales of water testing products represented 47% of total water product sales in 2009, and we expect that future growth in this business will be significantly dependent on our ability to increase international sales. Growth also will be dependent on our ability to enhance and broaden our product line. Most water microbiological testing is driven by regulation, and, in many countries, a test may not be used for regulatory testing unless it has been approved by the applicable regulatory body. As a result, we maintain an active regulatory program that involves applying for regulatory approvals in a number of countries, primarily in Europe. Production Animal Segment We develop, manufacture, market and sell a broad range of tests for various cattle, swine and poultry diseases and conditions, and have an active research and development, and in-licensing program in this area. Our strategy is to offer proprietary tests with superior performance characteristics. Disease outbreaks are episodic and unpredictable, and certain diseases that are prevalent at one time may be substantially contained or eradicated at a later time. In response to outbreaks, testing initiatives may lead to exceptional demand for certain products in certain periods. Conversely, successful eradication programs may result in significantly decreased demand for certain products. The performance of this business, therefore, can fluctuate. In 2009, approximately 88% of our sales in this business were international. Because of the significant dependence of this business on international sales, the performance of the business is particularly subject to the various risks described above that are associated with doing business internationally. See Part I, Item 1A. Risk Factors. 28 Table of Contents Other Dairy . Our strategy in the dairy testing business is to develop, manufacture and sell antibiotic residue testing products that satisfy applicable regulatory requirements for testing of milk by processors and producers and provide reliable field performance. The manufacture of these testing products leverage, almost exclusively, the SNAP platform as well as the production equipment of our rapid assay business, incorporating customized reagents for antibiotic detection. The majority of our sales in this business are international. To successfully increase sales of dairy testing products, we believe that we need to increase penetration in the processor and producer segments of the dairy market, and to develop product line enhancements and extensions. Because of the significant dependence of this business on international sales, the performance of the business is particularly subject to the various risks described above that are associated with doing business internationally. See Part I, Item 1A. Risk Factors. OPTI Medical Systems . Our strategy in the OPTI Medical Systems business for the human market is to develop, manufacture, and sell electrolyte and blood gas analyzers and related consumable products for the medical point-of-care diagnostics market worldwide, with a focus on small- to mid-sized hospitals. We seek to differentiate our products based on ease of use, menu, convenience, international distribution and service, and instrument reliability. Similar to our veterinary instruments and consumables strategy, a substantial portion of the revenues from this product line is derived from the sale of consumables for use on the installed base of electrolyte and blood gas analyzers. During the early stage of an instrument life cycle, relatively greater revenues are derived from instrument placements, while consumable sales become relatively more significant in later stages as the installed base of instruments increases and instrument placement revenues begin to decline. Our long-term success in this area of our business is dependent upon new customer acquisition, customer retention and increased customer utilization of existing and new assays introduced on these instruments. OPTI Medical Systems also supplies our VetStat analyzer, an instrument and consumable system that is a member of the IDEXX VetLab suite for the veterinary market. In addition, OPTI Medical Systems provides the electrolyte module and dry slide reagents that make up the electrolyte testing functionality of the Catalyst Dx analyzer. Our strategy in the OPTI Medical Systems business for the veterinary market is to utilize this unit know-how, intellectual property and manufacturing capability to continue to expand the menu and instrument capability of the VetStat and Catalyst Dx platforms for veterinary applications. Other Activities . We have developed certain proprietary technology that we believe may have application in areas that do not align with one of our existing business or service categories. Our strategy is to out-license these technologies to partners that are best positioned to complete the development and commercialization of products utilizing these technologies. To the extent we are successful in doing so, we may receive one-time or recurring payments based on the achievement of development or sales milestones. Our ability to succeed in this area of our business depends on our ability to attract and retain qualified scientific personnel to develop proprietary products or technology and our ability to identify suitable third parties to complete the commercialization of these technologies. CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates. Note 3 to the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2009 describes the significant accounting policies used in preparation of these consolidated financial statements. We believe the following critical accounting estimates and assumptions may have a material impact on reported financial condition and operating performance and involve significant levels of judgment to account for highly uncertain matters or are susceptible to significant change. Revenue Recognition We recognize revenue when four criteria are met: (i) persuasive evidence that an arrangement exists; (ii) delivery has occurred or services have been rendered; (iii) the sales price is fixed or determinable; and (iv) collectibility is reasonably assured. See Note 3(h) to the consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2009 included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information about our revenue recognition policy and criteria for recognizing revenue. 29 Table of Contents Multiple element arrangements (MEA s) . Arrangements to sell products to customers frequently include multiple deliverables. Our most significant MEA include the sale of one or more of the instruments from the IDEXX VetLab suite of analyzers or digital radiography systems, combined with one or more of the following products: extended maintenance agreements; consumables; laboratory services; and practice management software. Practice management software is frequently sold with postcontract customer support and implementation services. Delivery of the various products or performance of services within the arrangement may or may not coincide. Interpretation of customer sales agreements is sometimes required to determine the appropriate accounting, including whether the deliverables specified in a MEA should be treated as separate units of accounting for revenue recognition purposes, and, if so, how the price should be allocated among the elements and when to recognize revenue for each element. When arrangements include multiple elements, we use verifiable objective evidence ( VOE ) of fair value or vendor-specific objective evidence ( VSOE ) of fair value for software to allocate revenue to the elements and recognize revenue when the elements have standalone value and the four criteria for revenue recognition have been met for each element. The timing of product and service revenue recognized is affected by our judgments as to whether an arrangement includes multiple elements and, if so, whether fair value exists for those elements. Changes to the elements in an arrangement and the ability to establish fair value for those elements could affect the timing of the revenue recognition. We determine VOE and VSOE of fair value by amounts charged separately for the delivered and undelivered elements to similar customers in standalone sales of the specific elements. We have determined that the software components of our digital radiography systems and IVLS are more than incidental to the products as a whole, therefore we account for sales of these products in MEA under software accounting guidance and defer revenue equal to the fair value of the support provided to the customer during the one-year warranty period. Judgment is required to determine whether the software within our digital systems and IVLS is essential to the functionality of the products and judgment and estimation is required to establish the fair value of the updates and support provided. We have also applied judgment to determine that software used in, or with our IDEXX VetLab instruments, except for the IVLS, is not more than incidental to the functionality of those instruments. Certain arrangements with customers include discounts on future products and services. We apply judgment in determining whether discounts are significant and incremental and when the future discount offered is not considered significant and incremental, we do not account for the discount as an element of the arrangement. If the future discount is significant and incremental, we recognize that discount as an element of the arrangement and allocate the discount to the other elements of the arrangement based on relative fair value. To determine whether a discount is significant and incremental, we look to the discount provided in standalone sales of the same product to similar customers, the level of discount provided on other elements in the arrangement, and the significance of the discount to the overall arrangement. If the discount in the MEA approximates the discount typically provided in standalone sales, that discount is not considered significant and incremental. We separately price extended maintenance agreements ( EMA ) sold to customers. When an EMA is sold as a component of a multi-product sale, we recognize revenue related to the EMA at the stated contractual price on a straight-line basis over the life of the agreement. Customer programs . We record estimated reductions to revenue in connection with customer marketing programs and incentive offerings that may give customers credits, award points, or provide other incentives. Future market conditions and changes in product offerings may require us to change marketing strategies to increase customer incentive offerings, possibly resulting in incremental reductions of revenue in future periods as compared to reductions in the current or prior periods. Additionally, certain incentive programs require us to estimate, based on historical experience, and apply judgment to approximate the number of customers who will actually redeem the incentive. Differences between estimated and actual customer participation in programs may impact the amount and timing of revenue recognition. Revenue reductions are recorded quarterly based on issuance of credits, points earned but not yet issued, and estimates of credits and points to be earned in the future based on current revenue. In our analysis, we utilize data supplied from distributors and collected in-house that details the volume of qualifying products purchased as well as price paid per clinic ( practice-level sales data ). 30 Table of Contents Customers can earn IDEXX Points based on their participation in certain customer programs and making qualifying purchases related to those programs. IDEXX Points may then be applied against the purchase price for IDEXX products and services purchased in the future or applied to trade receivables due to us. As points are redeemed we recognize the benefit of points expected to expire, or breakage, using historical forfeiture rates. On November 30 of each year, unused points earned before January 1 of the prior year expire and any variance from the breakage estimate is accounted for as a change in estimate. Our two most significant customer programs are Practice Developer and SNAP up the Savings ( SUTS ), both of which are offered only to North American customers. In 2009, the SUTS program was redesigned to allow for payout of points earned quarterly. The most significant estimate related to SUTS, and other point programs, is estimating the amount of breakage. Following is a summary of revenue reductions recorded under these programs and in total for the years ended December 31, 2009, 2008 and 2007 ( in thousands ): For the Years Ended December 31, 2009 2008 2007 Revenue Reductions Recorded Practice Developer program (1) $ 6,892 $ 7,521 $ 6,747 SNAP up the Savings program (1) 4,582 4,011 4,429 Other programs (1) 9,201 3,808 5,946 Total revenue reductions $ 20,675 $ 15,340 $ 17,122 (1) Practice Developer , SNAP up the Savings and certain other customer program liabilities are settled through the issuance of IDEXX Points. At December 31, 2009, 2008 and 2007, the total accrued revenue reductions were $17.4 million, $15.2 million and $15.1 million, respectively. Following is a summary of changes in the accrual for estimated revenue reductions attributable to IDEXX Points customer programs and incentive offerings and the ending accrued revenue reductions balance for the years ended December 31, 2009, 2008 and 2007 ( in thousands ): For the Years Ended December 31, 2009 2008 2007 Accrued Customer Programs: Balance, beginning of the year $ 15,183 $ 15,107 $ 14,012 Current provision related to Practice Developer program (1) 6,892 7,521 6,747 Current provision related to SNAP up the Savings program (1) 4,582 4,011 4,429 Current provision related to other programs (1) 9,201 3,808 5,946 Breakage (367 ) (694 ) (352 ) Actual points redeemed and credits issued (18,256 ) (14,338 ) (15,755 ) Exchange impact on balances denominated in foreign currency 153 (232 ) 80 Balance, end of year $ 17,388 $ 15,183 $ 15,107 (1) Practice Developer , SNAP up the Savings and certain other customer program liabilities are settled through the issuance of IDEXX Points. 31 Table of Contents Inventory Valuation We write down inventory for estimated obsolescence when warranted by estimates of future demand, market conditions, remaining shelf life, or product functionality. If actual market conditions or results of estimated functionality are less favorable than those we estimated, additional inventory write-downs may be required, which would have a negative effect on results of operations. Certain major components of inventory for which we have made critical valuation judgments are discussed in more detail below. LaserCyte Hematology Analyzer . At December 31, 2009, 2008 and 2007, $1.3 million, $2.9 million and $2.7 million, respectively, of inventory associated with our LaserCyte analyzer required rework before it could be used to manufacture finished goods, which was net of $2.4 million, $2.2 million and $1.7 million, respectively, of write-downs for inventory estimated to be obsolete and disposed. We determined write-downs based on our estimate of the costs to rework inventory compared to replacement cost and the probability of success, primarily based on historical experience. We expect to fully realize our net investment in this inventory. However, if we are unsuccessful in reworking this inventory, if we revise our judgment of our ability to successfully rework inventory due to new experience in reworking this inventory, if we determine that it is more cost effective to purchase new inventory rather than rework this inventory, or if we alter the design of this product, we may be required to write off some or all of the remaining associated inventory. Valuation of Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets A significant portion of the purchase price for acquired businesses is assigned to intangible assets. Intangible assets other than goodwill are initially valued at fair value. If a market value is not readily available, the fair value of the intangible asset is estimated based on discounted cash flows using market participant assumptions, which are assumptions that are not specific to IDEXX. The selection of appropriate valuation methodologies and the estimation of discounted cash flows require significant assumptions about the timing and amounts of future cash flows, risks, appropriate discount rates, and the useful lives of intangible assets. When material, we utilize independent valuation experts to advise and assist us in allocating the purchase prices for acquired businesses to the fair values of the identified intangible assets and in determining appropriate amortization methods and periods for those intangible assets. Goodwill is initially valued based on the excess of the purchase price of a business combination over the fair values of acquired net assets, including intangible assets. We assess goodwill for impairment annually in the fourth quarter and whenever events or circumstances indicate an impairment may exist. For impairment testing, the fair values of the reporting units that include goodwill are estimated using an income approach by developing discounted cash flow models. Model assumptions are based on our projections and best estimates, using appropriate and customary market participant assumptions. Changes in forecasted cash flows or the discount rate would affect the estimated fair values of reporting units and could result in a goodwill impairment charge in a future period. However, at December 31, 2009 a 25% decrease in the current estimated fair value of any of our reporting units would not result in a goodwill impairment charge for any of our reporting units that include goodwill. As a measure to assess the fair values of the reporting units, we aggregate the fair value of each of the reporting units and compare that aggregate total to the overall market capitalization of the Company. As of November 30, 2009, the date that we performed our assessment of goodwill for impairment, the total aggregate fair values of the reporting units was approximately $3.2 billion, which approximates the Company market capitalization as of that date. No goodwill impairments were identified as a result of the annual or event-driven reviews during the years ended December 31, 2009, 2008 or 2007. During 2008, we sold certain pharmaceutical product lines and pharmaceutical assets that qualified as a business. The pharmaceutical business had $13.7 million of related goodwill, of which we wrote off approximately $7.2 million that was allocated to the product lines sold based on their respective fair values. Fair values were estimated using a discounted cash flow approach. A substantial portion of the remaining goodwill is associated with products that have been licensed to third parties and is included in our Other segment. Realization of this goodwill is dependant upon the success of those third parties in developing and commercializing products, which will result in our receipt of royalties and other payments. We assess the realizability of intangible assets other than goodwill whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable. If an impairment review is triggered, we evaluate the carrying value of intangible assets based on estimated undiscounted future cash flows over the remaining useful life of the assets and compare that value to the carrying value of the assets. The cash flows that are used contain our best estimates, using appropriate and customary assumptions and projections at the time. 32 Table of Contents During 2009, we recognized an impairment charge of $1.5 million to write off an acquired intangible asset associated with our equine digital radiography business, which is part of our CAG segment. Based on changes in estimated future demand and market conditions, we determined that we would not fully realize our investment and, therefore, fully expensed this asset. No other impairments were identified during the year ended December 31, 2009. No impairments were identified during the year ended December 31, 2008. During 2007, we recognized an impairment charge to write off a prepaid royalty license of $1.0 million associated with Navigator paste. We also recognized a related inventory write-down, the circumstances of which are described in Note 6 to the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Based on our changed estimates of product availability and estimated future demand and market conditions, we determined that we would not realize our investment in prepaid royalties and, therefore, fully expensed this asset. No other impairments were identified during the year ended December 31, 2007. Share-Based Compensation Beginning in 2006, we modified our employee share-based compensation programs to shift from the grant of stock options and employee stock purchase rights only to the grant of a mix of restricted stock units and stock options, along with employee stock purchase rights. There were no modifications to the terms of outstanding options, restricted stock units or deferred stock units during 2009, 2008 or 2007. On January 1, 2006 we adopted amendments to the accounting provisions governing share-based payments and adopted the straight-line method to prospectively expense share-based awards granted subsequent to December 31, 2005. The graded-vesting, or accelerated, method has been used to calculate the expense for stock options granted prior to January 1, 2006. If the total fair value of share-based compensation awards, as well as other features that impact expense, including forfeitures and capitalization of costs, was consistent from year-to-year in each of the last five years and through 2010, this change in expense method to straight-line expensing would yield less than the pro forma graded-vesting expense through 2010 until awards granted prior to January 1, 2006 were fully expensed. However, the total fair value of future awards may vary significantly from past awards based on a number of factors, including our share-based award practices. Therefore, share-based compensation expense is likely to fluctuate, possibly significantly, from year to year. We determine the assumptions to be used in the valuation of option grants as of the date of grant. As such, we may use different assumptions during the year if we grant options at different dates. However, substantially all of our options granted during the years ended December 31, 2009, 2008 and 2007 were granted in the first quarter of each year. The weighted average of each of the valuation assumptions used to determine the fair value of each option grant during each of the previous three years is as follows: For the Years Ended December 31, 2009 2008 2007 Expected stock price volatility 31 % 25 % 29 % Expected term, in years (1) 4.8 4.9 5.0 Risk-free interest rate 1.6 % 2.6 % 4.7 % (1) Options may not be granted for a contractual term of more than seven years. We use the Black-Scholes-Merton option-pricing model to determine the fair value of options granted. Option-pricing models require the input of highly subjective assumptions, particularly for the expected stock price volatility and the expected term of options. Changes in the subjective input assumptions can materially affect the fair value estimate. Our expected stock price volatility assumptions are based on the historical volatility of our stock over periods that are similar to the expected terms of grants and other relevant factors. Lower estimated volatility reduces the fair value of an option. The total fair value of options awarded during the year ended December 31, 2009 ($5.4 million) would have increased by 9% or decreased by 7% if the weighted average of the stock price volatility assumptions were increased or decreased by 10% to 33.6% or 27.5%, respectively. The total expense recognized for options awarded during the year ended December 31, 2009 would have increased or decreased by $0.1 million if the weighted average of the stock price volatility assumption used to value options granted during 2009 were increased or decreased by 10% to 33.6% or 27.5%, respectively. 33 Table of Contents To develop the expected term assumption for option awards, we previously elected to use the simplified method which is based on vesting and contractual terms. Beginning in January 2008, we derive the expected term assumption for options based on historical experience and other relevant factors concerning expected employee behavior with regard to option exercise. The expected term for future awards will be determined using a consistent method. Longer expected term assumptions increase the fair value of option awards, and therefore increase the expense recognized per award. The total fair value of options awarded during the year ended December 31, 2009 ($5.4 million) would have increased by 10% or decreased by 11% if the weighted average of the expected term assumptions were increased or decreased by one year, respectively. The total cost recognized for options awarded during the year ended December 31, 2009 would have increased or decreased by $0.1 million if the weighted average of the expected term assumptions were increased or decreased by one year, respectively. Share-based compensation expense is based on the number of awards ultimately expected to vest and is, therefore, reduced for an estimate of the number of awards that are expected to be forfeited. The forfeiture estimates are based on historical data and other factors, and compensation expense is adjusted for actual results. Share-based compensation costs for the year ended December 31, 2009 were $11.4 million, which is net of a reduction of $2.5 million for actual and estimated forfeitures. Changes in estimated forfeiture rates and differences between estimated forfeiture rates and actual experience may result in significant, unanticipated increases or decreases in share-based compensation expense from period to period. The termination of employment by certain employees who hold large numbers of share-based compensation instruments may also have a significant, unanticipated impact on forfeiture experience and, therefore, on share-based compensation expense. The fair value of options, restricted stock units, deferred stock units with vesting conditions, and employee stock purchase rights awarded during the years ended December 31, 2009, 2008 and 2007 totaled $16.0 million, $18.7 million and $18.2 million, respectively. The total unrecognized compensation cost for unvested share-based compensation awards outstanding at December 31, 2009, before consideration of estimated forfeitures, was $33.0 million. We estimate that this cost will be reduced by approximately $3.4 million related to forfeitures. The weighted average remaining expense recognition period is approximately 1.6 years. Income Taxes We recognize a current tax liability or asset for current taxes payable or refundable, respectively, and a deferred tax liability or asset, as the case may be, for the estimated future tax effects of temporary differences between book and tax treatment of assets and liabilities and carryforwards to the extent they are realizable. The future tax benefit arising from net deductible temporary differences and tax carryforwards, net of valuation allowances, was $8.0 million and $7.5 million at December 31, 2009 and 2008, respectively. On a quarterly basis we assess our current earnings by jurisdiction to determine whether or not our earnings during the periods when the temporary differences become deductible will be sufficient to realize the related future tax benefits. Should we determine that we would not be able to realize all or part of our net deferred tax asset in the future, an adjustment to the deferred tax asset would be charged to income in the period such determination was made. A reduction of net income before taxes in each subsidiary equal to 5% of revenue, compared to the corresponding reported amounts for the year ended December 31, 2009, would not result in the recognition of incremental valuation allowances except in two subsidiaries where a 5% reduction could result in our recording a valuation allowance of $1.2 million for those subsidiaries. For those jurisdictions where the expiration date of tax carryforwards or the projected operating results indicate that realization is not likely, a valuation allowance is recorded to offset the deferred tax asset within that jurisdiction. In assessing the need for a valuation allowance, we consider future taxable income and ongoing prudent and feasible tax planning strategies. Alternatively, in the event that we were to determine that we would be able to realize our deferred tax assets in the future in excess of the net recorded amount, an adjustment to the deferred tax asset would increase income in the period such determination was made. 34 Table of Contents Our net deductible temporary differences and tax carryforwards are recorded using the enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the periods in which the deferred tax liability or asset is expected to be settled or realized. Should the expected applicable tax rates change in the future, an adjustment to the net deferred tax asset would be credited or charged, as appropriate, to income in the period such determination was made. For example, an increase of one percentage point in our anticipated U.S. state income tax rate would cause us to increase our net deferred tax asset balance by $0.3 million. This increase in the net deferred asset would increase net income in the period that our rate was adjusted. Likewise, a decrease of one percentage point to our anticipated U.S. state income tax rate would have the opposite effect. We periodically assess our exposures related to our worldwide provision for income taxes and believe that we have appropriately accrued taxes for contingencies. Any reduction of these contingent liabilities or additional assessment would increase or decrease income, respectively, in the period such determination was made. We consider the majority of the operating earnings of non-United States subsidiaries to be indefinitely invested outside the U.S. The cumulative earnings of these subsidiaries were $194.0 million at December 31, 2009. No provision has been made for U.S. federal and state, or international taxes that may result from future remittances of these undistributed earnings of non-United States subsidiaries. Should we repatriate these earnings in the future, we would have to adjust the income tax provision in the period in which the decision to repatriate earnings is made. For the operating earnings not considered to be indefinitely invested outside the United States we have accrued taxes on a current basis. We record a liability for uncertain tax provisions in accordance with a comprehensive model for the recognition, measurement, and financial statement disclosure. This comprehensive model requires us to assess all tax positions against a more likely than not standard. We record tax benefits for only those positions that we believe will more likely than not be sustained. For positions that we believe that it is more likely than not that we will prevail, we record a benefit considering the amounts and probabilities that could be realized upon ultimate settlement. If our judgment as to the likely resolution of the uncertainty changes, if the uncertainty is ultimately settled or if the statute of limitation related to the uncertainty expires, the effects of the change would be recognized in the period in which the change, resolution or expiration occurs. As of December 31, 2009 our net liability for uncertain tax positions was $6.0 million, which includes estimated interest expense and penalties. RESULTS OF OPERATIONS Impact of Distribution Channel on Results of Operations . Because the instrument consumables and rapid assay products in our CAG segment are sold in the U.S. and certain other geographies by distributors, distributor purchasing dynamics have an impact on our reported sales of these products. Distributors purchase products from us and sell them to veterinary practices, who are the end users. Distributor purchasing dynamics may be affected by many factors and may be unrelated to underlying end-user demand for our products. As a result, fluctuations in distributors inventories may cause reported results in a period not to be representative of underlying end-user demand. Therefore, we believe it is important to track distributor sales to end users and to distinguish between the impact of end-user demand and the impact of distributor purchasing dynamics on reported revenue growth. Where growth rates are affected by changes in end-user demand, we refer to the impact of practice-level sales on growth. Where growth rates are affected by distributor purchasing dynamics, we refer to the impact of changes in distributors inventories. If during the comparable period of the prior year, distributors inventories grew by more than those inventories grew in the current year, then changes in distributors inventories have a negative impact on our reported sales growth in the current period. Conversely, if during the comparable period of the prior year, distributors inventories grew by less than those inventories grew in the current year, then changes in distributors inventories have a positive impact on our reported sales growth in the current period. Impact of Economic Factors, Including Foreign Currency Exchange Rates . Approximately 24% of our revenue is derived from products manufactured in the U.S. and sold internationally in local currencies. Strengthening of the rate of exchange for the U.S. dollar relative to other currencies has a negative impact on our international revenues and on margins of products manufactured in the U.S. and sold internationally. In addition, to the extent that the U.S. dollar is stronger in future periods relative to the exchange rates in effect in the corresponding prior periods, our growth rate will be negatively affected. The impact of foreign currency denominated operating expenses, foreign currency denominated supply contracts and the impact of foreign currency hedge contracts in place partly offset this exposure. 35 Table of Contents We believe that our financial results in 2009 continued to be negatively impacted by economic conditions that weakened over the course of 2008 due, in large part, to fewer patient visits to U.S. and European veterinary clinics for routine screening, preventive care and elective procedures. We believe reduced patient visits negatively impacted the growth rate of sales of rapid assay tests, instrument consumables, and laboratory diagnostic and consulting services in our CAG segment. In addition, we believe that the rate of growth of sales of our instruments, which are larger capital purchases for veterinarians, was negatively affected by increased caution among veterinarians regarding economic prospects. Weaker economic conditions also increased the sensitivity of our customers to the pricing of our products and services, resulting in lower price realization for certain products over the course of 2009 relative to prior periods. Beyond our companion animal business, we are also seeing the weaker economy impact certain customer groups in our Water and PAS businesses. Lower Water testing volumes in the non-regulatory segments of the business have been driven by a decline in new home construction and reduced consumer willingness to spend on certain luxury items, such as vacation cruises. Lower PAS testing volumes have been driven by a reduction in non-regulatory producer and laboratory testing, as a measure to reduce operating costs, and by a reduction in testing associated with government mandated eradication programs, due to lower government funding. While we expect these trends to continue in the near term, we believe the fundamental drivers of demand in the markets we serve to remain intact and that growth rates will improve as major world economies stabilize. Twelve Months Ended December 31, 2009 Compared to Twelve Months Ended December 31, 2008 Revenue Total Company. The following table presents revenue by operating segment: For the Years Ended December 31, Percentage Change Net of Percentage Acquisitions/ Percentage Change from Divestitures Net Revenue Dollar Percentage Change from Acquisitions/ and Currency (dollars in thousands) 2009 2008 Change Change Currency (1) Divestitures (2) Effect CAG $ 843,303 $ 834,056 $ 9,247 1.1 % (2.3 %) (2.0 %) 5.4 % Water 73,214 74,469 (1,255 ) (1.7 %) (3.4 %) 1.7 % PAS 77,208 80,762 (3,554 ) (4.4 %) (3.4 %) (1.0 %) Other 37,908 34,743 3,165 9.1 % (0.4 %) 9.5 % Total $ 1,031,633 $ 1,024,030 $ 7,603 0.7 % (2.4 %) (1.6 %) 4.7 % (1) Represents the percentage change in revenue attributed to the effect of changes in currency rates from the year ended December 31, 2009 to the year ended December 31, 2008. (2) Represents the percentage change in revenue during the year ended December 31, 2009 compared to the year ended December 31, 2008 attributed to incremental revenues from businesses acquired or revenues lost from businesses divested or discontinued subsequent to December 31, 2007. The following revenue analysis and discussion reflects the results of operations net of the impact of currency exchange rates on sales outside the U.S. and net of incremental sales from businesses acquired or revenues lost from divisions divested subsequent to December 31, 2007. 36 Table of Contents Companion Animal Group. The following table presents revenue by product and service category for CAG: For the Years Ended December 31, Percentage Change Net of Percentage Acquisitions/ Percentage Change from Divestitures Net Revenue Dollar Percentage Change from Acquisitions/ and Currency (dollars in thousands) 2009 2008 Change Change Currency (1) Divestitures (2) Effect Instruments and consumables $ 332,706 $ 318,533 $ 14,173 4.4 % (2.7 %) 7.1 % Rapid assay products 147,078 146,867 211 0.1 % (0.7 %) 0.8 % Laboratory diagnostic and consulting services 298,410 288,244 10,166 3.5 % (3.0 %) 0.7 % 5.8 % Practice information management systems and digital radiography 65,055 61,291 3,764 6.1 % (0.8 %) 0.2 % 6.7 % Pharmaceutical products 54 19,121 (19,067 ) (99.7 %) (99.6 %) (0.1 %) Net CAG revenue $ 843,303 $ 834,056 $ 9,247 1.1 % (2.3 %) (2.0 %) 5.4 % (1) Represents the percentage change in revenue attributed to the effect of changes in currency rates from the year ended December 31, 2009 to the year ended December 31, 2008. (2) Represents the percentage change in revenue during the year ended December 31, 2009 compared to the year ended December 31, 2008 attributed to incremental revenues from businesses acquired or revenues lost from divisions divested or discontinued subsequent to December 31, 2007. The increase in instruments and consumables revenue was due to higher sales volumes, partly offset by lower average unit sales prices on instruments. Higher sales volumes were driven primarily by sales of our Catalyst Dx analyzer, which was launched at the end of the first quarter of 2008. This impact was partly offset by a decrease in sales of our other IDEXX VetLab instruments, most notably of LaserCyte analyzers, due primarily to market penetration and a shift in focus of our sales efforts to our newer instruments. Higher sales volume was also attributable to sales of consumables used with the Catalyst Dx instrument, partly offset by lower sales of consumables used with our VetTest instrument as Catalyst Dx instruments have replaced VetTest instruments at certain customers. Instrument service revenue also contributed to revenue growth as our active installed base of instruments covered under service contracts continued to increase. Lower average unit sales prices for instruments were primarily related to sales of our LaserCyte analyzers, resulting from discounts associated with customer purchase programs. Changes in distributors inventory levels did not have a meaningful impact on reported instruments and consumables revenue growth. The slight increase in rapid assay revenue was due to higher practice-level sales resulting from increased sales volumes of canine combination test products and SNAP cPL , our test for pancreatitis in dogs, partly offset by lower sales volumes of feline combination test products. To a lesser extent, higher average unit sales prices also contributed to the increase in rapid assay revenue. Changes in distributors inventory levels did not have a meaningful impact on reported rapid assay revenue growth. The increase in laboratory diagnostic and consulting services revenue resulted primarily from the impact of higher testing volume and price increases. Higher testing volume was the result of growth in our customer base and the impact of new test offerings. To a lesser extent, revenue was also favorably impacted by incremental sales from businesses acquired in 2009. The increase in practice information management systems and digital radiography revenue resulted primarily from higher sales volumes of companion animal radiography systems and peripheral equipment and support services related to our practice information management systems. These favorable items were partly offset by lower sales of equine radiography systems, lower average unit prices for companion animal radiography systems, and lower sales of Cornerstone practice information management systems. In the fourth quarter of 2008, we sold a substantial portion of our pharmaceutical assets and product lines, and therefore did not have significant pharmaceutical product revenue in 2009. We have retained certain intellectual property and licenses for developed products as well as certain less significant product lines, which have been reassigned to other lines of business. Prior year amounts have been reclassified to conform to current year presentation. See Note 19 to the consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2009 included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. 37 Table of Contents Water. The increase in Water revenue resulted primarily from higher average unit sales prices, partly offset by lower sales volume of certain Water products. Higher average unit sales prices were attributable to a favorable mix of product sales within certain markets; the impact of price increases for certain products sold in the U.S.; and higher relative sales in geographies where products are sold at higher average unit sales prices. Production Animal Segment. The decrease in PAS revenue resulted primarily from the impact of the timing of revenue recognition on shipments to a customer, where revenue for shipments to that customer is recognized on the cash basis of accounting due to uncertain collectability and lower average unit sales prices. These unfavorable items were partly offset by higher overall sales volumes. Other. The increase in Other revenue was due primarily to higher sales volumes of Dairy and OPTI Medical products. Higher Dairy volume was primarily attributable to Dairy SNAP antibiotic residue tests, a recently released Dairy SNAP residue test for detection of melamine and a recently launched instrument. These favorable items were partly offset by lower average unit sales prices for OPTI Medical products. Gross Profit Total Company. The following table presents gross profit and gross profit percentages by operating segment: For the Years Ended December 31, Gross Profit Percent of Percent of Dollar Percentage (dollars in thousands) 2009 Revenue 2008 Revenue Change Change CAG $ 410,356 48.7 % $ 412,199 49.4 % $ (1,843 ) (0.4 %) Water 47,233 64.5 % 47,052 63.2 % 181 0.4 % PAS 51,256 66.4 % 55,005 68.1 % (3,749 ) (6.8 %) Other 17,067 45.0 % 15,131 43.6 % 1,936 12.8 % Unallocated amounts 369 N/A 379 N/A (10 ) (2.6 %) Total Company $ 526,281 51.0 % $ 529,766 51.7 % $ (3,485 ) (0.7 %) Companion Animal Group. Gross profit for CAG decreased due to a decrease in the gross profit percentage of less than one percentage point to 49%. The decrease in the gross profit percentage was due primarily to the absence of higher margin pharmaceutical product sales in 2009; higher relative sales of lower margin products and services, primarily IDEXX VetLab instruments and laboratory diagnostic and consulting services; higher product overhead spending due, in part, to investment in facilities and production equipment to meet anticipated future demand; and the impact of lower volumes of most of our instruments, except for Catalyst Dx and SNAPshot Dx analyzers. These unfavorable impacts were partly offset by gross profit improvement in our laboratory diagnostic and consulting services line of business due, in part, to higher selling prices and operational efficiencies. Lower depreciation expense associated with IDEXX VetLab instruments previously placed under rental agreements also favorably impacted gross profit percentage. Water. Gross profit for Water increased due to an increase in the gross profit percentage to 64.5% from 63%. The increase in the gross profit percentage was due primarily to the impact of lower royalty costs and, to a lesser extent, higher average unit sales prices. These favorable items were partly offset by higher overall manufacturing costs and higher costs related to product distribution. Production Animal Segment. Gross profit for PAS decreased due to lower sales volume and a decrease in the gross profit percentage to 66% from 68%. The decrease in gross profit percentage was due primarily to higher costs of product manufacturing and the impact of lower revenue recognized related to a customer where revenue is recognized on the cash basis of accounting due to uncertain collectability. These items were partly offset by the favorable impact of foreign currency hedge contracts and the favorable currency impact on foreign currency denominated expenses, net of the unfavorable impact the strengthening of the U.S. dollar had on sales denominated in foreign currencies and lower royalty costs. 38 Table of Contents Other. Gross profit for Other increased due to higher sales volume and an increase in the gross profit percentage to 45% from 44%. The increase in gross profit percentage was due to lower overall costs of product manufacturing in our OPTI Medical and Dairy businesses and, to a lesser extent, greater relative sales of higher margin Dairy SNAP tests and OPTI Medical instrument consumables. These favorable items were partly offset by lower average unit sales prices of OPTI Medical products. Operating Expenses and Operating Income Total Company. The following tables present operating expenses and operating income by operating segment: For the Years Ended December 31, Operating Expenses Percent of Percent of Dollar Percentage (dollars in thousands) 2009 Revenue 2008 Revenue Change Change CAG $ 274,235 32.5 % $ 282,579 33.9 % $ (8,344 ) (3.0 %) Water 15,618 21.3 % 15,722 21.1 % (104 ) (0.7 %) PAS 33,985 44.0 % 33,245 41.2 % 740 2.2 % Other 13,642 36.0 % 13,576 39.1 % 66 0.5 % Unallocated amounts 12,832 N/A 12,188 N/A 644 5.3 % Total Company $ 350,312 34.0 % $ 357,310 34.9 % $ (6,998 ) (2.0 %) Operating Income Percent of Percent of Dollar Percentage (dollars in thousands) 2009 Revenue 2008 Revenue Change Change CAG $ 136,121 16.1 % $ 129,620 15.5 % $ 6,501 5.0 % Water 31,615 43.2 % 31,330 42.1 % 285 0.9 % PAS 17,271 22.4 % 21,760 26.9 % (4,489 ) (20.6 %) Other 3,425 9.0 % 1,555 4.5 % 1,870 120.3 % Unallocated amounts (12,463 ) N/A (11,809 ) N/A (654 ) (5.5 %) Total Company $ 175,969 17.1 % $ 172,456 16.8 % $ 3,513 2.0 % Companion Animal Group. The following table presents CAG operating expenses by functional area: For the Years Ended December 31, Operating Expenses Percent of Percent of Dollar Percentage (dollars in thousands) 2009 Revenue 2008 Revenue Change Change Sales and marketing $ 141,681 16.8 % $ 143,644 17.2 % $ (1,963 ) (1.4 %) General and administrative 92,122 10.9 % 93,008 11.2 % (886 ) (1.0 %) Research and development 40,432 4.8 % 45,927 5.5 % (5,495 ) (12.0 %) Total operating expenses $ 274,235 32.5 % $ 282,579 33.9 % $ (8,344 ) (3.0 %) As previously described, we sold a substantial portion of our pharmaceutical assets and product lines and restructured the remainder of this business in the fourth quarter of 2008. As a result, we did not incur meaningful expenses related to this business in 2009 and will not incur meaningful expenses in the future. This impact on sales and marketing expense, general and administrative expense and research and development expense is referred to in the following operating expense analysis as the impact of the pharmaceutical transaction. In relation to restructuring the remainder of the pharmaceutical business, certain research and development personnel were realigned to our corporate research and development team, for which expenses are not allocated to our operating segments. A portion of the decrease in spending explained within the CAG section is due to this restructuring. 39 Table of Contents The decrease in sales and marketing expense resulted primarily from the effects of the pharmaceutical transaction and from the favorable impact of exchange rates on foreign currency denominated expenses. These decreases were partly offset by higher personnel and personnel-related costs due, in part, to the addition of customer support, sales and marketing personnel, and an increase in facility expenses related to completion of significant phases of our headquarters expansion project in 2009. The decrease in general and administrative expense resulted primarily from the favorable impact of exchange rates on foreign currency denominated expenses, the effects of the pharmaceutical transaction and lower bad debt expense. These decreases were partly offset by an impairment charge of $1.5 million to write off an acquired intangible asset associated with our equine digital radiography business. To a lesser extent, the decreases noted were also offset by an increase in spending related to general support functions in the U.S. and Europe and incremental expenses associated with businesses acquired subsequent to January 1, 2009, comprised mainly of administrative expenses of a recurring nature to support the acquired businesses and transaction related expenses. The decrease in research and development expense resulted primarily from a decrease in spending related to the pharmaceutical business. Water. The following table presents Water expenses by functional area: For the Years Ended December 31, Operating Expenses Percent of Percent of Dollar Percentage (dollars in thousands) 2009 Revenue 2008 Revenue Change Change Sales and marketing $ 7,115 9.7 % $ 7,504 10.1 % $ (389 ) (5.2 %) General and administrative 5,851 8.0 % 5,674 7.6 % 177 3.1 % Research and development 2,652 3.6 % 2,544 3.4 % 108 4.2 % Total operating expenses $ 15,618 21.3 % $ 15,722 21.1 % $ (104 ) (0.7 %) The decrease in sales and marketing expense resulted primarily from the favorable impact of exchange rates on foreign currency denominated expenses, lower spending on consulting services and a decrease in spending on travel. The increase in general and administrative expense resulted from higher bad debt expense and higher spending on corporate support function expenses, partly offset by lower legal expenses and the favorable impact of exchange rates on foreign currency denominated expenses. The increase in research and development expense was due primarily to an increase in spending associated with enhancing the functionality of an existing product, qualifying second source suppliers of certain raw materials and new product development. These increases were partly offset by lower spending related to product registration related fees and the favorable impact of exchange rates on foreign currency denominated expenses. Production Animal Segment. The following table presents PAS operating expenses by functional area: For the Years Ended December 31, Operating Expenses Percent of Percent of Dollar Percentage (dollars in thousands) 2009 Revenue 2008 Revenue Change Change Sales and marketing $ 12,650 16.4 % $ 12,982 16.1 % $ (332 ) (2.6 %) General and administrative 12,845 16.6 % 12,416 15.4 % 429 3.5 % Research and development 8,490 11.0 % 7,847 9.7 % 643 8.2 % Total operating expenses $ 33,985 44.0 % $ 33,245 41.2 % $ 740 2.2 % The decrease in sales and marketing expense resulted primarily from the favorable impact of exchange rates on foreign currency denominated expenses and lower spending on marketing activities. The increase in general and administrative expense resulted primarily from increased personnel costs and higher legal spending, partly offset by the favorable impact of exchange rates on foreign currency denominated expenses and lower intangible asset amortization expense. The increase in research and development expense resulted primarily from an increase in spending on product development, increased personnel-related expenses and increased spending on supplies, partly offset by the favorable impact of exchange rates on foreign currency denominated expenses. 40 Table of Contents Other. Operating expenses for Other operating units increased $0.1 million to $13.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2009. The unfavorable impact of an increase in deferred compensation expense associated with an employee plan assumed in the acquisition of OPTI Medical, higher personnel-related costs and higher bad debt expense were almost entirely offset by the receipt of a milestone payment and, to a lesser extent, by lower spending on marketing materials and advertising in our OPTI Medical and Dairy businesses. In the fourth quarter of 2009, we received a milestone payment of $2 million related to the sale of product rights in connection with the disposition of our pharmaceutical division in the fourth quarter of 2008. The receipt of this payment was due to the achievement of certain development milestones by the third party that purchased the product rights. Because we have no obligation to deliver product or services, or otherwise provide support to the third party under this agreement, receipt of milestone payments are included in results of operations, but are not classified as revenue as the transaction was accounted for as the sale of a product line. We may receive up to $9.5 million of future payments based on the achievement of future sales milestones by this third party. Additional milestone payments will be included in our results of operations upon achievement of the milestone. Unallocated Amounts. Operating expenses that are not allocated to our operating segments increased $0.6 million to $12.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2009 due to the write-off of capitalized costs related to an information technology project and higher expense related to share-based compensation. These increases were partly offset by the impact of the fourth quarter 2008 sale of our Acarexx and SURPASS pharmaceutical products and a product that was under development, and the subsequent restructuring of the remaining pharmaceutical division. In 2008, we recognized a loss on the transaction and restructuring of approximately $1.5 million, of which $1.1 million was recorded in general and administrative expense, $0.3 million was recorded in sales and marketing expense and $0.1 million was recorded in research and development expense. Interest Income and Interest Expense Interest income was $0.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2009 compared to $2.3 million for the same period of the prior year. The decrease in interest income was due to lower effective interest rates, partly offset by higher average invested cash balances. Interest expense was $1.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2009 compared to $4.6 million for the same period of the prior year. The decrease in interest expense was due to lower effective interest rates on outstanding debt balances, partly offset by lower capitalized interest and higher average borrowings under our revolving credit facility. Provision for Income Taxes Our effective income tax rate was 30.0% for the year ended December 31, 2009 and 31.7% for the year ended December 31, 2008. The decrease in tax rate was due primarily to the recognition of tax benefits resulting from the expiration of certain statutes of limitations, settlement of an audit in an international tax jurisdiction and the write-off of non-deductible goodwill related to the pharmaceutical product lines sold in the fourth quarter of 2008. These benefits were partly offset by a reduction in international deferred tax liabilities in 2008 due to a change in the statutory tax rates for a jurisdiction in which we operate. This non-recurring benefit of approximately $1.5 million reduced our effective income tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2008 by 0.9 percentage points. In the next year, it is reasonably possible that we could recognize up to $1.5 million of income tax benefits that have not been recognized at December 31, 2009. The income tax benefits are primarily due to the lapse in the statutes of limitations for various U.S. and international tax jurisdictions. 41 Table of Contents Twelve Months Ended December 31, 2008 Compared to Twelve Months Ended December 31, 2007 Revenue Total Company. The following table presents revenue by operating segment: For the Years Ended December 31, Percentage Change Net of Percentage Acquisitions/ Percentage Change from Divestitures Net Revenue Dollar Percentage Change from Acquisitions/ and Currency (dollars in thousands) 2008 2007 Change Change Currency (1) Divestitures (2) Effect CAG $ 834,056 $ 750,449 $ 83,607 11.1 % 1.0 % 0.8 % 9.3 % Water 74,469 66,235 8,234 12.4 % 0.3 % 12.1 % PAS 80,762 75,085 5,677 7.6 % 4.8 % 2.7 % 0.1 % Other 34,743 30,786 3,957 12.9 % 2.8 % 2.9 % 7.2 % Total $ 1,024,030 $ 922,555 $ 101,475 11.0 % 1.3 % 0.9 % 8.8 % (1) Represents the percentage change in revenue attributed to the effect of changes in currency rates from the year ended December 31, 2008 to the year ended December 31, 2007. (2) Represents the percentage change in revenue during the year ended December 31, 2008 compared to the year ended December 31, 2007 attributed to incremental revenues from businesses acquired or revenues lost from divisions divested or discontinued subsequent to December 31, 2006. The following revenue analysis reflects the results of operations net of the impact of currency exchange rates on sales outside the U.S. and net of incremental sales from businesses acquired or revenues lost from divisions divested subsequent to December 31, 2006. Companion Animal Group. The following table presents revenue by product and service category for CAG: For the Years Ended December 31, Percentage Change Net of Percentage Acquisitions/ Percentage Change from Divestitures Net Revenue Dollar Percentage Change from Acquisitions/ and Currency (dollars in thousands) 2008 2007 Change Change Currency (1) Divestitures (2) Effect Instruments and consumables $ 318,533 $ 289,271 $ 29,262 10.1 % 1.0 % 9.1 % Rapid assay products 146,867 133,508 13,359 10.0 % 0.9 % 9.1 % Laboratory diagnostic and consulting services 288,244 255,193 33,051 13.0 % 1.5 % 2.5 % 9.0 % Practice information management systems and digital radiography 61,291 53,385 7,906 14.8 % (0.2 %) 15.0 % Pharmaceutical products 19,121 19,092 29 0.2 % (2.5 %) 2.7 % Net CAG revenue $ 834,056 $ 750,449 $ 83,607 11.1 % 1.0 % 0.8 % 9.3 % (1) Represents the percentage change in revenue attributed to the effect of changes in currency rates from the year ended December 31, 2008 to the year ended December 31, 2007. (2) Represents the percentage change in revenue during the year ended December 31, 2008 compared to the year ended December 31, 2007 attributed to incremental revenues from businesses acquired or revenues lost from divisions divested or discontinued subsequent to December 31, 2006. 42 Table of Contents Instruments and consumables revenue increased due to higher consumables sales volumes for most of our analyzers and higher average unit sales prices, primarily on slides that are sold for use in our chemistry analyzers. Additionally, increased revenue was due to higher instrument sales volumes, due primarily to sales of recently launched instruments, including Catalyst Dx chemistry analyzers and SNAPshot Dx analyzers, which we began shipping to customers in the first quarter of 2008, and sales of Coag Dx blood coagulation analyzers, which we began shipping to customers in the fourth quarter of 2007. The increase in volumes due to the placement of recently launched instruments was partly offset by a decrease in sales of most of our other IDEXX VetLab instruments, due primarily to increased market penetration and a shift in focus of our sales team to our newer instruments. The lower sales of our other IDEXX VetLab instruments was also due to lower average unit sales prices, due largely to increased promotional discounting. Higher instrument service revenue was due to the increase in number of instruments covered under service contracts as we continue to increase our active installed base of instruments. Sales volumes of consumables in the U.S. and Canada in the first half of 2007 benefited from temporary additional diagnostic testing volume related to the recall of certain pet foods in March 2007. We believe that the recall resulted in a higher than usual number of pet visits to veterinary clinics in North America in the first and second quarters of 2007. We estimate that this event negatively impacted year-over-year growth in sales of instruments and consumables for the year ended December 31, 2008 by approximately 1%. The impact from changes in distributors inventory levels reduced reported instruments and consumables revenue growth by 1%. The increase in practice-level sales of rapid assay products was due to both higher average unit sales prices and higher sales volumes. Higher average unit sales prices were due primarily to the impact of price increases of certain canine and feline combination tests and, to a lesser extent, less promotional discounting in connection with our SNAP up the Savings and other customer programs and higher relative sales of canine combination test products versus single assay test products. Increased volume was due primarily to increased U.S. practice-level sales of our canine combination test products, such as the SNAP 4Dx , and the July 2007 launch of SNAP cPL , our test for pancreatitis in dogs. The favorable impacts on rapid assay sales noted above were partly offset by a decrease in the volume of sales of products under our distribution agreement with Agen Biomedical Limited. The impact from changes in distributors inventory levels reduced reported rapid assay revenue growth by 2%. The increase in sales of laboratory diagnostic and consulting services resulted from higher testing volume and the impact of price increases. As discussed above, the first half of 2007 benefited from temporary additional diagnostic testing volume resulting from the March 2007 pet food recall. We estimate that this event negatively impacted year-over-year growth in laboratory diagnostic and consulting services revenue for the year ended December 31, 2008 by approximately 1%. The increase in sales of practice information management systems and digital radiography resulted primarily from higher sales volumes of companion animal radiography systems, partly offset by lower sales of equine radiography systems, lower average unit prices for companion animal radiography systems, and lower sales of Cornerstone practice information management systems. Revenue from the sales of pharmaceutical products was unchanged as the higher average unit sales price of PZI VET , our insulin product for the treatment of diabetic cats, was offset by lower sales volumes of Acarexx and SURPASS pharmaceutical products. As previously discussed, in a series of transactions in the fourth quarter of 2008, we sold a substantial portion of our pharmaceutical assets and product lines. We retained certain intellectual property and licenses for developed products as well as certain less significant product lines, which were reassigned to other business units. See Note 19 to the consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2009 included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Water. The increase in Water revenue resulted primarily from higher sales volume, partly offset by lower average unit sales prices due to higher relative sales in geographies where products are sold at lower average unit sales prices. Higher sales volumes were attributable to the increased sales of our Colilert products, used to detect total coliforms and E. coli in water, and the commencement in September 2007 of distribution of certain water testing kits manufactured by Life Technologies Corporation, which increased reported Water revenue growth by 5%. Production Animal Segment. The increase in PAS revenue resulted from increased sales volume, partly offset by lower average unit sales prices. The increase in volume resulted primarily from higher livestock diagnostics sales, including sales attributable to Institut Pourquier, a France-based manufacturer of production animal diagnostic products that we acquired in March 2007. The year-over-year growth in sales of Pourquier products contributed 3% to PAS revenue growth. The decrease in average unit sales prices was due primarily to a reduction in average price for our post-mortem test for BSE. 43 Table of Contents Other. The increase in Other revenue was due primarily to higher sales volume of our OPTI Medical consumable products and, to a lesser extent, higher sales volume of Dairy SNAP antibiotic residue tests. Gross Profit Total Company. The following table presents gross profit and gross profit percentages by operating segment: For the Years Ended December 31, Gross Profit Percent of Percent of Dollar Percentage (dollars in thousands) 2008 Revenue 2007 Revenue Change Change CAG $ 412,199 49.4 % $ 362,162 48.3 % $ 50,037 13.8 % Water 47,052 63.2 % 41,656 62.9 % 5,396 13.0 % PAS 55,005 68.1 % 46,728 62.2 % 8,277 17.7 % Other 15,131 43.6 % 12,455 40.5 % 2,676 21.5 % Unallocated amounts 379 N/A 521 N/A (142 ) (27.3 %) Total Company $ 529,766 51.7 % $ 463,522 50.2 % $ 66,244 14.3 % Companion Animal Group. Gross profit for CAG increased due to increased sales volume in all CAG product and service lines, except the pharmaceutical business, and to an increase in the gross profit percentage to 49% from 48%. The gross profit percentage in 2007 was unfavorably impacted by the write-off of pharmaceutical inventory and of a prepaid royalty related to our Navigator product, as discussed below, which favorably impacted the comparison of current year gross profit percentage to prior year gross profit percentage by 1%. The increase in the 2008 gross profit percentage was also due to the favorable impact of foreign currency rates on sales denominated in those currencies, inclusive of foreign exchange hedge contract gains and foreign currency denominated expenses; lower cost of slides that are sold for use in our chemistry analyzers; and higher average unit sales prices on canine combination test products. These favorable items were partly offset by higher relative sales of lower margin laboratory diagnostic and consulting services and IDEXX VetLab instruments, and also by higher manufacturing costs of our instruments, including our Catalyst Dx Chemistry Analyzer. During 2007, we recognized a write-down of raw material inventory of nitazoxanide ( NTZ ), the active ingredient associated with our Navigator product, of $9.1 million and a write-off of a prepaid royalty license of $1.0 million associated with Navigator paste. We wrote down these assets because the third-party contract manufacturer of finished goods notified us that it would discontinue manufacturing the product in 2009. Additionally, product sales were lower than projected. We believed that we would not be able to enter into a replacement manufacturing arrangement on economically feasible terms and that we would not be able to obtain the product after termination of the existing manufacturing arrangement because the estimated production volume was low. Accordingly, we evaluated our associated inventory for obsolescence based on our changed estimates of product availability and estimated future demand and market conditions. Additionally, because of lower sales volume estimates and the reduced product life, we determined that we would not realize our related investment in prepaid royalties and, therefore, fully expensed this asset. In the fourth quarter of 2008, we cancelled our supply agreement for NTZ and sold our remaining raw material inventory back to the supplier for $2.0 million, payable in monthly installments of $25,000 through December 2010 with the remaining balance then due. We will recognize these payments in our results of operations when they are received due to uncertain collectibility. Water. Gross profit for Water increased due primarily to increased sales volume. Gross profit percentage remained approximately constant at 63% as lower overall costs of manufacturing and the favorable impact of foreign currency rates on sales denominated in those currencies, inclusive of foreign exchange hedge contract gains and foreign currency denominated expense, were offset by the impact of greater relative sales of lower margin products, consisting primarily of water testing kits manufactured by Life Technologies Corporation that we began distributing in September 2007; discrete costs incurred as a result of discontinuing a project to qualify a second source supplier for certain products; and higher relative sales in geographies where products are sold at lower unit prices. 44 Table of Contents Production Animal Segment. Gross profit for PAS increased due to increased sales volume and to an increase in the gross profit percentage to 68% from 62%. The increase in the gross profit percentage was due primarily to the impact of foreign currency exchange rates on sales denominated in those currencies, inclusive of foreign exchange hedge contract gains and foreign currency denominated expenses and, to a lesser extent, higher relative sales of higher margin livestock diagnostic tests; the impact of revenue recognized in 2008 on shipments prior to January 1, 2008 to a customer for which we recognize revenue on the cash basis of accounting due to uncertain collectibility; and the favorable settlement of a royalty liability. The gross profit percentage in 2007 was negatively affected by 1% as a result of purchase accounting for inventory acquired with the Pourquier business. These favorable impacts were partly offset by the impact of lower average unit sales prices. Other. Gross profit for Other increased due primarily to increased sales volume and to an increase in the gross profit percentage to 44% from 41%. The increase in the gross profit percentage was due primarily to the impact of foreign currency exchange rates on sales denominated in those currencies, inclusive of foreign exchange hedge contract gains and foreign currency denominated expenses. The gross profit percentage in 2008 also improved due to an initial payment under a royalty-bearing license agreement related to certain intellectual property. Under this agreement, we received an initial payment and are entitled to receive a total of $3.3 million in future milestone payments in addition to royalties based on future product sales. Milestone payments will be included in our results of operations upon achievement of each of the milestones. These favorable impacts were partly offset by higher relative sales of lower margin products. Operating Expenses and Operating Income Total Company. The following tables present operating expenses and operating income by operating segment: For the Years Ended December 31, Operating Expenses Percent of Percent of Dollar Percentage (dollars in thousands) 2008 Revenue 2007 Revenue Change Change CAG $ 282,579 33.9 % $ 261,877 34.9 % $ 20,702 7.9 % Water 15,722 21.1 % 14,809 22.4 % 913 6.2 % PAS 33,245 41.2 % 31,272 41.6 % 1,973 6.3 % Other 13,576 39.1 % 11,452 37.2 % 2,124 18.5 % Unallocated amounts 12,188 N/A 7,929 N/A 4,259 53.7 % Total Company $ 357,310 34.9 % $ 327,339 35.5 % $ 29,971 9.2 % Operating Income Percent of Percent of Dollar Percentage (dollars in thousands) 2008 Revenue 2007 Revenue Change Change CAG $ 129,620 15.5 % $ 100,285 13.4 % $ 29,335 29.3 % Water 31,330 42.1 % 26,847 40.5 % 4,483 16.7 % PAS 21,760 26.9 % 15,456 20.6 % 6,304 40.8 % Other 1,555 4.5 % 1,003 3.3 % 552 55.1 % Unallocated amounts (11,809 ) N/A (7,408 ) N/A (4,401 ) (59.4 %) Total Company $ 172,456 16.8 % $ 136,183 14.8 % $ 36,273 26.6 % 45 Table of Contents Companion Animal Group. The following table presents CAG operating expenses by functional area: For the Years Ended December 31, Operating Expenses Percent of Percent of Dollar Percentage (dollars in thousands) 2008 Revenue 2007 Revenue Change Change Sales and marketing $ 143,644 17.2 % $ 128,593 17.1 % $ 15,051 11.7 % General and administrative 93,008 11.2 % 87,179 11.6 % 5,829 6.7 % Research and development 45,927 5.5 % 46,105 6.1 % (178 ) (0.4 %) Total operating expenses $ 282,579 33.9 % $ 261,877 34.9 % $ 20,702 7.9 % The increase in sales and marketing expense resulted primarily from higher personnel and personnel-related costs due, in part, to expanded worldwide sales and marketing and the addition of customer service headcount. To a lesser extent, the impact of exchange rates on foreign currency denominated expenses and increased spending on customer support systems also contributed to the increase in sales and marketing expense. These increases were partly offset by lower overall spending on commissions and distributor incentives and marketing programs. The increase in general and administrative expense resulted primarily from higher spending on corporate support functions; incremental expenses associated with businesses acquired subsequent to January 1, 2007, comprised mainly of administrative expenses of a recurring nature to support the acquired businesses and amortization expense for intangible assets acquired; the unfavorable impact of exchange rates on foreign currency denominated expenses; and, to a lesser extent, increased bad debt expense and higher personnel costs due, in part, to increased headcount. These increases were partly offset by the absence of non-recurring costs incurred in 2007 related to acquisitions. The decrease in research and development expense resulted primarily from a decrease in product development spending due to the completion of the development of our Catalyst Dx chemistry analyzer, and our quantitative immunoassay platform, SNAPshot Dx , both of which we began shipping to customers in the first quarter of 2008, and to lower external consulting costs related to our pharmaceuticals product line. These decreases were largely offset by higher personnel costs to support development initiatives related primarily to IDEXX VetLab instrumentation, rapid assay and digital radiography products. Water. The following table presents Water expenses by functional area: For the Years Ended December 31, Operating Expenses Percent of Percent of Dollar Percentage (dollars in thousands) 2008 Revenue 2007 Revenue Change Change Sales and marketing $ 7,504 10.1 % $ 6,791 10.3 % $ 713 10.5 % General and administrative 5,674 7.6 % 5,532 8.4 % 142 2.6 % Research and development 2,544 3.4 % 2,486 3.8 % 58 2.3 % Total operating expenses $ 15,722 21.1 % $ 14,809 22.4 % $ 913 6.2 % The increase in sales and marketing expense resulted primarily from higher personnel and personnel-related costs due primarily to expanded headcount and, to a lesser extent, the impact of exchange rates on foreign currency denominated expenses. The increase in general and administrative expense resulted primarily from increased headcount and costs incurred in connection with the termination of a supply agreement, partly offset by a decrease in bad debt expense. The increase in research and development expense resulted primarily from an increase in professional fees and increased headcount, partly offset by the absence in 2008 of costs incurred in 2007 related to a regulatory study conducted to support a new test for drinking water. 46 Table of Contents Production Animal Segment. The following table presents PAS operating expenses by functional area: For the Years Ended December 31, Operating Expenses Percent of Percent of Dollar Percentage (dollars in thousands) 2008 Revenue 2007 Revenue Change Change Sales and marketing $ 12,982 16.1 % $ 12,234 16.3 % $ 748 6.1 % General and administrative 12,416 15.4 % 11,347 15.1 % 1,069 9.4 % Research and development 7,847 9.7 % 7,691 10.2 % 156 2.0 % Total operating expenses $ 33,245 41.2 % $ 31,272 41.6 % $ 1,973 6.3 % The increase in sales and marketing expense resulted primarily from the impact of exchange rates on foreign currency denominated expenses and, to a lesser extent, increased personnel and personnel-related costs and incremental activities associated with the Pourquier business, which was acquired in March 2007. These unfavorable impacts were partly offset by costs incurred in 2007 associated with terminating a distribution agreement, which favorably impacted the comparison of current year sales and marketing expense to the prior year, and by increased recruiting costs associated with the increase in headcount. The increase in general and administrative expense resulted primarily from increased personnel costs, the impact of exchange rates on foreign currency denominated expenses and incremental costs associated with the acquisition of the Pourquier business, which are comprised mainly of administrative expenses of a recurring nature to support the acquired business and amortization expense for intangible assets. These increases were partly offset by lower overall spending on corporate support function expenses. The increase in research and development expense resulted primarily from increased headcount and the impact of exchange rates on foreign currency denominated expenses, partly offset by a decrease in spending on research and development supplies and on third-party consulting firms used to conduct research. Other. Operating expenses for Other increased $2.1 million to $13.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2008 due primarily to higher spending on corporate support function expenses, increased personnel costs, partly due to increased headcount, and to incremental expenses related to OPTI Medical, which was acquired in January 2007. These increases were partly offset by a reduction in deferred compensation liability related to a deferred compensation plan assumed in the OPTI Medical acquisition. The deferred compensation liability is determined based on the value of the investments in an underlying consolidated trust. The unrealized loss on the marketable securities in the trust is recorded through other comprehensive income. Unallocated Amounts. Operating expenses that are not allocated to our operating segments increased $4.3 million to $12.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2008 due primarily to increased corporate research and development spending on software and systems research and development related to integration of our veterinary product and service offerings. To a lesser extent, the increase in operating expenses was also attributable to the sale of our Acarexx and SURPASS pharmaceutical products and a product that was under development, and the subsequent restructuring of the remaining pharmaceutical division. We recognized a loss on the transaction and restructuring of approximately $1.5 million, of which $1.1 million was recorded in general and administrative expense, $0.3 million was recorded in sales and marketing expense and $0.1 million was recorded in research and development expense in 2008. Interest Income and Interest Expense Interest income was $2.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2008 compared to $2.8 million for the same period of the prior year. The decrease in interest income was due to lower effective interest rates, partly offset by higher average invested cash balances. Interest expense was $4.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2008 compared to $4.2 million for the same period of the prior year. The increase in interest expense was due primarily to higher borrowings under our revolving credit facility, partly offset by lower effective interest rates on outstanding debt balances and incremental capitalized interest. 47 Table of Contents Provision for Income Taxes Our effective income tax rate was 31.7% for the year ended December 31, 2008 and 30.3% for the year ended December 31, 2007. The increase in tax rate is primarily attributable to several non-recurring items. First, we wrote off non-deductible goodwill related to the pharmaceutical product lines sold in the fourth quarter of 2008. Additionally, the increase in tax rate was impacted by certain non-recurring items that favorably impacted the tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2007, including the reduction of deferred tax liabilities due to a change in international tax rate and the recognition of state tax benefits resulting from the completion of an audit in 2007. These items were partly offset by tax benefits related to a reduction in international deferred tax liabilities in 2008 and the 2007 reduction of deferred tax assets due to changes in statutory income tax rates for jurisdictions in which we operate. RECENT ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS A discussion of recent accounting pronouncements is included in Note 3 to the consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2009 included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In September 2009, authoritative literature was issued that modifies the revenue recognition guidance for establishing separate units of accounting and additionally, how to recognize revenue for the sale of tangible products that contain software that is more than incidental to the functionality of the product as a whole. The revised guidance becomes effective on January 1, 2011; however, may be early adopted as of the beginning of the 2009 fiscal year. We have made the election to adopt these changes as of January 1, 2010. Adoption of the revisions to the authoritative guidance will not have a significant impact on our financial position, results of operations, or cash flows. LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES Liquidity We fund the capital needs of our business through cash on hand, funds generated from operations, and amounts available under our unsecured short-term revolving credit facility ( Credit Facility ). At December 31, 2009 and December 31, 2008, we had $106.7 million and $78.9 million, respectively, of cash and cash equivalents, and working capital of $120.0 million and $60.6 million, respectively. Additionally, at December 31, 2009, we had remaining borrowing availability under our Credit Facility of $80.2 million. We believe that current cash and cash equivalents, funds generated from operations, and amounts available under our Credit Facility will be sufficient to fund our operations, capital purchase requirements, and strategic growth needs for the next twelve months. We further believe that we could obtain additional borrowings at prevailing market interest rates to fund our growth objectives. However, based on the current credit market, we believe that the interest rates, financial covenants and other terms of such borrowings would be less favorable than those applicable to our current Credit Facility and those which otherwise would have been available historically. We consider the operating earnings of certain non-United States subsidiaries to be indefinitely invested outside the U.S. Changes to this policy could have adverse tax consequences. Subject to this policy, we manage our worldwide cash requirements considering available funds among all of our subsidiaries. Our foreign cash balances are generally available without legal restrictions to fund ordinary business operations outside the U.S. 48 Table of Contents The following table presents additional key information concerning working capital: For the Three Months Ended December 31, September 30, June 30, March 31, December 31, 2009 2009 2009 2009 2008 Days sales outstanding 38.9 41.2 40.2 43.8 41.9 Inventory turns 2.2 1.8 1.8 1.6 2.0 Sources and Uses of Cash The following table presents cash provided (used): For the Years Ended December 31, (dollars in thousands) 2009 2008 Dollar Change Net cash provided by operating activities $ 174,952 $ 143,308 $ 31,644 Net cash used by investing activities (53,621 ) (91,595 ) 37,974 Net cash used by financing activities (95,295 ) (30,790 ) (64,505 ) Net effect of changes in exchange rates on cash 1,824 (2,415 ) 4,239 Net increase in cash and cash equivalents $ 27,860 $ 18,508 $ 9,352 Operating Activities. Cash provided by operating activities was $175.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2009, compared to $143.3 million for the same period in 2008. We historically have experienced proportionally lower or net negative cash flows from operating activities during the first quarter and proportionally higher or net positive cash flows from operating activities for the remainder of the year and for the annual period. Several factors contribute to the seasonal fluctuations in cash flows generated by operating activities, including the following: Accounts receivable are historically higher in the first quarter of the year due to seasonality of certain products. We have management and non-management employee incentive programs that provide for the payment of annual bonuses in the first quarter following the year for which the bonuses were earned. We have agreements with certain suppliers that require us to make minimum annual inventory purchases, in some cases in order to retain exclusive distribution rights, and we have other agreements with suppliers that provide for lower pricing based on annual purchase volumes. We may place a higher volume of purchase orders for inventory during the fourth quarter in order to meet our minimum commitments or realize volume pricing discounts and we receive that inventory in the fourth or first quarters and pay in the first quarter. The specific facts and circumstances that we consider in determining the timing and level of inventory purchases throughout the year related to these agreements may yield inconsistent cash flows from operations, most typically in the first and fourth quarters. The total of net income and net non-cash charges was $185.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2009, compared to $176.8 million for the same period in 2008. During the year ended December 31, 2009, cash decreased by $10.3 million due to changes in operating assets and liabilities, compared to a decrease in the same period of 2008 of $33.5 million, resulting in a year-to-year increase in cash of $23.2 million. 49 Table of Contents The following table presents cash flows from changes in operating assets and liabilities: For the Years Ended December 31, (dollars in thousands) 2009 2008 Dollar Change Accounts receivable $ (1,155 ) $ (10,266 ) $ 9,111 Inventories 6,223 (18,468 ) 24,691 Other assets (7,842 ) (3,902 ) (3,940 ) Accounts payable (9,156 ) (4,327 ) (4,829 ) Accrued liabilities 705 4,257 (3,552 ) Deferred revenue 925 (805 ) 1,730 Decrease in cash due to changes in operating assets and liabilities $ (10,300 ) $ (33,511 ) $ 23,211 During the year ended December 31, 2009, we realized cash related to investments made during 2008 in inventories and accounts receivable. At December 31, 2008, higher inventory balances, as compared to balances at December 31, 2007, related primarily to Catalyst Dx analyzers, digital radiography instruments and Lasercyte hematology analyzers. In 2009, higher sales of Catalyst Dx analyzers and other products, combined with specific efforts to manage growth in inventory of all of our products favorably impacted the change in our cash position. This favorable impact was partly offset by the impact of a large reduction of slides inventory from 2007 to 2008, as compared to an increase in slides inventory balances from 2008 to 2009. The favorable impact on our cash position due to changes in accounts receivable was driven by improved collection of cash from customers coupled with growth in sales. However, sales growth in 2009 was at a slower rate than experienced in 2008. The slowing of sales growth and improved collections caused the use of cash related to accounts receivable to be lower during the year ended December 31, 2009, as compared to the same period of the prior year. These increases in cash were partly offset by additional cash used by accounts payable, due to timing of payment for slide inventory, and accrued expenses related to the timing of payments of royalties and employee benefits during the year ended December 31, 2009 as compared to the same period of the prior year. Investing Activities. Cash used by investing activities was $53.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2009, compared to cash used of $91.6 million for the same period of 2008. The decrease in cash used by investing activities for 2009, compared to 2008, was due primarily to $39.8 million less cash used for purchases of property and equipment. The decrease in purchases of property and equipment was attributable primarily to a reduction in spending of $26.4 million for the renovation and expansion of our headquarters facility in Westbrook, Maine, which we expect to conclude in the second quarter of 2011. We paid $49.4 million to purchase fixed assets during the year ended December 31, 2009. Our total capital expenditure plan for 2010 is approximately $45 million, which includes approximately $12 million for the continued renovation and expansion of our Westbrook facility, approximately $10 million related to information technology hardware and software, and the remainder related to investments in machinery and equipment. We paid $8.4 million in cash to acquire businesses and certain intangible assets not comprising businesses during the year ended December 31, 2009. We paid $6.8 million in cash to acquire a business and, under separate transactions, to acquire certain intangible assets that did not comprise businesses during the year ended December 31, 2008 and recognized liabilities of $0.3 million, of which $0.1 million was paid in 2008. See Note 4 to the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information about our acquisitions of businesses. Financing Activities. At December 31, 2009, we had $118.8 million outstanding under our Credit Facility, of which $4.8 million was borrowed by our Canadian subsidiary and denominated in Canadian dollars. The applicable interest rates on the Credit Facility generally range from 0.375 to 0.875 percentage points ( Credit Spread ) above the London interbank rate ( LIBOR ) or the Canadian Dollar-denominated bankers acceptance rate ( CDOR ), dependent on our consolidated leverage ratio. Under the Credit Facility, we pay quarterly commitment fees of 0.08% to 0.20%, dependent on our consolidated leverage ratio, on any unused commitment. The Credit Facility agreement contains a subjective material adverse event clause, which allows the debt holders to call the loans under the Credit Facility if we fail to notify the debt holder of such an event. The Credit Facility agreement also contains financial and other affirmative and negative covenants, as well as customary events of default, that would allow any amounts outstanding under the Credit Facility to be accelerated, or restrict our ability to borrow thereunder, in the event of noncompliance. The financial covenant requires our ratio of debt to earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization, as defined by the agreement, not to exceed 3-to-1. At December 31, 2009, we were in compliance with the covenants of the Credit Facility. 50 Table of Contents Our board of directors has authorized the repurchase of up to 44,000,000 shares of our common stock in the open market or in negotiated transactions. From the inception of the program in August 1999 to December 31, 2009, we repurchased 37,706,000 shares. Cash used to repurchase shares during the year ended December 31, 2009 and 2008 was $83.1 million and $132.3 million, respectively. We believe that the repurchase of our common stock is a favorable investment and we also repurchase to offset the dilutive effect of our share-based compensation programs. Repurchases of our common stock may vary depending upon the level of other investing activities and the share price. See Note 16 to the condensed consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information about our share repurchases. Other Commitments, Contingencies and Guarantees Under our workers compensation insurance policies for U.S. employees since January 1, 2003, we have retained the first $250,000 in claim liability per incident and an aggregate claim liability based on payroll for each year. The insurance company provides insurance for claims above the individual occurrence and aggregate limits. We estimate claim liability based on claims incurred and the estimated ultimate cost to settle the claims. Based on this analysis, we have recognized expenses of $0.8 million, $0.9 million, and $0.3 million for claims incurred during the years ended December 31, 2009, 2008 and 2007, respectively. Claims incurred during the years ended December 31, 2009 and 2008 are relatively undeveloped and significant additional healthcare and wage indemnification costs could arise from those claims. Our liability for claims incurred during the years ended December 31, 2009 and 2008 could exceed our estimates and we could be liable for up to $1.9 million and $2.0 million, respectively, in excess of the expense we have recognized. For the five years ended on or prior to December 31, 2007, based on our retained claim liability per incident and our aggregate claim liability, our maximum liability at December 31, 2009 is $0.8 million in excess of the amounts deemed probable and previously recognized. In connection with these policies, we have outstanding letters of credit totaling $1.9 million to the insurance companies as security for these claims. We have commitments outstanding at December 31, 2009 for additional purchase price payments of up to $7.7 million, of which $0.2 million has been accrued, in connection with acquisitions of businesses and intangible assets during the current and prior periods, all of which are contingent on the achievement by certain acquired businesses of specified milestones. We are contractually obligated to make the following payments in the years below: (in thousands) Total 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 After 2014 Long-term debt obligations (1) $ 5,817 $ 1,091 $ 2,181 $ 2,181 $ 364 Operating leases 66,440 13,697 21,813 13,818 17,112 Purchase obligations (2) 64,143 61,771 2,372 Minimum royalty payments 6,900 666 1,634 1,670 2,930 Other long-term liabilities (3) 4,503 1,124 1,575 990 814 Total contractual cash obligations $ 147,803 $ 78,349 $ 29,575 $ 18,659 $ 21,220 (1) Long-term debt amounts include interest payments associated with long-term debt. (2) Purchase obligations include agreements to purchase goods or services that are enforceable and legally binding and that specify all significant terms, including fixed or minimum quantities, pricing, and approximate timing of purchase transactions. Of this amount, $53.3 million represents amounts committed under purchase orders and $4.6 million represents our minimum purchase obligation under our VetTest supply agreement with Ortho. (3) Other long-term liabilities are liabilities that are reflected on our consolidated balance sheet in this Annual Report on Form 10-K and include accrued sabbatical leave. These liabilities do not reflect unrecognized tax benefits of $5.4 million and deferred compensation liabilities of $1.9 million as the timing of recognition is uncertain. Refer to Note 10 of the consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2009 included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional discussion on unrecognized tax benefits. 51 Table of Contents 
