CIK: 874716
Company Name: IDEXX LABORATORIES INC DE
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2009-02-20


ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSES OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS Description of Segments . During 2008, we operated primarily through three business segments: products and services for the veterinary market, which we refer to as the Companion Animal Group ( CAG ), water quality products ( Water ) and products for production animal health, which we refer to as the Production Animal Segment ( PAS ). We also operate two smaller segments that comprise products for dairy quality, which we refer to as Dairy, and products for the human medical diagnostic market, which we refer to as OPTI Medical. Financial information about the Dairy and OPTI Medical operating segments and other activities are combined and presented in an Other category because they do not meet the quantitative or qualitative thresholds for reportable segments. We added the OPTI Medical operating segment in connection with our acquisition of substantially all of the assets and assumption of certain liabilities of the Critical Care Division of Osmetech plc in January 2007. 22 Table of Contents In the fourth quarter of 2008, we sold our Acarexx and SURPASS veterinary pharmaceutical products and a product under development and subsequently restructured the remaining pharmaceutical business. In connection with this restructuring, we realigned two of our remaining product lines to the Rapid Assay business, which is part of our CAG segment, and realigned the remainder of the business, which comprised one product line and two out-licensing arrangements, to the Other category. In addition, we maintain active research and development programs, some of which may materialize into the development and introduction of new technology, products or services that do not align with one of our existing business or service categories. In such situations, the related financial impacts are shown in the Other category. The segment information for the years ended December 31, 2007 and 2006 has been restated to conform to our presentation of reportable segments for the year ended December 31, 2008. Previously, financial information related to the product lines realigned to Rapid Assay and the product line and out-licensing arrangement realigned to Other were included in the pharmaceutical business and reported in the CAG segment. See Note 17 to the consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2008 included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for financial information about our segments, including geographic information, and about our product and service categories. Items that are not allocated to our operating segments are comprised primarily of corporate research and development expenses, a portion of share-based compensation expense, interest income and expense, and income taxes. We allocate most of our share-based compensation expense to the operating segments. This allocation differs from the actual expense and consequently yields a difference between the total allocated share-based compensation expense and the actual expense for the total company. In our segment disclosure of gross profit, operating expenses and operating income, these amounts are shown under the caption unallocated amounts. Impact of Distribution Channel on Results of Operations . Because our instrument consumables and rapid assay products are sold in the U.S. and certain other geographies by distributors, distributor purchasing dynamics have an impact on our reported sales of these products. Distributors purchase products from us and sell them to veterinary practices, who are the end users. Distributor purchasing dynamics may be affected by many factors and may be unrelated to underlying end-user demand for our products. As a result, fluctuations in distributors inventories may cause reported results in a period not to be representative of underlying end-user demand. Therefore, we believe it is important to track distributor sales to end users and to distinguish between the impact of end-user demand and the impact of distributor purchasing dynamics on reported revenue growth. Where growth rates are affected by changes in end-user demand, we refer to the impact of practice-level sales on growth. Where growth rates are affected by distributor purchasing dynamics, we refer to the impact of changes in distributors inventories. If during the comparable period of the prior year, distributors inventories grew by more than those inventories grew in the current year, then changes in distributors inventories have a negative impact on our reported sales growth in the current period. Conversely, if during the comparable period of the prior year, distributors inventories grew by less than those inventories grew in the current year, then changes in distributors inventories have a positive impact on our reported sales growth in the current period. The following is a discussion of the strategic and operating factors that we believe have the most significant effect on the performance of our business. Companion Animal Group In the CAG segment, we believe we have developed a strategic advantage over companies with more narrow product or service offerings. The breadth and complementary nature of our products and services give us scale in sales and distribution, permit us to offer integrated disease-management solutions that leverage the advantages of both point-of-care and outside laboratory testing, and facilitate the flow of medical and business information in the veterinary practice by connecting practice information software systems with reference laboratory test data, in-clinic test data from our IDEXX VetLab suite of analyzers, and radiographic data in the IDEXX-PACS and IDEXX EquiView PACS software taken by our digital radiography systems. 23 Table of Contents Instruments and Consumables . Our strategy in our IDEXX VetLab instrument business is to provide veterinarians with an integrated set of instruments that, individually and together, provide superior diagnostic information in the clinic, enabling veterinarians to practice better medicine and, in doing so, achieve their practice economic objectives, including growth and profitability. We derive substantial revenues and margins from the sale of consumables that are used in these instruments. The principal instruments used by veterinarians for in-clinic diagnostic testing are chemistry and hematology analyzers. In addition we sell instruments used for endocrinology, blood gas, electrolytes, urinalysis, and blood coagulation testing. Our IDEXX VetLab Station is an in-clinic laboratory information management system that records and integrates patient diagnostic information from our analyzers for better practice management. Additionally, we offer extended maintenance agreements in connection with the sale of our instruments. During the early stage of an instrument life cycle, we derive relatively greater revenues from instrument placements, while consumable sales become relatively more significant in later stages as the installed base of instruments increases and instrument placement revenues begin to decline. Instrument sales have significantly lower gross margins than sales of consumables, and therefore the mix of instrument and consumable sales in a particular period will impact our gross margins in this line of business. Our Catalyst Dx analyzer is our latest generation chemistry analyzer, which was launched in the first quarter of 2008. In addition, we sell and have an active installed base of approximately 30,000 VetTest Chemistry Analyzers, with substantially all of our revenues from that product line currently derived from consumables sales. We continue to place VetTest instruments through sales, lease, rental and other programs. A substantial portion of 2008 Catalyst Dx analyzer placements have been made at veterinary clinics that already own our VetTest Chemistry Analyzer. As we continue to experience growth in sales of Catalyst Dx analyzers and the related consumables, we expect to see a decline in the sales of VetTest consumables. Based on projections of future sales volume and the average unit price of consumables used in the Catalyst Dx and VetTest analyzers, we do not expect a future shift to Catalyst Dx consumables to significantly impact gross margin. We do however expect near-term downward pressure on gross margin percentage due to higher relative instrument placement revenues as compared to consumable sales with continued penetration of the Catalyst Dx analyzer. Our long-term success in this area of our business is dependent upon new customer acquisition, customer retention and customer utilization of existing and new assays introduced on these instruments. To increase utilization, we seek to educate veterinarians about best medical practices that emphasize the importance of blood and urine chemistry testing for a variety of diagnostic purposes. We purchase the chemistry consumables, other than electrolyte slides, used in our Catalyst Dx and VetTest chemistry analyzers from Ortho under a supply agreement that continues through 2025. This supply agreement provides us with a long-term source of slides at costs that improve annually through 2010, and also improve over the term of the agreement as a result of increasing volume. Our principal hematology analyzer is the LaserCyte Hematology Analyzer, and in addition we sell the VetAutoread Hematology Analyzer. A substantial portion of LaserCyte placements have been made at veterinary clinics that already own our VetAutoread . Although we have experienced growth in sales of hematology consumables, LaserCyte consumable sales have been partly offset by declines in sales of VetAutoread consumables. Because the gross margin percentage of LaserCyte consumables exceeds the gross margin percentage of the VetAutoread consumables, gross margin from hematology consumables is expected to increase with continued penetration of the LaserCyte Hematology Analyzer. With all of our instrument lines, we seek to differentiate our products based on breadth of diagnostic menu, flexibility of menu selection, accuracy, reliability, ease of use, ability to handle compromised samples, time to result, analytical capability of software, integration with the IDEXX VetLab Station, education and training, and superior sales and customer service. Our instruments and consumables typically are sold at a premium price to competitive offerings. Our success depends, in part, on our ability to differentiate our products in a way that justifies premium pricing. 24 Table of Contents Rapid Assay Products . Our rapid assay business consists primarily of single-use kits for point-of-care testing and, to a limited degree, microwell-based kits for laboratory testing for canine and feline diseases and conditions. Our rapid assay strategy is to develop, manufacture, market and sell proprietary tests that address important medical needs for particular diseases prevalent in the companion animal population. We seek to differentiate our tests through superior performance, including by providing our customers with proprietary combination tests that test a single sample for multiple analytes. Where alternative point-of-care offerings exist, we seek to differentiate our tests with superior performance. As in our other lines of business, we also seek to differentiate our products through superior customer service. These products carry price premiums over competitive products that we believe do not offer equivalent performance and diagnostic capabilities, and which we believe do not include a similar level of support. We further augment our product development and customer service efforts with sales and marketing programs that enhance medical awareness and understanding regarding our target diseases and the importance of diagnostic testing. We also seek to enhance efficiency and test result capture by providing our customers the ability to have rapid assay tests read and results recorded into the patient record by our SNAPshot Dx Analyzer. This functionality is currently available for quantitative measurements of total thyroxine ( T 4 ), cortisol and bile acids, which assist in the evaluation of thyroid, adrenal and liver function, respectively. We are currently developing this functionality across our canine and feline family of rapid assay products. Veterinary Reference Laboratory and Consulting Services . We believe that more than half of all diagnostic testing by U.S. veterinarians is done at outside reference laboratories such as our IDEXX Reference Laboratories. In markets outside the U.S., in-clinic testing is less prevalent and an even greater percentage of diagnostic testing is done in reference laboratories. We attempt to differentiate our laboratory testing services from those of our competitors primarily on the basis of quality, customer service, technology employed and specialized test menu. Revenue growth in this business is achieved both through increased sales at existing laboratories and through the acquisition of new customers, including through laboratory acquisitions, customer list acquisitions and opening new laboratories. In 2006, we acquired laboratories in the U.S., South Africa, and Canada and acquired a veterinary laboratory customer list in the U.S. In 2007, we acquired laboratories in the U.S. and Canada and acquired veterinary laboratory customer lists in the U.S., Switzerland, and United Kingdom. In 2008, we acquired a laboratory in Spain and acquired certain intellectual property and distribution rights associated with a diagnostic test product. Profitability of this business is largely the result of our ability to achieve efficiencies from both volume and operational improvements. New laboratories that we open typically will operate at a loss until testing volumes reach a level that permits profitability. Acquired laboratories frequently operate less profitably than our existing laboratories and those laboratories may not achieve profitability comparable to our existing laboratories for several years while we implement operating improvements and efficiencies. Therefore, in the short term, new and acquired reference laboratories generally will have a negative effect on the operating margin of the laboratory and consulting services business. Practice Information Systems and Digital Radiography . These businesses consist of veterinary practice information systems including hardware and software and veterinary-specific digital radiography systems. Our strategy in the practice information systems business is to provide superior total software and hardware integrated information solutions, backed by superior customer support and education, to allow the veterinarian to practice better medicine and achieve the practice business objectives. We differentiate our software systems through enhanced functionality and ease of use. Our veterinary-specific digital radiography systems allow veterinarians to capture digital radiographs with ease and without the use of hazardous chemicals. The digital radiography systems also incorporate IDEXX-PACS and IDEXX EquiView PACS picture archiving and communication software developed by IDEXX that allows for image enhancement, manipulation, storage and retrieval, and integration with the practice information software. Our strategy in digital radiography is to offer a system that provides superior image quality and software capability at a competitive price, backed by the same customer support provided for our other products and services in the Companion Animal Group. Water Our strategy in the water testing business is to develop, manufacture, market and sell proprietary products with superior performance, supported by exceptional customer service. Our customers are primarily water utilities, government laboratories and private certified laboratories to whom strong relationships and customer support are very important. International sales of water testing products represented 48% of total water product sales in 2008, and we expect that future growth in this business will be significantly dependent on our ability to increase international sales. Growth also will be dependent on our ability to enhance and broaden our product line. Most water microbiological testing is driven by regulation, and, in many countries, a test may not be used for regulatory testing unless it has been approved by the applicable regulatory body. As a result, we maintain an active regulatory program under which we are seeking regulatory approvals in a number of countries, primarily in Europe. 25 Table of Contents Production Animal Segment We develop, manufacture, market and sell a broad range of tests for various cattle, swine and poultry diseases and conditions, and have an active research and development and in-licensing program in this area. Our strategy is to offer proprietary tests with superior performance characteristics. Disease outbreaks are episodic and unpredictable, and certain diseases that are prevalent at one time may be substantially contained or eradicated at a later time. In response to outbreaks, testing initiatives may lead to exceptional demand for certain products in certain periods. Conversely, successful eradication programs may result in significantly decreased demand for certain products. The performance of this business, therefore, can fluctuate. In 2008, approximately 85% of our sales in this business were international. Because of the significant dependence of this business on international sales, the performance of the business is particularly subject to the various risks described above that are associated with doing business internationally. See Part I, Item 1A. Risk Factors. Other Dairy . Our strategy in the dairy testing business is to develop, manufacture and sell antibiotic residue testing products that satisfy applicable regulatory requirements for testing of milk by processors and producers and provide reliable field performance. The manufacture of these testing products leverage, almost exclusively, the SNAP platform as well as the production equipment of our rapid assay business, incorporating customized reagents for antibiotic detection. In 2008, approximately 77% of our sales in this business were international. To successfully increase sales of dairy testing products, we believe that we need to increase penetration in geographies outside the U.S. and in the processor segment of the dairy market, defend our share of the farm segment of the dairy market, and to develop product line enhancements and extensions. OPTI Medical Systems . Our strategy in the OPTI Medical Systems business for the human market is to develop, manufacture, and sell electrolyte and blood gas analyzers and related consumable products for the medical point-of-care diagnostics market worldwide, with a focus on small- to mid-sized hospitals. We seek to differentiate our products based on ease of use, menu, convenience, international distribution and service, and instrument reliability. Similar to our veterinary instruments and consumables strategy, a substantial portion of the revenues from this product line is derived from the sale of consumables for use on the installed base of electrolyte and blood gas analyzers. During the early stage of an instrument life cycle, relatively greater revenues are derived from instrument placements, while consumable sales become relatively more significant in later stages as the installed base of instruments increases and instrument placement revenues begin to decline. Our long-term success in this area of our business is dependent upon new customer acquisition, customer retention and increased customer utilization of existing and new assays introduced on these instruments. OPTI Medical Systems also supplies our VetStat Electrolyte and Blood Gas Analyzer, an instrument and consumable system that is a member of the IDEXX VetLab suite for the veterinary market. In addition, OPTI Medical Systems provides the electrolyte module and dry slide reagents that make up the electrolyte testing functionality of the Catalyst Dx analyzer. Our strategy in the OPTI Medical Systems business for the veterinary market is to utilize this unit know-how, intellectual property and manufacturing capability to continue to expand the menu and instrument capability of the VetStat and Catalyst Dx platforms for veterinary applications. Other . We have developed certain proprietary technology that we believe may have application in areas that do not align with one of our existing business or service categories. Our strategy is to out-license these technologies to partners that are best positioned to complete the development and commercialization of products utilizing these technologies. To the extent we are successful in doing so, we may receive one-time or recurring payments based on the achievement of development or sales milestones. Our ability to succeed in this area of our business depends on our ability to attract and retain qualified scientific personnel to develop proprietary products or technology and our ability to identify suitable third parties to complete the commercialization of these technologies. 26 Table of Contents CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the U.S. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates. Note 3 to the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2008 describes the significant accounting policies used in preparation of these consolidated financial statements. We believe the following critical accounting estimates and assumptions may have a material impact on reported financial condition and operating performance and involve significant levels of judgment to account for highly uncertain matters or are susceptible to significant change. Revenue Recognition Customer programs . We record estimated reductions to revenue in connection with customer marketing programs and incentive offerings that may give customers credits or award points. Award points may be applied to trade receivables owed to us and/or toward future purchases of our products or services. We establish accruals for estimated revenue reductions attributable to customer programs and incentive offerings for each program based on numerous factors, including: program design and award levels; forecasted purchasing patterns of those enrolled in the program based on historical experience with similar programs, current sales trends and market analyses; inventory levels of eligible products in the distribution channel; and estimated number of participants that will ultimately reach volume purchase thresholds. Revenue reductions are recorded quarterly based on issuance of credits, points earned but not yet issued, and estimates of credits and points to be earned in the future based on current revenue. In our analysis, we utilize data supplied from distributors and collected in-house that details the volume of qualifying products purchased as well as price paid per clinic ( practice-level sales data ). 27 Table of Contents IDEXX Points . Customers can earn points based on their participation in certain customer programs and making qualifying purchases related to those programs. Points may then be applied against the purchase price for IDEXX products and services purchased in the future or applied to trade receivables due to us. As points are redeemed we recognize the benefit of points expected to expire, or breakage, using historical forfeiture rates. On November 30 of each year, unused points earned before January 1 of the prior year expire and any variance from the breakage estimate is accounted for as a change in estimate. Within our overall IDEXX Points program, our two most significant customer programs are Practice Developer and SNAP up the Savings TM ( SUTS ), both of which are offered only to North American customers. For the years ended December 31, 2008, 2007 and 2006, we recorded revenue reductions of $7.7 million, $6.8 million and $5.1 million, respectively, related to our Practice Developer program and $4.0 million, $4.3 million and $4.9 million, respectively, related to our SUTS program. At December 31, 2008, 2007 and 2006, the total accrued revenue reductions were $15.2 million, $15.1 million and $14.0 million, respectively. Following is a summary of changes in the accrual for estimated revenue reductions attributable to IDEXX Points customer programs and incentive offerings in total and individually for our Practice Developer and SUTS programs, for the years ended December 31, 2008, 2007 and 2006 ( in thousands ): For the Years Ended December 31, 2008 2007 2006 IDEXX Points Balance, beginning of the year $ 10,364 $ 8,982 $ 6,119 Issuance of points for Practice Developer program (1) 7,527 6,574 4,810 Issuance of points for SNAP up the Savings program (1) 3,603 4,703 5,010 Issuance of points for other programs (1) 1,624 4,855 3,099 Breakage (694 ) (352 ) (76 ) Actual points redeemed (12,518 ) (14,398 ) (9,980 ) Exchange impact on balances denominated in foreign currency (101 ) Balance, end of year $ 9,805 $ 10,364 $ 8,982 Practice Developer Balance, beginning of the year $ 1,590 $ 1,417 $ 1,026 Current provision related to current period 7,704 6,799 5,089 Current provision (benefit) related to prior periods (183 ) (52 ) 112 Issuance of points for Practice Developer program (1) (7,527 ) (6,574 ) (4,810 ) Exchange impact on balances denominated in foreign currency (16 ) Balance, end of year $ 1,568 $ 1,590 $ 1,417 SNAP up the Savings Balance, beginning of the year $ 1,155 $ 1,429 $ 1,422 Current provision related to current period 3,998 4,334 4,936 Current provision related to prior periods 13 95 81 Issuance of points for SNAP up the Savings program (1) (3,603 ) (4,703 ) (5,010 ) Balance, end of year $ 1,563 $ 1,155 $ 1,429 Other Customer Programs Balance, beginning of the year $ 1,998 $ 2,184 $ 1,416 Current provision related to current period 4,066 6,031 5,236 Current benefit related to prior periods (258 ) (85 ) (169 ) Issuance of points for other programs (1) (1,624 ) (4,855 ) (3,099 ) Actual credits issued (1,820 ) (1,357 ) (1,228 ) Exchange impact on balances denominated in foreign currency (115 ) 80 28 Balance, end of year $ 2,247 $ 1,998 $ 2,184 (1) Practice Developer , SNAP up the Savings and certain other customer program liabilities are settled through the issuance of IDEXX Points. 28 Table of Contents Practice Developer . Our Practice Developer program is a Companion Animal Group awards program that permits customers to earn points by purchasing quarterly minimums in certain product and service categories, including IDEXX Reference Laboratories services, Catalyst Dx and VetTest slides, VetTest SNAP Reader reagents, LaserCyte and VetAutoread tubes, Feline and Canine SNAP tests, and service and maintenance agreements. The accrued revenue reduction is calculated each quarter based on sales to end users during the quarter by either us or our distributors and on our estimate of future points to be issued upon sale of applicable product inventories held by distributors at the end of the quarter. SUTS . SUTS is our volume incentive program for selected SNAP tests that provides customers with benefits in the form of (1) discounts off invoice at the time of purchase and (2) points under the IDEXX Points program awarded quarterly throughout the SUTS program year (which ends on August 31) based on total purchase volume of qualified SNAP products during the year. Under the SUTS program, commencing September 1, 2008, customers receive a 5% rebate of their purchase price if they purchase a minimum volume of products, either from us or our distributors. We cannot be certain what percentage of customers will purchase the minimum volume of products until that program year has ended. At the beginning of the program year, we develop an estimate of the percentage of customers that we expect to meet the minimum purchase threshold over the program period based on program enrollee purchasing patterns, historical experience with similar programs, current sales trends, and marketing analysis. The percentage of customers expected to meet the minimum purchase threshold is adjusted quarterly during the program year based on our experience with the program and finalized when the program year ends in August. The 5% revenue reduction is calculated quarterly based on the applicable gross sales during the period, at end-user prices, and the estimated percentage of end users that are expected to meet the minimum purchase threshold by the end of the program year. The accrued revenue reduction also includes our estimate of future points to be issued upon sale of applicable product inventories held by distributors at the end of the quarter. If the estimated percentage of customers expected to meet the minimum purchase threshold required to receive the 5% rebate under the SUTS program were to increase or decrease by 5%, we would be required to further reduce revenue or increase revenue, respectively, by $0.1 million. Doubtful accounts receivable . We recognize revenue only in those situations where collection from the customer is reasonably assured. We maintain allowances for doubtful accounts for estimated losses resulting from the inability of our customers to make required payments. We base our estimates on detailed analysis of specific customer situations and a percentage of our accounts receivable by aging category. If the financial condition of our customers were to deteriorate, resulting in an impairment of their ability to make payments, additional allowances might be required. Account balances are charged off against the allowance when we believe the receivable will not be recovered. Write-offs of customer accounts during the years ended December 31, 2008, 2007 and 2006, were $0.7 million, $1.0 million and $0.6 million, respectively. Inventory Valuation We write down inventory for estimated obsolescence when warranted by estimates of future demand, market conditions, and remaining shelf life. If actual market conditions are less favorable than those we estimated, additional inventory write-downs may be required, which would have a negative effect on results of operations. Certain major components of inventory for which we have made critical valuation judgments are discussed in more detail below. LaserCyte Hematology Analyzer . At December 31, 2008 and 2007, $2.9 million and $2.7 million, respectively, of inventory associated with our LaserCyte hematology instrument required rework before it could be used to manufacture finished goods, which was net of $2.2 million and $1.7 million, respectively, of write-downs for inventory estimated to be obsolete. We determined write-downs based on our estimate of the costs to rework inventory compared to replacement cost and the probability of success, primarily based on historical experience. We expect to fully realize our net investment in this inventory. However, if we are unsuccessful reworking this inventory, if we revise our judgment of our ability to successfully rework inventory due to new experience in reworking this inventory, or if we alter the design of this product, we may be required to write off some or all of the remaining associated inventory. 29 Table of Contents Valuation of Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets A significant portion of the purchase price for acquired businesses is assigned to intangible assets. Intangible assets other than goodwill are initially valued at the lesser of fair value or, if applicable, fair value proportionately reduced by the excess of the fair value of acquired net assets over the purchase price (collectively, fair value ) of the acquired business. If a market value is not readily available, the fair value of the intangible asset is estimated based on discounted cash flows using market participant assumptions, which are assumptions that are not specific to IDEXX. The selection of appropriate valuation methodologies and the estimation of discounted cash flows require significant assumptions about the timing and amounts of future cash flows, risks, appropriate discount rates, and the useful lives of intangible assets. When deemed appropriate by management, we utilize independent valuation experts to advise and assist us in allocating the purchase prices for acquired businesses to the fair values of the identified intangible assets and in determining appropriate amortization methods and periods for those intangible assets. Goodwill is initially valued based on the excess of the purchase price of a business combination over the fair values of acquired net assets. We assess goodwill for impairment annually in the fourth quarter and whenever events or circumstances indicate an impairment may exist, in accordance with Financial Accounting Standards Board ( FASB ) Statement of Financial Accounting Standards ( SFAS ) No. 142, Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets. For impairment testing, the fair values of the reporting units that include goodwill are estimated using a discounted cash flow approach. The cash flows used contain our best estimates, using appropriate and customary assumptions and projections at the time. Changes in forecast cash flows or the discount rate would affect the estimated fair values of reporting units and could result in a goodwill impairment charge in a future period. However, at December 31, 2008 a 25% decrease in the current estimated fair value of any of our reporting units would not result in a goodwill impairment charge for any of our reporting units that include goodwill. No impairments were identified as a result of the annual or event-driven reviews during the years ended December 31, 2008, 2007 or 2006. During 2008, we sold certain pharmaceutical product lines and pharmaceutical assets that qualified as a business. The pharmaceutical business had $13.7 million of related goodwill, of which we wrote off approximately $7.2 million that was allocated to the product lines sold based on their respective fair values. Fair values were estimated using a discounted cash flow approach. A substantial portion of the remaining goodwill is associated with products that have been licensed to third parties and is included in our Other segment. Realization of this goodwill is dependant upon the success of those third parties in developing and commercializing products, which will result in our receipt of royalties and other payments. We assess the realizability of intangible assets other than goodwill whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable in accordance with SFAS No. 144, Accounting for the Impairment or Disposal of Long-Lived Assets. If an impairment review is triggered, we evaluate the carrying value of intangible assets based on estimated undiscounted future cash flows over the remaining useful life of the assets and comparing that value to the carrying value of the assets. The cash flows that are used contain our best estimates, using appropriate and customary assumptions and projections at the time. No impairments were identified during the years ended December 31, 2008 or 2006. During 2007, we recognized an impairment charge to write off a prepaid royalty license of $1.0 million associated with Navigator paste. We also recognized a related inventory write-down and the circumstances are described in Note 6 to the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Based on our changed estimates of product availability and estimated future demand and market conditions, we determined that we would not realize our investment in prepaid royalties and, therefore, fully expensed this asset. No other impairments were identified during the year ended December 31, 2007. Share-Based Compensation We adopted the provisions of SFAS No. 123(R), Share-Based Payment ( SFAS No. 123(R) ) on January 1, 2006. Beginning in 2006, we modified our share-based employee compensation programs to shift from the grant of stock options and employee stock purchase rights only to the grant of a mix of restricted stock units and stock options, along with employee stock purchase rights. There were no modifications to the terms of outstanding options, restricted stock units or deferred stock units during 2008, 2007 or 2006. 30 Table of Contents In connection with the adoption of SFAS No. 123(R), we adopted the straight-line method to prospectively expense share-based awards granted subsequent to December 31, 2005. The graded-vesting, or accelerated, method has been used to calculate the expense for stock options granted prior to January 1, 2006. If the total fair value of share-based compensation awards, as well as other features that impact expense, including forfeitures and capitalization of costs, was consistent from year-to-year in each of the last five years and through 2010, this change in expense method from graded-vesting to straight-line expensing would yield decreasing annual expense through 2010 until awards granted prior to January 1, 2006 were fully expensed. However, the total fair value of future awards may vary significantly from past awards based on a number of factors, including our share-based award practices. Therefore, share-based compensation expense is likely to fluctuate, possibly significantly, from year to year. We use the Black-Scholes-Merton option-pricing model to determine the fair value of options granted. Option-pricing models require the input of highly subjective assumptions, particularly for the expected stock price volatility and the expected term of options. Changes in the subjective input assumptions can materially affect the fair value estimate. Our expected stock price volatility assumptions are based on the historical volatility of our stock over periods that are similar to the expected terms of grants and other relevant factors. Lower estimated volatility reduces the fair value of an option. The total fair value of options awarded during the year ended December 31, 2008 ($6.7 million) would have increased or decreased by approximately 7% if the stock price volatility assumption were increased or decreased by 10% to 27.5% or 22.5%, respectively. The total cost recognized for options awarded during the year ended December 31, 2008 would have increased or decreased by $0.1 million if the stock price volatility assumption were increased or decreased by 10% to 27.5% or 22.5%, respectively. To develop the expected term assumption for option awards, we previously elected to use the simplified method described in the Securities and Exchange Commission Staff Accounting Bulletin No. 107, which is based on vesting and contractual terms. Beginning in January 2008, we derive the expected term assumption for options based on historical experience and other relevant factors concerning expected employee behavior with regard to option exercise. The expected term for future awards will be determined using a consistent method. Longer expected term assumptions increase the fair value of option awards, and therefore increase the expense recognized per award. The total fair value of options awarded during the year ended December 31, 2008 ($6.7 million) would have increased or decreased by approximately 12% if the expected term assumption were increased or decreased by one year, respectively. The total cost recognized for options awarded during the year ended December 31, 2008 would have increased or decreased by $0.2 million if the expected term assumption were increased or decreased by one year, respectively. We determine the assumptions to be used in the valuation of option grants as of the date of grant. As such, we may use different assumptions during the year if we grant options at different dates. The weighted average of the valuation assumptions used to determine the fair value of each option grant is as follows: For the Year Ended December 31, 2008 2007 2006 Expected stock price volatility 25 % 29 % 30 % Expected term, in years 4.9 5.0 5.0 Risk-free interest rate 2.6 % 4.7 % 4.6 % Share-based compensation expense is based on the number of awards ultimately expected to vest and is, therefore, reduced for an estimate of the number of awards that are expected to be forfeited. The forfeiture estimates are based on historical data and other factors, and compensation expense is adjusted for actual results. Share-based compensation costs for the year ended December 31, 2008 were $10.2 million, which is net of a reduction of $1.8 million for actual and estimated forfeitures. Changes in estimated forfeiture rates and differences between estimated forfeiture rates and actual experience may result in significant, unanticipated increases or decreases in share-based compensation expense from period to period. The termination of employment by certain employees who hold large numbers of share-based compensation instruments may also have a significant, unanticipated impact on forfeiture experience and, therefore, on share-based compensation expense. The fair value of options, restricted stock units, deferred stock units with vesting conditions, and employee stock purchase rights awarded during the years ended December 31, 2008, 2007 and 2006 totaled $18.7 million, $18.2 million and $11.9 million, respectively. The total unrecognized compensation cost for unvested share-based compensation awards outstanding at December 31, 2008, before consideration of estimated forfeitures, was $30.9 million. We estimate that this cost will be reduced by approximately $3.1 million related to forfeitures. The weighted average remaining expense recognition period is approximately 2 years. 31 Table of Contents Income Taxes We recognize a current tax liability or asset for current taxes payable or refundable, respectively, and a deferred tax liability or asset, as the case may be, for the estimated future tax effects of temporary differences between book and tax treatment of assets and liabilities and carryforwards to the extent they are realizable. The future tax benefit arising from net deductible temporary differences and tax carryforwards, net of valuation allowances, was $7.5 million and $15.4 million at December 31, 2008 and 2007, respectively. We believe that our earnings during the periods when the temporary differences become deductible will be sufficient to realize the related future tax benefits. Should we determine that we would not be able to realize all or part of our net deferred tax asset in the future, an adjustment to the deferred tax asset would be charged to income in the period such determination was made. A reduction of net income before taxes in each subsidiary equal to 5% of revenue, compared to the corresponding reported amounts for the year ended December 31, 2008, would not result in the recognition of incremental valuation allowances except in two subsidiaries where a 5% reduction could result in our recording a valuation allowance of $1.1 million for those subsidiaries. For those jurisdictions where the expiration date of tax carryforwards or the projected operating results indicate that realization is not likely, a valuation allowance is recorded to offset the deferred tax asset within that jurisdiction. In assessing the need for a valuation allowance, we consider future taxable income and ongoing prudent and feasible tax planning strategies. In the event that we were to determine that we would be able to realize our deferred tax assets in the future in excess of the net recorded amount, an adjustment to the deferred tax asset would increase income in the period such determination was made. Similarly, a determination that a higher valuation allowance is required would decrease income in the period such determination was made. Our net deductible temporary differences and tax carryforwards are recorded using the enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the periods in which the deferred tax liability or asset is expected to be settled or realized. Should the expected applicable tax rates change in the future, an adjustment to the net deferred tax asset would be credited or charged, as appropriate, to income in the period such determination was made. For example, an increase of one percentage point in our anticipated U.S. state income tax rate would cause us to increase our net deferred tax asset balance by $0.4 million. This increase in the net deferred asset would increase net income in the period that our rate was adjusted. Likewise, a decrease of one percentage point to our anticipated U.S. state income tax rate would have the opposite effect. We periodically assess our exposures related to our worldwide provision for income taxes and believe that we have appropriately accrued taxes for contingencies. Any reduction of these contingent liabilities or additional assessment would increase or decrease income, respectively, in the period such determination was made. We consider certain operating earnings of non-United States subsidiaries to be indefinitely invested outside the U.S. The cumulative earnings of these subsidiaries were $155.6 million at December 31, 2008. No provision has been made for U.S. federal and state, or international taxes that may result from future remittances of these undistributed earnings of non-United States subsidiaries. Should we repatriate these earnings in the future, we would have to adjust the income tax provision in the period in which the decision to repatriate earnings is made. For the operating earnings not considered to be indefinitely invested outside the United States we have accrued taxes on a current basis. We record a liability for uncertain tax provisions in accordance with FASB Interpretation ( FIN ) No. 48, Accounting for Uncertainty in Income Taxes ( FIN 48 ). FIN 48 clarifies the accounting for uncertainty in income taxes recognized in financial statements under SFAS No. 109, Accounting for Income Taxes and prescribes a comprehensive model for the recognition, measurement, and financial statement disclosure of uncertain tax positions. This comprehensive model requires us to assess all tax positions against a more likely than not standard. We record tax benefits for only those positions that we believe will more likely than not be sustained. For positions that we believe that it is more likely than not that we will prevail, we record a benefit considering the amounts and probabilities that could be realized upon ultimate settlement. If our judgment as to the likely resolution of the uncertainty changes, if the uncertainty is ultimately settled or if the statute of limitation related to the uncertainty expires, the effects of the change would be recognized in the period in which the change, resolution or expiration occurs. As of December 31, 2008 our net liability for uncertain tax positions was $6.9 million, which includes interest expense and penalties. 32 Table of Contents RESULTS OF OPERATIONS Twelve Months Ended December 31, 2008 Compared to Twelve Months Ended December 31, 2007 Revenue Total Company. Revenue increased $101.5 million, or 11%, to $1.024 billion for the year ended December 31, 2008. Incremental sales from businesses acquired subsequent to January 1, 2007 contributed 1% to revenue growth. These acquisitions consisted primarily of veterinary reference laboratories and customer lists in Canada, the United States and Europe; a production animal diagnostic products business in France; and the Critical Care Division of Osmetech plc, which we refer to as OPTI Medical. The favorable impact of currency exchange rates contributed 1% to revenue growth. The following table presents revenue by operating segment: For the Year Ended December 31, Percentage Change Net of Percentage Percentage Acquisitions Net Revenue Dollar Percentage Change from Change from and Currency (dollars in thousands) 2008 2007 Change Change Currency (1) Acquisitions (2) Effect CAG $ 834,056 $ 750,449 $ 83,607 11.1 % 1.0 % 0.8 % 9.3 % Water 74,469 66,235 8,234 12.4 % 0.3 % 12.1 % PAS 80,762 75,085 5,677 7.6 % 4.8 % 2.7 % 0.1 % Other 34,743 30,786 3,957 12.9 % 2.8 % 2.9 % 7.2 % Total $ 1,024,030 $ 922,555 $ 101,475 11.0 % 1.3 % 0.9 % 8.8 % (1) Represents the percentage change in revenue attributed to the effect of changes in currency rates from the year ended December 31, 2007 to the year ended December 31, 2008. (2) Represents the percentage change in revenue attributed to incremental revenues during the year ended December 31, 2008 compared to the year ended December 31, 2007 from businesses acquired subsequent to January 1, 2007. Companion Animal Group. The following table presents revenue by product and service category for CAG: For the Year Ended December 31, Percentage Change Net of Percentage Percentage Acquisitions Net Revenue Dollar Percentage Change from Change from and Currency (dollars in thousands) 2008 2007 Change Change Currency (1) Acquisitions (2) Effect Instruments and consumables $ 318,533 $ 289,271 $ 29,262 10.1 % 1.0 % 9.1 % Rapid assay products 146,867 133,508 13,359 10.0 % 0.9 % 9.1 % Laboratory and consulting services 288,244 255,193 33,051 13.0 % 1.5 % 2.5 % 9.0 % Practice information systems and digital radiography 61,291 53,385 7,906 14.8 % (0.2 %) 15.0 % Pharmaceutical products 19,121 19,092 29 0.2 % (2.5 %) 2.7 % Net CAG revenue $ 834,056 $ 750,449 $ 83,607 11.1 % 1.0 % 0.8 % 9.3 % (1) Represents the percentage change in revenue attributed to the effect of changes in currency rates from the year ended December 31, 2007 to the year ended December 31, 2008. (2) Represents the percentage change in revenue attributed to incremental revenues during the year ended December 31, 2008 compared to the year ended December 31, 2007 from businesses acquired subsequent to January 1, 2007. 33 Table of Contents The following revenue analysis reflects the results of operations net of the impact of currency exchange rates on sales outside the U.S. and net of incremental sales from veterinary reference laboratory businesses acquired subsequent to January 1, 2007. Instruments and consumables revenue increased due to higher consumables sales volumes for most of our analyzers and higher average unit sales prices, primarily on slides that are sold for use in our chemistry analyzers. Additionally, increased revenue was also due to higher instrument sales volumes, due primarily to sales of recently launched instruments, including Catalyst Dx chemistry analyzers and SNAPshot Dx analyzers, which we began shipping to customers in the first quarter of 2008, and sales of Coag Dx blood coagulation analyzers, which we began shipping to customers in the fourth quarter of 2007. The increase in volumes due to the placement of recently launched instruments was partly offset by a decrease in sales of most of our other IDEXX VetLab instruments, due primarily to increased market penetration and a shift in focus of our sales team to our newer instruments. We anticipate that in future periods as we continue to penetrate the market with our next-generation chemistry analyzer, Catalyst Dx , sales of our VetTest chemistry analyzers will decline. The lower sales of our other IDEXX VetLab instruments was also due to lower average unit sales prices, due largely to increased promotional discounting. Higher instrument service revenue was due to the increase in number of instruments covered under service contracts as we continue to increase our active installed base of instruments. Sales volumes of consumables in the U.S. and Canada in the first half of 2007 benefited from temporary additional diagnostic testing volume related to the recall of certain pet foods in March 2007. We believe that the recall resulted in a higher than usual number of pet visits to veterinary clinics in North America in the first and second quarters of 2007. We estimate that this event negatively impacted year-over-year growth in sales of instruments and consumables for the year ended December 31, 2008 by approximately 1%. The impact from changes in distributors inventory levels reduced reported instruments and consumables revenue growth by 1%. The increase in practice-level sales of rapid assay products was due to both higher average unit sales prices and higher sales volumes. Higher average unit sales prices were due primarily to the impact of price increases of certain canine and feline combination tests and, to a lesser extent, less promotional discounting in connection with our SNAP up the Savings and other customer programs and higher relative sales of canine combination test products versus single assay test products. We expect that the rate of end users conversion from canine heartworm-only tests to combination test products will slow in future periods, which will decelerate the rate of increase in average unit sales prices. Increased volume was due primarily to increased U.S. practice-level sales of our canine combination test products, such as the SNAP 4Dx , and the July 2007 launch of SNAP cPL , our test for pancreatitis in dogs. The favorable impacts on rapid assay sales noted above were partly offset by a decrease in the volume of sales of products under our distribution agreement with Agen Biomedical Limited. The impact from changes in distributors inventory levels reduced reported rapid assay revenue growth by 2%. The increase in sales of laboratory and consulting services resulted from higher testing volume and the impact of price increases. As discussed above, the first half of 2007 benefited from temporary additional diagnostic testing volume resulting from the March 2007 pet food recall. We estimate that this event negatively impacted year-over-year growth in laboratory and consulting services revenue for the year ended December 31, 2008 by approximately 1%. The increase in sales of practice information management systems and digital radiography resulted primarily from higher sales volumes of companion animal radiography systems, partly offset by lower sales of equine radiography systems, lower average unit prices for companion animal radiography systems, and lower sales of Cornerstone practice information management systems. Revenue from the sales of pharmaceutical products was unchanged as the higher average unit sales price of PZI VET , our insulin product for the treatment of diabetic cats, was offset by lower sales volumes of Acarexx and SURPASS pharmaceutical products. As discussed above, in a series of transactions in the fourth quarter of 2008, we sold a substantial portion of our pharmaceutical assets and product lines and therefore will not have meaningful pharmaceutical product revenue in 2009 or future years. We have retained certain intellectual property and licenses for developed products as well as certain less significant product lines, which have been reassigned to other business units. See note 16 to the consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2008 included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. 34 Table of Contents Water. Revenue for Water increased $8.2 million, or 12%, to $74.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2008 from $66.2 million for the same period of the prior year. The increase resulted primarily from higher sales volume, partly offset by lower average unit sales prices due to higher relative sales in geographies where products are sold at lower average unit sales prices. Higher sales volumes were attributable to the increased sales of our Colilert products, used to detect total coliforms and E. coli in water, and the commencement in September 2007 of distribution of certain water testing kits manufactured by Invitrogen, which increased reported Water revenue growth by 5%. Production Animal Segment. Revenue for PAS increased $5.7 million, or 8%, to $80.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2008 from $75.1 million for the same period of the prior year. The increase in revenue resulted from increased sales volume and the favorable impact from currency exchange rates, which contributed 5% to PAS revenue growth, partly offset by lower average unit sales prices. The increase in volume resulted primarily from higher livestock diagnostics sales, including sales attributable to Institut Pourquier, a France-based manufacturer of production animal diagnostic products that we acquired in March 2007. The year-over-year growth in sales of Pourquier products contributed 3% to PAS revenue growth. The decrease in average unit sales prices was due primarily to a reduction in average price for our post-mortem test for BSE. Other. Revenue for Other operating units increased $4.0 million, or 13%, to $34.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2008 from $30.8 million for the same period of the prior year due primarily to higher sales volume of our OPTI Medical consumable products and, to a lesser extent, higher sales volume of Dairy SNAP antibiotic residue tests. The favorable impact of currency exchange rates contributed 3% to the increase in revenue from Other operating units. Gross Profit Total Company. The following table presents gross profit and gross profit percentages by operating segment: For the Year Ended December 31, Gross Profit Percent of Percent of Dollar Percentage (dollars in thousands) 2008 Revenue 2007 Revenue Change Change CAG $ 412,199 49.4 % $ 362,162 48.3 % $ 50,037 13.8 % Water 47,052 63.2 % 41,656 62.9 % 5,396 13.0 % PAS 55,005 68.1 % 46,728 62.2 % 8,277 17.7 % Other 15,131 43.6 % 12,455 40.5 % 2,676 21.5 % Unallocated amounts 379 N/A 521 N/A (142 ) (27.3 %) Total Company $ 529,766 51.7 % $ 463,522 50.2 % $ 66,244 14.3 % Companion Animal Group. Gross profit for CAG increased $50.0 million, or 14%, to $412.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2008 from $362.2 million for the same period of the prior year due to increased sales volume in all CAG product and service lines, except the pharmaceutical business, and to an increase in the gross profit percentage to 49% from 48%. The gross profit percentage in 2007 was unfavorably impacted by the write-off of pharmaceutical inventory and of a prepaid royalty related to our Navigator product, as discussed below, which favorably impacted the comparison of current year gross profit percentage to prior year gross profit percentage by 1%. The increase in the 2008 gross profit percentage was also due to the favorable impact of foreign currency rates on sales denominated in those currencies, inclusive of foreign exchange hedge contract gains and foreign currency denominated expenses; lower cost of slides that are sold for use in our chemistry analyzers; and higher average unit sales prices on canine combination test products. These favorable items were partly offset by higher relative sales of lower margin laboratory and consulting services and IDEXX VetLab instruments, and also by higher manufacturing costs of our instruments, including our Catalyst Dx Chemistry Analyzer, for which we have not yet achieved economies of scale. 35 Table of Contents During 2007 we recognized a write-down of NTZ raw materials inventory of $9.1 million and a write-off of a prepaid royalty license of $1.0 million associated with Navigator paste. We wrote down these assets because the third-party contract manufacturer of finished goods notified us that it would discontinue manufacturing the product in 2009. Additionally, product sales were lower than projected. We believed that we would not be able to enter into a replacement manufacturing arrangement on economically feasible terms and that we would not be able to obtain the product after termination of the existing manufacturing arrangement because the estimated production volume was low. Accordingly, we evaluated our associated inventory for obsolescence based on our changed estimates of product availability and estimated future demand and market conditions. Additionally, because of lower sales volume estimates and the reduced product life, we determined that we would not realize our related investment in prepaid royalties and, therefore, fully expensed this asset. In the fourth quarter of 2008, we cancelled our supply agreement for NTZ and sold our remaining raw material inventory back to the supplier for $2.0 million, payable in monthly installments of $25,000 through December, 2010 with the remaining balance then due. We will recognize these payments in our results of operations when they are received due to uncertain collectibility. Water. Gross profit for Water increased $5.4 million, or 13%, to $47.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2008 from $41.7 million for the same period of the prior year due primarily to increased sales volume. Gross profit percentage remained approximately constant at 63% as lower overall costs of manufacturing and the favorable impact of foreign currency rates on sales denominated in those currencies, inclusive of foreign exchange hedge contract gains and foreign currency denominated expense, were offset by the impact of greater relative sales of lower margin products, consisting primarily of water testing kits manufactured by Invitrogen that we began distributing in September 2007; discrete costs incurred as a result of discontinuing a project to qualify a second source supplier for certain products; and higher relative sales in geographies where products are sold at lower unit prices. Production Animal Segment. Gross profit for PAS increased $8.3 million, or 18%, to $55.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2008 from $46.7 million for the same period of the prior year due to increased sales volume and to an increase in the gross profit percentage to 68% from 62%. The increase in the gross profit percentage was due primarily to the impact of foreign currency exchange rates on sales denominated in those currencies, inclusive of foreign exchange hedge contract gains and foreign currency denominated expenses and, to a lesser extent, higher relative sales of higher margin livestock diagnostic tests; the impact of revenue recognized in 2008 on shipments prior to January 1, 2008 to a customer for which we recognize revenue on the cash basis of accounting due to uncertain collectibility; and the favorable settlement of a royalty liability. The gross profit percentage in 2007 was negatively affected by 1% as a result of purchase accounting for inventory acquired with the Pourquier business. These favorable impacts were partly offset by the impact of lower average unit sales prices. Other. Gross profit for Other operating units increased $2.7 million, or 21%, to $15.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2008 from $12.5 million for the same period of the prior year due primarily to increased sales volume and to an increase in the gross profit percentage to 44% from 41%. The increase in the gross profit percentage was due primarily to the impact of foreign currency exchange rates on sales denominated in those currencies, inclusive of foreign exchange hedge contract gains and foreign currency denominated expenses. The gross profit percentage in 2008 also improved due to an initial payment under a royalty-bearing license agreement related to certain intellectual property. Under this agreement we received an initial payment and are entitled to receive a total of $3.3 million in future milestone payments in addition to royalties based on future product sales. Milestone payments will be included in our results of operations upon achievement of each of the milestones. These favorable impacts were partly offset by higher relative sales of lower margin products. 36 Table of Contents Operating Expenses and Operating Income Total Company. The following tables present operating expenses and operating income by operating segment: For the Year Ended December 31, Operating Expenses Percent of Percent of Dollar Percentage (dollars in thousands) 2008 Revenue 2007 Revenue Change Change CAG $ 282,579 33.9 % $ 261,877 34.9 % $ 20,702 7.9 % Water 15,722 21.1 % 14,809 22.4 % 913 6.2 % PAS 33,245 41.2 % 31,272 41.6 % 1,973 6.3 % Other 13,576 39.1 % 11,452 37.2 % 2,124 18.5 % Unallocated amounts 12,188 N/A 7,929 N/A 4,259 53.7 % Total Company $ 357,310 34.9 % $ 327,339 35.5 % $ 29,971 9.2 % Operating Income Percent of Percent of Dollar Percentage (dollars in thousands) 2008 Revenue 2007 Revenue Change Change CAG $ 129,620 15.5 % $ 100,285 13.4 % $ 29,335 29.3 % Water 31,330 42.1 % 26,847 40.5 % 4,483 16.7 % PAS 21,760 26.9 % 15,456 20.6 % 6,304 40.8 % Other 1,555 4.5 % 1,003 3.3 % 552 55.1 % Unallocated amounts (11,809 ) N/A (7,408 ) N/A (4,401 ) (59.4 %) Total Company $ 172,456 16.8 % $ 136,183 14.8 % $ 36,273 26.6 % Companion Animal Group. The following table presents CAG operating expenses by functional area: For the Year Ended December 31, Operating Expenses Percent of Percent of Dollar Percentage (dollars in thousands) 2008 Revenue 2007 Revenue Change Change Sales and marketing $ 143,644 17.2 % $ 128,593 17.1 % $ 15,051 11.7 % General and administrative 93,008 11.2 % 87,179 11.6 % 5,829 6.7 % Research and development 45,927 5.5 % 46,105 6.1 % (178 ) (0.4 %) Total operating expenses $ 282,579 33.9 % $ 261,877 34.9 % $ 20,702 7.9 % The increase in sales and marketing expense resulted primarily from higher personnel and personnel-related costs due, in part, to expanded worldwide sales and marketing and the addition of customer service headcount. To a lesser extent, the impact of exchange rates on foreign currency denominated expenses and increased spending on customer support systems also contributed to the increase in sales and marketing expense. These increases were partly offset by lower overall spending on commissions and distributor incentives and marketing programs. The increase in general and administrative expense resulted primarily from higher spending on corporate support functions; incremental expenses associated with businesses acquired subsequent to January 1, 2007, comprised mainly of administrative expenses of a recurring nature to support the acquired businesses and amortization expense for intangible assets acquired; the unfavorable impact of exchange rates on foreign currency denominated expenses; and, to a lesser extent, increased bad debt expense and higher personnel costs due, in part, to increased headcount. These increases were partly offset by the absence of non-recurring costs incurred in 2007 related to acquisitions. The decrease in research and development expense resulted primarily from a decrease in product development spending due to the completion of the development of our next-generation chemistry analyzer, Catalyst Dx , and our new quantitative immunoassay platform, SNAPshot Dx , both of which we began shipping to customers in the first quarter of 2008, and to lower external consulting costs related to our pharmaceuticals product line. These decreases were largely offset by higher personnel costs to support development initiatives related primarily to IDEXX VetLab instrumentation, rapid assay and digital radiography products. 37 Table of Contents Water. The following table presents Water expenses by functional area: For the Year Ended December 31, Operating Expenses Percent of Percent of Dollar Percentage (dollars in thousands) 2008 Revenue 2007 Revenue Change Change Sales and marketing $ 7,504 10.1 % $ 6,791 10.3 % $ 713 10.5 % General and administrative 5,674 7.6 % 5,532 8.4 % 142 2.6 % Research and development 2,544 3.4 % 2,486 3.8 % 58 2.3 % Total operating expenses $ 15,722 21.1 % $ 14,809 22.4 % $ 913 6.2 % The increase in sales and marketing expense resulted primarily from higher personnel and personnel-related costs due primarily to expanded headcount and, to a lesser extent, the impact of exchange rates on foreign currency denominated expenses. The increase in general and administrative expense resulted primarily from increased headcount and costs incurred in connection with the termination of a supply agreement, partly offset by a decrease in bad debt expense. The increase in research and development expense resulted primarily from an increase in professional fees and increased headcount, partly offset by the absence in 2008 of costs incurred in 2007 related to a regulatory study conducted to support a new test for drinking water. Production Animal Segment. The following table presents PAS operating expenses by functional area: For the Year Ended December 31, Operating Expenses Percent of Percent of Dollar Percentage (dollars in thousands) 2008 Revenue 2007 Revenue Change Change Sales and marketing $ 12,982 16.1 % $ 12,234 16.3 % $ 748 6.1 % General and administrative 12,416 15.4 % 11,347 15.1 % 1,069 9.4 % Research and development 7,847 9.7 % 7,691 10.2 % 156 2.0 % Total operating expenses $ 33,245 41.2 % $ 31,272 41.6 % $ 1,973 6.3 % The increase in sales and marketing expense resulted primarily from the impact of exchange rates on foreign currency denominated expenses and, to a lesser extent, increased personnel and personnel-related costs and incremental activities associated with the Pourquier business, which was acquired in March 2007. These unfavorable impacts were partly offset by costs incurred in 2007 associated with terminating a distribution agreement, which favorably impacted the comparison of current year sales and marketing expense to prior year, and by increased recruiting costs associated with the increase in headcount. The increase in general and administrative expense resulted primarily from increased personnel costs, the impact of exchange rates on foreign currency denominated expenses and incremental costs associated with the acquisition of the Pourquier business, which are comprised mainly of administrative expenses of a recurring nature to support the acquired business and amortization expense for intangible assets. These increases were partly offset by lower overall spending on corporate support function expenses. The increase in research and development expense resulted primarily from increased headcount and the impact of exchange rates on foreign currency denominated expenses, partly offset by a decrease in spending on research and development supplies and on third-party consulting firms used to conduct research. Other. Operating expenses for Other operating units increased $2.1 million to $13.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2008 due primarily to higher spending on corporate support function expenses, increased personnel costs, partly due to increased headcount, and to incremental expenses related to OPTI Medical, which was acquired in January 2007. These increases were partly offset by a reduction in deferred compensation liability related to a deferred compensation plan assumed in the Opti Medical acquisition. The deferred compensation liability is determined based on the value of the investments in an underlying consolidated trust. The unrealized loss on the marketable securities in the trust is recorded through other comprehensive income. 38 Table of Contents Unallocated Amounts. Operating expenses that are not allocated to our operating segments increased $4.3 million to $12.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2008 due primarily to increased corporate research and development spending on software and systems research and development related to integration of our veterinary product and service offerings. To a lesser extent, the increase in operating expenses was also attributable to the sale of our Acarexx and SURPASS pharmaceutical products and a product that was under development, and the subsequent restructuring of the remaining pharmaceutical business. We recognized a loss on the transaction and restructuring of approximately $1.5 million, of which $1.1 million was recorded in general and administrative expense, $0.3 million was recorded in sales and marketing expense and $0.1 million was recorded in research and development expense in 2008. Interest Income and Interest Expense Interest income was $2.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2008 compared to $2.8 million for the same period of the prior year. The decrease in interest income was due to lower effective interest rates, partly offset by higher average invested cash balances. Interest expense was $4.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2008 compared to $4.2 million for the same period of the prior year. The increase in interest expense was due primarily to higher borrowings under our revolving credit facility, partly offset by lower effective interest rates on outstanding debt balances and incremental capitalized interest. Provision for Income Taxes Our effective income tax rate was 31.7% for the year ended December 31, 2008 and 30.3% for the year ended December 31, 2007. The increase in tax rate is primarily attributable to several non-recurring items. First, we wrote off non-deductible goodwill related to the pharmaceutical product lines sold in the fourth quarter of 2008. Additionally, the increase in tax rate was impacted by certain non-recurring items that favorably impacted the tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2007, including the reduction of deferred tax liabilities due to a change in international tax rate and the recognition of state tax benefits resulting from the completion of an audit in 2007. These items were partly offset by tax benefits related to a reduction in international deferred tax liabilities in 2008 and the 2007 reduction of deferred tax assets due to changes in statutory income tax rates for jurisdictions in which we operate. We anticipate recognizing approximately $1.4 million of income tax benefits in 2009 that have not been recognized at December 31, 2008 in accordance with FIN 48. The income tax benefits are primarily due to the lapse in the statute of limitations for various foreign and state tax jurisdictions. 39 Table of Contents Twelve Months Ended December 31, 2007 Compared to Twelve Months Ended December 31, 2006 Revenue Total Company. Revenue increased $183.4 million, or 25%, to $922.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2007 from $739.1 million for the prior year. Incremental sales from businesses and from customer-related and other intangible assets acquired subsequent to January 1, 2006 contributed 8% to revenue growth. These acquisitions consisted primarily of veterinary reference laboratories and customer-related assets in Canada, the United States, Europe and South Africa; intellectual property and distribution rights of a veterinary diagnostics business; a production animal diagnostic products business in France; and the Critical Care Division of Osmetech plc. The favorable impact of currency exchange rates contributed 3% to revenue growth. The following table presents revenue by operating segment: For the Year Ended December 31, Percentage Change Net of Percentage Percentage Acquisitions Net Revenue Dollar Percentage Change from Change from and Currency (dollars in thousands) 2007 2006 Change Change Currency (1) Acquisitions (2) Effect CAG $ 750,449 $ 604,341 $ 146,108 24.2 % 2.7 % 6.0 % 15.5 % Water 66,235 58,466 7,769 13.3 % 3.5 % 9.8 % PAS 75,085 58,940 16,145 27.4 % 7.4 % 12.4 % 7.6 % Other 30,786 17,370 13,416 77.2 % 3.4 % 82.7 % (8.9 %) Total $ 922,555 $ 739,117 $ 183,438 24.8 % 3.2 % 7.6 % 14.0 % (1) Represents the percentage change in revenue attributed to the effect of changes in currency rates from the year ended December 31, 2006 to the year ended December 31, 2007. (2) Represents the percentage change in revenue attributed to incremental revenues during the year ended December 31, 2007 compared to the year ended December 31, 2006 from businesses acquired subsequent to January 1, 2006. Companion Animal Group. Revenue for CAG increased $146.1 million, or 24%, to $750.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2007 from $604.3 million for the prior year. Incremental sales from veterinary reference laboratory businesses and customer-related assets and from intellectual property and distribution rights of a veterinary diagnostics business acquired subsequent to January 1, 2006 contributed 6% to CAG revenue growth. The favorable impact of currency exchange rates contributed 3% to the increase in CAG revenue. The following table presents revenue by product and service category for CAG: For the Year Ended December 31, Percentage Change Net of Percentage Percentage Acquisitions Net Revenue Dollar Percentage Change from Change from and Currency (dollars in thousands) 2007 2006 Change Change Currency (1) Acquisitions (2) Effect Instruments and consumables $ 289,271 $ 242,312 $ 46,959 19.4 % 3.5 % 15.9 % Rapid assay products 133,508 115,481 18,027 15.6 % 0.8 % 1.5 % 13.3 % Laboratory and consulting services 255,193 187,114 68,079 36.4 % 3.4 % 18.4 % 14.6 % Practice information systems and digital radiography 53,385 44,427 8,958 20.2 % 1.5 % 18.7 % Pharmaceutical products 19,092 15,007 4,085 27.2 % 27.2 % Net CAG revenue $ 750,449 $ 604,341 $ 146,108 24.2 % 2.7 % 6.0 % 15.5 % (1) Represents the percentage change in revenue attributed to the effect of changes in currency rates from the year ended December 31, 2006 to the year ended December 31, 2007. (2) Represents the percentage change in revenue attributed to incremental revenues during the year ended December 31, 2007 compared to the year ended December 31, 2006 from businesses acquired subsequent to January 1, 2006. 40 Table of Contents The following revenue analysis reflects the results of operations net of the impact of currency exchange rates on sales outside the U.S. and net of incremental sales from businesses and from customer-related and other intangible assets acquired subsequent to January 1, 2006. The increase in sales of instruments and consumables was due mainly to higher unit sales volume. Higher consumables sales volumes were attributable primarily to higher worldwide practice-level sales of slides and, to a lesser extent, to increased practice-level sales of tubes used with our hematology analyzers, with all consumables categories benefiting from the continued growth of our installed base of instruments. Sales volumes of consumables also benefited from temporary additional diagnostic testing volume related to the recall of certain pet foods in mid-March 2007 in the U.S. and Canada. We believe that the recall resulted in a higher than usual number of pet visits to veterinary clinics in North America in the first and second quarters of 2007. Higher instrument sales revenue resulted mainly from increased sales of our LaserCyte Hematology Analyzer and, to a lesser extent, our IDEXX VetLab Station, an in-clinic laboratory information management system. The impact from changes in U.S. distributors inventory levels reduced reported instruments and consumables revenue growth by less than 1%. The increase in practice-level sales of rapid assay products was due to both higher average unit sales prices and higher sales volumes. Higher average unit sales prices were due, in part, to higher relative sales of canine combination test products, such as the SNAP 4Dx , which was launched in the U.S. in September 2006, and less promotional discounting in connection with our SNAP up the Savings and other customer programs. We expect the rate of end users conversion from canine heartworm-only tests to combination test products and, therefore, the rate of increase of average unit sales prices, will lessen in future periods. Higher sales volumes resulted in part from the July 2007 launch of the SNAP cPL , our test for pancreatitis in dogs. Effective January 2008, we changed our distribution methods in Japan from a combination of direct sales and the use of multiple distributors to an exclusive distribution arrangement for our rapid assay products and instrument consumables. The impact from the distributor initial stocking orders to build inventory levels increased reported revenue growth by 1%. The impact from changes in U.S. distributors inventory levels reduced reported rapid assay revenue growth by 4%. The increase in sales of laboratory and consulting services resulted primarily from higher testing volume and, to a lesser extent, the impact of price increases. Higher testing volume was attributable to both new customers and to increased testing volume from existing customers, and benefited from temporary additional diagnostic testing volume resulting from the March 2007 pet food recall, as discussed above, and from new test offerings. The increase in sales of practice information management systems and digital radiography resulted primarily from higher sales volumes of companion animal and equine radiography systems, higher sales of Cornerstone practice information management systems and services, and the favorable impact of implementing tiered support service level offerings with differentiated pricing for our practice information management systems, partly offset by lower average unit prices for radiography systems due to increased competition. The increase in sales of pharmaceutical products resulted primarily from higher sales volume and price increases, in each case related largely to PZI VET , our insulin product for the treatment of diabetic cats. Water. Revenue for Water increased $7.8 million, or 13%, to $66.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2007 from $58.5 million for the prior year. The increase resulted primarily from higher worldwide sales volume, partly offset by lower average unit sales prices due to both higher relative sales in geographies where products are sold at lower average unit sales prices and greater price competition in certain geographies. Higher sales volumes resulted in part from our commencement in September 2007 of distribution of certain water testing kits manufactured by Invitrogen Corporation ( Invitrogen ), which increased reported Water revenue growth by 2%. The favorable impact of currency exchange rates contributed 4% to the increase in Water revenue. Production Animal Segment. Revenue for PAS increased $16.1 million, or 27%, to $75.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2007 from $58.9 million for the prior year. The increase resulted primarily from higher livestock diagnostics sales volume, including sales attributable to Institut Pourquier, a manufacturer of production animal diagnostic products in France that we acquired in March 2007. Sales of Pourquier products contributed 12% to PAS revenue growth. The favorable impact of higher sales volume was partly offset by lower average unit sales prices for our HerdChek products that test for transmissible spongiform encephalopathies ( TSEs ) due to both greater price competition and higher relative sales in geographies where products are sold at lower average unit sales prices. The favorable impact of currency exchange rates contributed 7% to the increase in PAS revenue. 41 Table of Contents Other. Revenue for Other operating units increased $13.4 million, or 77%, to $30.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2007 from $17.4 million for the prior year due primarily to incremental revenue attributable to OPTI Medical, which was acquired in January 2007. Gross Profit Total Company. Gross profit increased $84.0 million, or 22%, to $463.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2007 from $379.5 million for the prior year. As a percentage of total revenue, gross profit decreased to 50% from 51%. During 2007, we recognized a write-down of NTZ raw materials inventory of $9.1 million and a write-off of a prepaid royalty license of $1.0 million associated with Navigator , which resulted in an unfavorable impact of 1.1% of total company gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2007. These write-downs are included in cost of product revenue in the consolidated statement of operations. Share-based compensation expense of $0.7 million was included in cost of revenue for the year ended December 31, 2007, compared to $1.1 million for the prior year. Beginning in 2007, we have allocated share-based compensation expense to the operating segments based on headcount and other personnel data. This allocation differs from the actual expense and consequently yields a difference between the total allocated share-based compensation expense and the actual expense for the total company, which was categorized as unallocated amounts. Share-based compensation expense was not allocated to our operating segments in 2006. Therefore, the total company share-based compensation expense was categorized as unallocated amounts for the year ended December 31, 2006. The following table presents gross profit and gross profit percentage by operating segment: For the Year Ended December 31, Gross Profit Percent of Percent of Dollar Percentage (dollars in thousands) 2007 Revenue 2006 Revenue Change Change CAG $ 362,162 48.3 % $ 297,072 49.2 % $ 65,090 21.9 % Water 41,656 62.9 % 38,441 65.7 % 3,215 8.4 % PAS 46,728 62.2 % 38,654 65.6 % 8,074 20.9 % Other 12,455 40.5 % 7,033 40.5 % 5,422 77.1 % Unallocated amounts 521 N/A (1,671 ) N/A 2,192 N/A Total Company $ 463,522 50.2 % $ 379,529 51.3 % $ 83,993 22.1 % Companion Animal Group. Gross profit for CAG increased $65.1 million, or 22%, to $362.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2007 from $297.1 million for the prior year due primarily to increased sales volume across the CAG product and service lines, partly offset by a decrease in gross profit percentage to 48% from 49%. The write-down of pharmaceutical inventory and the related prepaid royalty impairment charge, discussed above, resulted in an unfavorable impact of 1.4% of CAG revenue. Greater relative sales of lower margin products and services, such as laboratory and consulting services and IDEXX VetLab instruments, also contributed to the decrease in the gross profit percentage. These unfavorable impacts were partly offset by higher relative sales of our canine combination test product, SNAP 4Dx and, to a lesser extent, all other CAG product and service lines, except in the Digital Radiography business; lower cost of slides that are sold for use in VetTest Chemistry Analyzers; and the favorable impact of foreign currency rates on sales denominated in those currencies, net of foreign exchange hedge contract losses. Water. Gross profit for Water increased $3.2 million, or 8%, to $41.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2007 from $38.4 million for the prior year due to higher sales volume, partly offset by a decrease in the gross profit percentage to 63% from 66%. The decrease in gross profit percentage was due primarily to higher manufacturing costs; lower average unit sales prices, and greater relative sales of lower margin products, which was primarily due to the lower gross margin earned on certain water testing kits manufactured by Invitrogen that we began distributing in September 2007. 42 Table of Contents Production Animal Segment. Gross profit for PAS increased $8.1 million, or 21%, to $46.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2007 from $38.7 million for the prior year due to increased sales volume, partly offset by a decrease in the gross profit percentage to 62% from 66%. The gross profit percentage was unfavorably impacted by lower average unit sales prices; net higher production costs; the effect of purchase accounting for inventory acquired in connection with the Pourquier business acquisition; and a relatively lower gross profit rate realized on sales by Pourquier, largely offset by greater relative sales of higher margin products, exclusive of the impact of the Pourquier business. The gross profit percentage earned on sales by Pourquier, excluding the impact of purchase accounting, was lower than our historical PAS gross profit rate due to greater price competition in the primary markets served by Pourquier. Additionally, purchase accounting for inventory had an unfavorable impact of 0.8% of PAS revenue because finished goods inventory acquired in connection with a business acquisition are assigned a fair value that exceeds replacement cost, which results in a low gross margin on the sale of those finished goods by the acquirer. Additionally, decreases in the gross profit percentage were partly offset by the favorable impact of foreign currency rates on sales denominated in those currencies, net of foreign exchange hedge contract losses. Other. Gross profit for Other operating units increased $5.4 million, or 77%, to $12.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2007 from $7.0 million for the prior year due primarily to incremental revenue attributable to OPTI Medical, which resulted in incremental gross profit for the Other operating units. Excluding the acquisition of OPTI Medical, the gross profit percentage was 39% for the year ended December 31, 2007 compared to 41% for the prior year. The decrease in the gross profit percentage was due to lower average unit sales prices for certain Dairy products and higher manufacturing and distribution costs, partly offset by the favorable impact of the effect of foreign currency rates on sales denominated in those currencies. Operating Expenses and Operating Income Total Company. Total operating expenses increased $75.7 million, or 30%, to $327.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2007 from $251.6 million for the prior year. As a percentage of revenue, operating expenses increased to 35% from 34%. Share-based compensation expense of $7.9 million was included in operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2007, compared to $9.0 million for the prior year. Beginning in 2007, we allocate share-based compensation expense to the operating segments, as discussed above. The total company share-based compensation expense was categorized as unallocated amounts for the year ended December 31, 2006. Operating income increased $8.3 million, or 6%, to $136.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2007 from $127.9 million for the prior year. As a percentage of revenue, operating income decreased to 15% from 17%. 43 Table of Contents The following tables present operating expenses and operating income by operating segment: For the Year Ended December 31, Operating Expenses Percent of Percent of Dollar Percentage (dollars in thousands) 2007 Revenue 2006 Revenue Change Change CAG $ 261,877 34.9 % $ 197,239 32.6 % $ 64,638 32.8 % Water 14,809 22.4 % 12,679 21.7 % 2,130 16.8 % PAS 31,272 41.6 % 22,482 38.1 % 8,790 39.1 % Other 11,452 37.2 % 4,254 24.5 % 7,198 169.2 % Unallocated amounts 7,929 N/A 14,942 N/A (7,013 ) (46.9 %) Total Company $ 327,339 35.5 % $ 251,596 34.0 % $ 75,743 30.1 % Operating Income Percent of Percent of Dollar Percentage (dollars in thousands) 2007 Revenue 2006 Revenue Change Change CAG $ 100,285 13.4 % $ 99,833 16.5 % $ 452 0.5 % Water 26,847 40.5 % 25,762 44.1 % 1,085 4.2 % PAS 15,456 20.6 % 16,172 27.4 % (716 ) (4.4 %) Other 1,003 3.3 % 2,779 16.0 % (1,776 ) (63.9 %) Unallocated amounts (7,408 ) N/A (16,613 ) N/A 9,205 55.4 % Total Company $ 136,183 14.8 % $ 127,933 17.3 % $ 8,250 6.4 % Companion Animal Group. Operating expenses for CAG increased $64.6 million, or 33%, to $261.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2007 from $197.2 million for the prior year and, as a percentage of revenue, increased to 35% from 33%. Share-based compensation expense of $6.0 million, or 0.8% of revenue, was included in CAG operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2007. The following table presents CAG operating expenses by functional area: For the Year Ended December 31, Operating Expenses Percent of Percent of Dollar Percentage (dollars in thousands) 2007 Revenue 2006 Revenue Change Change Sales and marketing $ 128,593 17.1 % $ 98,748 16.3 % $ 29,845 30.2 % General and administrative 87,179 11.6 % 60,267 10.0 % 26,912 44.7 % Research and development 46,105 6.1 % 38,224 6.3 % 7,881 20.6 % Total operating expenses $ 261,877 34.9 % $ 197,239 32.6 % $ 64,638 32.8 % The increase in sales and marketing expense resulted primarily from higher personnel-related costs due, in part, to expanded worldwide sales, marketing and customer service support resources and higher sales commissions as a result of revenue performance. Additionally, the unfavorable impact of exchange rates on foreign currency denominated expenses, the inclusion of share-based compensation expense, and incremental expenses associated with businesses acquired subsequent to January 1, 2006 also contributed to the increase in sales and marketing expense. The increase in general and administrative expense resulted primarily from higher personnel-related costs due, in part, to expanded resources and spending on information technology, facilities, and other general support functions. To a lesser extent, the inclusion of share-based compensation expense; incremental expenses associated with businesses acquired subsequent to January 1, 2006, comprised mainly of administrative expenses of a recurring nature to support the acquired businesses and amortization expense for intangible assets acquired; and the unfavorable impact of exchange rates on foreign currency denominated expenses also contributed to the increase in general and administrative expense. The increase in research and development expense resulted primarily from increased product development spending, including additional professional resources, related primarily to IDEXX VetLab instrumentation and rapid assay products. To a lesser extent, product development activities in all other CAG product and service categories and the inclusion of share-based compensation expense also contributed to the increases in research and development expense. 44 Table of Contents Water. Operating expenses for Water increased $2.1 million, or 17%, to $14.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2007 from $12.7 million for the prior year and, as a percentage of revenue, were approximately constant at 22%. Share-based compensation expense of $0.4 million, or 0.6% of revenue, was included in Water operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2007. The following table presents Water expenses by functional area: For the Year Ended December 31, Operating Expenses Percent of Percent of Dollar Percentage (dollars in thousands) 2007 Revenue 2006 Revenue Change Change Sales and marketing $ 6,791 10.3 % $ 5,465 9.3 % $ 1,326 24.3 % General and administrative 5,532 8.4 % 5,167 8.8 % 365 7.1 % Research and development 2,486 3.8 % 2,047 3.5 % 439 21.4 % Total operating expenses $ 14,809 22.4 % $ 12,679 21.7 % $ 2,130 16.8 % The increase in sales and marketing expense resulted primarily from higher personnel-related costs due, in part, to expanded headcount and, to a lesser extent, the unfavorable impact of exchange rates on foreign currency denominated expenses. The increase in general and administrative expense resulted primarily from the inclusion of share-based compensation expense and higher spending on information technology, facilities, and other general support functions, partly offset by the favorable comparison due to costs incurred during the third quarter of 2006 to consolidate our office and production facilities based in the United Kingdom into a single facility and other net cost reductions. The increase in research and development expense resulted primarily from higher costs associated with coliform and E. coli water test product development. Production Animal Segment. Operating expenses for PAS increased $8.8 million, or 39%, to $31.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2007 from $22.5 million for the prior year and, as a percentage of revenue, increased to 42% from 38%. Share-based compensation expense of $0.8 million, or 1.0% of revenue, was included in PAS operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2007. The following table presents PAS operating expenses by functional area: For the Year Ended December 31, Operating Expenses Percent of Percent of Dollar Percentage (dollars in thousands) 2007 Revenue 2006 Revenue Change Change Sales and marketing $ 12,234 16.3 % $ 8,162 13.8 % $ 4,072 49.9 % General and administrative 11,347 15.1 % 9,258 15.7 % 2,089 22.6 % Research and development 7,691 10.2 % 5,062 8.6 % 2,629 51.9 % Total operating expenses $ 31,272 41.6 % $ 22,482 38.1 % $ 8,790 39.1 % The increase in sales and marketing expense resulted primarily from incremental activities associated with the Pourquier business, higher personnel-related costs, and, to a lesser extent, the unfavorable impact of exchange rates on foreign currency denominated expenses. The increase in general and administrative expense resulted primarily from incremental expenses associated with the Pourquier business, comprised mainly of administrative expenses of a recurring nature to support the acquired business and amortization expense for intangible assets, and higher spending on information technology, facilities, and other general support functions. To a lesser extent, the unfavorable impact of exchange rates on foreign currency denominated expenses and the inclusion of share-based compensation expense also contributed to the increase in general and administrative expense. These increases were partly offset by a favorable comparison due to the write-off, in the second quarter of 2006, of certain fixed assets located in our facility in China. The increase in research and development expense resulted primarily from higher development activities and associated higher personnel-related costs, including incremental development activities attributable to the Pourquier business acquired in March 2007, and, to a lesser extent, the inclusion of share-based compensation expense. 45 Table of Contents Other. Operating expenses for Other operating units increased $7.2 million to $11.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2007 from $4.3 million for the prior year due primarily to incremental expenses attributable to OPTI Medical, which was acquired in January 2007. These costs are mainly composed of operating expenses of a recurring nature to support the OPTI Medical business and amortization expense for intangible assets acquired. Share-based compensation expense of $0.3 million, or 1.0% of revenue, was included in Other operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2007. Unallocated Amounts. Operating expenses that are not allocated to our operating segments decreased $7.0 million to $7.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2007 from $14.9 million for the prior year. As described above, share-based compensation expense was not allocated to our operating segments in 2006. Therefore, total company share-based compensation expense included in operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2006 of $9.0 million was categorized as unallocated amounts. Beginning in 2007, we allocate a portion of share-based compensation expense to the operating segments. The unallocated share-based compensation expense for the year ended December 31, 2007 was $0.5 million. Corporate research and development expense was also included in unallocated amounts for both periods and grew mainly due to personnel additions in 2007 to support increased long-term product development activities. Interest Income and Interest Expense Interest income was $2.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2007 compared to $3.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2006. The decrease in interest income was due primarily to lower invested cash balances, partly offset by higher effective interest rates. Interest expense was $4.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2007 compared to $0.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2006. The increase in interest expense was due primarily to interest expense incurred on borrowings under a revolving credit facility. Provision for Income Taxes Our effective income tax rate was 30.3% for the year ended December 31, 2007 and 28.4% for the year ended December 31, 2006. The increase in tax rate is primarily attributable to several non-recurring items that benefited the tax rate in the year ended December 31, 2006. These 2006 items included the resolution of an income tax audit for years ended December 31, 2003 and 2004, a reduction of previously recorded deferred tax liabilities as a result of obtaining certain multi-year tax incentives and the release of a valuation allowance on international deferred tax assets as a result of a foreign subsidiary demonstrating consistent sustained profitability. Offsetting the impact of the items occurring in 2006 were several favorable impacts to our rate that occurred during the year ended December 31, 2007. These items included an increase in certain federal tax incentives due to changes in legislation, tax benefits related to reductions in international rates, and the recognition of state tax benefits resulting from the completion of an audit. We anticipate recognizing approximately $0.5 million of income tax benefits that have not been recognized at December 31, 2007 in accordance with FIN 48. The income tax benefits are primarily due to the lapse in the statute of limitations for various foreign and state tax jurisdictions. RECENT ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS A discussion of recent accounting pronouncements is included in Note 3(q) to the consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2008 included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES Liquidity We fund the capital needs of our business through cash on hand, funds generated from operations, and amounts available under our credit facilities. At December 31, 2008 and December 31, 2007, we had $78.9 million and $60.4 million, respectively, of cash and cash equivalents and working capital of $60.6 million and $82.3 million, respectively. Additionally, at December 31, 2008, we had borrowing availability under our revolving credit facility of $48.8 million. We believe that current cash and cash equivalents, funds generated from operations, and amounts available under our credit facility will be sufficient to fund our operations, capital purchase requirements, and strategic growth needs for the foreseeable future. We further believe that we could obtain additional borrowings at prevailing market interest rates to fund our growth objectives. However, based on the current credit market, the interest rates and financial covenants obtained may be less favorable than historical interest rates and the interest rates and financial covenants available to us under our current credit facilities. 46 Table of Contents We consider certain operating earnings of non-United States subsidiaries to be indefinitely invested outside the U.S. Changes to this policy could have adverse tax consequences. Subject to this policy, we manage our worldwide cash requirements considering available funds among all of our subsidiaries. Foreign cash balances are generally available without legal restrictions to fund ordinary business operations outside the U.S. The following table presents additional key information concerning working capital: For the Three Months Ended December 31, September 30, June 30, March 31, December 31, 2008 2008 2008 2008 2007 Days sales outstanding 41.9 42.3 39.9 42.6 39.4 Inventory turns 2.0 1.9 2.1 2.0 2.3 Sources and Uses of Cash Cash generated by operating activities was $143.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2008, compared to $135.1 million for the same period in 2007. We historically have experienced proportionally lower or net negative cash flows from operating activities during the first quarter and proportionally higher or net positive cash flows from operating activities for the remainder of the year and for the annual period. Several factors contribute to the seasonal fluctuations in cash flows generated by operating activities, including the following: In the U.S., we have historically paid our final income tax payments for each fiscal year on March 15 th of the following year. Additionally, we would deposit our first quarter estimated tax payment for the current fiscal year at the same time. In the current year we paid our final income tax payment for 2007 in the first quarter of 2008. However, we did not make our first quarter estimated payment related to 2008 until the second quarter of 2008. Additionally, due to changes in federal tax law in 2008, we paid substantially all of our final payment related to 2008 in the fourth quarter of 2008. As a result, prior to 2008, tax payments were higher in the first quarter of each year. We believe the timing of cash payments for taxes will be more evenly distributed in future periods. We have management and non-management employee incentive programs that provide for the payment of annual bonuses in the first quarter following the year for which the bonuses were earned. We have agreements with certain suppliers that require us to make minimum annual inventory purchases, in some cases in order to retain exclusive distribution rights, and we have other agreements with suppliers that provide for lower pricing based on annual purchase volumes. We may place a higher volume of purchase orders for inventory during the fourth quarter in order to meet our minimum commitments or realize volume pricing discounts and we receive that inventory in the fourth or first quarters and pay in the first quarter. The specific facts and circumstances that we consider in determining the timing and level of inventory purchases throughout the year related to these agreements may yield inconsistent cash flows from operations, most typically in the first and fourth quarters. Net income for the year ended December 31, 2008 increased $22.2 million to $116.2 million from $94.0 million for the prior year. The total of net income and net non-cash charges was $176.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2008, compared to $136.1 million for the same period in 2007, resulting in a year-to-year increase of $40.7 million. The increase is due to an additional $12.0 million in net income as adjusted for the write down of Navigator inventory and the associated royalty license impairment and noncash items of $28.7 million. The changes in noncash adjustments are primarily due to an increase in our provision for deferred income taxes of $14.7 million and an increase in depreciation and amortization expense of $7.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2008 as compared to 2007. The increase in the provision for deferred income taxes is primarily due to the 2007 deferral of a tax deduction for the write-down of Navigator inventory until 2008 and bonus depreciation taken for tax purposes in the current year. The increase in depreciation and amortization expense is primarily due to incremental spending on computer hardware at the end of 2007. See Note 6 to the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information about the Navigator inventory write-down. 47 Table of Contents During the twelve months ended December 31, 2008, cash decreased by $33.5 million due to changes in operating assets and liabilities, compared to a decrease in the same period of 2007 of $1.0 million, resulting in incremental cash used of $32.5 million. The increase in cash used by changes in operating assets and liabilities, compared to 2007, was primarily attributable to $36.2 million incremental cash used to pay down accounts payable and accrued expenses and $13.2 million incremental cash used by changes in inventory, partly offset by $15.3 million less cash used by changes in accounts receivable. The incremental cash used to reduce accrued expenses was due to greater relative reductions in employee-related liabilities including management incentive bonuses and the timing of estimated tax payments caused by changes in federal estimated payment rules that became effective in the current year. The incremental cash used by changes in inventory was due primarily to increases in certain instrument inventory, including the Catalyst Dx Chemistry Analyzer and the SNAPshot Dx Analyzer, resulting from the launch of the instruments in the first quarter of 2008. The incremental cash provided by decreases in accounts receivable was due to slower sales growth during the year ended December 31, 2008 compared to the same period of the prior year. Cash used by investing activities was $91.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2008, compared to cash used of $121.1 million for the same period of 2007. The decrease in cash used by investing activities for 2008, compared to 2007, was largely due to $81.2 million less cash used for business acquisitions and intangible assets, which are described below, partly offset by incremental purchases of property and equipment of $24.1 million and $35.0 million less cash provided by the sale of investments. We paid $6.8 million in cash to acquire a business and, under separate transactions, to acquire certain intangible assets that did not comprise businesses during the year ended December 31, 2008 and recognized liabilities of $0.3 million, of which $0.1 million was paid in 2008. See Note 4 to the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information about our acquisitions of businesses. We paid $89.2 million to purchase fixed assets during the year ended December 31, 2008. Our total capital expenditures for 2008 included $38.9 million towards the renovation and expansion of our primary facility in Westbrook, Maine, which included $1.0 million in capitalized interest. We preliminarily project additional capital spending of approximately $35 million during 2009 through 2011 to complete this project, with approximately $16 million of the projected spending expected in 2009. In January 2007, we entered into an unsecured short-term revolving credit facility with a bank in the principal amount of $125.0 million that matured on June 30, 2007. On March 30, 2007, we refinanced this short-term facility by entering into an unsecured revolving credit facility with four multinational banks that matures on March 30, 2012 (the Credit Facility ). In February 2008, we increased the aggregate principal amount available under our Credit Facility to $200.0 million and added a fifth bank to the syndication. The Credit Facility may be used for general corporate purposes, including repurchases of our common stock and business acquisitions. The applicable interest rates generally range from 0.375% to 0.875% above the London interbank offered rate (the LIBOR ) or the Canadian Dollar-denominated bankers acceptance rate (the CDOR ), dependent on our leverage ratio. Under the Credit Facility, we pay quarterly commitment fees of 0.08% to 0.20%, dependent on our leverage ratio, on any unused commitment. The Credit Facility contains financial and other affirmative and negative covenants, as well as customary events of default, that would allow any amounts outstanding under the Credit Facility to be accelerated, or restrict our ability to borrow thereunder, in the event of noncompliance. The financial covenant requires our ratio of debt to earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization, as defined by the agreement, not to exceed 3-to-1. At December 31, 2008, our ratio of debt to earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization was less than 1-to-1. At December 31, 2008, we had $150.6 million outstanding under the Credit Facility at a weighted-average interest rate of 2.3%. At December 31, 2007, we had $72.2 million outstanding under the Credit Facility at a weighted-average interest rate of 5.4%. Our availability under the Credit Facility was further reduced at December 31, 2008 by $0.6 million for a letter of credit issued related to our workers compensation policy which commenced January 1, 2009. Of the total amount outstanding at December 31, 2008 and 2007, $6.6 million and $5.1 million, respectively, was borrowed by our Canadian subsidiary and denominated in Canadian dollars. 48 Table of Contents The board of directors has authorized the repurchase of up to 40,000,000 shares of our common stock in the open market or in negotiated transactions. From the inception of the program in August 1999 to December 31, 2008, we repurchased 35,787,000 shares. Cash used to repurchase shares during the years ended December 31, 2008 and 2007 was $132.3 million and $118.4 million, respectively. We believe that the repurchase of our common stock is a favorable investment and we also repurchase to offset the dilutive effect of our employee share-based compensation programs. Repurchases of our common stock may vary depending upon the level of other investing activities and the share price. See Note 14 to the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information about our share repurchases. Other Commitments, Contingencies and Guarantees Under our workers compensation insurance policies for U.S. employees since January 1, 2003, we have retained the first $250,000 in claim liability per incident and aggregate claim liability based on payroll for each year. The insurance company provides insurance for claims above the individual occurrence and aggregate limits. We estimate claim liability based on claims incurred and the estimated ultimate cost to settle the claims. Based on this analysis, we have recognized expenses of $0.7 million, $0.3 million, $0.9 million, $0.5 million, $0.9 million, and $0.8 million for claims incurred during the years ended December 31, 2008 through 2003, respectively. Claims incurred during the years ended December 31, 2008 and 2007 are relatively new and significant additional healthcare and wage indemnification costs could arise from those claims. Our liability for claims incurred during the years ended December 31, 2008 and 2007 could exceed our estimates and we could be liable for up to $2.5 million and $0.9 million, respectively, in excess of the expense we have recognized. For the four years ended on or prior to December 31, 2006, based on our retained claim liability per incident and our aggregate claim liability, our maximum liability at December 31, 2008 is $1.6 million in excess of the amounts deemed probable and previously recognized. In connection with these policies, we have outstanding letters of credit totaling $2.0 million to the insurance companies as security for these claims. We also have $0.6 million of outstanding letters of credit at December 31, 2008 related to our workers compensation policy, which commenced on January 1, 2009. We have commitments outstanding at December 31, 2008 for additional purchase price payments of up to $7.7 million, of which $0.2 million has been accrued, in connection with acquisitions of businesses and intangible assets during the current and prior periods, all of which are contingent on the achievement by certain acquired businesses of specified milestones. We are contractually obligated to make the following payments in the years below: (in thousands) Total 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 After 2013 Long-term debt obligations (1) $ 6,908 $ 1,091 $ 2,181 $ 2,181 $ 1,455 Operating leases 62,198 11,442 17,914 12,944 19,898 Purchase obligations (2) 85,305 73,205 4,600 2,000 5,500 Minimum royalty payments 10,657 1,671 3,180 2,171 3,635 Other long-term liabilities (3) 3,598 527 1,468 825 778 Total contractual cash obligations $ 168,666 $ 87,936 $ 29,343 $ 20,121 $ 31,266 (1) Long-term debt amounts include interest payments associated with long-term debt. (2) Purchase obligations include agreements to purchase goods or services that are enforceable and legally binding and that specify all significant terms, including fixed or minimum quantities, pricing, and approximate timing of purchase transactions. Of this amount, $55.3 million represents amounts committed under purchase orders and $13.8 million represents our minimum purchase obligation under our VetTest supply agreement with Ortho. (3) Other long-term liabilities are liabilities that are reflected on our consolidated balance sheet in this Annual Report on Form 10-K and include accrued sabbatical leave. These liabilities do not reflect unrecognized tax benefits of $5.9 million and deferred compensation liabilities of $1.4 million as the timing of recognition is uncertain. Refer to Note 10 of the consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2008 included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional discussion on unrecognized tax benefits. 49 Table of Contents 
