CIK: 874766
Company Name: HARTFORD FINANCIAL SERVICES GROUP INC DE
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2009-02-12


Item 7. MANAGEMENT S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS (Dollar amounts in millions, except for per share data, unless otherwise stated) Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations ( MD&A ) addresses the financial condition of The Hartford Financial Services Group, Inc. and its subsidiaries (collectively, The Hartford or the Company ) as of December 31, 2008, compared with December 31, 2007, and its results of operations for each of the three years in the period ended December 31, 2008. This discussion should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and related Notes beginning on page F-1. Certain reclassifications have been made to prior year financial information to conform to the current year presentation. Certain of the statements contained herein are forward-looking statements. These forward-looking statements are made pursuant to the safe harbor provisions of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 and include estimates and assumptions related to economic, competitive and legislative developments. These forward-looking statements are subject to change and uncertainty which are, in many instances, beyond the Company control and have been made based upon management expectations and beliefs concerning future developments and their potential effect upon the Company. There can be no assurance that future developments will be in accordance with management expectations or that the effect of future developments on The Hartford will be those anticipated by management. Actual results could differ materially from those expected by the Company, depending on the outcome of various factors, including, but not limited to, those set forth in Part II, Item 1A, Risk Factors. These important risks and uncertainties include, without limitation, uncertainties related to the depth and duration of the current recession and related financial crisis, and the impact of these volatile market conditions on, among other things, our investment portfolio, liabilities from variable annuity products and capital position; the success of our efforts to preserve capital and reduce risk, and the costs and charges associated therewith; our ability to participate in programs under the Emergency Economic Stabilization Act of 2008 and similar initiatives and the terms of such participation; changes in financial and capital markets, including changes in interest rates, credit spreads, equity prices and foreign exchange rates; the inability to effectively mitigate the impact of equity market volatility on the Company financial position and results of operations arising from obligations under annuity product guarantees; the amount of statutory capital that the Company has, changes to the statutory reserves and/or risk based capital requirements, and the Company ability to hold sufficient statutory capital to maintain financial strength and credit ratings; risks related to the Company potential participation in the U.S. Treasury Capital Purchase Program; a downgrade in the Company financial strength or credit ratings; the potential for differing interpretations of the methodologies, estimations and assumptions that underlie the valuation of the Company financial instruments that could result in changes to investment valuations; the subjective determinations that underlie the Company evaluation of other-than-temporary impairments on available-for-sale securities; losses due to nonperformance or defaults by others; the availability of our commercial paper program; the potential for acceleration of DAC amortization; the potential for an impairment of our goodwill; the difficulty in predicting the Company potential exposure for asbestos and environmental claims; the possible occurrence of terrorist attacks; the response of reinsurance companies under reinsurance contracts and the availability, pricing and adequacy of reinsurance to protect the Company against losses; the possibility of unfavorable loss development; the incidence and severity of catastrophes, both natural and man-made; stronger than anticipated competitive activity; unfavorable judicial or legislative developments; the potential effect of domestic and foreign regulatory developments, including those which could increase the Company business costs and required capital levels; the Company ability to distribute its products through distribution channels, both current and future; the uncertain effects of emerging claim and coverage issues; the ability of the Company subsidiaries to pay dividends to the Company; the Company ability to adequately price its property and casualty policies; the ability to recover the Company systems and information in the event of a disaster or other unanticipated event; potential for difficulties arising from outsourcing relationships; potential changes in federal or state tax laws, including changes impacting the availability of the separate account dividend received deduction; the Company ability to protect its intellectual property and defend against claims of infringement; and other factors described in such forward-looking statements. INDEX Overview 41 Critical Accounting Estimates 41 Consolidated Results of Operations 62 Life 70 Retail 80 Individual Life 83 Retirement Plans 85 Group Benefits 87 International 89 Institutional 91 Other 93 Property & Casualty 94 Total Property & Casualty 123 Ongoing Operations 124 Personal Lines 130 Small Commercial 136 Middle Market 140 Specialty Commercial 145 Other Operations (Including Asbestos and Environmental Claims) 149 Investments 156 Investment Credit Risk 166 Capital Markets Risk Management 177 Capital Resources and Liquidity 187 Impact of New Accounting Standards 198 40 Table of Contents OVERVIEW The Hartford is an insurance and financial services company with operations dating back to 1810. The Company is headquartered in Connecticut and is organized into two major operations: Life and Property & Casualty, each containing reporting segments. Within the Life and Property & Casualty operations, The Hartford conducts business principally in eleven reporting segments. Corporate primarily includes the Company debt financing and related interest expense, as well as other capital raising activities and purchase accounting adjustments. Life is organized into four groups which are comprised of six reporting segments: The Retail Products Group ( Retail ) and Individual Life segments make up the Individual Markets Group. The Retirement Plans and Group Benefits segments make up the Employer Markets Group. The Institutional Solutions Group ( Institutional ) and International segments each make up their own group. Through Life the Company provides retail and institutional investment products such as variable and fixed annuities, mutual funds, private placement life insurance and retirement plan services, individual life insurance products including variable universal life, universal life, interest sensitive whole life and term life; and group benefit products, such as group life and group disability insurance. Property & Casualty is organized into five reporting segments: the underwriting segments of Personal Lines, Small Commercial, Middle Market and Specialty Commercial (collectively Ongoing Operations ), and the Other Operations segment. Through Property & Casualty the Company provides a number of coverages, as well as insurance-related services, to businesses throughout the United States, including workers compensation, property, automobile, liability, umbrella, specialty casualty, marine, livestock, fidelity and surety, professional liability and director and officer liability coverages. Property & Casualty also provides automobile, homeowners, and home-based business coverage to individuals throughout the United States, as well as insurance-related services to businesses. Many of the principal factors that drive the profitability of The Hartford Life and Property & Casualty operations are separate and distinct. To present its operations in a more meaningful and organized way, management has included separate overviews within the Life and Property & Casualty sections of the MD&A. For further overview of Life profitability and analysis, see page 70. For further overview of Property & Casualty profitability and analysis, see page 94. CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES The preparation of financial statements, in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America ( U.S. GAAP ), requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ, and in the past have differed, from those estimates. The Company has identified the following estimates as critical in that they involve a higher degree of judgment and are subject to a significant degree of variability: property and casualty reserves, net of reinsurance; life estimated gross profits used in the valuation and amortization of assets and liabilities associated with variable annuity and other universal life-type contracts; living benefits required to be fair valued; valuation of investments and derivative instruments; evaluation of other-than-temporary impairments on available-for-sale securities; pension and other postretirement benefit obligations; contingencies relating to corporate litigation and regulatory matters; and goodwill impairment. In developing these estimates management makes subjective and complex judgments that are inherently uncertain and subject to material change as facts and circumstances develop. Although variability is inherent in these estimates, management believes the amounts provided are appropriate based upon the facts available upon compilation of the financial statements. Property and Casualty Reserves, Net of Reinsurance The Hartford establishes property and casualty reserves to provide for the estimated costs of paying claims under insurance policies written by the Company. These reserves include estimates for both claims that have been reported and those that have not yet been reported, and include estimates of all expenses associated with processing and settling these claims. Estimating the ultimate cost of future losses and loss adjustment expenses is an uncertain and complex process. This estimation process is based largely on the assumption that past developments are an appropriate predictor of future events and involves a variety of actuarial techniques that analyze experience, trends and other relevant factors. Reserve estimates can change over time because of unexpected changes in the external environment. Potential external factors include (1) changes in the inflation rate for goods and services related to covered damages such as medical care, hospital care, auto parts, wages and home repair, (2) changes in the general economic environment that could cause unanticipated changes in the claim frequency per unit insured, (3) changes in the litigation environment as evidenced by changes in claimant attorney representation in the claims negotiation and settlement process, (4) changes in the judicial environment regarding the interpretation of policy provisions relating to the determination of coverage and/or the amount of damages awarded for certain types of damages, (5) changes in the social environment regarding the general attitude of juries in the determination of liability and damages, (6) changes in the legislative environment regarding the definition of damages and (7) new types of injuries caused by new types of injurious exposure: past examples include breast implants, lead paint and construction defects. Reserve estimates can also change over time because of changes in internal company operations. Potential internal factors include (1) periodic changes in claims handling procedures, (2) growth in new lines of business where exposure and loss development patterns are not well established or (3) changes in the quality of risk selection in the underwriting process. In the case of assumed reinsurance, all of the above risks apply. In addition, changes in ceding company case reserving and reporting patterns can create additional factors that need to be considered in estimating the reserves. Due to the inherent complexity of the assumptions used, final claim settlements may vary significantly from the present estimates, particularly when those settlements may not occur until well into the future. 41 Table of Contents Through both facultative and treaty reinsurance agreements, the Company cedes a share of the risks it has underwritten to other insurance companies. The Company net reserves for loss and loss adjustment expenses include anticipated recovery from reinsurers on unpaid claims. The estimated amount of the anticipated recovery, or reinsurance recoverable, is net of an allowance for uncollectible reinsurance. Reinsurance recoverables include an estimate of the amount of gross loss and loss adjustment expense reserves that may be ceded under the terms of the reinsurance agreements, including incurred but not reported unpaid losses. The Company calculates its ceded reinsurance projection based on the terms of any applicable facultative and treaty reinsurance, including an estimate of how incurred but not reported losses will ultimately be ceded by reinsurance agreement. Accordingly, the Company estimate of reinsurance recoverables is subject to similar risks and uncertainties as the estimate of the gross reserve for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses. The Company provides an allowance for uncollectible reinsurance, reflecting management best estimate of reinsurance cessions that may be uncollectible in the future due to reinsurers unwillingness or inability to pay. The Company analyzes recent developments in commutation activity between reinsurers and cedants, recent trends in arbitration and litigation outcomes in disputes between reinsurers and cedants and the overall credit quality of the Company reinsurers. Where its contracts permit, the Company secures future claim obligations with various forms of collateral, including irrevocable letters of credit, secured trusts, funds held accounts and group-wide offsets. The allowance for uncollectible reinsurance was $379 as of December 31, 2008, including $254 related to Other Operations and $125 related to Ongoing Operations. Due to the inherent uncertainties as to collection and the length of time before reinsurance recoverables become due, it is possible that future adjustments to the Company reinsurance recoverables, net of the allowance, could be required, which could have a material adverse effect on the Company consolidated results of operations or cash flows in a particular quarter or annual period. The Hartford, like other insurance companies, categorizes and tracks its insurance reserves for its segments by line of business , such as property, auto physical damage, auto liability, commercial multi-peril package business, workers compensation, general liability professional liability and fidelity and surety. Furthermore, The Hartford regularly reviews the appropriateness of reserve levels at the line of business level, taking into consideration the variety of trends that impact the ultimate settlement of claims for the subsets of claims in each particular line of business. In addition, within the Other Operations segment, the Company has reserves for asbestos and environmental ( A&E ) claims. Adjustments to previously established reserves, which may be material, are reflected in the operating results of the period in which the adjustment is determined to be necessary. In the judgment of management, information currently available has been properly considered in the reserves established for losses and loss adjustment expenses. Incurred but not reported ( IBNR ) reserves represent the difference between the estimated ultimate cost of all claims and the actual reported loss and loss adjustment expenses ( reported losses ). Reported losses represent cumulative loss and loss adjustment expenses paid plus case reserves for outstanding reported claims. Company actuaries evaluate the total reserves (IBNR and case reserves) on an accident year basis. An accident year is the calendar year in which a loss is incurred, or, in the case of claims-made policies, the calendar year in which a loss is reported. The following table shows loss and loss adjustment expense reserves by line of business and by operating segment as of December 31, 2008, net of reinsurance: Personal Small Middle Specialty Ongoing Other Total Lines Commercial Market Commercial Operations Operations P&C Reserve Line of Business Property $ 304 $ 2 $ 61 $ 86 $ 453 $ $ 453 Auto physical damage 23 4 6 11 44 44 Auto liability 1,615 281 252 142 2,290 2,290 Package business 1,108 938 149 2,195 2,195 Workers compensation 11 1,854 2,226 2,241 6,332 6,332 General liability 36 145 814 1,256 2,251 2,251 Professional liability 773 773 773 Fidelity and surety 210 210 210 Assumed Reinsurance [1] 562 562 All other non-A&E 1,066 1,066 A&E 3 2 10 3 18 2,153 2,171 Total reserves-net 1,992 3,396 4,307 4,871 14,566 3,781 18,347 Reinsurance and other recoverables 60 176 437 2,110 2,783 803 3,586 Total reserves-gross $ 2,052 $ 3,572 $ 4,744 $ 6,981 $ 17,349 $ 4,584 $ 21,933 [1] These net loss and loss adjustment expense reserves relate to assumed reinsurance that was moved into Other Operations (formerly known as HartRe ). 42 Table of Contents Reserving for non-A&E reserves within Ongoing and Other Operations How non-A&E reserves are set Reserves are set by line of business within the various operating segments. As indicated in the above table, a single line of business may be written in one or more of the segments. Case reserves are established by a claims handler on each individual claim and are adjusted as new information becomes known during the course of handling the claim. Lines of business for which loss data (e.g., paid losses and case reserves) emerge (i.e., is reported) over a long period of time are referred to as long-tail lines of business. Lines of business for which loss data emerge more quickly are referred to as short-tail lines of business. Within the Company Ongoing Operations, the shortest-tail lines of business are property and auto physical damage. The longest tail lines of business within Ongoing Operations include workers compensation, general liability, and professional liability. Assumed reinsurance, which is within Other Operations, is also long-tail business. For short-tail lines of business, emergence of paid loss and case reserves is credible and likely indicative of ultimate losses. For long-tail lines of business, emergence of paid losses and case reserves is less credible in the early periods and, accordingly, may not be indicative of ultimate losses. An expected loss ratio is used in initially recording the reserves for both short-tail and long-tail lines of business. This expected loss ratio is determined through a review of prior accident years loss ratios and expected changes to earned pricing, loss costs, mix of business, ceded reinsurance and other factors that are expected to impact the loss ratio for the current accident year. For short-tail lines, IBNR for the current accident year is initially recorded as the product of the expected loss ratio for the period, earned premium for the period and the proportion of losses expected to be reported in future calendar periods for the current accident period. For long-tailed lines, IBNR reserves for the current accident year are initially recorded as the product of the expected loss ratio for the period and the earned premium for the period, less reported losses for the period. Company reserving actuaries, who are independent of the business units, regularly review reserves for both current and prior accident years using the most current claim data. These reserve reviews incorporate a variety of actuarial methods and judgments and involve rigorous analysis. Most non-A&E reserves are reviewed fully each quarter, including loss reserves for property, auto physical damage, auto liability, package business, workers compensation, most general liability, professional liability and fidelity and surety. Other non-A&E reserves are reviewed semi-annually (twice per year) or annually. These include, but are not limited to, reserves for losses incurred before 1988, allocated loss adjustment expenses, assumed reinsurance, latent exposures such as construction defects, unallocated loss adjustment expense and all other non-A&E exposures within Other Operations. For reserves that are reviewed semi-annually and annually, management monitors the emergence of paid and reported losses in the intervening quarters to either confirm that its estimate of ultimate losses should not change or, if necessary, perform a reserve review to determine whether the reserve estimate should change. For most lines of business, a variety of actuarial methods are reviewed and the actuaries select methods and specific assumptions appropriate for each line of business based on the current circumstances affecting that line of business. These selections incorporate input, as judged by the reserving actuaries to be appropriate, from claims personnel, pricing actuaries and operating management on reported loss cost trends and other factors that could affect the reserve estimates. The output of the reserve reviews are reserve estimates that are referred to herein as the actuarial indication . The actuarial techniques or methods used primarily include paid and reported loss development, frequency / severity, expected loss ratio and Bornhuetter-Ferguson techniques. Within any one line of business, a variety of techniques are used. Within any one line of business, certain methods are generally given more influence in determining the actuarial indication. The methods that are given more influence vary within a line of business based primarily on the maturity of the accident year, the mix of business and the particular internal and external influences impacting the claims experience or the methods. The following is a discussion of the most common methods used; these methods are not used for every line of business or every accident year within a line of business. Paid Development method . Historical data, organized by accident period and calendar period, is used to develop paid loss development patterns, which are then applied to current paid losses by accident period to estimate ultimate losses. The paid development method is also used to estimate reserves for allocated loss adjustments expenses ( ALAE ). Paid development techniques do not use information about case reserves and, therefore, are not affected by changes in case reserving practices. Paid development techniques can, however, be significantly affected by changes in claim closure patterns. Paid development techniques for longer-tailed lines are generally less useful for more recent accident years since a low percentage of ultimate losses are paid to date in early periods of development and small changes in paid losses can have a large impact on estimated ultimate losses. Reported Development method. Historical data, organized by accident period and calendar period, is used to develop reported loss development patterns, which are then applied to current reported losses by accident period to estimate ultimate losses. The reported losses used in this analysis refer to cumulative paid losses plus case reserves and do not include IBNR. Compared to the paid development technique, the reported development technique has the advantage that a higher percentage of ultimate losses are reflected in reported losses than in cumulative paid losses. The reported development technique estimates only the unreported losses rather than the total unpaid losses. While the reported development technique takes advantage of information contained in the case reserves, estimates determined from this technique are affected by changes in case reserving practices. Both paid and reported development techniques assume that historical development patterns are predictive of future development patterns. 43 Table of Contents Frequency / Severity methods . Historical data is used to develop claim count development patterns and those patterns are applied to the number of current reported claims to estimate ultimate claim counts. Estimated ultimate claim counts are multiplied by an estimated average severity (i.e., an average cost per claim) to calculate estimated ultimate losses. Average severity is estimated by fitting historical severity data to a trend line and making assumptions about how the current environment would affect claim severity. In making assumptions about the current environment, industry data is used where such data is available and appropriate. The advantage of frequency / severity techniques is that frequency estimates are generally easier to predict and external information can be used to supplement internal data in making severity estimates. Expected Loss Ratio method . Loss ratios for prior accident years are used to determine the appropriate expected loss ratio for the current accident year after applying anticipated changes in rates, pricing and loss costs. The current accident year expected loss ratio is multiplied by earned premium to calculate estimated ultimate losses. Expected Loss Ratio techniques are useful for early periods of maturity on long-tailed lines of business, where very little paid or reported loss information is available. Bornhuetter-Ferguson method . This method is a combination of the expected loss ratio method and the paid development or reported development method, where the paid or reported loss development method is given more weight as an accident year matures. Berquist-Sherman method . This method is used in cases where historical development patterns may be inappropriate for use in estimating ultimate losses of recent accident years. Under this method, the pattern of historical reported losses is adjusted for changes in case reserve adequacy and the pattern of historical paid losses is adjusted for changes in claim settlement rates. For all lines of business, variations of the above methods are used. Examples of variation within the paid and reported development methods include: The accident period used may vary (e.g., year, quarter, or month); The Company may analyze the data by coverage (e.g., bodily injury separate from property damage); There may be adjustments for unusual loss activity; For ALAE, the Company uses patterns of the relationship between paid ALAE and paid losses. Examples of variation within the frequency /severity methods include: For one sub-set of professional liability business, management estimates frequency, not through historical claim count development, but through an analysis of the securities class actions filed and policy listings; For some methods, management projects severity on only open claims; In the commercial liability lines, the Company performs the frequency / severity technique only on claims over a certain size; For each line of business, certain methods are given more influence than other methods. The discussion below gives a general indication of which methods are preferred by line of business. Because the actuarial estimates are generated at a much finer level of detail than line of business (e.g., by distribution channel, coverage, accident period), this description should not be assumed to apply to each coverage and accident year within a line of business. Also, as circumstances change, the methods that are given more influence will change. For example, for Personal Lines auto liability claims, reported development techniques are currently given less emphasis in making estimates for recent accident years because case reserving practices have been changing in the recent past. If case reserving practices become more stable, reported development techniques may be given more weight. Property and Auto Physical Damage. These lines are fast-developing and paid and reported development techniques are used. The Company performs and relies primarily on reported development techniques and frequency/severity and Bornhuetter-Ferguson techniques for the most immature accident months. Auto Liability Personal Lines. For auto liability, and bodily injury in particular, the Company performs a greater number of techniques than it does for property and auto physical damage, including paid and reported development methods, frequency/severity approaches, and Berquist-Sherman techniques. The Company generally uses the reported development method for older accident years and the frequency/severity and Berquist-Sherman methods for more recent accident years. Recent periods are heavily influenced by changes in case reserve practices and changing disposal rates; the frequency/severity techniques are not affected as much by these changes and the Berquist-Sherman techniques specifically adjust for changes in case reserve adequacy and claim disposal rates. Auto Liability Commercial Lines, Package Business and Short-Tailed General Liability. As with Personal Lines auto liability, the Company performs a variety of techniques, including the paid and reported development methods and frequency / severity techniques. For older, more mature accident years, management finds that reported development techniques are best. For more recent accident years, management typically prefers frequency / severity techniques that allow it to make assumptions about the frequency of larger claims. Long-Tailed General Liability, Fidelity and Surety and Large Deductible Workers Compensation . For these long-tailed lines of business, the Company generally relies on the expected loss ratio, Bornhuetter-Ferguson and reported development techniques. Management generally weights these techniques together, relying more heavily on the expected loss ratio method at early ages of development and more on the reported development method as an accident year matures. 44 Table of Contents Workers Compensation . Workers compensation is the Company single largest reserve line of business and management does the largest amount of actuarial analysis on this line of business. Methods performed include paid and reported development, variations on expected loss ratio methods, and an in-depth analysis on the largest states. Paid development patterns are historically very stable in the Company workers compensation business, so paid techniques are preferred for older accident periods. For more recent periods, paid techniques are less predictive of the ultimate liability since such a low percentage of ultimate losses are paid in early periods of development. Accordingly, for more recent accident periods, the Company generally relies more heavily on a state-by-state analysis and the expected loss ratio approach. Professional Liability. Reported and paid loss developments patterns for this line tend to be volatile. Therefore, the Company typically relies on frequency and severity techniques. Assumed Reinsurance and All Other within Other Operations. For these lines, management tends to rely on the reported development techniques. In assumed reinsurance, assumptions are influenced by information gained from claim and underwriting audits. Allocated Loss Adjustment Expenses (ALAE). For some lines of business (e.g., professional liability and assumed reinsurance), ALAE and losses are analyzed together. For most lines of business, however, ALAE is analyzed separately, using paid development techniques and an analysis of the relationship between ALAE and loss payments. Unallocated Loss Adjustment Expense (ULAE). ULAE is analyzed separately from loss and ALAE. For most lines of business, incurred ULAE costs to be paid in the future are projected based on an expected cost per claim year and the anticipated claim closure pattern and the ratio of paid ULAE to paid loss. The final step in the reserve review process involves a comprehensive review by senior reserving actuaries who apply their judgment and, in concert with senior management, determine the appropriate level of reserves based on the various information that has been accumulated. Numerous factors are considered in this determination process including, but not limited to, the assessed reliability of key loss trends and assumptions that may be significantly influencing the current actuarial indications, the maturity of the accident year, pertinent trends observed over the recent past, the level of volatility within a particular line of business, and the improvement or deterioration of actuarial indications in the current period as compared to the prior periods. In general, changes are made more quickly to more mature accident years and less volatile lines of business. Total recorded net reserves, excluding asbestos and environmental, were higher than the actuarial indication of the reserves by 3.8% as of December 31, 2008 compared to 2.9% as of December 31, 2007. During 2008, there were numerous changes to non-A&E reserve estimates. Among other loss developments in 2008, these changes included a $156 release of reserves for workers compensation claims, primarily related to accident years 2000 to 2007, a $105 release of general liability claims, primarily related to accident years 2001 to 2007, and a $75 release of reserves for professional liability claims related to accident years 2003 through 2006. See Reserves within the Property & Casualty MD&A for further discussion of reserve developments. Current trends contributing to reserve uncertainty The Hartford is a multi-line company in the property and casualty business. The Hartford is therefore subject to reserve uncertainty stemming from a number of conditions, including but not limited to those noted above, any of which could be material at any point in time for any segment. Certain issues may become more or less important over time as conditions change. As various market conditions develop, management must assess whether those conditions constitute a long-term trend that should result in a reserving action (i.e., increasing or decreasing the reserve). Within the commercial segments and the Other Operations segment, the Company has exposure to claims asserted for bodily injury as a result of long-term or continuous exposure to harmful products or substances. Examples include, but are not limited to, pharmaceutical products, silica and lead paint. The Company also has exposure to claims from construction defects, where property damage or bodily injury from negligent construction is alleged. The Company also has exposure to claims asserted against religious institutions and other organizations relating to molestation or abuse. Such exposures may involve potentially long latency periods and may implicate coverage in multiple policy periods. These factors make reserves for such claims more uncertain than other bodily injury or property damage claims. With regard to these exposures, the Company is monitoring trends in litigation, the external environment, the similarities to other mass torts and the potential impact on the Company reserves. In Personal Lines, reserving estimates are generally less variable than for the Company other property and casualty segments. This is largely due to the coverages having relatively shorter periods of loss emergence. Estimates, however, can still vary due to a number of factors, including interpretations of frequency and severity trends and their impact on recorded reserve levels. Severity trends can be impacted by changes in internal claim handling and case reserving practices in addition to changes in the external environment. These changes in claim practices increase the uncertainty in the interpretation of case reserve data, which increases the uncertainty in recorded reserve levels. In addition, the introduction of new products has lead to a different mix of business by type of insured than the Company experienced in the past. Beginning in 2004, the Company introduced its Dimensions auto and homeowners product for Agency business and beginning in 2007, the Company introduced its Next Generation Auto product for AARP customers. In general, the Company now has a lower proportion of preferred risks than in the past. Such a change in mix increases the uncertainty of the reserve projections, since historical data and reporting patterns may not be applicable to the new business. 45 Table of Contents In both Small Commercial and Middle Market, workers compensation is the Company single biggest line of business and the line of business with the longest pattern of loss emergence. Reserve estimates for workers compensation are particularly sensitive to assumptions about medical inflation and the changing use of medical care procedures. In addition, changes in state legislative and regulatory environments impact the Company estimates. These changes increase the uncertainty in the application of development patterns. In addition, over the past several accident years, the Company has experienced favorable claim frequency on workers compensation claims. The Company reserve estimates assume that reported losses for recent accident years will continue to emerge favorably and that severity will not be adversely impacted by the lower volume of reported claims. In the Specialty Commercial segment, many lines of insurance, such as excess insurance and large deductible workers compensation insurance, are long-tail lines of insurance. For long-tail lines, the period of time between the incidence of the insured loss and either the reporting of the claim to the insurer, the settlement of the claim, or the payment of the claim can be substantial, and in some cases, several years. As a result of this extended period of time for losses to emerge, reserve estimates for these lines are more uncertain (i.e., more variable) than reserve estimates for shorter-tail lines of insurance. Estimating required reserve levels for large deductible workers compensation insurance is further complicated by the uncertainty of whether losses that are attributable to the deductible amount will be paid by the insured; if such losses are not paid by the insured due to financial difficulties, the Company would be contractually liable. Another example of reserve variability relates to reserves for directors and officers insurance. There is potential volatility in the required level of reserves due to the continued uncertainty regarding the number and severity of class action suits, including uncertainty regarding the Company exposure to losses arising from the collapse of the sub-prime mortgage market. Additionally, the Company exposure to losses under directors and officers insurance policies is primarily in excess layers, making estimates of loss more complex. The current financial market turmoil has increased the number of shareholder class action lawsuits against our insureds or their directors and officers and this trend could continue for some period of time. Impact of changes in key assumptions on reserve volatility As stated above, the Company practice is to estimate reserves using a variety of methods, assumptions and data elements. Within its reserve estimation process for reserves other than asbestos and environmental, the Company does not derive statistical loss distributions or confidence levels around its reserve estimate and, as a result, does not have reserve range estimates to disclose. The reserve estimation process includes explicit assumptions about a number of factors in the internal and external environment. Across most lines of business, the most important assumptions are future loss development factors applied to paid or reported losses to date. For most lines, the reported loss development factor is most important. In workers compensation, paid loss development factors are also important. The trend in loss costs is also a key assumption, particularly in the most recent accident years, where loss development factors are less credible. The following discussion includes disclosure of possible variation from current estimates of loss reserves due to a change in certain key assumptions. Each of the impacts described below is estimated individually, without consideration for any correlation among key assumptions or among lines of business. Therefore, it would be inappropriate to take each of the amounts described below and add them together in an attempt to estimate volatility for the Company reserves in total. The estimated variation in reserves due to changes in key assumptions is a reasonable estimate of possible variation that may occur in the future, likely over a period of several calendar years. It is important to note that the variation discussed is not meant to be a worst-case scenario, and therefore, it is possible that future variation may be more than the amounts discussed below. Recorded reserves for auto liability, net of reinsurance, are $2.3 billion across all lines, $1.6 billion of which is in Personal Lines. Personal auto liability reserves are shorter-tailed than other lines of business (such as workers compensation) and, therefore, less volatile. However, the size of the reserve base means that future changes in estimates could be material to the Company results of operations in any given period. The key assumption for Personal Lines auto liability is the annual loss cost trend, particularly the severity trend component of loss costs. A review of Insurance Services Office ( ISO ) data suggests that annual growth in industry severity since 1999 has varied from +1% to +6%. The ISO data shows recent severity changes to be in the middle of this range. A 2.5 point change in assumed annual severity is within historical variation for the industry and for the Company. A 2.5 point change in assumed annual severity for the two most recent accident years would change the estimated net reserve need by $90, in either direction. Assumed annual severity for accident years prior to the two most recent accident years is likely to have minimal variability. Recorded reserves for workers compensation, net of reinsurance, are $6.3 billion in total for Ongoing Operations. Paid loss development patterns are a key assumption for this line of business, particularly for more mature accident years. Historically, paid loss development patterns have been impacted by, among other things, medical cost inflation. The Company has reviewed the historical variation in reported loss development patterns. If the reported loss development patterns change by 4%, the estimated net reserve need would change by $400, in either direction. A 4% change in reported loss development patterns is within historical variation, as measured by the variation around the average development factors as reported in statutory accident year reports. Recorded reserves for general liability, net of reinsurance, are $2.3 billion in total for Ongoing Operations. Reported loss development patterns are a key assumption for this line of business, particularly for more mature accident years. Historically, assumptions on reported loss development patterns have been impacted by, among other things, emergence of new types of claims (e.g., construction defect claims) or a shift in the mixture between smaller, more routine claims and larger, more complex claims. The Company has reviewed the historical variation in reported loss development patterns. If the reported loss development patterns change by 11%, the estimated net reserve need would change by $300, in either direction. An 11% change in reported loss development patterns is within historical variation, as measured by the variation around the average development factors as reported in statutory accident year reports. 46 Table of Contents Similar to general liability, assumed casualty reinsurance is affected by reported loss development pattern assumptions. In addition to the items identified above that would affect both direct and reinsurance liability claim development patterns, there is also an impact to assumed reporting patterns for any changes in claim notification from ceding companies to the reinsurer. Recorded net reserves for HartRe assumed reinsurance business, excluding asbestos and environmental liabilities, within Other Operations were $562 as of December 31, 2008. If the reported loss development patterns underlying the Company net reserves for HartRe assumed casualty reinsurance change by 10%, the estimated net reserve need would change by $245, in either direction. A 10% change in reported loss development patterns is within historical variation, as measured by the variation around the average development factors as reported in statutory accident year reports. Reserving for Asbestos and Environmental Claims within Other Operations How A&E reserves are set The Company continues to receive asbestos and environmental claims. Asbestos claims relate primarily to bodily injuries asserted by people who came in contact with asbestos or products containing asbestos. Environmental claims relate primarily to pollution and related clean-up costs. The Company wrote several different categories of insurance contracts that may cover asbestos and environmental claims. First, the Company wrote primary policies providing the first layer of coverage in an insured liability program. Second, the Company wrote excess policies providing higher layers of coverage for losses that exhaust the limits of underlying coverage. Third, the Company acted as a reinsurer assuming a portion of those risks assumed by other insurers writing primary, excess and reinsurance coverages. Fourth, subsidiaries of the Company participated in the London Market, writing both direct insurance and assumed reinsurance business. In establishing reserves for asbestos claims, the Company evaluates its insureds estimated liabilities for such claims using a ground-up approach. The Company considers a variety of factors, including the jurisdictions where underlying claims have been brought, past, pending and anticipated future claim activity, disease mix, past settlement values of similar claims, dismissal rates, allocated loss adjustment expense, and potential bankruptcy impact. Similarly, a ground-up exposure review approach is used to establish environmental reserves. The Company evaluation of its insureds estimated liabilities for environmental claims involves consideration of several factors, including historical values of similar claims, the number of sites involved, the insureds alleged activities at each site, the alleged environmental damage at each site, the respective shares of liability of potentially responsible parties at each site, the appropriateness and cost of remediation at each site, the nature of governmental enforcement activities at each site, and potential bankruptcy impact. Having evaluated its insureds probable liabilities for asbestos and/or environmental claims, the Company then evaluates its insureds insurance coverage programs for such claims. The Company considers its insureds total available insurance coverage, including the coverage issued by the Company. The Company also considers relevant judicial interpretations of policy language and applicable coverage defenses or determinations, if any. Evaluation of both the insureds estimated liabilities and the Company exposure to the insureds depends heavily on an analysis of the relevant legal issues and litigation environment. This analysis is conducted by the Company lawyers and is subject to applicable privileges. For both asbestos and environmental reserves, the Company also compares its historical direct net loss and expense paid and reported experience, and net loss and expense paid and reported experience year by year, to assess any emerging trends, fluctuations or characteristics suggested by the aggregate paid and reported activity. Once the gross ultimate exposure for indemnity and allocated loss adjustment expense is determined for its insureds by each policy year, the Company calculates its ceded reinsurance projection based on any applicable facultative and treaty reinsurance and the Company experience with reinsurance collections. Uncertainties Regarding Adequacy of Asbestos and Environmental Reserves With regard to both environmental and particularly asbestos claims, significant uncertainty limits the ability of insurers and reinsurers to estimate the ultimate reserves necessary for unpaid losses and related expenses. Traditional actuarial reserving techniques cannot reasonably estimate the ultimate cost of these claims, particularly during periods where theories of law are in flux. The degree of variability of reserve estimates for these exposures is significantly greater than for other more traditional exposures. In particular, the Company believes there is a high degree of uncertainty inherent in the estimation of asbestos loss reserves. In the case of the reserves for asbestos exposures, factors contributing to the high degree of uncertainty include inadequate loss development patterns, plaintiffs expanding theories of liability, the risks inherent in major litigation, and inconsistent emerging legal doctrines. Furthermore, over time, insurers, including the Company, have experienced significant changes in the rate at which asbestos claims are brought, the claims experience of particular insureds, and the value of claims, making predictions of future exposure from past experience uncertain. Plaintiffs and insureds also have sought to use bankruptcy proceedings, including pre-packaged bankruptcies, to accelerate and increase loss payments by insurers. In addition, some policyholders have asserted new classes of claims for coverages to which an aggregate limit of liability may not apply. Further uncertainties include insolvencies of other carriers and unanticipated developments pertaining to the Company ability to recover reinsurance for asbestos and environmental claims. Management believes these issues are not likely to be resolved in the near future. 47 Table of Contents In the case of the reserves for environmental exposures, factors contributing to the high degree of uncertainty include expanding theories of liability and damages, the risks inherent in major litigation, inconsistent decisions concerning the existence and scope of coverage for environmental claims, and uncertainty as to the monetary amount being sought by the claimant from the insured. It is also not possible to predict changes in the legal and legislative environment and their effect on the future development of asbestos and environmental claims. Although potential Federal asbestos-related legislation was considered by the Senate in 2006, it is uncertain whether such legislation will be reconsidered or enacted in the future and, if enacted, what its effect would be on the Company aggregate asbestos liabilities. The reporting pattern for assumed reinsurance claims, including those related to asbestos and environmental claims, is much longer than for direct claims. In many instances, it takes months or years to determine that the policyholder own obligations have been met and how the reinsurance in question may apply to such claims. The delay in reporting reinsurance claims and exposures adds to the uncertainty of estimating the related reserves. Given the factors described above, the Company believes the actuarial tools and other techniques it employs to estimate the ultimate cost of claims for more traditional kinds of insurance exposure are less precise in estimating reserves for its asbestos and environmental exposures. For this reason, the Company relies on exposure-based analysis to estimate the ultimate costs of these claims and regularly evaluates new information in assessing its potential asbestos and environmental exposures. A number of factors affect the variability of estimates for asbestos and environmental reserves including assumptions with respect to the frequency of claims, the average severity of those claims settled with payment, the dismissal rate of claims with no payment and the expense to indemnity ratio. The uncertainty with respect to the underlying reserve assumptions for asbestos and environmental adds a greater degree of variability to these reserve estimates than reserve estimates for more traditional exposures. While this variability is reflected in part in the size of the range of reserves developed by the Company, that range may still not be indicative of the potential variance between the ultimate outcome and the recorded reserves. The recorded net reserves as of December 31, 2008 of $2.18 billion ($1.90 billion and $275 for asbestos and environmental, respectively) is within an estimated range, unadjusted for covariance, of $1.80 billion to $2.42 billion. The process of estimating asbestos and environmental reserves remains subject to a wide variety of uncertainties, which are detailed in Note 12 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. The Company believes that its current asbestos and environmental reserves are reasonable and appropriate. However, analyses of further developments could cause the Company to change its estimates and ranges of its asbestos and environmental reserves, and the effect of these changes could be material to the Company consolidated operating results, financial condition and liquidity. If there are significant developments that affect particular exposures, reinsurance arrangements or the financial condition of particular reinsurers, the Company will make adjustments to its reserves or to the amounts recoverable from its reinsurers. Total Property & Casualty Reserves, Net of Reinsurance In the opinion of management, based upon the known facts and current law, the reserves recorded for the Company property and casualty businesses at December 31, 2008 represent the Company best estimate of its ultimate liability for losses and loss adjustment expenses related to losses covered by policies written by the Company. However, because of the significant uncertainties surrounding reserves, and particularly asbestos exposures, it is possible that management estimate of the ultimate liabilities for these claims may change and that the required adjustment to recorded reserves could exceed the currently recorded reserves by an amount that could be material to the Company results of operations, financial condition and liquidity. 48 Table of Contents Life Estimated Gross Profits Used in the Valuation and Amortization of Assets and Liabilities Associated with Variable Annuity and Other Universal Life-Type Contracts Accounting Policy and Assumptions Life deferred policy acquisition costs asset and present value of future profits ( PVFP ) intangible asset (hereafter, referred to collectively as DAC ) related to investment contracts and universal life-type contracts (including variable annuities) are amortized in the same way, over the estimated life of the contracts acquired using the retrospective deposit method. Under the retrospective deposit method, acquisition costs are amortized in proportion to the present value of estimated gross profits ( EGPs ). EGPs are also used to amortize other assets and liabilities on the Company balance sheet, such as sales inducement assets and unearned revenue reserves ( URR ). Components of EGPs are used to determine reserves for guaranteed minimum death, income and universal life secondary guarantee benefits accounted for and collectively referred to as SOP 03-1 reserves . The specific breakdown of the most significant EGP based balances by segment is as follows: Individual Variable Annuities - Individual Variable Annuities - U.S. Japan Individual Life December 31, December 31, December 31, December 31, December 31, December 31, 2008 2007 2008 2007 2008 2007 DAC $ 4,844 $ 4,982 $ 1,834 $ 1,760 $ 2,931 $ 2,309 Sales Inducements $ 436 $ 390 $ 19 $ 8 $ 36 $ 20 URR $ 109 $ 124 $ $ $ 1,299 $ 816 SOP 03-1 reserves $ 867 $ 527 $ 229 $ 42 $ 40 $ 19 For most contracts, the Company estimates gross profits over a 20 year horizon as estimated profits emerging subsequent to that timeframe are immaterial. The Company uses other amortization bases for amortizing DAC, such as gross costs (net of reinsurance), as a replacement for EGPs when EGPs are expected to be negative for multiple years of the contract life. Actual gross profits, in a given reporting period, that vary from management initial estimates result in increases or decreases in the rate of amortization, commonly referred to as a true-up , which are recorded in the current period. The true-up recorded for the years ended December 31, 2008, 2007, and 2006 was an increase (decrease) to amortization of $404 (of which $194 is attributed to accelerated DAC amortization for the Company 3Win product in Japan as further discussed under the Japan Variable Annuities section below), $(6), and $41, respectively. 49 Table of Contents Products sold in a particular year are aggregated into cohorts. Future gross profits for each cohort are projected over the estimated lives of the underlying contracts, and are, to a large extent, a function of future account value projections for variable annuity products and to a lesser extent for variable universal life products. The projection of future account values requires the use of certain assumptions. The assumptions considered to be important in the projection of future account value, and hence the EGPs, include separate account fund performance, which is impacted by separate account fund mix, less fees assessed against the contract holder account balance, surrender and lapse rates, interest margin, mortality, and hedging costs. The assumptions are developed as part of an annual process and are dependent upon the Company current best estimates of future events. The Company current 20 year separate account return assumption is approximately 7.2% (after fund fees, but before mortality and expense charges) for U.S. products and 5.1% (after fund fees, but before mortality and expense charges) in aggregate for all Japanese products, but varies from product to product. The Company estimates gross profits using the mean of EGPs derived from a set of stochastic scenarios that have been calibrated to our estimated separate account return. The following table summarizes the general impacts to individual variable annuity EGPs and earnings for DAC amortization caused by changes in separate account returns, mortality and future lapse rate assumptions: Impact on Earnings for DAC Assumption Impact to EGPs Amortization Future separate account return increases Increase : Expected fee income would increase and expected claims would decrease. Benefit Future separate account return decreases Decrease: Expected fee income would decrease and expected claims would increase. Charge Future mortality increases Decrease: Expected fee income would decrease because the time period in which fees would be collected would be reduced and claims would increase Charge Future mortality decreases Increase: Expected fee income would increase because the time period in which fees would be collected would increase and claims would decrease Benefit Future lapse rate increases Decrease: Expected fee income would decrease because the time period in which fees would be collected would be reduced and claims would decrease. Charge Future lapse rate decreases Increase: Expected fee income would increase because the time period in which fees would be collected would increase and claims would increase. Benefit In addition to changes to the assumptions described above, changes to other policyholder behaviors such as resets, partial surrenders, reaction to price increases, and asset allocations could cause EGPs to fluctuate. Estimating future gross profits is a complex process requiring considerable judgment and the forecasting of events well into the future. Given the current volatility in the capital markets and the evaluation of other factors, the Company will continually evaluate its separate account return estimation process and may change that process from time to time. The Company plans to complete a comprehensive assumption study and refine its estimate of future gross profits during the third quarter of each year. Upon completion of an assumption study, the Company revises its assumptions to reflect its current best estimate, thereby changing its estimate of projected account values and the related EGPs in the DAC, sales inducement and unearned revenue reserve amortization models as well as SOP 03-1 reserving models. The DAC asset, as well as the sales inducement asset, unearned revenue reserves and SOP 03-1 reserves are adjusted with an offsetting benefit or charge to income to reflect such changes in the period of the revision, a process known as Unlocking . An Unlock that results in an after-tax benefit generally occurs as a result of actual experience or future expectations of product profitability being favorable compared to previous estimates. An Unlock that results in an after-tax charge generally occurs as a result of actual experience or future expectations of product profitability being unfavorable compared to previous estimates. 50 Table of Contents In addition to when a comprehensive assumption study is completed, revisions to best estimate assumptions used to estimate future gross profits are necessary when the EGPs in the Company models fall outside of an independently determined reasonable range of EGPs. The Company performs a quantitative process each quarter to determine the reasonable range of EGPs. This process involves the use of internally developed models, which run a large number of stochastically determined scenarios of separate account fund performance. Incorporated in each scenario are assumptions with respect to lapse rates, mortality and expenses, based on the Company most recent assumption study. These scenarios are run for the Company individual variable annuity businesses in the United States and Japan, the Company Retirement Plans businesses, and for the Company individual variable universal life business and are used to calculate statistically significant ranges of reasonable EGPs. The statistical ranges produced from the stochastic scenarios are compared to the present value of EGPs used in the Company models. If EGPs used in the Company models fall outside of the statistical ranges of reasonable EGPs, an Unlock would be necessary. If EGPs used in the Company models fall inside of the statistical ranges of reasonable EGPs, the Company will not solely rely on the results of the quantitative analysis to determine the necessity of an Unlock. In addition, the Company considers, on a quarterly basis, other qualitative factors such as product, regulatory and policyholder behavior trends and may also revise EGPs if those trends are expected to be significant and were not or could not be included in the statistically significant ranges of reasonable EGPs. As of December 31, 2008, the EGPs used in the Company models fell within the statistical ranges of reasonable EGPs. As a result of this statistical test and review of qualitative factors, the Company did not Unlock the EGPs used in the Company models during the fourth quarter of 2008. Unlock and Sensitivity Analysis As described above, as of September 30 2008, the Company completed a comprehensive study of assumptions underlying EGPs, resulting in an Unlock. The study covered all assumptions, including mortality, lapses, expenses, interest rate spreads, hedging costs, and separate account returns, in substantially all product lines. The new best estimate assumptions were applied to the current policy related in-force or account values to project future gross profits. The after-tax impact on the Company assets and liabilities as a result of the Unlock during the third quarter of 2008 was as follows: Death and DAC Unearned Income Sales and Revenue Benefit Inducement Segment After-tax (charge) benefit PVFP Reserves Reserves [1] Assets Total [2] Retail $ (648 ) $ 18 $ (75 ) $ (27 ) $ (732 ) Retirement Plans (49 ) (49 ) Individual Life (29 ) (12 ) (3 ) (44 ) International Japan (23 ) (1 ) (90 ) (2 ) (116 ) Corporate 9 9 Total $ (740 ) $ 5 $ (168 ) $ (29 ) $ (932 ) [1] As a result of the Unlock, death benefit reserves in Retail, increased $389, pre-tax, offset by an increase of $273, pre-tax, in reinsurance recoverables. In International, death benefit reserves increased $164, pre-tax, offset by an increase of $25, pre-tax, in reinsurance recoverables. [2] The following were the most significant contributors to the Unlock amounts recorded during the third quarter of 2008: Actual separate account returns from the period ending July 31, 2007 to September 30, 2008 were significantly below our aggregated estimated return. The Company reduced its 20 year projected separate account return assumption from 7.8% to 7.2% in the U.S. In Retirement Plans, the Company reduced its estimate of future fees as plans meet contractual size limits ( breakpoints ) causing a lower fee schedule to apply and the Company increased its assumption for future deposits by existing plan participants. 51 Table of Contents The after-tax impact on the Company assets and liabilities as a result of the Unlock during the third quarter of 2007 was as follows: Death and DAC Unearned Income Sales and Revenue Benefit Inducement Segment After-tax (charge) benefit PVFP Reserves Reserves [1] Assets Total [2] Retail $ 180 $ (5 ) $ (4 ) $ 9 $ 180 Retirement Plans (9 ) (9 ) Institutional 1 1 Individual Life 24 (8 ) 16 International Japan 16 6 22 Corporate 3 3 Total $ 215 $ (13 ) $ 2 $ 9 $ 213 [1] As a result of the unlock, death benefit reserves, in Retail, decreased $4, pre-tax, offset by a decrease of $10, pre-tax, in reinsurance recoverables. [2] The following were the most significant contributors to the unlock amounts recorded during the third quarter of 2007: Actual separate account returns were above our aggregated estimated return. During the third quarter of 2007, the Company estimated gross profits using the mean of EGPs derived from a set of stochastic scenarios that have been calibrated to our estimated separate account return as compared to prior year where we used a single deterministic estimation. The impact of this change in estimation was a benefit of $13, after-tax, for Japan variable annuities and $20, after-tax, for U.S. variable annuities. As part of its continual enhancement to its assumption setting processes and in connection with its assumption study, the Company included dynamic lapse behavior assumptions. Dynamic lapses reflect that lapse behavior will be different depending upon market movements. The impact of this assumption change along with other base lapse rate changes was an approximate benefit of $40, after-tax, for U.S. variable annuities. The Company performs sensitivity analyses with respect to the effect certain assumptions have on EGPs and the related DAC, sales inducement, unearned revenue reserve and SOP 03-1 reserve balances. Each of the sensitivities illustrated below are estimated individually, without consideration for any correlation among the key assumptions. Therefore, it would be inappropriate to take each of the sensitivity amounts below and add them together in an attempt to estimate volatility for the respective EGP-related balances in total. In addition, the tables below only provide sensitivities on separate account returns and lapses. While those two assumptions are critical in projecting EGPs, as described above, many additional assumptions are necessary to project EGPs and to determine an Unlock amount. As a result, actual Unlock amounts may vary from those calculated by using the sensitivities below. The following tables depict the estimated sensitivities for U.S. variable annuities and Japan variable annuities: U.S. Variable Annuities Effect on EGP-related (Increasing separate account returns and decreasing lapse rates generally result in benefits. Decreasing balances if unlocked separate account returns and increasing lapse rates generally result in charges.) (after-tax) [1] If actual separate account returns were 1% above or below our aggregated estimated return $ 20 $40 [3] If actual lapse rates were 1% above or below our estimated aggregate lapse rate $ 10 $25 [2] If we changed our future separate account return rate by 1% from our aggregated estimated future return $ 90 $120 If we changed our future lapse rate by 1% from our estimated aggregate future lapse rate $ 50 $80 [2] Japan Variable Annuities Effect on EGP-related (Increasing separate account returns and decreasing lapse rates generally result in benefits. Decreasing balances if unlocked separate account returns and increasing lapse rates generally result in charges.) (after-tax) [1] If actual separate account returns were 1% above or below our aggregated estimated return $ 5 $20 [4] [5] If actual lapse rates were 1% above or below our estimated aggregate lapse rate $ 1 $10 [2] If we changed our future separate account return rate by 1% from our aggregated estimated future return $ 50 $70 If we changed our future lapse rate by 1% from our estimated aggregate future lapse rate $ 10 $25 [2] [1] These sensitivities are reflective of the results of our 2008 assumption studies. The Company EGP models assume that separate account returns are earned linearly and that lapses occur linearly (except for certain dynamic lapse features) throughout the year. Similarly, the sensitivities assume that differential separate account and lapse rates are linear and parallel and persist for one year from September 30, 2008, the date of our third quarter 2008 Unlock, and reflect all current in-force and account value data, including the corresponding market levels, allocation of funds, policyholder behavior and actuarial assumptions. These sensitivities are not perfectly linear nor perfectly symmetrical for increases and decreases. As such, extrapolating results over a wide range will decrease the accuracy of the sensitivities predictive ability. Sensitivity results are, in part, based on the current in-the-moneyness of various guarantees offered with the products. Future market conditions could significantly change the sensitivity results. [2] Sensitivity around lapses assumes lapses increase or decrease consistently across all cohort years and products. 52 Table of Contents [3] The overall actual return generated by the U.S. variable annuity separate accounts is dependent on several factors, including the relative mix of the underlying sub-accounts among bond funds and equity funds as well as equity sector weightings and as a result of the large proportion of separate account assets invested in U.S. equity markets, the Company overall U.S. separate account fund performance has been reasonably correlated to the overall performance of the S&P 500 although no assurance can be provided that this correlation will continue in the future. Since September 30, 2008, the date of the last unlock, the actual return on U.S. variable annuity assets has been 21% below our estimated aggregate return. The Company estimates the actual return would need to drop by an additional 6% since December 31, 2008, before EGPs in the Company models fall outside of the statistical ranges of reasonable EGPs. [4] The overall actual return generated by the Japan variable annuity separate accounts is influenced by the variable annuity products offered in Japan as well as the wide variety of funds offered within the sub-accounts of those products. The actual return is also dependent upon the relative mix of the underlying sub-accounts among the funds. Unlike in the U.S., there is no global index or market that reasonably correlates with the overall Japan actual separate account fund performance. Since September 30, 2008, the date of the last unlock, the actual return on Japan variable annuity assets has been 15.5% below our estimated aggregate return. The Company estimates the actual return would need to drop by an additional 7.5% since December 31, 2008, before EGPs in the Company models fall outside of the statistical ranges of reasonable EGPs. [5] For the Company 3Win product in Japan, decreases in the contract holder account value (which is partially dependent upon equity market movements due to fixed contractual investment allocations) of greater than 20% of the initial deposit require the contract holder to withdraw 80% of their initial deposit without penalty or recover their initial investment through a payout annuity. The exercise of these options results in an acceleration of the amount of DAC amortization in a specific reporting period. During the fourth quarter of 2008 approximately 97% of all 3Win contractholders had account values that fell by 20% or more from their initial deposit. This resulted in accelerated amortization of DAC in the fourth quarter of 2008 of $194, pre-tax. Further declines in equity markets during 2009 could cause the entire remaining DAC balance of $11 to be amortized. An Unlock only revises EGPs to reflect current best estimate assumptions. With or without an Unlock, and even after an Unlock occurs, the Company must also test the aggregate recoverability of the DAC and sales inducement assets by comparing the existing DAC balance to the present value of future EGPs. In addition, the Company routinely stress tests its DAC and sales inducement assets for recoverability against severe declines in its separate account assets, which could occur if the equity markets experienced a significant sell-off, as the majority of policyholders funds in the separate accounts is invested in the equity market. As of December 31, 2008, the Company believed U.S. individual and Japan individual variable annuity EGPs could fall, through a combination of negative market returns, lapses and mortality, by at least 6% and 49%, respectively, before portions of its DAC and sales inducement assets would be unrecoverable. The extent of the charge against earnings upon the DAC and sales inducement assets becoming unrecoverable is dependent upon how much further beyond the thresholds listed above variable annuity EGPs decline. The Company estimates that for every 1% decline in variable annuity EGPs beyond the thresholds listed above, the DAC and sales inducements write-off would be $65 and $12, after-tax, for U.S. variable annuity and Japan variable annuity, respectively. If, at the end of any quarter, the EGPs in the Company models fall outside of the statistical ranges of reasonable EGPs, see footnote [3] above, and the Company has exceeded the threshold for recoverability, the Company will first Unlock the future EGPs to reflect the Company revised best estimates and second will re-test for recoverability. Living Benefits Required to be Fair Valued The Company offers certain variable annuity products with a guaranteed minimum withdrawal benefit ( GMWB ) rider in the U.S., Japan and the U.K. The Company also offers a guaranteed minimum accumulation benefit ( GMAB ) with a variable annuity product offered in Japan. As of December 31, 2008 and December 31, 2007, the fair values of the GMWB liabilities are $6.6 billion and $715, respectively. As of December 31, 2008 the fair value of the GMAB liability is $0. As of December 31, 2007 the fair value of the GMAB was an asset of $2 because the present value of the fees expected to be earned in the future exceeded the present value claims expected to be paid in the future. Due to significant market declines in the fourth quarter of 2008, a large majority of the Company in force Japan 3 Win policies, which include a GMAB feature, annuitized or surrendered free of charge in the fourth quarter of 2008. See Note 4 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for a description of the Japan GMAB. Fair values for GMWB and GMAB contracts are calculated based upon internally developed models because active, observable markets do not exist for those items. Below is a description of the Company fair value methodologies for guaranteed benefit liabilities, the related reinsurance and customized derivatives, all accounted for under SFAS 133, prior to the adoption of SFAS 157 and subsequent to adoption of SFAS 157. 53 Table of Contents Pre-SFAS 157 Fair Value Prior to January 1, 2008, the Company used the guidance prescribed in SFAS 133 and other related accounting literature on fair value which represented the amount for which a financial instrument could be exchanged in a current transaction between knowledgeable, unrelated willing parties. However, under that accounting literature, when an estimate of fair value was made for liabilities where no market observable transactions existed for that liability or similar liabilities, market risk margins were only included in the valuation if the margin was identifiable, measurable and significant. If a reliable estimate of market risk margins was not obtainable, the present value of expected future cash flows under a risk neutral framework, discounted at the risk free rate of interest, was the best available estimate of fair value in the circumstances ( Pre-SFAS 157 Fair Value ). The Pre-SFAS 157 Fair Value was calculated based on actuarial and capital market assumptions related to projected cash flows, including benefits and related contract charges, over the lives of the contracts, incorporating expectations concerning policyholder behavior such as lapses, fund selection, resets and withdrawal utilization (for the customized derivatives, policyholder behavior is prescribed in the derivative contract). Because of the dynamic and complex nature of these cash flows, best estimate assumptions and a Monte Carlo stochastic process involving the generation of thousands of scenarios that assume risk neutral returns consistent with swap rates and a blend of observable implied index volatility levels were used. Estimating these cash flows involved numerous estimates and subjective judgments including those regarding expected markets rates of return, market volatility, correlations of market index returns to funds, fund performance, discount rates and policyholder behavior. At each valuation date, the Company assumed expected returns based on: risk-free rates as represented by the current LIBOR forward curve rates; forward market volatility assumptions for each underlying index based primarily on a blend of observed market implied volatility data; correlations of market returns across underlying indices based on actual observed market returns and relationships over the ten years preceding the valuation date; three years of history for fund regression; and current risk-free spot rates as represented by the current LIBOR spot curve to determine the present value of expected future cash flows produced in the stochastic projection process. As many guaranteed benefit obligations are relatively new in the marketplace, actual policyholder behavior experience is limited. As a result, estimates of future policyholder behavior are subjective and based on analogous internal and external data. As markets change, mature and evolve and actual policyholder behavior emerges, management continually evaluates the appropriateness of its assumptions for this component of the fair value model. Fair Value Under SFAS 157 The Company SFAS 157 fair value is calculated as an aggregation of the following components: Pre-SFAS 157 Fair Value; Actively-Managed Volatility Adjustment; Credit Standing Adjustment; Market Illiquidity Premium; and Behavior Risk Margin. The resulting aggregation is reconciled or calibrated, if necessary, to market information that is, or may be, available to the Company, but may not be observable by other market participants, including reinsurance discussions and transactions. The Company believes the aggregation of each of these components, as necessary and as reconciled or calibrated to the market information available to the Company, results in an amount that the Company would be required to transfer, for a liability or receive for an asset, to market participants in an active liquid market, if one existed, for those market participants to assume the risks associated with the guaranteed minimum benefits and the related reinsurance and customized derivatives required to be fair valued. The SFAS 157 fair value is likely to materially diverge from the ultimate settlement of the liability as the Company believes settlement will be based on our best estimate assumptions rather than those best estimate assumptions plus risk margins. In the absence of any transfer of the guaranteed benefit liability to a third party, the release of risk margins is likely to be reflected as realized gains in future periods net income. Each of the components described below are unobservable in the marketplace and require subjectivity by the Company in determining their value. Actively-Managed Volatility Adjustment. This component incorporates the basis differential between the observable index implied volatilities used to calculate the Pre-SFAS 157 component and the actively-managed funds underlying the variable annuity product. The Actively-Managed Volatility Adjustment is calculated using historical fund and weighted index volatilities. Credit Standing Adjustment. This component makes an adjustment that market participants would make to reflect the risk that guaranteed benefit obligations or the GMWB reinsurance recoverables will not be fulfilled ( nonperformance risk ). SFAS 157 explicitly requires nonperformance risk to be reflected in fair value. The Company calculates the Credit Standing Adjustment by using default rates provided by rating agencies, adjusted for market recoverability, reflecting the long-term nature of living benefit obligations and the priority of payment on these obligations versus long-term debt. Market Illiquidity Premium. This component makes an adjustment that market participants would require to reflect that guaranteed benefit obligations are illiquid and have no market observable exit prices in the capital markets. Behavior Risk Margin. This component adds a margin that market participants would require for the risk that the Company assumptions about policyholder behavior used in the Pre-SFAS 157 model could differ from actual experience. The Behavior Risk Margin is calculated by taking the difference between adverse policyholder behavior assumptions and the best estimate assumptions used in the Pre-SFAS 157 model using interest rate and volatility assumptions that the Company believes market participants would use in developing risk margins. 54 Table of Contents In valuing the embedded derivative, the Company attributes to the derivative a portion of fees collected from the contract holder equal to the present value of future claims (the Attributed Fees ). Attributed Fees in dollars are determined at the inception of each quarterly cohort by setting the dollars equal to the present value of expected claims. The Attributed Fees, in basis points, are determined by dividing the Attributed Fees in dollars by the present value of account value. The Attributed Fees in basis points are locked-in for each quarterly cohort. Recent capital markets conditions, in particular high equity index volatility and low interest rates have increased the Attributed Fees for recent cohorts to a level above our rider fees. Capital market assumptions can significantly change the value of embedded derivative living benefit guarantees. For example, independent future decreases in equity market returns, future decreases in interest rates and future increases in equity index volatility will all have the effect of increasing the value of the embedded derivative liability as of December 31, 2008 resulting in a realized loss in net income. Furthermore, changes in policyholder behavior can also significantly change the value of the GMWB. For example, independent future increases in fund mix towards equity based funds vs. bond funds, future increases in withdrawals, future decreasing mortality, future increasing usage of the step-up feature and decreases in lapses will all have the effect of increasing the value of the GMWB embedded derivative liability as of December 31, 2008 resulting in a realized loss in net income. Independent changes in any one of these assumptions moving in the opposite direction will have the effect of decreasing the value of the embedded derivative liability as of December 31, 2008 resulting in a realized gain in net income. As markets change, mature and evolve and actual policyholder behavior emerges, management continually evaluates the appropriateness of its assumptions. In addition, management regularly evaluates the valuation model, incorporating emerging valuation techniques where appropriate, including drawing on the expertise of market participants and valuation experts. Valuation of Investments and Derivative Instruments The Hartford investments in fixed maturities include bonds, redeemable preferred stock and commercial paper. These investments, along with certain equity securities, which include common and non-redeemable preferred stocks, are classified as available-for-sale and are carried at fair value. The after-tax difference from cost or amortized cost is reflected in stockholders equity as a component of Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income ( AOCI ), after adjustments for the effect of deducting the life and pension policyholders share of the immediate participation guaranteed contracts and certain life and annuity deferred policy acquisition costs and reserve adjustments. The equity investments associated with the variable annuity products offered in Japan are recorded at fair value and are classified as trading with changes in fair value recorded in net investment income. Policy loans are carried at outstanding balance. Mortgage loans on real estate are recorded at the outstanding principal balance adjusted for amortization of premiums or discounts and net of valuation allowances, if any. Short-term investments are carried at amortized cost, which approximates fair value. Limited partnerships and other alternative investments are reported at their carrying value with the change in carrying value accounted for under the equity method and accordingly the Company share of earnings are included in net investment income. Recognition of limited partnerships and other alternative investment income is delayed due to the availability of the related financial statements, as private equity and other funds are generally on a three-month delay and hedge funds are on a one-month delay. Accordingly, income at December 31, 2008 may not include the full impact of current year changes in valuation of the underlying assets and liabilities. Other investments primarily consist of derivatives instruments which are carried at fair value. Valuation of Fixed Maturity, Short-Term and Equity Securities, Available-for-Sale The fair value for fixed maturity, short-term and equity securities, available-for-sale, is determined by management after considering one of three primary sources of information: third party pricing services, independent broker quotations or pricing matrices. Security pricing is applied using a waterfall approach whereby publicly available prices are first sought from third party pricing services, the remaining unpriced securities are submitted to independent brokers for prices, or lastly, securities are priced using a pricing matrix. Typical inputs used by these three pricing methods include, but are not limited to, reported trades, benchmark yields, issuer spreads, bids, offers, and/or estimated cash flows and prepayments speeds. Based on the typical trading volumes and the lack of quoted market prices for fixed maturities, third party pricing services will normally derive the security prices through recent reported trades for identical or similar securities making adjustments through the reporting date based upon available market observable information as outlined above. If there are no recent reported trades, the third party pricing services and brokers may use matrix or model processes to develop a security price where future cash flow expectations are developed based upon collateral performance and discounted at an estimated market rate. Included in the pricing of asset-backed securities ( ABS ), collateralized mortgage obligations ( CMOs ), and mortgage-backed securities ( MBS ) are estimates of the rate of future prepayments of principal over the remaining life of the securities. Such estimates are derived based on the characteristics of the underlying structure and prepayment speeds previously experienced at the interest rate levels projected for the underlying collateral. Actual prepayment experience may vary from these estimates. Prices from third party pricing services are often unavailable for securities that are rarely traded or are traded only in privately negotiated transactions. As a result, certain securities are priced via independent broker quotations which utilize inputs that may be difficult to corroborate with observable market based data. Additionally, the majority of these independent broker quotations are non-binding. A pricing matrix is used to price securities for which the Company is unable to obtain either a price from a third party pricing service or an independent broker quotation. The pricing matrix used by the Company begins with current spread levels to determine the market price for the security. The credit spreads, as assigned by a knowledgeable private placement broker, incorporate the issuer credit rating and a risk premium, if warranted, due to the issuer industry and the security time to maturity. The issuer-specific yield adjustments, which can be positive or negative, are updated twice per year, as of June 30 and December 31, by the private placement broker and are intended to adjust security prices for issuer-specific factors. The Company assigns a credit rating to these securities based upon an internal analysis of the issuer financial strength. 55 Table of Contents The Company performs a monthly analysis on the prices and credit spreads received from third parties to ensure that the prices represent a reasonable estimate of the fair value. This process involves quantitative and qualitative analysis and is overseen by investment and accounting professionals. Examples of procedures performed include, but are not limited to, initial and on-going review of third party pricing services methodologies, review of pricing statistics and trends, back testing recent trades and monitoring of trading volumes. In addition, the Company ensures whether prices received from independent brokers represent a reasonable estimate of fair value through the use of internal and external cash flow models developed based on spreads, and when available, market indices. As a result of this analysis, if the Company determines that there is a more appropriate fair value based upon the available market data, the price received from the third party is adjusted accordingly. At December 31, 2008, the Company made fair value determinations which lowered prices received from third party pricing services and brokers by a total of $139. The securities adjusted had an amortized cost and fair value after the adjustment of $623 and $232, respectively, and were primarily commercial mortgage-backed securities ( CMBS ). In accordance with SFAS 157, the Company has analyzed the third party pricing services valuation methodologies and related inputs, and has also evaluated the various types of securities in its investment portfolio to determine an appropriate SFAS 157 fair value hierarchy level based upon trading activity and the observability of market inputs. The SFAS 157 fair value hierarchy prioritizes the inputs in the valuation techniques used to measure fair value into three broad levels (Level 1 quoted prices in active markets for identical assets, Level 2 significant observable inputs, or Level 3 significant unobservable inputs). For further discussion of SFAS 157, see Note 4 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. Based on this, each price was classified into Level 1, 2, or 3. Most prices provided by third party pricing services are classified into Level 2 because the inputs used in pricing the securities are market observable. Due to a general lack of transparency in the process that brokers use to develop prices, most valuations that are based on brokers prices are classified as Level 3. Some valuations may be classified as Level 2 if the price can be corroborated. Internal matrix priced securities, primarily consisting of certain private placement debt, are also classified as Level 3. The matrix pricing of certain private placement debt includes significant non-observable inputs, the internally determined credit rating of the security and an externally provided credit spread. The following table presents the fair value of fixed maturity, short-term and equity securities, available-for-sale, by pricing source and SFAS 157 hierarchy level as of December 31, 2008. Quoted Prices in Active Markets Significant Significant for Identical Observable Unobservable Assets Inputs Inputs (Level 1) (Level 2) (Level 3) Total Priced via third party pricing services $ 3,787 $ 50,252 $ 2,976 $ 57,015 Priced via independent broker quotations 3,962 3,962 Priced via matrices 180 4,693 4,873 Priced via other methods [1] 720 720 Short-term investments [2] 7,025 2,997 10,022 Total $ 10,812 $ 53,429 $ 12,351 $ 76,592 % of Total 14.1 % 69.8 % 16.1 % 100.0 % [1] Represents securities for which adjustments were made to reduce prices received from third parties and certain private equity investments that are carried at the Company determination of fair value from inception. [2] Short-term investments are primarily valued at amortized cost, which approximates fair value. [2] Short-term investments are primarily valued at amortized cost, which approximates fair value. The fair value of a financial instrument is the amount at which the instrument could be exchanged in a current transaction between knowledgeable, unrelated willing parties using inputs, including assumptions and estimates, a market participant would utilize. As the estimated fair value of a financial instrument utilizes assumptions and estimates, the amount that may be realized may differ significantly. 56 Table of Contents The following table presents the fair value of the significant asset sectors within the SFAS 157 Level 3 securities classification as of December 31, 2008. % of Total Fair Value Fair Value ABS Below prime $ 1,643 13.3 % Collateralized loan obligations ( CLOs ) 2,131 17.3 % Other 560 4.5 % Corporate Matrix priced private placements 4,641 37.6 % Other 1,755 14.2 % CMBS 802 6.5 % Preferred stock 337 2.7 % Other 482 3.9 % Total Level 3 securities $ 12,351 100.0 % ABS below prime primarily represents sub-prime and Alt-A securities which are classified as Level 3 due to the lack of liquidity in the market. ABS CLOs represent senior secured bank loan CLOs which are primarily priced by independent brokers. ABS other primarily represents broker priced securities. Corporate matrix priced represents private placement securities that are thinly traded and priced using a pricing matrix which includes significant non-observable inputs. Corporate other primarily represents broker priced public securities and private placement securities qualified for sale under rule 144A, and long-dated fixed maturities where the term of significant inputs may not be sufficient to be deemed observable. CMBS primarily represents CMBS bonds and commercial real estate collateralized debt obligations ( CRE CDOs ) which were either fair valued by the Company or by independent brokers due to the illiquidity of this sector. Preferred stock primarily represents lower quality preferred securities that are less liquid due to market conditions. Valuation of Derivative Instruments, excluding embedded derivatives within liability contracts Derivative instruments are reported on the consolidated balance sheets at fair value and are reported in Other Investments and Other Liabilities. Derivative instruments are fair valued using pricing valuation models, which utilize market data inputs or independent broker quotations. As of December 31, 2008 and 2007, 94% and 89% of derivatives, respectively, based upon notional values, were priced by valuation models, which utilize independent market data. The remaining derivatives were priced by broker quotations. The derivatives are valued using mid-market level inputs, with the exception of the customized swap contracts that hedge GMWB liabilities, that are predominantly observable in the market. Inputs used to value derivatives include, but are not limited to, interest swap rates, foreign currency forward and spot rates, credit spreads and correlations, interest and equity volatility and equity index levels. The Company performs a monthly analysis on derivative valuations which includes both quantitative and qualitative analysis. Examples of procedures performed include, but are not limited to, review of pricing statistics and trends, back testing recent trades, analyzing the impacts of changes in the market environment, and review of changes in market value for each derivative including those derivatives priced by brokers. The following table presents the notional value and net fair value of derivatives instruments by SFAS 157 hierarchy level as of December 31, 2008. Notional Value Fair Value Quoted prices in active markets for identical assets (Level 1) $ 4,502 $ Significant observable inputs (Level 2) 26,011 1,108 Significant unobservable inputs (Level 3) 23,915 2,330 Total $ 54,428 $ 3,438 The following table presents the notional value and net fair value of the derivative instruments within the SFAS 157 Level 3 securities classification as of December 31, 2008. Notional Value Fair Value Credit derivatives $ 3,629 $ (358 ) Interest derivatives 3,152 49 Equity derivatives 15,735 2,759 Other 1,399 (120 ) Total Level 3 $ 23,915 $ 2,330 57 Table of Contents Derivative instruments classified as Level 3 include complex derivatives, primarily consisting of equity options and swaps, interest rate derivatives which have interest rate optionality, certain credit default swaps, and long-dated interest rate swaps. These derivative instruments are valued using pricing models which utilize both observable and unobservable inputs and, to a lesser extent, broker quotations. A derivative instrument that is priced using both observable and unobservable inputs will be classified as a Level 3 financial instrument in its entirety if the unobservable input is significant in developing the price. The Company utilizes derivative instruments to manage the risk associated with certain assets and liabilities. However, the derivative instrument may not be classified with the same fair value hierarchy level as the associated assets and liabilities. Evaluation of Other-Than-Temporary Impairments on Available-for-Sale Securities One of the significant estimates related to available-for-sale securities is the evaluation of investments for other-than-temporary impairments. If a decline in the fair value of an available-for-sale security is judged to be other-than-temporary, a charge is recorded in net realized capital losses equal to the difference between the fair value and cost or amortized cost basis of the security. In addition, for securities expected to be sold, an other-than-temporary impairment charge is recognized if the Company does not expect the fair value of a security to recover to cost or amortized cost prior to the expected date of sale. The fair value of the other-than-temporarily impaired investment becomes its new cost basis. For fixed maturities, the Company accretes the new cost basis to par or to the estimated future cash flows over the expected remaining life of the security by adjusting the security yield. The evaluation of securities for impairments is a quantitative and qualitative process, which is subject to risks and uncertainties and is intended to determine whether declines in the fair value of investments should be recognized in current period earnings. The risks and uncertainties include changes in general economic conditions, the issuer financial condition or future prospects, the effects of changes in interest rates or credit spreads and the expected recovery period. The Company has a security monitoring process overseen by a committee of investment and accounting professionals ( the committee ) that identifies securities that, due to certain characteristics, as described below, are subjected to an enhanced analysis on a quarterly basis. Based on this evaluation, during 2008, the Company concluded $4.0 billion of unrealized losses were other-than-temporarily impaired and as of December 31, 2008, the Company unrealized losses on available-for-sale securities of $14.6 billion were temporarily impaired. Securities not subject to Emerging Issues Task Force ( EITF ) Issue No. 99-20, Recognition of Interest Income and Impairment on Purchased Beneficial Interests and Beneficial Interests That Continued to Be Held by a Transferor in Securitized Financial Assets ( non-EITF Issue No. 99-20 securities ) that are in an unrealized loss position, are reviewed at least quarterly to determine if an other-than-temporary impairment is present based on certain quantitative and qualitative factors. The primary factors considered in evaluating whether a decline in value for non-EITF Issue No. 99-20 securities is other-than-temporary include: (a) the length of time and extent to which the fair value has been less than cost or amortized cost of the security, (b) the financial condition, credit rating and future prospects of the issuer, (c) whether the debtor is current on contractually obligated interest and principal payments and (d) the intent and ability of the Company to retain the investment for a period of time sufficient to allow for recovery. Through September 30, 2008, for securitized financial assets with contractual cash flows, including those subject to EITF Issue No. 99-20, the Company periodically updated its best estimate of cash flows over the life of the security. The Company best estimate of cash flows used severe economic recession assumptions due to market uncertainty, similar to those the Company believed market participants would use. If the fair value of a securitized financial asset was less than its cost or amortized cost and there has been an adverse change in timing or amount of anticipated future cash flows since the last revised estimate, an other-than-temporary impairment charge was recognized. The Company also considered its intent and ability to retain a temporarily depressed security until recovery. Estimating future cash flows is a quantitative and qualitative process that incorporates information received from third party sources along with certain internal assumptions and judgments regarding the future performance of the underlying collateral. In addition, projections of expected future cash flows may change based upon new information regarding the performance of the underlying collateral. Beginning in the fourth quarter of 2008, the Company implemented FSP No. EITF 99-20-1, Amendments to the Impairment Guidance of EITF Issue No. 99-20 (see Note 1 in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements). Upon implementation, the Company continued to utilize the impairment process described above, however, rather than exclusively relying upon market participant assumptions, management judgment was also used in assessing the probability that an adverse change in future cash flows has occurred. Each quarter, during this analysis, the Company asserts its intent and ability to retain until recovery those securities judged to be temporarily impaired. Once identified, these securities are systematically restricted from trading unless approved by the committee. The committee will only authorize the sale of these securities based on predefined criteria that relate to events that could not have been reasonably foreseen. Examples of the criteria include, but are not limited to, the deterioration in the issuer creditworthiness, a change in regulatory requirements or a major business combination or major disposition. Pension and Other Postretirement Benefit Obligations The Company maintains a U.S. qualified defined benefit pension plan (the Plan ) that covers substantially all employees, as well as unfunded excess plans to provide benefits in excess of amounts permitted to be paid to participants of the Plan under the provisions of the Internal Revenue Code. The Company has also entered into individual retirement agreements with certain retired directors providing for unfunded supplemental pension benefits. In addition, the Company provides certain health care and life insurance benefits for eligible retired employees. The Company maintains international plans which represent an immaterial percentage of total pension assets, liabilities and expense and, for reporting purposes, are combined with domestic plans. 58 Table of Contents Pursuant to accounting principles related to the Company pension and other postretirement obligations to employees under its various benefit plans, the Company is required to make a significant number of assumptions in order to calculate the related liabilities and expenses each period. The two economic assumptions that have the most impact on pension and other postretirement expense are the discount rate and the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets. In determining the discount rate assumption, the Company utilizes a discounted cash flow analysis of the Company pension and other postretirement obligations and currently available market and industry data. The yield curve utilized in the cash flow analysis is comprised of bonds rated Aa or higher with maturities primarily between zero and thirty years. Based on all available information, it was determined that 6.25% was the appropriate discount rate as of December 31, 2008 to calculate the Company pension and other postretirement obligation. Accordingly, the 6.25% discount rate will also be used to determine the Company 2009 pension and other postretirement expense. At December 31, 2007, the discount rate was also 6.25%. As of December 31, 2008, a 25 basis point increase/decrease in the discount rate would decrease/increase the pension and other postretirement obligations by $116 and $9, respectively. However, because the Company employs a duration overlay program to adjust the duration of the fixed income component of the Plan assets to better match the duration of the liabilities, the funded status of the pension benefits would only increase/decrease by $43. The Company determines the expected long-term rate of return assumption based on an analysis of the Plan portfolio historical compound rates of return since 1979 (the earliest date for which comparable portfolio data is available) and over 5 year and 10 year periods. The Company selected these periods, as well as shorter durations, to assess the portfolio volatility, duration and total returns as they relate to pension obligation characteristics, which are influenced by the Company workforce demographics. In addition, the Company also applies long-term market return assumptions utilized in Life DAC analysis to an investment mix that generally anticipates 60% fixed income securities, 20% equity securities and 20% alternative assets to derive an expected long-term rate of return. Based upon these analyses, management maintained the long-term rate of return assumption at 7.30% as of December 31, 2008. This assumption will be used to determine the Company 2009 expense. The long-term rate of return assumption at December 31, 2007, that was used to determine the Company 2008 expense, was also 7.30%. Pension expense reflected in the Company net income was $122, $131 and $152 in 2008, 2007 and 2006, respectively. The Company estimates its 2009 pension expense will be approximately $134, based on current assumptions. To illustrate the impact of these assumptions on annual pension expense for 2009 and going forward, a 25 basis point decrease in the discount rate will increase pension expense by approximately $12 and a 25 basis point change in the long-term asset return assumption will increase/decrease pension expense by approximately $9. In 2008, the deterioration of the global economy, together with the current credit crisis, caused significant volatility in interest rates and equity prices, which caused actual asset returns of the Plan investment portfolios to be less than expected. As provided for under SFAS No. 87, the Company uses a five-year averaging method to determine the market-related value of Plan assets, which is used to determine the expected return component of pension expense. Under this methodology, asset gains/losses that result from returns that differ from the Company long-term rate of return assumption are recognized in the market-related value of assets on a level basis over a five year period. The difference between actual asset returns for the plans of $(441) and $331 for the years ended December 31, 2008 and 2007, respectively, as compared to expected returns of $279 and $283 for the years ended December 31, 2008 and 2007, respectively, will be fully reflected in the market-related value of plan assets over the next five years using the methodology described above. The level of actuarial net losses continues to exceed the allowable amortization corridor as defined under SFAS No. 87. Based on the 6.25% discount rate selected as of December 31, 2008 and taking into account estimated future minimum funding, the difference between actual and expected performance in 2008 will increase annual pension expense in future years. The increase in pension expense will be approximately $30 in 2009 and will increase ratably to an increase of approximately $205 in 2014. Contingencies Relating to Corporate Litigation and Regulatory Matters Management follows the requirements of SFAS No. 5 Accounting for Contingencies. This statement requires management to evaluate each contingent matter separately. A loss is recorded if probable and reasonably estimable. Management establishes reserves for these contingencies at its best estimate, or, if no one number within the range of possible losses is more probable than any other, the Company records an estimated reserve at the low end of the range of losses. The Company has a quarterly monitoring process involving legal and accounting professionals. Legal personnel first identify outstanding corporate litigation and regulatory matters posing a reasonable possibility of loss. These matters are then jointly reviewed by accounting and legal personnel to evaluate the facts and changes since the last review in order to determine if a provision for loss should be recorded or adjusted, the amount that should be recorded, and the appropriate disclosure. The outcomes of certain contingencies currently being evaluated by the Company, which relate to corporate litigation and regulatory matters, are inherently difficult to predict, and the reserves that have been established for the estimated settlement amounts are subject to significant changes. In view of the uncertainties regarding the outcome of these matters, as well as the tax-deductibility of payments, it is possible that the ultimate cost to the Company of these matters could exceed the reserve by an amount that would have a material adverse effect on the Company consolidated results of operations or cash flows in a particular quarterly or annual period. 59 Table of Contents Goodwill Impairment SFAS No. 142, Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets, requires that goodwill balances be reviewed for impairment at least annually or more frequently if events occur or circumstances change that would indicate that a triggering event, as defined in SFAS 142, has occurred. A reporting unit is defined as an operating segment or one level below an operating segment. Most of the Company reporting units, for which goodwill has been allocated, are equivalent to the Company operating segments as there is no discrete financial information available for the separate components of the segment or all of the components of the segment have similar economic characteristics. The fixed and variable annuity components of Individual Annuity have been aggregated into one reporting unit; the 401(k), 457 and 403(b) components of Retirement have been aggregated into one reporting unit; the variable life, universal life and term life components of Individual Life have been aggregated into one reporting unit; the private placement life insurance and institutional investment products components of the Institutional Solutions Group have been aggregated into one reporting unit; the group disability and group life components of Group Benefits have been aggregated into one reporting unit; the Japan, Brazil and U.K. components of International have been aggregated into one reporting unit, and the homeowners and automobile components of Personal Lines have been aggregated into one reporting unit. In circumstances where the components of an operating segment constitute a business for which discrete financial information is available and segment management regularly reviews the operating results of that component such as with Other Retail, which combined with Individual Annuity constitutes the Retail operating segment, and Hartford Financial Products, the Company has classified those components as reporting units. As of December 31, 2008, the Company had goodwill allocated to the following reporting units: Segment Goodwill Goodwill in Corporate Total Other Retail $ 159 $ 92 $ 251 Retirement Plans [1] 79 69 148 Institutional Solutions Group 32 32 Individual Life 224 118 342 Group Benefits 138 138 Personal Lines 119 119 Hartford Financial Products within Specialty Commercial 30 30 Total $ 611 $ 449 $ 1,060 [1] In 2008, the Company completed three acquisitions that resulted in additional goodwill of $79 in Retirement Plans. As of December 31, 2007, the Company had goodwill allocated to the following reporting units: Segment Goodwill Goodwill in Corporate Total Individual Annuity $ 422 $ 308 $ 730 Other Retail 159 92 251 Retirement Plans 69 69 Institutional Solutions Group 32 32 Individual Life 224 118 342 Group Benefits 138 138 International 15 15 Personal Lines 119 119 Hartford Financial Products within Specialty Commercial 30 30 Total $ 954 $ 772 $ 1,726 The goodwill impairment test follows a two step process as defined in SFAS 142. In the first step, the fair value of a reporting unit is compared to its carrying value. If the carrying value of a reporting unit exceeds its fair value, the second step of the impairment test is performed for purposes of measuring the impairment. In the second step, the fair value of the reporting unit is allocated to all of the assets and liabilities of the reporting unit to determine an implied goodwill value. This allocation is similar to a purchase price allocation performed in purchase accounting. If the carrying amount of the reporting unit goodwill exceeds the implied goodwill value, an impairment loss shall be recognized in an amount equal to that excess. Management determination of the fair value of each reporting unit incorporates multiple inputs including discounted cash flow calculations, peer company price to earnings multiples, the level of the Company own share price and assumptions that market participants would make in valuing the reporting unit. Other assumptions include levels of economic capital, future business growth, earnings projections, assets under management for Life reporting units and the weighted average cost of capital used for purposes of discounting. Decreases in the amount of economic capital allocated to a reporting unit, decreases in business growth, decreases in earnings projections and increases in the weighted average cost of capital will all cause the reporting unit fair value to decrease. The Company completed its annual goodwill assessment for the individual reporting units within Life and Property & Casualty as of January 1, 2008 and September 30, 2008, respectively. The conclusion reached as a result of the annual goodwill impairment testing was that the fair value of each reporting unit, for which goodwill had been allocated, was in excess of the respective reporting unit carrying value (the first step of the goodwill impairment test). 60 Table of Contents However, as noted above, goodwill is reassessed at an interim date if certain circumstances occur which would cause the entity to conclude that it was more likely than not that the carrying value of one or more of its reporting units would be in excess of the respective reporting unit fair value. As a result of the sharp decline in the equity markets during the fourth quarter of 2008 and a sharp decline in The Hartford share price below book value per share, the Company concluded, in connection with the preparation of its year end financial statements, that the conditions had been met to warrant an interim goodwill impairment test. The Company believes one of the significant drivers in the decline of its traded per share price is the risks associated with the death and living benefit guarantees offered with the products sold by the Individual Annuity and International reporting units and the related U.S. GAAP and statutory requirements. As a result of the testing performed during the fourth quarter of 2008, which included the effects of decreasing sales outlooks and declining equity markets on future earnings, the fair value for each reporting unit continued to be in excess of the respective reporting unit carrying value except for the Life Individual Annuity and International reporting units. For both of these reporting units, the Company concluded that the fair value of the reporting unit had declined significantly, as evidenced by the decline in the Company share price, due to the significant risks associated with the product suite discussed above. As a result of the step 2 analysis, the allocation of the fair value of the Individual Annuity and International reporting units to their respective assets and liabilities as of December 31, 2008 indicated an implied level of goodwill of $0 for both reporting units. Therefore, the Company recorded an impairment charge of $730 and $15 of goodwill which had been allocated to the Individual Annuity and International reporting units, respectively. The goodwill impairment charge of $745 included $323 that had resulted from the Company buyback of the Life operations in 2000. The buyback goodwill was reported in Corporate but had been allocated to Life reporting units for purposes of goodwill impairment testing, including $308 to Individual Annuity and $15 to International. This portion of the impairment was recorded in Corporate. The remaining impairment charge of $422 was recorded in Individual Annuity and related to the Company prior acquisitions of Planco, Inc. and Fortis Financial Group, Inc. If current market conditions persist during 2009, in particular, if the Company share price remains below book value per share, or if the Company actions to limit risk associated with its products or investments causes a significant change in any one reporting unit fair value, the Company may need to reassess goodwill impairment at the end of each quarter as part of an annual or interim impairment test. Subsequent reviews of goodwill could result in additional impairment of goodwill during 2009. 61 Table of Contents CONSOLIDATED RESULTS OF OPERATIONS For the Years Ended December 31, Operating Summary 2008 2007 2006 Earned premiums $ 15,503 $ 15,619 $ 15,023 Fee income 5,135 5,436 4,739 Net investment income (loss) Securities available-for-sale and other 4,335 5,214 4,691 Equity securities held for trading [1] (10,340 ) 145 1,824 Total net investment income (loss) (6,005 ) 5,359 6,515 Other revenues 504 496 474 Net realized capital losses (5,918 ) (994 ) (251 ) Total revenues 9,219 25,916 26,500 Benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses 14,088 13,919 13,218 Benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses returns credited on International variable annuities [1] (10,340 ) 145 1,824 Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs and present value of future profits 4,271 2,989 3,558 Insurance operating costs and expenses 3,993 3,894 3,252 Interest expense 343 263 277 Goodwill impairment 745 Other expenses 710 701 769 Total benefits, losses and expenses 13,810 21,911 22,898 Income (loss) before income taxes (4,591 ) 4,005 3,602 Income tax expense (benefit) (1,842 ) 1,056 857 Net income (loss) $ (2,749 ) $ 2,949 $ 2,745 [1] Includes investment income and mark-to-market effects of equity securities held for trading supporting the international variable annuity business, which are classified in net investment income with corresponding amounts credited to policyholders within benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses. Net Income (Loss) by Operation and Life Segment 2008 2007 2006 Life Retail $ (1,399 ) $ 812 $ 536 Individual Life (43 ) 182 150 Total Individual Markets Group (1,442 ) 994 686 Retirement Plans (157 ) 61 101 Group Benefits (6 ) 315 298 Total Employer Markets Group (163 ) 376 399 International (325 ) 223 231 Institutional (502 ) 17 78 Other (11 ) (52 ) 47 Total Life (2,443 ) 1,558 1,441 Property & Casualty Ongoing Operations Underwriting results Personal Lines 280 322 429 Small Commercial 437 508 422 Middle Market 169 157 214 Specialty Commercial 71 (18 ) 46 Ongoing Operations underwriting results 957 969 1,111 Net servicing income [1] 31 52 53 Net investment income 1,056 1,439 1,225 Net realized capital losses (1,669 ) (160 ) (17 ) Other expenses (219 ) (248 ) (222 ) Income tax (expense) benefit 33 (575 ) (596 ) Ongoing Operations 189 1,477 1,554 Other Operations (97 ) 30 (35 ) Total Property & Casualty 92 1,507 1,519 Corporate (398 ) (116 ) (215 ) Net income (loss) $ (2,749 ) $ 2,949 $ 2,745 [1] Net of expenses related to service business. 62 Table of Contents Operating Results Year ended December 31, 2008 compared to the year ended December 31, 2007 Net income decreased primarily due to decreases in Life of $4.0 billion for the year ended December 31, 2008 compared to the year ended December 31, 2007. Additionally, Property & Casualty net income decreased $1.4 billion for the year ended December 31, 2008 compared to the year ended December 31, 2007. Corporate results decreased primarily due to a goodwill impairment charge of $323, after-tax. The decrease in Life net income was due to the following: Realized losses increased as compared to the comparable prior year period primarily due to impairments on investment securities and net losses from the adoption of SFAS 157. For further discussion, please refer to the Realized Capital Gains and Losses by Segment table under Life Operating Section of the MD&A. Life recorded a DAC unlock charge of $941, after-tax, during the third quarter of 2008 as compared to a DAC unlock benefit of $210, after-tax, during the third quarter of 2007. See Critical Accounting Estimates with Managements Discussion and Analysis for a further discussion on the DAC unlock. Declines in assets under management in Retail, primarily driven by market depreciation of $37.8 billion for Individual Annuity and $20.2 billion for retail mutual funds during 2008, drove declines in fee income compared to 2007. Net investment income on securities, available-for-sale, and other declined primarily due to declines in limited partnership and other alternative investments income and a decrease in investment yield for fixed maturities. A goodwill impairment of $274, after-tax, in Retail. The effect of the triggering of the guaranteed minimum income benefit for the 3 Win product was $151, after-tax. Property & Casualty results changed from net income of $1.5 billion in 2007 to net income of $92 in 2008, largely due to a $1.1 billion after-tax increase in net realized capital losses on investments, a $325 after-tax decrease in net investment income and a $238 after-tax increase in current accident year catastrophes, partially offset by a $147 after-tax net release of prior accident year reserves in 2008. Ongoing Operations net income decreased by $1.3 billion in 2008, from net income of $1.5 billion in 2007 to net income of $189 in 2008. Before income taxes, Ongoing Operations results deteriorated by $1.9 billion, primarily due to a $1.5 billion increase in net realized capital losses on investments, a $383 decrease in net investment income and a $366 increase in current accident year catastrophes, partially offset by a $210 increase in net favorable prior accident year development and more favorable underwriting results from personal auto and workers compensation lines of business. The increase in net realized capital losses of $1.5 billion in 2008 was primarily due to impairments of subordinated fixed maturities and preferred equity securities in the financial services sector as well as of securitized assets. Contributing to the $383 decrease in net investment income was a change from net income to net losses on limited partnerships and other alternative investments in 2008 and decreased fixed maturity income. The $366 increase in current accident year catastrophes was largely due to losses incurred from hurricane Ike in September of 2008 and an increase in losses from tornadoes and thunderstorms in the South and Midwest. The $210 increase in net favorable prior accident year development was primarily due to larger net reserve releases for workers compensation, professional liability and personal auto liability claims. Other Operations reported a net loss of $97 in 2008 compared to net income of $30 in 2007. Before income taxes, Other Operations results deteriorated by $184, primarily due to a $196 increase in net realized capital losses on investments, largely driven by impairments of subordinated fixed maturities and preferred equity securities in the financial services sector as well as of securitized assets, and a $51 decrease in net investment income, partially offset by a $64 decrease in net unfavorable prior accident year reserve development. Year ended December 31, 2007 compared to the year ended December 31, 2006 Net income increased primarily due to increases in Life of $117 for the year ended December 31, 2007 compared to the year ended December 31, 2006. Additionally, Property & Casualty net income decreased $12 for the year ended December 31, 2007 compared to the year ended December 31, 2006. Also included in the year ended December 31, 2007 is an increase in reserve for regulatory matters of $30, after-tax, of which $21 and $9 relates to Life and Property & Casualty, respectively. 63 Table of Contents The increase in Life net income was due to the following: The DAC unlock benefit of $210 recorded in the third quarter of 2007. Increased income on asset growth in the variable annuity, mutual fund, retirement and institutional businesses. Partially offsetting the increase in Life net income were the following: Increased non-deferrable individual annuity asset based commissions. Unfavorable mortality in Individual Life. Increased DAC amortization in Group Benefits due to the adoption of Statement of Position 05-1, Accounting by Insurance Enterprises for Deferred Acquisition Costs in Connection with Modifications or Exchanges of Insurance Contracts ( SOP 05-1 ). During the first quarter of 2006, the Company achieved favorable settlements in several cases brought against the Company by policyholders regarding their purchase of broad-based leveraged corporate owned life insurance ( leveraged COLI ) policies in the early to mid-1990s and therefore, released a reserve for these matters of $34, after-tax. Realized losses increased for the year ended December 31, 2007 as compared to the comparable prior year periods primarily due to net losses on GMWB derivatives and impairments. Property & Casualty net income decreased by $12 for the year ended December 31, 2007. Ongoing Operations net income decreased by $77 for the year, while Other Operations improved its results by $65, primarily due to a reduction in unfavorable loss reserve development. Ongoing Operations net income decreased by $77, primarily due to a $92 after-tax decrease in underwriting results and a change from net realized capital gains of $29, after-tax, in 2006 to net realized capital losses of $104, after-tax, in 2007. The decrease in underwriting results and the change to net realized capital losses was partially offset by a $150 after-tax increase in net investment income. The decrease in underwriting results was primarily driven by an increase in the loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development and an increase in insurance and operating costs and dividends, partially offset by a reduction in prior accident year reserves for workers compensation business. Other Operations reported net income of $30 in 2007 compared to a net loss of $35 in 2006. The improvement in results was primarily due to a decrease in unfavorable prior accident year reserve development, partially offset by a change from net realized gains in 2006 to net realized losses in 2007 and a decrease in net investment income. Net Realized Capital Gains and Losses See Investment Results in the Investments section and the Realized Capital Gains and Losses by Segment table within the Life section of the MD&A. Income Taxes The effective tax rate for 2008, 2007 and 2006 was 40%, 26%, and 24%, respectively. The principal causes of the difference between the effective rate and the U.S. statutory rate of 35% for 2008, 2007 and 2006 were tax-exempt interest earned on invested assets and the separate account dividends received deduction ( DRD ). This caused an increase in the tax benefit on the 2008 pre-tax loss and a decrease in the tax expense on the 2007 and 2006 pre-tax income. Income taxes paid in 2008, 2007 and 2006 were $253, $451, and $179 respectively. For additional information, see Note 13 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. The separate account dividends-received deduction ( DRD ) is estimated for the current year using information from the prior year-end, adjusted for current year equity market performance and other appropriate factors, including estimated levels of corporate dividend payments. The estimated DRD was updated in the third quarter for the provision-to-filed-return adjustments, and in the fourth quarter based on current year ultimate mutual fund distributions and fee income from the Company variable insurance products. The actual current year DRD varied from earlier estimates based on, but not limited to, changes in eligible dividends received by the mutual funds, amounts of distributions from these mutual funds, amounts of short-term capital gains and asset values at the mutual fund level and the Company taxable income before the DRD. Given recent financial markets volatility, the Company intends to review its DRD computations on a quarterly basis, beginning in 2009. The Company recorded benefits of $176, $155 and $174 related to the separate account DRD in the years ended December 31, 2008, December 31, 2007 and December 31, 2006, respectively. The 2008 benefit included a benefit of $9 related to a true-up of the prior year tax return, the 2007 benefit included a charge of $1 related to a true-up of the prior year tax return, and the 2006 benefit included a benefit of $6 related to true-ups of prior years tax returns. In Revenue Ruling 2007-61, issued on September 25, 2007, the IRS announced its intention to issue regulations with respect to certain computational aspects of the DRD on separate account assets held in connection with variable annuity contracts. Revenue Ruling 2007-61 suspended Revenue Ruling 2007-54, issued in August 2007 that purported to change accepted industry and IRS interpretations of the statutes governing these computational questions. Any regulations that the IRS may ultimately propose for issuance in this area will be subject to public notice and comment, at which time insurance companies and other members of the public will have the opportunity to raise legal and practical questions about the content, scope and application of such regulations. As a result, the ultimate timing and substance of any such regulations are unknown, but they could result in the elimination of some or all of the separate account DRD tax benefit that the Company receives. Management believes that it is highly likely that any such regulations would apply prospectively only. 64 Table of Contents The Company receives a foreign tax credit ( FTC ) against its U.S. tax liability for foreign taxes paid by the Company including payments from its separate account assets. The separate account FTC is estimated for the current year using information from the most recent filed return, adjusted for the change in the allocation of separate account investments to the international equity markets during the current year. The actual current year FTC can vary from the estimates due to actual FTCs passed through by the mutual funds. The Company recorded benefits of $16, $11 and $17 related to separate account FTC in the years ended December 31, 2008, December 31, 2007 and December 31, 2006, respectively. These amounts included benefits related to true-ups of prior years tax returns of $4, $0 and $7 in 2008, 2007 and 2006 respectively. The Company unrecognized tax benefits increased by $15 during 2008 as a result of tax positions taken on the Company 2007 tax return and expected to be taken on its 2008 tax return, bringing the total unrecognized tax benefits to $91 as of December 31, 2008. This entire amount, if it were recognized, would affect the effective tax rate. Earnings (Losses) Per Common Share The following table represents earnings per common share data for the past three years: 2008 2007 2006 Basic earnings (losses) per share $ (8.99 ) $ 9.32 $ 8.89 Diluted earnings (losses) per share $ (8.99 ) $ 9.24 $ 8.69 Weighted average common shares outstanding (basic) 306.7 316.3 308.8 Weighted average common shares outstanding and dilutive potential common shares (diluted) 306.7 319.1 315.9 For additional information on earnings (losses) per common share see Note 2 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Outlooks The Hartford provides projections and other forward-looking information in the Outlook sections within MD&A. The Outlook sections contain many forward-looking statements, particularly relating to the Company future financial performance. These forward-looking statements are estimates based on information currently available to the Company, are made pursuant to the safe harbor provisions of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 and are subject to the precautionary statements set forth in the introduction to MD&A above. Actual results are likely to differ, and in the past have differed, materially from those forecast by the Company, depending on the outcome of various factors, including, but not limited to, those set forth in each Outlook section and in Item 1A, Risk Factors. Outlook During 2008, the Company has been negatively impacted by conditions in the global financial markets and economic conditions in general. As these conditions persist in 2009, the Company would anticipate that it would continue to be negatively impacted, including the effect of rating downgrades that have occurred and those that could occur in the future. See Risk Factors in Item 1A. Life Retail In the long-term, management continues to believe the market for retirement products will expand as individuals increasingly save and plan for retirement. Demographic trends suggest that as the baby boom generation matures, a significant portion of the United States population will allocate a greater percentage of their disposable incomes to saving for their retirement years due to uncertainty surrounding the Social Security system and increases in average life expectancy. Near-term, the industry and the Company are experiencing lower variable annuity sales as a result of recent market turbulence and uncertainty in the U.S. financial system. Current market pressures are also increasing the expected claim costs, the cost and volatility of hedging programs, and the level of capital needed to support living benefit guarantees. Some companies have already begun to increase the price of their guaranteed living benefits and change the level of guarantees offered. In 2009, the Company intends to adjust pricing levels and take certain actions to reduce the risks in its variable annuity product features in order to address the risks and costs associated with variable annuity benefit features in the current economic environment and explore other risk limiting techniques such as increased hedging or other reinsurance structures. Competitor reaction, including the extent of competitor risk limiting strategies, is difficult to predict and may result in a decline in Retail market share. Significant declines in equity markets and increased equity market volatility are also likely to continue to impact the cost and effectiveness of our GMWB hedging program. Continued equity market volatility could result in material losses in our hedging program. For more information on the GMWB hedging program, see the Equity Risk Management section within Capital Markets Risk Management. During periods of volatile equity markets, policyholders may allocate more of their variable account assets to the fixed account options and fixed annuities may see increased deposits. In the fourth quarter of 2008, the Company has seen an increase in fixed annuity deposits compared to prior quarters. Management expects this trend to continue throughout 2009 or until the equity markets begin to stabilize and improve. 65 Table of Contents For the retail mutual fund business net sales can vary significantly depending on market conditions. The Company has seen a decline in mutual fund deposits and net flows during the fourth quarter as a result of increased equity market volatility and the declines in equity values throughout the fourth quarter. As this business continues to evolve, success will be driven by diversifying net sales across the mutual fund platform, delivering superior investment performance and creating new investment solutions for current and future mutual fund shareholders. The decline in assets under management as a result of continued declines in the equity markets throughout 2008 have decreased the extent of the scale efficiencies that Retail has benefited from in recent years. The significant reduction in assets under management has resulted in revenues declining faster than expenses causing lower earnings during the fourth quarter of 2008 and management expects this strain to continue in 2009. Management will continue to actively evaluate its expense structure to ensure the business is controlling costs while maintaining its level of service to our customers. Individual Life Sales and account values for variable universal life products have been under pressure due to continued equity market volatility and declines. For the year ended December 31, 2008, variable universal life sales and account values decreased 30% and 34%, respectively, compared to prior year. Continued volatility and declines in the equity markets may reduce the attractiveness of variable universal life products and put additional strain on future earnings as variable life fees earned by the Company are driven by the level of assets under management. The variable universal life mix was 40% of total life insurance in-force for the year ended December 31, 2008. Future sales for all products will be influenced by the Company management of current distribution relationships, including recent merger and consolidation activity, and the development of new sources of distribution, while offering competitive and innovative new products and product features. The current economic environment poses both opportunities and challenges for future sales; while life insurance products respond well to consumer demand for financial security and wealth accumulation solutions, individuals may be reluctant to transfer funds when market volatility has recently resulted in significant declines in investment values. In addition, the availability and terms of capital solutions in the marketplace, as discussed below, to support universal life products with secondary guarantees, may influence future growth. Effective November 1, 2007, Individual Life reinsured the policy liability related to statutory reserves in universal life with secondary guarantees to a captive reinsurance subsidiary. These reserves are calculated under prevailing statutory reserving requirements as promulgated under Actuarial Guideline 38, The Application of the Valuation of Life Insurance Policies Model Regulation . An unaffiliated standby third party letter of credit supports a portion of the statutory reserves that have been ceded to this subsidiary. As of December 31, 2008, the transaction provided approximately $429 of statutory capital relief associated with the Company universal life products with secondary guarantees. The Company expects this transaction to accommodate future statutory capital needs for in-force business and new business written through approximately December 31, 2009. The use of the letter of credit will result in a decline in net investment income and increased expenses in future periods for Individual Life. As its business evolves in this product line, Individual Life will evaluate the need for, and availability of, an additional capital transaction, which may impact the capacity to write these policies in the future. For risk management purposes, Individual Life accepts and retains up to $10 in risk on any one life. Individual Life uses reinsurance where appropriate to mitigate earnings volatility; however, death claim experience may lead to periodic short-term earnings volatility. Individual Life is currently evaluating and preparing to implement changes to its reinsurance structure in 2009 in an effort to balance the overall profitability of its business while minimizing earnings volatility associated with higher retention limits. Individual Life continues to face uncertainty surrounding estate tax legislation, aggressive competition from other life insurance providers, reduced availability and higher price of reinsurance, and the current regulatory environment related to reserving for term insurance and universal life products with no-lapse guarantees. These risks may have a negative impact on Individual Life future earnings. Retirement Plans The future financial results of the Retirement Plans segment will depend on Life ability to increase assets under management across all businesses, achieve scale in areas with a high degree of fixed costs and maintain its investment spread earnings on the general account products sold largely in the 403(b)/457 business. Disciplined expense management will continue to be a focus and additional investments in service and technology will occur. During 2008, the Company completed three Retirement Plans acquisitions. The acquisition of part of the defined contribution record keeping business of Princeton Retirement Group gives Life a foothold in the business of providing recordkeeping services to large financial firms which offer defined contribution plans to their clients and at acquisition added $2.9 billion in mutual funds to Retirement Plans assets under management and $5.7 billion of assets under administration. The acquisition of Sun Life Retirement Services, Inc., at acquisition added $15.8 billion in Retirement Plans assets under management across 6,000 plans and provides new service locations in Boston, Massachusetts and Phoenix, Arizona. The acquisition of TopNoggin LLC., provides web-based technology to address data management, administration and benefit calculations. These three acquisitions were not accretive to 2008 net income. Furthermore, net income as a percentage of assets is expected to be lower in 2009 reflecting a full year of the new business mix represented by the acquisitions, which includes larger, more institutionally priced plans, predominantly executed on a mutual fund platform, and the cost of maintaining multiple technology platforms during the integration period. 66 Table of Contents Given the recent market declines and increased volatility during the fourth quarter of 2008, the Company has seen and expects that growth in Retirement deposits will be negatively affected if businesses reduce their workforces and offer more modest salary increases and as workers potentially allocate less to retirement accounts in the near term. The severe decline in equity markets in the second half of 2008 has significantly reduced Retirement Plans assets under management, which has strained its net income. This earnings strain is expected to continue throughout 2009 or until the equity markets improve. Group Benefits Group Benefits sales may fluctuate based on the competitive pricing environment in the marketplace. In 2008, the Company generated fully insured ongoing premium growth in the group life and disability operations. During 2007, the Company completed a renewal rights transaction associated with its medical stop loss business, which caused lower earned premium and sales growth in 2008. The Company anticipates relatively stable loss ratios and expense ratios based on underlying trends in the in-force business and disciplined new business and renewal underwriting. The Company has not seen a meaningful impact in disability loss ratios as a result of the recent economic downturn. While claims incidence may increase during a recession, the Company would expect the impact to the disability loss ratio to be within the normal range of volatility. The current economic downturn has resulted in rising unemployment combined with the potential for employees to lessen spending on the Company products may impact future premium growth. Nonetheless, employees continue to look to the workplace for a broader and ever expanding array of insurance products. As employers design benefit strategies to attract and retain employees, while attempting to control their benefit costs, management believes that the need for the Company products will continue to expand. This combined with the significant number of employees who currently do not have coverage or adequate levels of coverage, creates opportunities for our products and services. International Financial results depend on the account values of our customers, which are affected by equity, bond and currency markets. Periods of favorable market performance will increase assets under management and thus increase fee income earned on those assets, while unfavorable market performance will have the reverse effect. In addition, higher or lower account value levels, whether driven by market or currency impacts on the underlying investments, will generally reduce or increase, respectively, certain costs for individual annuities to the Company, such as guaranteed minimum death benefits ( GMDB ), guaranteed minimum income benefits ( GMIB ), guaranteed minimum accumulation benefits ( GMAB ) and guaranteed minimum withdrawal benefits ( GMWB ). In addition, International financial results are significantly impacted by the exchange rate between the U.S. dollar and the Japanese yen. Prudent expense management is also an important component of product financial results. Due to significant market declines in the fourth quarter, approximately 97% of our in-force 3 Win policies, or $3.1 billion in account value, have triggered the associated GMIB. As a result of the GMIB trigger, the majority of our 3 Win policies annuitized or surrendered free of charge in the fourth quarter of 2008. This significantly and negatively impacted fourth quarter net flows and will continue to reduce future profitability. For further details on the trigger of the GMIB associated with the 3 Win product, see Unlock and Sensitivity Analysis within Critical Accounting Estimates. Competition has increased dramatically in the Japanese market from both domestic and foreign insurers. In addition to seeing new entrants in the Japanese market, our existing competitors are rapidly introducing new products, some of which include shorter guarantee periods as well as ratcheting guarantee features and higher equity asset allocation. This increase in competition has impacted current deposits and is expected to negatively impact future deposit levels. In addition, the Company continues to evaluate product designs that meet customers needs while maintaining prudent risk management. During the second and third quarters of 2008, the Company launched a new product called Rising Income/Care Story, which is a GMWB variable annuity combined with a nursing care rider, as well as the new product Plus 5, which is a 10-year GMAB variable annuity with a 5% bonus at year 10. The success of the Company product offerings will ultimately be based on customer acceptance in an increasingly competitive environment. During 2008 the Company has experienced lower than expected surrenders and related surrender fees. In addition, the Company has experienced significant market declines and therefore some of the product guarantees have increased in cost. Specifically, the trigger of the 3 Win product, referenced above, has reduced variable annuity assets under management and will negatively impact overall financial results and is expected to result in a lower return on assets than in prior years. In 2009, the Company intends to review its variable annuity product features in an effort to reduce the risks and costs associated with variable annuity benefit features in the current economic environment. 67 Table of Contents Institutional Institutional markets are highly competitive from a pricing perspective, and a small number of cases often account for a significant portion of deposits. Most Institutional product issuances depend on pricing levels as well as the Company credit ratings and perceived financial stability and may be negatively impacted by rating agency downgrades of the Company that have occurred during February 2009 or could occur in the future. During 2008, the Company ceased issuance of retail and institutional funding agreement backed notes, largely due to the change in customer preference to FDIC-insured products. Prospectively, the Company will issue only Guaranteed Investment Contracts (GIC) and on a limited basis, funding agreements. The Company will be disciplined and opportunistic in capturing new GIC and funding agreement opportunities, and accordingly, deposits in 2009 are expected to be substantially lower than 2008 amounts. The Company expects stable value products will experience negative net flows in 2009 as contractual maturities and the payments associated with certain contracts which allow an investor to accelerate principal repayments (after a defined notice period of typically thirteen months). Approximately $3.9 billion of account value will be paid out on stable value contracts during 2009. As of December 31, 2008, Institutional has no remaining contracts that contain an unexercised investor option feature that allows for contract surrender at book value. The Company has the option to accelerate the repayment of principal for certain other stable value products and will evaluate calling these contracts individually based upon the financial benefits to the Company. The net income of this segment will depend on Institutional ability to increase assets under management, mix of business, net investment spread and investment performance. The net investment spread, discussed in the Performance Measures section of this MD&A, has declined in 2008 versus prior year amounts and we expect investment spread will remain pressured in 2009 due to the anticipated performance of limited partnerships and other alternative investments as well as the decline in short term interest rates. Property & Casualty In 2009, management expects Ongoing Operations written premium to be flat to slightly lower, reflecting the continuation of competitive market conditions. However, written premium growth in 2009 may be significantly lower if the economy deteriorates more than management expects or if the market perceives greater uncertainty about the financial strength of the Company as a result of reductions in the financial strength ratings of the Company property and casualty subsidiaries that have occurred or could occur. Within the Personal Lines segment, the Company expects written premium to be flat to modestly higher in 2009, with growth in AARP partially offset by a decline in Agency. The Company expects personal auto written premium to be flat to modestly higher and homeowners written premium to be flat to slightly lower. The expected increase in AARP written premium will be largely driven by continued direct marketing to AARP members and an expansion of underwriting appetite through the continued roll-out of the Next Gen Auto product. The expected decline in Agency written premium will be driven by the Company decision to stop renewing Florida homeowners policies sold through agents. Apart from the effect of non-renewing Florida homeowners business in Agency, management expects a slight increase in Agency written premium driven by appointing more agents and increasing market penetration in select markets. In 2009, the Company expects to increase its auto and homeowners written premium generated from direct sales to the consumer and from agents selling the AARP product. In 2008, the Company launched a brand and channel expansion pilot in four states: Arizona, Illinois, Tennessee and Minnesota and expects to expand the initiative to additional states in 2009. In the targeted states, the Company will increase Personal Lines brand advertising and launch direct marketing efforts beyond its existing AARP program. In addition, certain agents in the targeted states will be authorized to offer the Company AARP product. While carriers in the personal lines industry will continue to compete on price, management expects that written pricing in Personal Lines will continue to increase modestly in 2009 in response to rising loss costs. For the Company, written pricing in 2008 increased 2% in both auto and homeowners. Within Small Commercial, management expects written premium in 2009 to be flat to slightly lower, primarily driven by an increase in workers compensation written premium with an expected decline in commercial auto written premium. Contributing to the expected increase in workers compensation written premium will be an expansion of underwriting appetite in selected industries and an expansion of business written through payroll service providers. In 2008, average premium per policy in Small Commercial is expected to continue to decline due to written pricing decreases, a lower average premium on Next Generation Auto business and the potential for an increase in mid-term endorsements as insureds reduce coverage due to the economic downturn. Written pricing in Small Commercial decreased by 2% in 2008. Management expects that 2009 written premium for Middle Market will be lower as the Company takes a disciplined approach to evaluating and pricing risks in the face of declines in written pricing. Written pricing for Middle Market business declined by 5% in 2008 and while management expects written pricing to begin to stabilize in 2009, management expects carriers will continue to price new business more aggressively than renewals. Management expects to compete for new business and protect renewals in Middle Market by, among other actions, refining its pricing models, increasing its willingness to write more workers compensation business on a mono-line basis and writing larger property policies and umbrella general liability policies. Within Specialty Commercial, management expects written premium to be flat to slightly lower, primarily driven by a decrease in property written premium, largely offset by an increase in professional liability, fidelity and surety written premium and an increase in casualty written premium. 68 Table of Contents Excluding catastrophes and prior accident year development, Ongoing Operations underwriting margins will likely decline in 2009 due primarily to increases in both the loss and loss adjustment expense ratio as well as the expense ratio, partially offset by lower anticipated policyholder dividends. The Ongoing Operations 2009 accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes is expected to increase due to mid single-digit increases in claim cost severity and continued earned pricing decreases in commercial lines, partially offset by moderately favorable claim frequency. For auto business, emerged claim frequency in 2008 was favorable to the prior year and claim severity was slightly higher. In 2009, management expects claim severity will increase and claim frequency will be less favorable than it was in 2008. Non-catastrophe loss costs of homeowners claims increased in 2008 due to higher claim frequency and severity and management expects loss costs to continue to increase in 2009, driven by higher claim severity. Small Commercial experienced favorable frequency on workers compensation claims in recent accident years and management expects favorable frequency to continue for the 2009 accident year though not as favorable as it has been. While the Company experienced favorable non-catastrophe property losses on package business and commercial auto claims in 2008, management expects that severity will increase for non-catastrophe property claims in 2009 and that frequency will be less favorable. For Middle Market, management expects an increase in claim cost severity in 2009 across all lines, although the increase in claim severity for non-catastrophe property claims will not likely be as high as it was in 2008 when the Company experienced a number of individually large property losses. Partially offsetting the expected increase in severity is an expectation of moderately lower frequency. On professional liability business within Specialty Commercial, the Company expects its losses from the fallout of the sub-prime mortgage market and from the alleged Madoff fraud to be manageable based on several factors. Principal among them is the diversified nature of the product and customer portfolio, with the majority of the Company total in-force professional liability net written premium derived from policyholders with privately-held ownership and, therefore, relatively low shareholder class action exposure. The Company average net limit exposed is $8 at an average attachment point of $74 on reported claims or notices of potential claims on sub-prime exposed policies. While the Madoff alleged fraud case continues to evolve, based on the involved parties noted in press reports to date, the Company expects a limited number of its policies will be exposed and, based on the net limits expected to be at risk, does not expect its losses from the Madoff case will be material. The Ongoing Operations expense ratio is expected to increase in 2009, in part, due to a lower expected earned premium in Middle Market, the amortization of a higher amount of acquisition costs on AARP business and an increase in the cost of investments in technology to support future growth. The policyholder dividend ratio was unusually high in 2008 due to the accrual of $26 in dividends due to certain workers compensation policyholders as a result of underwriting profits. (See the Property and Casualty MD&A section for further discussion.) Current accident year catastrophe losses in 2008, at 5.3 percent of Ongoing Operations earned premium, were higher than the long-term historical average due principally to hurricane Ike and higher than average losses from tornadoes and thunderstorms in the South and Midwest. While catastrophe losses vary significantly from year to year and are unpredictable, management has assumed that catastrophe losses in 2009 will be closer to 3% to 3.5% of earned premium. The Company will continue to manage its exposure to catastrophe losses through the ongoing assessment of its risk, disciplined underwriting and the use of reinsurance and other risk transfer alternatives, as appropriate. As of January 1, 2009, the Company retention under its principal property catastrophe reinsurance program remained at $250 per catastrophe event. With the January 1, 2009 renewal, the cost of the Company principal property catastrophe reinsurance program increased modestly. Driven primarily by an expected increase in loss costs and underwriting expenses, the Company expects the Ongoing Operations combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development in 2009 to be higher than the 88.9 achieved in 2008. At the segment level, the combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development is expected to be higher in 2009 for Personal Lines, Small Commercial and Middle Market as increases in loss costs are expected to outpace earned pricing. For Specialty Commercial, management expects that the combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development for 2009 will be in line with the ratio for 2008. Property & Casualty operating cash flow is expected to be less favorable in 2009 than in 2008, although still positive. Based upon the current interest rate and credit environment, Property & Casualty expects a slightly higher investment portfolio yield for 2009. The Other Operations segment will continue to manage the discontinued operations of the Company as well as claims (and associated reserves) related to asbestos, environmental and other exposures. The Company will continue to review various components of all of its reserves on a regular basis. The Company expects to perform its regular reviews of asbestos liabilities in the second quarter of 2009, Other Operations reinsurance recoverables and the allowance for uncollectible reinsurance in the second quarter 2009, and environmental liabilities in the third quarter of 2009. If there are significant developments that affect particular exposures, reinsurance arrangements or the financial condition of particular reinsurers, the Company will make adjustments to its reserves, or the portion of liabilities it expects to cede to reinsurers. 69 Table of Contents LIFE Executive Overview Life provides retail and institutional investment products such as variable and fixed annuities, mutual funds, PPLI, and retirement plan services, individual life insurance and group benefit products, such as group life and group disability insurance. Retail offers individual variable and fixed market value adjusted ( MVA ) annuities, retail mutual funds, 529 college savings plans, Canadian and offshore investment products. Individual Life sells a variety of life insurance products, including variable universal life, universal life, interest sensitive whole life and term life. Retirement Plans offers retirement plan products and services to corporations and municipalities under Section 401(k), 403(b) and 457 plans. Group Benefits provides individual members of employer groups, associations, affinity groups and financial institutions with group life, accident and disability coverage, along with other products and services, including voluntary benefits and group retiree health. International, which has operations located in Japan, Brazil, Ireland and the United Kingdom, provides investments, retirement savings and other insurance and savings products to individuals and groups outside the United States and Canada. Institutional provides customized investment, insurance, and income solutions to select markets. Products include structured settlements, institutional annuities (primarily terminal funding cases), stable value products, and income annuities. Furthermore, Institutional offers variable private placement life insurance ( PPLI ) owned by corporations and high net worth individuals, as well as mutual funds owned by institutional investors. Life charges direct operating expenses to the appropriate segment and allocates the majority of indirect expenses to the segments based on an intercompany expense arrangement. Inter-segment revenues primarily occur between Life Other category and the reporting segments. These amounts primarily include interest income on allocated surplus and interest charges on excess separate account surplus. Life derives its revenues principally from: (a) fee income, including asset management fees, on separate account and mutual fund assets and mortality and expense fees, as well as cost of insurance charges; (b) net investment income on general account assets; (c) fully insured premiums; and (d) certain other fees. Asset management fees and mortality and expense fees are primarily generated from separate account assets, which are deposited with Life through the sale of variable annuity and variable universal life products and from mutual funds. Cost of insurance charges are assessed on the net amount at risk for investment-oriented life insurance products. Premium revenues are derived primarily from the sale of group life, group disability and individual term insurance products. Life expenses essentially consist of interest credited to policyholders on general account liabilities, insurance benefits provided, amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs, expenses related to selling and servicing the various products offered by the Company, dividends to policyholders, and other general business expenses. Life financial results in its variable annuity, mutual fund and, to a lesser extent, variable universal life businesses, depends largely on the amount of the contract holder account value or assets under management on which it earns fees and the level of fees charged. Changes in account value or assets under management are driven by two main factors: net flows, which measure the success of the Company asset gathering and retention efforts, and the market return of the funds, which is heavily influenced by the return realized in the equity markets. Net flows are comprised of new sales and other deposits less surrenders, death benefits, policy charges and annuitizations of investment type contracts, such as variable annuity contracts. In the mutual fund business, net flows are known as net sales. Net sales are comprised of new sales less redemptions by mutual fund customers. Life uses the average daily value of the S&P 500 Index as an indicator for evaluating market returns of the underlying account portfolios in the United States. Relative financial results of variable products is highly correlated to the growth in account values or assets under management since these products generally earn fee income on a daily basis. Equity market movements could also result in benefits for or charges against deferred acquisition costs. See the Critical Accounting Estimates section of the MD&A for further information on DAC unlocks. During 2008, primarily as a result of current market conditions, the Company recorded an unlock charge of $932. The profitability of Life fixed annuities and other spread-based products depends largely on its ability to earn target spreads between earned investment rates on its general account assets and interest credited to policyholders. Profitability is also influenced by operating expense management including the benefits of economies of scale in the administration of its United States variable annuity businesses in particular. In addition, the size and persistency of gross profits from these businesses is an important driver of earnings as it affects the rate of amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs. Life profitability in its individual life insurance and group benefits businesses depends largely on the size of its in force block, the adequacy of product pricing and underwriting discipline, actual mortality and morbidity experience, and the efficiency of its claims and expense management. 70 Table of Contents Performance Measures Fee Income Fee income is largely driven from amounts collected as a result of contractually defined percentages of assets under management. These fees are generally collected on a daily basis. For individual life insurance products, fees are contractually defined as percentages based on levels of insurance, age, premiums and deposits collected and contract holder value. Life insurance fees are generally collected on a monthly basis. Therefore, the growth in assets under management either through positive net flows or net sales, or favorable equity market performance will have a favorable impact on fee income. Conversely, either negative net flows or net sales, or unfavorable equity market performance will reduce fee income. As of and for the years ended December 31, Product/Key Indicator Information 2008 2007 2006 Retail U.S. Individual Variable Annuities Account value, beginning of period $ 119,071 $ 114,365 $ 105,314 Net flows (6,235 ) (2,733 ) (3,150 ) Change in market value and other (38,258 ) 7,439 12,201 Account value, end of period $ 74,578 $ 119,071 $ 114,365 Retail Mutual Funds Assets under management, beginning of period $ 48,383 $ 38,536 $ 29,063 Net sales 2,840 5,545 5,659 Change in market value and other (20,191 ) 4,302 3,814 Assets under management, end of period $ 31,032 $ 48,383 $ 38,536 Individual Life Insurance Variable universal life account value, end of period $ 4,802 $ 7,284 $ 6,637 Total life insurance in-force 195,464 179,483 164,227 Retirement Plans Group Annuities Account value, beginning of period $ 27,094 $ 23,575 $ 19,317 Net flows 2,418 1,669 2,545 Change in market value and other (7,314 ) 1,850 1,713 Account value, end of period $ 22,198 $ 27,094 $ 23,575 Retirement Plans Mutual Funds Assets under management, beginning of period $ 1,454 $ 1,140 $ 947 Net sales/(redemptions) (446 ) 103 59 Acquisitions 18,725 Change in market value and other (4,895 ) 211 134 Assets under management, end of period $ 14,838 $ 1,454 $ 1,140 Japan Annuities Account value, beginning of period $ 37,637 $ 31,343 $ 26,104 Net flows [1] 714 4,525 4,393 Change in market value and other (10,921 ) (608 ) 1,195 Effect of currency translation 7,065 2,377 (349 ) Account value, end of period $ 34,495 $ 37,637 $ 31,343 S&P 500 Index Year end closing value 903 1,468 1,418 Daily average value 1,220 1,477 1,310 [1] Includes the effect of the triggering of the guaranteed minimum income benefit ( GMIB ) for the 3 Win product of which $(809) relates to policyholders surrendering and $(170) relates to the current period annuity payments. Year ended December 31, 2008 compared to year ended December 31, 2007 Assets under management, across all businesses have had substantial reductions in values from prior year primarily due to declines in equity markets during 2008. The changes in line of business assets under management have also been affected by: Retail U.S. individual variable annuity recorded increased negative net flows as a result of increased competition and equity market volatility. Retail Mutual funds has seen positive net sales as a result of diversified sales growth. Individual Life insurance in-force growth has occurred across multiple product lines, including term, universal life and variable universal life. Retirement Plans group annuities has seen positive net flows driven by higher deposits as a result of the expanded sales force obtained through the 2008 acquisitions. 71 Table of Contents Retirement Plans mutual funds reflects an increase of $18.7 billion from the acquisition of servicing rights of Sun Life Retirement Services, Inc and Princeton Retirement Group, both of which closed in the first quarter of 2008. Net sales for 2008 reflect expected outflows on the acquired business. International Japan Annuities has seen positive net flows and favorable effects from currency exchange rates for 2008. Net flows have decreased in Japan annuities due the 3 Win trigger and to increased competition from domestic and foreign insurers, particularly competition relating to products offered with living benefit guarantees. Year ended December 31, 2007 compared to year ended December 31, 2006 Increases in Retail U.S. individual variable annuity account values as of December 31, 2007 can be primarily attributed to market growth during the year and improved net flows due to an increase in sales. In addition to strong positive net flows, market appreciation and diversified sales growth during the year contributed to Retail mutual funds assets under management growth. Individual Life variable universal life account values increased primarily due to market appreciation and positive net flows. Life insurance in-force increased from the prior periods due to business growth. Retirement Plans account values increased for the year ended December 31, 2007 due to positive net flows driven by ongoing contributions and market appreciation during the year. International Japan annuity account values continue to grow as a result of positive net flows and a strengthening of the yen versus the dollar offset by a decline in market performance throughout the year Net Investment Spread Management evaluates performance of certain products based on net investment spread. These products include those that have insignificant mortality risk, such as fixed annuities, certain general account universal life contracts and certain institutional contracts. Net investment spread is determined by taking the difference between the earned rate and the related crediting rates on average general account assets under management. The net investment spreads shown below are for the total portfolio of relevant contracts in each segment and reflect business written at different times. When pricing products, the Company considers current investment yields and not the portfolio average. Net investment spread can be volatile period over period, which can have a significant positive or negative effect on the operating results of each segment. Investment earnings can also be influenced by factors such as the actions of the Federal Reserve and a decision to hold higher levels of short-term investments. The volatile nature of net investment spread is driven primarily by prepayment premiums on securities and earnings on limited partnership and other alternative investments. Net investment spread is calculated as a percentage of general account assets and expressed in basis points ( bps ): For the years ended December 31, 2008 2007 2006 Retail Individual Annuity 73.1 bps 173.5 bps 153.0 bps Individual Life 89.6 bps 130.3 bps 123.9 bps Retirement Plans 92.3 bps 161.9 bps 152.0 bps Institutional Stable Value 20.5 bps 100.6 bps 84.8 bps Year ended December 31, 2008 compared to year ended December 31, 2007 Retail Individual Annuity, Individual Life, Retirement Plans and Institutional net investment spread decreased primarily due to negative earnings on limited partnership and other alternative investment income in 2008 compared to strong earnings in these classes in 2007 and lower yields on fixed maturities, partially offset by reduced credited rates. Year ended December 31, 2007 compared to year ended December 31, 2006 Retail Individual Annuity, Individual Life, Retirement Plans and Institutional net investment spreads increased primarily due to a higher allocation of investments in higher yield/higher risk investment classes, including limited partnerships and other alternative investments and relative strong performance of this asset class in 2007. 72 Table of Contents Premiums Traditional insurance type products, such as those sold by Group Benefits, collect premiums from policyholders in exchange for financial protection for the policyholder from a specified insurable loss, such as death or disability. These premiums together with net investment income earned from the overall investment strategy are used to pay the contractual obligations under these insurance contracts. Two major factors, new sales and persistency, impact premium growth. Sales can increase or decrease in a given year based on a number of factors, including but not limited to, customer demand for the Company product offerings, pricing competition, distribution channels and the Company reputation and ratings. Persistency refers to the percentage of policies remaining in-force from year-to-year. For the years ended December 31, Group Benefits 2008 2007 2006 Total premiums and other considerations $ 4,391 $ 4,301 $ 4,149 Fully insured ongoing sales (excluding buyouts) 820 770 861 Persistency 89 % 87 % 87 % Earned premiums and other considerations include $1, $27 and $12 in buyout premiums for the years ended December 31, 2008, 2007 and 2006, respectively. Total premiums and other considerations, excluding buyouts, increased in 2008 compared to 2007 due to increases in sales and persistency that were offset by lower premiums in the medical stop loss business as a result of the renewal rights transaction that closed during the second quarter of 2007. The increase in premiums and other considerations for Group Benefits in 2007 compared to 2006 was driven by growth in the block of business. Fully insured ongoing sales, excluding buyouts, increased in 2008 from 2007 primarily due to national account and small case sales growth. Fully insured ongoing sales, excluding buyouts, declined in 2007 from 2006 primarily due to fewer large national account sales, and the small case competitive environment remained intense. The Company also completed a renewal rights arrangement associated with its medical stop loss business during the second quarter of 2007 eliminating new sales related to this business. In addition, there was an anticipated decrease in association life sales from an unusually high comparable prior year period. Expenses There are three major categories for expenses. The first major category of expenses is benefits and losses. These include the costs of mortality and morbidity, particularly in the group benefits business, and mortality in the individual life businesses, as well as other contractholder benefits to policyholders. In addition, traditional insurance type products generally use a loss ratio which is expressed as the amount of benefits incurred during a particular period divided by total premiums and other considerations, as a key indicator of underwriting performance. Since Group Benefits occasionally buys a block of claims for a stated premium amount, the Company excludes this buyout from the loss ratio used for evaluating the underwriting results of the business as buyouts may distort the loss ratio. The second major category is insurance operating costs and expenses, which is commonly expressed in a ratio of a revenue measure depending on the type of business. The third major category is the amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs and the present value of future profits, which is typically expressed as a percentage of pre-tax income before the cost of this amortization (an approximation of actual gross profits). Retail Individual Annuity business accounts for the majority of the amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs and present value of future profits for Life. For the years ended December 31, 2008 2007 2006 Retail General insurance expense ratio (individual annuity) 21.0 bps 17.9 bps 17.2 bps DAC amortization ratio (individual annuity) [1] 218.5 % 25.5 % 65.3 % DAC amortization ratio (individual annuity) excluding DAC Unlock [1] [3] 65.2 % 47.9 % 52.4 % Individual Life Death benefits $ 359 $ 298 $ 251 Group Benefits Total benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses $ 3,144 $ 3,109 $ 3,002 Loss ratio (excluding buyout premiums) 71.6 % 72.1 % 72.3 % Expense ratio (excluding buyout premiums) 27.0 % 27.9 % 27.6 % International Japan General insurance expense ratio 49.4 bps 48.4 bps 49.1 bps DAC amortization ratio [2] 109.3 % 35.3 % 30.2 % DAC amortization ratio excluding DAC Unlock [2] [3] 77.8 % 40.0 % 40.7 % Institutional General insurance expense ratio 14.1 bps 14.1 bps 14.7 bps [1] Excludes the effects of realized gains and losses. [2] Excludes the effects of realized gains and losses except for net periodic settlements. Included in the net realized capital gains (losses) are amounts that represent the net periodic accruals on currency rate swaps used in the risk management of Japan fixed annuity products. [3] See Unlock and Sensitivity Analysis in the Critical Accounting Estimates section of the MD&A. 73 Table of Contents Year ended December 31, 2008 compared to year ended December 31, 2007 The Retail DAC amortization ratio (individual annuity), excluding the effects of the 2008 Unlock and realized losses, increased due to the impairment of goodwill in the fourth quarter of 2008, which reduced pre tax earnings but did not affect EGPs. Excluding the impacts of the goodwill impairment, realized losses, and DAC Unlock, the DAC amortization ratio was 43.3%, which reflects the 2008 effect of changes in assumptions made as part of the 2007 and 2008 Unlocks. The Retail general insurance expense ratio increased due to the impact of a declining asset base on relatively consistent expenses. Individual Life death benefits increased, primarily due to growth of life insurance in-force and unfavorable mortality. Group Benefits loss ratio decreased due to favorable disability and medical stop loss experience partially offset by unfavorable mortality. Group Benefits expense ratio, excluding buyouts decreased primarily due to lower commission expense. International Japan DAC amortization ratio, excluding DAC Unlock and certain realized gains or losses, increased due to actual gross profits being less than expected as a result of lower fees earned on declining assets resulting in negative true-ups and a higher DAC amortization rate, as well as the accelerated amortization associated with the impact of the 3 Win trigger. Institutional general insurance expense ratio is unchanged, as additional product development expenses were offset by higher assets under management. Year ended December 31, 2007 compared to year ended December 31, 2006 Retail Individual Annuity general insurance expense ratio increased in 2007 primarily due to higher service and technology costs. The Retail DAC amortization ratio (individual annuity) excluding DAC Unlock declined in 2007, primarily due to increased net investment income on allocated capital and an increase in limited partnership and other alternative investment income. Individual Life death benefits increased in 2007 primarily due to growth of life insurance in-force and unfavorable mortality. Group Benefits expense ratio, excluding buyouts, increased in 2007 primarily due to higher DAC amortization. Institutional general insurance expense ratio decreased in 2007 primarily due to higher assets under management. 74 Table of Contents Profitability Management evaluates the rates of return various businesses can provide as an input in determining where additional capital should be invested to increase net income and shareholder returns. The Company uses the return on assets for the individual annuity business for evaluating profitability. In Group Benefits and Individual Life, after-tax margin is a key indicator of overall profitability. Ratios 2008 2007 2006 Retail Individual annuity return on assets ( ROA ) (133.5 ) bps 58.9 bps 39.9 bps Effect of net realized gains (losses), net of tax and DAC on ROA [1] (96.5 ) bps (13.3 ) bps (7.4 ) bps Effect of DAC Unlock on ROA [3] (68.0 ) bps 15.6 bps (6.0 ) bps ROA excluding realized gains (losses) and DAC Unlock 31.0 bps 56.6 bps 53.3 bps Individual Life After-tax margin (4.7 %) 16.0 % 13.3 % Effect of net realized gains (losses), net of tax and DAC on after-tax margin [1] (13.1 %) (1.3 %) (1.5 %) Effect of DAC Unlock on after-tax margin [3] (4.7 %) 1.4 % (1.6 %) After-tax margin excluding realized gains (losses) and DAC Unlock 13.1 % 15.9 % 16.4 % Retirement Plans Retirement ROA (47.9 ) bps 22.9 bps 44.7 bps Effect of net realized gains (losses), net of tax and DAC on ROA [1] (51.5 ) bps (10.5 ) bps (3.1 ) bps Effect of DAC Unlock on ROA [3] (15.0 ) bps (3.4 ) bps 8.9 bps ROA excluding realized gains (losses) and DAC Unlock 18.6 bps 36.8 bps 38.9 bps Group Benefits After-tax margin (excluding buyouts) (0.1 %) 6.7 % 6.6 % Effect of net realized gains (losses), net of tax on after-tax margin (excluding buyouts) [1] (7.3 %) (0.4 %) (0.1 %) After-tax margin (excluding buyouts) excluding realized gains (losses) 7.2 % 7.1 % 6.7 % International Japan International Japan ROA (72.9 ) bps 73.4 bps 87.7 bps Effect of net realized gains (losses) excluding net periodic settlements, net of tax and DAC on ROA [1] [2] (65.1 ) bps (8.1 ) bps (5.6 ) bps Effect of DAC Unlock on ROA [3] (31.9 ) bps 6.4 bps 18.5 bps ROA excluding realized gains (losses) and DAC Unlock 24.1 bps 75.1 bps 74.8 bps Institutional Institutional ROA (83.3 ) bps 3.0 bps 16.6 bps Effect of net realized gains (losses), net of tax and DAC on ROA [1] (85.0 ) bps (21.5 ) bps (5.1 ) bps Effect of DAC Unlock on ROA [3] bps 0.2 bps bps ROA excluding realized gains (losses) and DAC Unlock 1.7 bps 24.3 bps 21.7 bps [1] See Realized Capital Gains and Losses by Segment table within the Life Section of the MD&A. [2] Included in the net realized capital gain (losses) are amounts that represent the net periodic accruals on currency rate swaps used in the risk management of Japan fixed annuity products. [3] See Unlock and Sensitivity Analysis within the Critical Accounting Estimates section of the MD&A. Year ended December 31, 2008 compared to year ended December 31, 2007 The decrease in Individual Annuity ROA, excluding realized gains (losses) and the effect of the DAC Unlock, reflects the write-off of goodwill of $274 after-tax, or 19.4 bps; lower limited partnership and other alternative investment income; and the net effect of lower fees. The decrease in Individual Life after-tax margin, excluding realized gains (losses) and the effect of the DAC Unlock, was due to lower net investment income from limited partnership and other alternative investments, unfavorable mortality expense, reduced net investment income associated with a more efficient capital approach for our secondary guarantee universal life business which released assets supporting capital and lower variable life insurance fees from equity market declines, partially offset by life insurance in-force growth, lower credited rates and higher surrender charges. The decrease in Retirement Plans ROA, excluding realized gains (losses) and the effect of the DAC Unlock, was primarily driven by an increase in assets under management due to the acquired rights to service $18.7 billion in mutual funds, comprised of $15.8 billion in mutual funds from Sun Life Retirement Services, Inc., and $2.9 billion in mutual funds from Princeton Retirement Group, both of which closed in the first quarter of 2008. The acquired blocks of assets produce a lower ROA as they are comprised of mutual fund assets and assets under administration as opposed to traditional annuity contracts. Also contributing to the decrease was lower yields on fixed maturity investments and a decline in limited partnership and other alternative investment income, higher service and technology costs and additional expenses associated with the acquisitions. Partially offsetting these decreases were tax benefits primarily associated with DRD. 75 Table of Contents The Group Benefit increase in after-tax margin was primarily due to the favorable expense ratio. International-Japan ROA, excluding realized gains (losses) and the effect of the DAC Unlock, declined due to lower earned fees as a result of declining account values, lower surrender fees due to a reduction in lapses and an increase in the DAC amortization rate due to lower actual gross profits, as well as the accelerated DAC amortization associated with the 3 Win trigger. The decrease in Institutional ROA, excluding realized gains (losses), is primarily due to a decline in limited partnership and other alternative investment income. The decrease is also due to unfavorable mortality and lower yields on fixed maturity investments. Year ended December 31, 2007 compared to year ended December 31, 2006 The increase in Individual Annuity ROA, excluding realized gains (losses) and DAC Unlock, was primarily due to increased net investment income on allocated capital and an increase in limited partnership and other alternative investment income. This was partially offset by an increase in the effective tax rate as a result of revisions in the estimates of the separate account DRD and FTC. Individual Life decrease in after-tax margin, excluding realized gains (losses) and DAC Unlock, was primarily due to unfavorable mortality experience. The decrease in Retirement Plan ROA, excluding realized gains (losses) and DAC Unlock, was primarily due to a shift in product mix resulting in lower fees as a percent of assets. The increase in Institutional ROA, excluding realized gains (losses) and DAC Unlock, was primarily due to an increase in limited partnership and other alternative investment income and increased net investment income on allocated capital. The increase in the Group Benefits after-tax margin, excluding buyouts, excluding realized gains (losses), was due to an improvement in the loss ratio, partially offset by higher DAC amortization. Life Operating Summary 2008 2007 2006 Earned premiums $ 5,165 $ 5,123 $ 4,590 Fee income 5,118 5,420 4,726 Net investment income (loss) Securities available-for-sale and other 3,045 3,497 3,184 Equity securities held for trading [1] (10,340 ) 145 1,824 Total net investment income (loss) (7,295 ) 3,642 5,008 Net realized capital losses (4,138 ) (819 ) (260 ) Total revenues [2] (1,150 ) 13,366 14,064 Benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses 7,381 7,002 6,216 Benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses returns credited on International variable annuities [1] (10,340 ) 145 1,824 Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs and present value of future profits 2,176 884 1,452 Goodwill impairment 422 Insurance operating costs and other expenses 3,300 3,230 2,708 Total benefits, losses and expenses 2,939 11,261 12,200 Income (loss) before income taxes (4,089 ) 2,105 1,864 Income (loss) tax expense (benefit) (1,646 ) 547 423 Net income (loss) [3] $ (2,443 ) $ 1,558 $ 1,441 [1] Net investment income includes investment income and mark-to-market effects of equity securities, held for trading, supporting the international variable annuity business, which are classified in net investment income with corresponding amounts credited to policyholders. [2] The transition impact related to the SFAS 157 adoption was a reduction in revenues of $650 for the year ended December 31, 2008. For further discussion of the SFAS 157 transition impact, refer to Note 4 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. [3] The transition impact related to the SFAS 157 adoption was a reduction in net income of $220 for the year ended December 31, 2008. For further discussion of the SFAS 157 transition impact, refer to Note 4 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. Year ended December 31, 2008 compared to the year ended December 31, 2007 The decrease in Life net income was due to the following: Realized losses increased as compared to the comparable prior year period primarily due to net losses from the adoption of SFAS 157 and impairments on investment securities. For further discussion, please refer to the Realized Capital Gains and Losses by Segment table under Life Operating Section of the MD&A. Life recorded a DAC unlock charge of $941, after-tax, during the third quarter of 2008 as compared to a DAC unlock benefit of $210, after-tax, during the third quarter of 2007. See Critical Accounting Estimates with Managements Discussion and Analysis for a further discussion on the DAC unlock. Declines in assets under management in Retail, primarily driven by market depreciation of $37.8 billion for Individual Annuity and $20.2 billion for retail mutual funds during 2008, drove declines in fee income compared to 2007. 76 Table of Contents Net investment income on securities, available-for-sale, and other declined primarily due to declines in limited partnership and other alternative investments income and a decrease in investment yield for fixed maturities. A goodwill impairment of $274, after-tax, in Retail. The effect of the triggering of the guaranteed minimum income benefit for the 3 Win product was $151, after-tax. Year ended December 31, 2007 compared to the year ended December 31, 2006 The increase in Life net income was due to the following: The DAC Unlock benefit of $210 recorded in the third quarter of 2007. Increased income on asset growth in the variable annuity, mutual fund, retirement and institutional businesses. Partially offsetting the increase in Life net income were the following: Increased non-deferrable individual annuity asset based commissions. Unfavorable mortality in Individual Life. Increased DAC amortization in Group Benefits due to the adoption of SOP 05-1. During the first quarter of 2006, the Company achieved favorable settlements in several cases brought against the Company by policyholders regarding their purchase of broad-based leveraged corporate owned life insurance ( leveraged COLI ) policies in the early to mid-1990s and therefore, released a reserve for these matters of $34, after-tax. Realized losses increased for the year ended December 31, 2007 as compared to the comparable prior year periods primarily due to net losses on GMWB derivatives and impairments. 77 Table of Contents Realized Capital Gains and Losses by Segment Life includes net realized capital gains and losses in each reporting segment. Following is a summary of the types of realized gains and losses by segment: Net realized gains (losses) for the year ended December 31, 2008 Individual Group Retail Life Retirement Benefits International Institutional Other Total Gains/losses on sales, net $ (31 ) $ (20 ) $ (38 ) $ (3 ) $ (20 ) $ 167 $ (32 ) $ 23 Impairments (474 ) (245 ) (243 ) (513 ) (114 ) (740 ) (95 ) (2,424 ) Japanese fixed annuity contract hedges, net 64 64 Periodic net coupon settlements on credit derivatives/Japan (6 ) (2 ) (4 ) (1 ) (28 ) 6 (35 ) SFAS 157 transition impact (616 ) (34 ) (650 ) Results of variable annuity hedge program GMWB derivatives, net (631 ) (82 ) (713 ) Macro Hedge Program 40 34 74 Total results of variable annuity hedge program (591 ) (48 ) (639 ) Other, net (192 ) 15 13 (23 ) (242 ) (216 ) 168 (477 ) Total net realized capital gains (losses) (1,910 ) (252 ) (272 ) (540 ) (422 ) (789 ) 47 (4,138 ) Income tax expense (benefit) and DAC (859 ) (89 ) (101 ) (188 ) (133 ) (277 ) 13 (1,634 ) Total gains (losses), net of tax and DAC $ (1,051 ) $ (163 ) $ (171 ) $ (352 ) $ (289 ) $ (512 ) $ 34 $ (2,504 ) Net realized gains (losses) for the year ended December 31, 2007 Individual Group Retail Life Retirement Benefits International Institutional Other Total Gains/losses on sales, net $ 17 $ 7 $ (11 ) $ 8 $ $ 13 $ 11 $ 45 Impairments (87 ) (21 ) (22 ) (19 ) (48 ) (148 ) (13 ) (358 ) Japanese fixed annuity contract hedges, net 18 18 Periodic net coupon settlements on credit derivatives/Japan 1 (68 ) 3 24 (40 ) Results of variable annuity hedge program GMWB derivatives, net (286 ) (286 ) Macro Hedge Program (12 ) (12 ) Total results of variable annuity hedge program (298 ) (298 ) Other, net (14 ) (14 ) (8 ) (19 ) (18 ) (56 ) (57 ) (186 ) Total net realized capital losses (381 ) (28 ) (41 ) (30 ) (116 ) (188 ) (35 ) (819 ) Income tax benefit and DAC (212 ) (13 ) (13 ) (12 ) (52 ) (67 ) (4 ) (373 ) Total losses, net of tax and DAC $ (169 ) $ (15 ) $ (28 ) $ (18 ) $ (64 ) $ (121 ) $ (31 ) $ (446 ) 78 Table of Contents Net realized gains (losses) for the year ended December 31, 2006 Individual Group Retail Life Retirement Benefits International Institutional Other Total Gains/losses on sales, net $ (44 ) $ (1 ) $ (9 ) $ (6 ) $ (4 ) $ 23 $ (1 ) $ (42 ) Impairments (6 ) (18 ) (6 ) (3 ) (2 ) (32 ) (9 ) (76 ) Japanese fixed annuity contract hedges, net (17 ) (17 ) Periodic net coupon settlements on credit derivatives/Japan 3 (1 ) 1 (63 ) 1 11 (48 ) Results of variable annuity hedge program GMWB derivatives, net (26 ) (26 ) Macro Hedge Program (14 ) (14 ) Total results of variable annuity hedge program (40 ) (40 ) Other, net (5 ) (1 ) (5 ) (2 ) (29 ) 5 (37 ) Total net realized capital gains (losses) (87 ) (25 ) (16 ) (13 ) (88 ) (37 ) 6 (260 ) Income tax expense (benefit) and DAC 3 (8 ) (9 ) (5 ) (41 ) (13 ) 1 (72 ) Total losses, net of tax and DAC $ (90 ) $ (17 ) $ (7 ) $ (8 ) $ (47 ) $ (24 ) $ 5 $ (188 ) The circumstances giving rise to the changes in these components are as follows: Year ended December 31, 2008 compared to the years ended December 31, 2007 and 2006 Gross Gains and Losses on Sale Gross gains and losses on sales for the year ended December 31, 2008 primarily resulted from the decision to reallocate the portfolio to securities with more favorable risk/return profiles. Also included was a gain of $141 from the sale of a synthetic CDO, as well as losses on sales of HIMCO managed CLOs in the first quarter. For more information regarding these CLO losses, refer to the Variable Interest Entities section below. During the year ended December 31, 2008, securities sold at a loss were depressed, on average, approximately 2% at the respective period impairment review date and were deemed to be temporarily impaired. Gross gains and losses on sales for the year ended December 31, 2007 were primarily comprised of corporate securities. During the year ended December 31, 2007, securities sold at a loss were depressed, on average, approximately 1% at the respective period impairment review date and were deemed to be temporarily impaired. Gross gains on sales for the year ended December 31, 2006 were primarily within fixed maturities and were concentrated in U.S. government, corporate and foreign government securities. Gross losses on sale for the year ended December 31, 2006 were primarily within fixed maturities and were concentrated in the corporate and CMBS sectors. Impairments See the Other-Than-Temporary Impairments section of the Investments section of the MD&A for information on impairment losses. SFAS 157 See Note 4 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for a discussion of the SFAS 157 transition impact. Variable Annuity Hedge Program See Note 4 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for a discussion of variable annuity hedge program gains and losses. Other Other, net losses for the year ended December 31, 2008 were primarily related to net losses of $291 related to transactional foreign currency losses predominately on the internal reinsurance of the Japan variable annuity business, which is entirely offset in AOCI, resulting from appreciation of the Yen and credit derivative losses of $222 due to significant credit spread widening. Also included were losses on HIMCO managed CLOs in the first quarter and derivative related losses of $39 in the third quarter due to counterparty default related to the bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers Holdings Inc. For more information regarding the CLO losses, refer to the Variable Interest Entities section below. Other, net losses for the year ended December 31, 2007 were primarily driven by the change in value of non-qualifying derivatives due to credit spread widening as well as fluctuations in interest rates and foreign currency exchange rates. Credit spreads widened primarily due to the deterioration in the U.S. housing market, tightened lending conditions and the market flight to quality securities. Other, net losses for the year ended December 31, 2006 were primarily driven from the change in value of non-qualifying derivatives due to fluctuations in interest rates and foreign currency exchange rates. These losses were partially offset by a before-tax benefit of $25 received from the WorldCom security settlement. 79 Table of Contents RETAIL Operating Summary 2008 2007 2006 Fee income and other $ 2,757 $ 3,117 $ 2,695 Earned premiums (4 ) (62 ) (86 ) Net investment income 747 801 839 Net realized capital losses (1,910 ) (381 ) (87 ) Total revenues [1] 1,590 3,475 3,361 Benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses 1,008 820 819 Insurance operating costs and other expenses 1,187 1,221 994 Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs and present value of future profits 1,344 406 973 Goodwill impairment 422 Total benefits, losses and expenses 3,961 2,447 2,786 Income (loss) before income taxes (2,371 ) 1,028 575 Income tax expense (benefit) (972 ) 216 39 Net income (loss) [2] $ (1,399 ) $ 812 $ 536 Assets Under Management 2008 2007 2006 Individual variable annuity account values $ 74,578 $ 119,071 $ 114,365 Individual fixed annuity and other account values 11,278 10,243 9,937 Other retail products account values 398 677 525 Total account values [3] 86,254 129,991 124,827 Retail mutual fund assets under management 31,032 48,383 38,536 Other mutual fund assets under management 1,678 2,113 1,489 Total mutual fund assets under management 32,710 50,496 40,025 Total assets under management $ 118,964 $ 180,487 $ 164,852 [1] For the year ended December 31, 2008, the transition impact related to the SFAS 157 adoption was a reduction in revenues of $616. For further discussion of the SFAS 157 transition impact, refer to Note 4 in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. [2] For the year ended December 31, 2008, the transition impact related to the SFAS 157 adoption was a reduction in net income of $209. For further discussion of the SFAS 157 transition impact, refer to Note 4 in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. [3] Includes policyholders balances for investment contracts and reserves for future policy benefits for insurance contracts. Retail focuses on the savings and retirement needs of the growing number of individuals who are preparing for retirement, or have already retired, through the sale of individual variable and fixed annuities, mutual funds and other investment products. Life is both a leading writer of individual variable annuities and a top seller of individual variable annuities through banks in the United States. Year ended December 31, 2008 compared to the year ended December 31, 2007 Net income decreased primarily as a result of increased realized capital losses, the impact of the 2008 Unlock charge, the impairment of goodwill attributed to the individual annuity line of business and the effect of equity market declines on variable annuity and mutual fund fee income. Included in net realized capital losses in 2008 were changes in value on GMWB derivatives, impairments, and the adoption of SFAS 157 during the first quarter of 2008. For further discussion of the SFAS 157 transition impact, see Note 4 in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. For further discussion of realized capital losses, see the Realized Capital Gains and Losses by Segment table under Life Operating Section of the MD&A. For further discussion of the 2008 and 2007 Unlock; and the impairment of goodwill, see the Critical Accounting Estimates section of the MD&A. The following other factors contributed to the changes in net income: Fee income and other Fee income and other decreased $360 primarily as a result of lower variable annuity fee income due to a decline in average account values. The decrease in average variable annuity account values can be attributed to market depreciation of $38.2 billion and net outflows of $6.2 billion during the year. Net outflows were driven by surrender activity resulting from the aging of the variable annuity in-force block of business; increased sales competition, particularly competition related to guaranteed living benefits, and volatility in the equity markets. Also contributing to the decrease in fee income was lower mutual fund fees due to declining assets under management primarily driven by market depreciation of $20.1 billion, partially offset by $2.8 billion of net flows. Earned Premiums Earned Premiums increased primarily due to an increase in life contingent premiums combined with a decrease in reinsurance premiums as a result of the lapsing of business covered by reinsurance and the significant decline in the equity markets. 80 Table of Contents Net investment income Net investment income was lower primarily due to a $77 decline in income from limited partnerships and other alternative investments, combined with lower yields on fixed maturity investments due to interest rate declines, partially offset by an increase in general account assets from increased fixed account sales. Net realized capital losses Net realized capital losses increased primarily as a result of losses on GMWB derivatives of $(631); the adoption of SFAS 157 during the first quarter of 2008, which resulted in realized capital losses of $(616); and impairments of $(474). Benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses Benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses increased primarily as a result of the impact of the 2008 Unlock which increased the benefit ratio used in the calculation of GMDB reserves. Insurance operating costs and other expenses Insurance operating costs and other expenses decreased primarily as a result of lower non deferrable asset based trail commissions due to equity market declines. Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs and present value of future profits ( DAC ) Amortization of DAC increased primarily due to the impact of the 2008 Unlock charge as compared to the 2007 Unlock benefit. This was partially offset by a DAC benefit associated with the adoption of SFAS 157 at the beginning of the first quarter of 2008. Goodwill impairment As a result of testing performed during the fourth quarter of 2008, all goodwill attributed to the individual annuity business in Retail was deemed to be impaired and was written down to $0. For further discussion of this impairment, see the Critical Accounting Estimates section of the MD&A. Income tax expense (benefit) The effective tax rate increased from 21% to 41% for the year ended December 31, 2008 as compared to the prior year primarily due to losses before income taxes in 2008 compared to pre-tax earnings in 2007. The impact of DRD and other permanent differences caused an increase in the tax benefit to above 35% on the 2008 pre tax loss and a decrease in the tax expense on the 2007 pre tax income. 81 Table of Contents Year ended December 31, 2007 compared to the year ended December 31, 2006 Net income in Retail increased for the year ended December 31, 2007, primarily driven by lower amortization of DAC resulting from the unlock benefit in the third quarter of 2007, fee income growth in the variable annuity and mutual fund businesses, partially offset by increased non-deferrable individual annuity asset based commissions and mutual fund commissions. In addition, realized capital losses increased $294 for the year ended December 31, 2007 as compared to 2006. For further discussion, see Realized Capital Gains and Losses by Segment table under Life Operating Section of the MD&A. A more expanded discussion of income growth is presented below: Fee income and other Fee income increased for the year ended December 31, 2007 primarily as a result of growth in variable annuity average account values. The year-over-year increase in average variable annuity account values can be attributed to market appreciation of $7.4 billion during the year. Variable annuities had net outflows of $2.7 billion in 2007. Net outflows were driven by surrender activity due to the aging of the variable annuity in force block of business and increased sales competition, particularly competition related to guaranteed living benefits. Mutual fund fee income increased 23% for the year ended December 31, 2007 due to increased assets under management driven by net sales of $5.5 billion and market appreciation of $4.4 billion during 2007. Net investment income Net investment income declined for the year ended December 31, 2007 due to a decrease in variable annuity fixed option account values of 11% or $635. The decrease in these account values can be attributed to a combination of transfers into separate accounts and surrender activity. Offsetting this decrease in net investment income was an increase in the returns from limited partnership and other alternative investment income of $14 for the year ended December 31, 2007. Insurance operating costs and other expenses Insurance operating costs and other expenses increased for the year ended December 31, 2007. These increases were principally driven by mutual fund commission increases of $75 for the year ended December 31, 2007 due to growth in deposits of 29%. In addition, non-deferrable variable annuity asset based commissions increased $67 for the year ended December 31, 2007 due to a 4% growth in assets under management, as well as an increase in the number of contracts reaching anniversaries when trail commission payments begin. Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs and present value of future profits ( DAC ) Lower amortization of DAC resulted from the unlock benefit during the third quarter of 2007 as compared to an unlock expense during the fourth quarter of 2006. For further discussion, see Unlock and Sensitivity Analysis in the Critical Accounting Estimates section of the MD&A. Income tax expense (benefit) The effective tax rate increased from 7% to 21% for the year ended December 31, 2007 from the prior year due to an increase in income before income taxes and revisions in the estimates of the separate account DRD which resulted in an incremental tax of $17, and foreign tax credits. 82 Table of Contents INDIVIDUAL LIFE Operating Summary 2008 2007 2006 Fee income and other $ 899 $ 870 $ 885 Earned premiums (71 ) (62 ) (53 ) Net investment income 338 359 324 Net realized capital losses (252 ) (28 ) (25 ) Total revenues 914 1,139 1,131 Benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses 627 562 497 Insurance operating costs and other expenses 202 193 179 Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs and present value of future profits 169 121 243 Total benefits, losses and expenses 998 876 919 Income (loss) before income taxes (84 ) 263 212 Income tax expense (benefit) (41 ) 81 62 Net income (loss) $ (43 ) $ 182 $ 150 Account Values 2008 2007 2006 Variable universal life insurance $ 4,802 $ 7,284 $ 6,637 Universal life/interest sensitive whole life 4,727 4,388 4,035 Modified guaranteed life and other 653 677 699 Total account values $ 10,182 $ 12,349 $ 11,371 Life Insurance In-force Variable universal life insurance $ 78,853 $ 77,566 $ 73,770 Universal life/interest sensitive whole life 52,356 48,636 45,230 Term life 63,334 52,298 44,175 Modified guaranteed life and other 921 983 1,052 Total life insurance in-force $ 195,464 $ 179,483 $ 164,227 Individual Life provides life insurance solutions to a wide array of business intermediaries to solve the wealth protection, accumulation and transfer needs of their affluent, emerging affluent and small business insurance clients. Year ended December 31, 2008 compared to the year ended December 31, 2007 Net income decreased for the year ended December 31, 2008, driven primarily by significantly higher realized capital losses and the impacts of the Unlock in the third quarter of 2008 as compared to the third quarter of 2007. For further discussion on the Unlock, see Unlock and Sensitivity Analysis in the Critical Accounting Estimates section of the MD&A. For further discussion of net realized capital losses, see Realized Capital Gains and Losses by Segment table under Life Operating Section of the MD&A. The following other factors contributed to the changes in net income: Fee income and other Fee income and other increased primarily due to an increase in cost of insurance charges of $45 as a result of growth in guaranteed universal life insurance in-force and fees on higher surrenders of $12 due to internal exchanges from non-guaranteed universal life insurance to variable universal life insurance. Partially offsetting these increases are the impacts of the 2008 and 2007 Unlocks as well as lower variable life fees as a result of equity market declines. Earned premiums Earned premiums, which include premiums for ceded reinsurance, decreased primarily due to increased ceded reinsurance premiums due to life insurance in-force growth. Net investment income Net investment income decreased primarily due to lower income from limited partnership and other alternative investments, lower yields on fixed maturity investments, and reduced net investment income associated with a more efficient capital approach for our secondary guarantee universal life business, which released assets supporting capital and the related net investment income earned on those assets (described further in the Outlook section), partially offset by growth in general account values. Benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses Benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses increased as a result of higher death benefits consistent with a larger life insurance in-force and unfavorable mortality, as well as the impact of the 2008 Unlock. 83 Table of Contents Insurance operating costs and other expenses Insurance operating costs and other increased less than the growth of in-force business as a result of active expense management efforts. Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs and present value of future profits ( DAC ) Amortization of DAC increased primarily as a result of the unlock expense in 2008 as compared to the unlock benefit in 2007, partially offset by reduced DAC amortization primarily attributed to net realized capital losses. This increase in DAC amortization had a partial offset in amortization of deferred revenues, included in fee income. Income tax expense (benefit) Income tax benefits were a result of lower income before income taxes primarily due to an increase in realized capital losses and DAC amortization. Year ended December 31, 2007 compared to the year ended December 31, 2006 Net income increased for the year ended December 31, 2007, driven primarily by the unlock benefit in the third quarter of 2007 as compared to an unlock expense in the fourth quarter of 2006 partially offset by unfavorable mortality in 2007. For further discussion on the Unlock, see Unlock and Sensitivity Analysis in the Critical Accounting Estimates section of the MD&A. The year ended December 31, 2006 also included favorable revisions to prior period DAC estimates of $7, after-tax. A more expanded discussion of income growth is presented below: Fee income and other Fee income and other decreased primarily due to the impacts of the 2007 and 2006 Unlocks. Offsetting the impacts of the Unlocks, fee income increased primarily due to higher cost of insurance charges, the largest component of fee income, of $35 primarily driven by growth in variable universal and universal life insurance in-force. Variable fee income increased consistent with the growth in variable universal life insurance account value. Earned premiums Earned premiums, which include premiums for ceded reinsurance, decreased primarily due to increased ceded reinsurance premiums. Net investment income Net investment income increased consistent with growth in general account values. Individual Life earned additional net investment income throughout 2007 associated with higher returns from limited partnerships and other alternative investments. Benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses Benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses increased due to life insurance in-force growth and unfavorable mortality. Insurance operating costs and other expenses Insurance operating costs and other expenses increased in 2007 consistent with life insurance in-force growth. Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs and present value of future profits ( DAC ) Lower amortization of DAC resulted from the unlock benefit in 2007 as compared to an unlock expense in 2006. This decrease in DAC amortization had a partial offset in amortization of deferred revenues, included in fee income. 84 Table of Contents RETIREMENT PLANS Operating Summary 2008 2007 2006 Fee income and other $ 334 $ 238 $ 193 Earned premiums 4 4 19 Net investment income 342 355 326 Net realized capital losses (272 ) (41 ) (16 ) Total revenues 408 556 522 Benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses 271 249 250 Insurance operating costs and other expenses 335 170 136 Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs and present value of future profits 91 58 (4 ) Total benefits, losses and expenses 697 477 382 Income (loss) before income taxes (289 ) 79 140 Income tax expense (benefit) (132 ) 18 39 Net income (loss) $ (157 ) $ 61 $ 101 Assets Under Management 2008 2007 2006 403(b)/457 account values $ 10,242 $ 12,363 $ 11,540 401(k) account values 11,956 14,731 12,035 Total account values [1] 22,198 27,094 23,575 403(b)/457 mutual fund assets under management [2] 99 26 401(k) mutual fund assets under management [3] 14,739 1,428 1,140 Total mutual fund assets under management 14,838 1,454 1,140 Total assets under management $ 37,036 $ 28,548 $ 24,715 Total assets under administration 401(k) [4] $ 5,122 $ $ [1] Includes policyholder balances for investment contracts and reserves for future policy benefits for insurance contracts. [2] In 2007, Life began selling mutual fund based products in the 403(b) market. [3] During the year ended December 31, 2008, Life acquired the rights to service mutual fund assets from Sun Life Retirement Services, Inc., and Princeton Retirement Group. [4] During the year ended December 31, 2008, Life acquired the rights to service assets under administration ( AUA ) from Princeton Retirement Group. Servicing revenues from AUA are based on the number of plan participants and do not vary directly with asset levels. As such, they are not included in AUM upon which asset based returns are calculated. The Retirement Plans segment primarily offers customized wealth creation and financial protection for corporate, government and tax-exempt employers through its two business units, 403(b)/457 and 401(k). Year ended December 31, 2008 compared to the year ended December 31, 2007 Net income in Retirement Plans decreased due to higher net realized capital losses, the DAC Unlock in 2008 as compared to 2007 and increased operating expenses partially offset by growth in fee income. For further discussion of net realized capital losses, see Realized Capital Gains and Losses by Segment table under Life Operating section of the MD&A. For further discussion of the 2008 and 2007 Unlocks see Critical Accounting Estimates section of the MD&A. The following other factors contributed to the changes in net income: Fee income and other Fee income and other increased primarily due to $109 of fees earned on assets relating to the acquisitions in the first quarter of 2008. Offsetting this increase was lower annuity fees driven by lower average account values as a result of market depreciation of $7.3 billion, partially offset by positive net flows of $2.4 billion over the past four quarters. Net investment income Net investment income declined due to a decrease in the returns from limited partnership and other alternative investment income of $33, partially offset by growth in general account assets. Insurance operating costs and other expenses Insurance operating costs and other expenses increased primarily attributable to operating expenses associated with the acquired businesses. Also contributing to higher insurance operating costs were higher trail commissions resulting from an aging portfolio and higher service and technology costs. Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs and present value of future profits Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs increased as a result of the higher Unlock in the third quarter of 2008 as compared to the Unlock in the third quarter of 2007, partially offset by lower DAC amortization associated with lower gross profits. For further discussion, see Unlock and Sensitivity Analysis in the Critical Accounting Estimates section of the MD&A. Income tax expense (benefit) The income tax benefit for 2008 as compared to the prior year periods income tax expense was due to lower income before income taxes primarily due to increased realized capital losses and increased tax benefits associated with the dividends received deduction of $12. 85 Table of Contents Year ended December 31, 2007 compared to the year ended December 31, 2006 Net income in Retirement Plans decreased for the year ended December 31, 2007 due to higher amortization of DAC as a result of the unlock expense in the third quarter of 2007, partially offset by a growth in fee income. In addition, realized capital losses increased $25 for the year ended December 31, 2007 as compared to the prior year period. For further discussion, see Realized Capital Gains and Losses by Segment table under Life Operating Section of the MD&A. The following other factors contributed to the changes in income: Fee income and other Fee income increased for the year ended December 31, 2007 primarily due to an increase in 401(k) average account values. This growth in 401(k) business is primarily driven by positive net flows of $1.8 billion over the past four quarters resulting from strong sales and increased ongoing deposits. Market appreciation contributed an additional $888 to assets under management in 2007. Net investment income Net investment income increased for the year ended December 31, 2007 for 403(b)/457 business due to growth in general account assets along with an increase in return on limited partnership and other alternative investments. Benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses Benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses and earned premiums decreased for the year ended December 31, 2007 primarily due to a large case annuitization in the 401(k) business of $12 which occurred in the first quarter of 2006. This decrease was partially offset by an increase in interest credited resulting from the growth in general account assets. Insurance operating costs and other expenses Insurance operating costs and other expenses increased for the year ended December 31, 2007, primarily attributable to greater assets under management aging beyond their first year resulting in higher trail commissions. Also contributing to higher insurance operating costs for the year ended December 31, 2007 were higher service and technology costs. Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs and present value of future profits Higher amortization of DAC resulted from the unlock expense in the third quarter of 2007 as compared to an unlock benefit in the fourth quarter of 2006. For further discussion, see Unlock and Sensitivity Analysis in the Critical Accounting Estimates section of the MD&A. 86 Table of Contents GROUP BENEFITS Operating Summary 2008 2007 2006 Premiums and other considerations $ 4,391 $ 4,301 $ 4,149 Net investment income 419 465 415 Net realized capital losses (540 ) (30 ) (13 ) Total revenues 4,270 4,736 4,551 Benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses 3,144 3,109 3,002 Insurance operating costs and other expenses 1,128 1,131 1,101 Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs 57 62 41 Total benefits, losses and expenses 4,329 4,302 4,144 Income (loss) before income taxes (59 ) 434 407 Income tax expense (benefit) (53 ) 119 109 Net income (loss) $ (6 ) $ 315 $ 298 Earned Premiums and Other 2008 2007 2006 Fully insured ongoing premiums $ 4,355 $ 4,239 $ 4,100 Buyout premiums 1 27 12 Other 35 35 37 Total earned premiums and other $ 4,391 $ 4,301 $ 4,149 Ratios, excluding buyouts Loss ratio 71.6 % 72.1 % 72.3 % Loss ratio, excluding financial institutions 76.3 % 77.3 % 77.2 % Expense ratio 27.0 % 27.9 % 27.6 % Expense ratio, excluding financial institutions 22.4 % 23.0 % 22.9 % The Group Benefits segment provides employers, associations, affinity groups and financial institutions with group life, accident and disability coverage, along with other products and services, including voluntary benefits, and group retiree health. The Company also offers disability underwriting, administration, claims processing services and reinsurance to other insurers and self-funded employer plans. Group Benefits has a block of financial institution business that is experience rated. This business comprised approximately 9% to 10% of the segment 2008, 2007 and 2006 premiums and other considerations (excluding buyouts) respectively, and, on average, 4% to 5% of the segment 2008, 2007 and 2006 net income, excluding realized capital gains and losses. Year ended December 31, 2008 compared to the year ended December 31, 2007 The decrease in net income for the year ended December 31, 2008, was primarily due to increased realized capital losses. For further discussion, see Realized Capital Gains and Losses by Segment table under Life Operating Section of the MD&A. The following other factors contributed to the changes in net income: Premiums and other considerations Premiums and other considerations increased largely due to business growth driven by new sales and persistency over the last twelve months. Net investment income Net investment income decreased primarily as a result of lower yields on fixed maturity investments and lower limited partnership and other alternative investment returns of $33. Loss ratio The segment loss ratio (defined as benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses as a percentage of premiums and other considerations excluding buyouts) decreased due to favorable disability and medical stop loss experience partially offset by unfavorable mortality. Expense ratio The segment expense ratio, excluding buyouts decreased compared to the prior year due primarily to lower commission expenses. 87 Table of Contents Year ended December 31, 2007 compared to the year ended December 31, 2006 Net income increased in Group Benefits for the year ended December 31, 2007, primarily due to higher earned premiums, higher net investment income, a gain on a renewal rights transaction associated with the Company medical stop loss business and a change in assumptions underlying the valuation of long term disability claims incurred in 2007. Partially offsetting the higher net income was increased DAC amortization due to the adoption of SOP 05-1. In addition, realized capital losses increased $17 for the year ended December 31, 2007 as compared to the prior year period. For further discussion, see Realized Capital Gains and Losses by Segment table under Life Operating Section of the MD&A. A more expanded discussion of income growth is presented below: Premiums and other considerations Premiums and other considerations increased largely due to business growth driven by new sales and persistency over the last twelve months. Net investment income Net investment income increased due to a higher invested asset base and increased interest income on allocated surplus. Loss ratio The segment loss ratio (defined as benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses as a percentage of premiums and other considerations excluding buyouts) for the year ended December 31, 2007, decreased slightly. Loss ratios experience volatility in period over period comparisons due to fluctuation in mortality and morbidity experience. Additionally there was a change in assumptions underlying the valuation of long term disability claims incurred in 2007. Expense ratio The segment expense ratio, excluding buyouts, for the year ended December 31, 2007, increased primarily due to higher DAC amortization resulting from a shorter amortization period following the adoption of SOP 05-1. 88 Table of Contents INTERNATIONAL Operating Summary 2008 2007 2006 Fee income $ 881 $ 843 $ 709 Earned premiums (9 ) (11 ) (8 ) Net investment income 167 131 123 Net realized capital losses (422 ) (116 ) (88 ) Total revenues [1] 617 847 736 Benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses 270 32 3 Insurance operating costs and other expenses 321 246 208 Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs 496 214 167 Total benefits, losses and expenses 1,087 492 378 Income (loss) before income taxes (470 ) 355 358 Income tax expense (benefit) (145 ) 132 127 Net income (loss) [2] $ (325 ) $ 223 $ 231 Assets Under Management Japan 2008 2007 2006 Japan variable annuity account values $ 29,726 $ 35,793 $ 29,653 Japan fixed annuity and other account values [3] 4,769 1,844 1,690 Total assets under management Japan $ 34,495 $ 37,637 $ 31,343 [1] The transition impact related to the SFAS 157 adoption was a reduction in revenues of $34, for the year ended December 31, 2008. For further discussion of the SFAS 157 transition impact, refer to Note 4 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. [2] The transition impact related to the SFAS 157 adoption was a reduction in net income of $11, for the year ended December 31, 2008. For further discussion of the SFAS 157 transition impact, refer to Note 4 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. [3] Japan fixed annuity and other account values includes an increase due to the net triggering impact of the GMIB pay-out annuity account value for the 3 Win product of $2.0 billion. International, with operations in Japan, Brazil, Ireland and the United Kingdom, focuses on the savings and retirement needs of the growing number of individuals outside the United States who are preparing for retirement, or have already retired, through the sale of variable annuities, fixed annuities and other insurance and savings products. The Company Japan operation is the largest component of the International segment. 89 Table of Contents Year ended December 31, 2008 compared to the year ended December 31, 2007 Net income decreased for the year ended December 31, 2008 as a result of the 2008 Unlock versus the 2007 Unlock along with increased realized capital losses from the adoption of SFAS 157, which resulted in a net realized capital loss of $34 during the first quarter of 2008, the impact of the 3 Win trigger, impairment charges, increases in insurance operating costs and other expenses, partially offset by an increase in fee income. For further discussion on the Unlock and 3 Win trigger, see Unlock and Sensitivity Analysis in the Critical Accounting Estimates section of the MD&A. For further discussion of the SFAS 157 transition impact, see Note 4 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. For further discussion of realized capital losses, see Realized Capital Gains and losses by Segment table under Life Operating Section of the MD&A. The following other factors contributed to the changes in net income: Fee income Fee income increased primarily due to growth in Japan variable annuity average assets under management. The increase in average assets under management over the past four quarters was driven by deposits of $3.0 billion and a $6.6 billion increase due to foreign currency exchange translation as the yen strengthened compared to the U.S. dollar. Deposits and favorable foreign currency exchange were offset by unfavorable market performance of $10.9 billion. Benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses Benefits, losses and loss adjustment expense increased as a result of the impacts of the Unlock in the third quarter of 2008 as compared to the third quarter of 2007, the impact of the 3 Win trigger, as well as higher GMDB net amount at risk and increased claims costs. For further discussion of the 3 Win trigger, see Unlock and Sensitivity Analysis in the Critical Accounting Estimates section of the MD&A. Insurance operating costs and other expenses Insurance operating costs and other expenses increased due to the growth and strategic investment in the Japan and Other International operations, as well as lower capitalization of deferred policy acquisition costs, as acquisition costs exceeded pricing allowables. Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs increased as a result of the impacts of the Unlock in the third quarter of 2008 as compared to the third quarter of 2007, as well as the accelerated amortization associated with the 3 Win trigger. For further discussion of the 3 Win trigger see Unlock and Sensitivity Analysis in the Critical Accounting Estimates section of the MD&A. Income Tax expense Income tax expense decreased primarily as a result of a decline in income before taxes. Year ended December 31, 2007 compared to the year ended December 31, 2006 Net income decreased for the year ended December 31, 2007 due to a lower unlock benefit in 2007 compared with 2006 and an increase in realized capital losses of $28 for the year ended December 31, 2007 as compared to the prior year period. Losses were partially offset by increased fee income driven by growth in assets under management. For further discussion, see Realized Capital Gains and Losses by Segment table under Life Operating Section of the MD&A. The following other factors contributed to the change in income: Fee income Fee income increased for the year ended December 31, 2007 primarily due to growth in Japan variable annuity assets under management. As of December 31, 2007, Japan variable annuity assets under management were $35.8 billion, an increase of $6.1 billion or 21% from the prior year period. The increase in assets under management was driven by positive net flows of $4.5 billion, partially offset by unfavorable market performance of $620, which includes the impact of foreign currency movements on the Japanese customer foreign assets and a $2.3 billion increase due to foreign currency exchange translation as the yen strengthened compared to the U.S. dollar. Benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses The increase in benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses for the year ended December 31, 2007 over the prior year period was due to the unlock benefit in the fourth quarter of 2006 exceeding the unlock benefit in the third quarter of 2007. For further discussion, see Unlock and Sensitivity Analysis in the Critical Accounting Estimates section of the MD&A. Insurance operating costs and other expenses Insurance operating costs and other expenses increased for the year ended December 31, 2007 due to the growth in the Japan operation. Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs and present value of future profits Higher amortization of DAC resulted primarily from a decrease in the 2007 unlock benefit compared with the prior year period, as well as overall growth of operations. For further discussion, see Unlock and Sensitivity Analysis in the Critical Accounting Estimates section of the MD&A. 90 Table of Contents INSTITUTIONAL Operating Summary 2008 2007 2006 Fee income and other $ 152 $ 251 $ 125 Earned premiums 889 987 607 Net investment income 1,004 1,241 1,003 Net realized capital losses (789 ) (188 ) (37 ) Total revenues 1,256 2,291 1,698 Benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses 1,907 2,074 1,484 Insurance operating costs and expenses 120 185 78 Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs 19 23 32 Total benefits, losses and expenses 2,046 2,282 1,594 Income (loss) before income taxes (790 ) 9 104 Income tax expense (benefit) (288 ) (8 ) 26 Net income (loss) $ (502 ) $ 17 $ 78 Assets Under Management 2008 2007 2006 Institutional account values [1] [3] $ 24,081 $ 25,103 $ 22,214 Private Placement Life Insurance account values [1] 32,459 32,792 26,131 Mutual fund assets under management [2] 2,578 3,581 2,567 Total assets under management $ 59,118 $ 61,476 $ 50,912 [1] Includes policyholder balances for investment contracts and reserves for future policy benefits for insurance contracts. [2] Mutual fund assets under management include transfers from the Retirement Plans segment of $178 during 2006. [3] Institutional investment product account values include transfers from Retirement Plans and Retail of $763 during 2006. Institutional provides customized investment, insurance, and income solutions to select markets. Products include PPLI owned by corporations and high net worth individuals, institutional annuities, mutual funds owned by institutional investors, structured settlements, and stable value contracts. Furthermore, Institutional offers individual products including income annuities and longevity assurance. Year ended December 31, 2008 compared to the year ended December 31, 2007 Net income in Institutional decreased primarily due to increased net realized capital losses and lower net investment income. For additional discussion of realized capital losses, see Realized Capital Gains and Losses by Segment table under Life Operating Section of the MD&A. Further discussion of income is presented below: Fee income and other Fee income and other decreased primarily due to lower front-end loads on private placement life insurance ( PPLI ) cases during 2008. PPLI collects front-end loads recorded in fee income, offset by corresponding premium taxes reported in insurance operating costs and other expenses. For 2008 and 2007, PPLI deposits of $247 and $5.2 billion, respectively, resulted in fee income due to front-end loads of $2 and $107, respectively. Earned premiums Earned premiums decreased as compared to the prior year due to greater amounts of life contingent business sold in 2007. The decrease in earned premiums was offset by a corresponding decrease in benefits, losses, and loss adjustment expenses. Net investment income Net investment income declined due to a decrease in returns from limited partnership and other alternative investments income of $(127), lower yields on fixed maturity investments indexed to LIBOR, and lower assets under management. The decline in yield on fixed maturities was largely offset by a corresponding decrease in interest credited on liabilities reported in benefits, losses, and loss adjustment expenses. Assets under management decreased primarily due to stable value outflows. Benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses Benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses decreased primarily due to lower reserve increases as the result of lower sales in life contingent business, as well as lower interest credited on liabilities indexed to LIBOR. The decrease was partially offset by $8 greater mortality loss. Insurance operating costs and other expenses Insurance operating costs and other expenses decreased due to a decline in premium tax, driven by reduced PPLI deposits, partially offset by discontinued administrative system projects and product development expenses. Income tax expense (benefit) The income tax benefit increased compared to the prior year primarily due to a decline in income before taxes primarily due to increased realized capital losses. 91 Table of Contents Year ended December 31, 2007 compared to the year ended December 31, 2006 Net income in Institutional decreased for the year ended December 31, 2007 primarily due to increased realized capital losses of $151 as compared to 2006. For further discussion, see Realized Capital Gains and Losses by Segment table under Life Operating Section of the MD&A. Offsetting the impact of realized capital losses, Institutional net income increased driven by higher assets under management, combined with increased returns on general account assets, primarily due to limited partnership and other alternative investment income. The following other factors contributed to the changes in income: Fee income and other Fee income increased for the year ended December 31, 2007 primarily due to higher Mutual Fund and PPLI assets under management on net flows and change in market appreciation of $5.8 billion and $2.1 billion, respectively, during the year. In addition, PPLI collects front-end loads recorded in fee income, offset by corresponding premium taxes reported in insurance operating costs and other expenses. During the year ended December 31, 2007, PPLI had deposits of $5.2 billion, which resulted in an increase in fee income due to front-end loads of $107. Earned premiums Earned premiums increased for the year ended December 31, 2007 primarily as a result of increased structured settlement life contingent sales, and one large terminal funding life contingent case sold in the third quarter. This increase in earned premiums was offset by a corresponding increase in benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses. Net investment income Net investment income increased due to higher assets under management resulting from positive net flows of $1.5 billion during the year, and higher returns on limited partnerships and other alternative investments. Net flows were favorable primarily as a result of the Company funding agreement backed Investor Notes program. Benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses Benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses increased as compared to the comparable prior year period primarily due to higher assets under management, in addition to one large terminal funding life contingent case sold in the third quarter of 2007. Insurance operating costs and other expenses Insurance operating costs and other expenses increased due to greater premium tax, driven by increased PPLI deposits. Income tax expense (benefit) The change in income taxes was due to lower income before income taxes primarily driven by the increase in realized capital losses. 92 Table of Contents OTHER Operating Summary 2008 2007 2006 Fee income and other $ 60 $ 67 $ 81 Net investment income (loss) Securities available-for-sale and other 28 145 154 Equity securities held for trading [1] (10,340 ) 145 1,824 Total net investment income (loss) (10,312 ) 290 1,978 Net realized capital gains (losses) 47 (35 ) 6 Total revenues (10,205 ) 322 2,065 Benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses [1] 154 156 161 Benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses returns credited on International variable annuities [1] (10,340 ) 145 1,824 Insurance operating costs and other expenses 7 84 12 Total benefits, losses and expenses (10,179 ) 385 1,997 Income (loss) before income taxes (26 ) (63 ) 68 Income tax expense (benefit) (15 ) (11 ) 21 Net income (loss) $ (11 ) $ (52 ) $ 47 [1] Includes investment income and mark-to-market effects of equity securities held for trading supporting the international variable annuity business, which are classified in net investment income with corresponding amounts credited to policyholders within benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses. Life includes in Other its leveraged PPLI product line of business; corporate items not directly allocated to any of its reportable operating segments; inter-segment eliminations and the mark-to-mark adjustment for the International variable annuity assets that are classified as equity securities held for trading reported in net investment income and the related change in interest credited reported as a component of benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses. Year ended December 31, 2008 compared to the year ended December 31, 2007 Net investment income Net investment income on securities available-for-sale and other declined primarily due to decreases in yields on fixed maturity investments and declines in limited partnerships and other alternative investment income. Realized capital gains (losses) See Realized Capital Gains and Losses by Segment table under Life Operating section of the MD&A. Insurance operating costs and other expenses Insurance operating costs and other expenses decreased for the year ended December 31, 2008 as compared to the prior year period, primarily due to a charge of $21 for regulatory matters in the second quarter of 2007 and reallocation of expenses to the applicable lines of business in 2008. Year ended December 31, 2007 compared to the year ended December 31, 2006 Insurance operating costs and other expenses During the first quarter of 2006, the Company achieved favorable settlements in several cases brought against the Company by policyholders regarding their purchase of broad-based leveraged corporate owned life insurance ( leveraged COLI ) policies in the early to mid-1990s. The Company ceased offering this product in 1996. Based on the favorable outcome of these cases, together with the Company current assessment of the few remaining leveraged COLI cases, the Company reduced its estimate of the ultimate cost of these cases as of June 30, 2006. This reserve reduction, recorded in insurance operating costs and other expenses, resulted in an after-tax benefit of $34. Also contributing to the increase in insurance operating costs and other expenses was $18, after-tax, of interest charged by Corporate on the amount of capital held by the Life operations in excess of the amount needed to support the capital requirements of the Life Operations for the year ended December 31, 2007 The Company recorded a reserve in the second quarter of 2007 for market regulatory matters of $21, after-tax. During the year, the Company recorded an insurance recovery of $9, after-tax, against the litigation costs associated with the regulatory matters. Realized capital gains (losses) Refer to Realized Capital Gains and Losses by Segment table under Life Operating section of the MD&A. 93 Table of Contents PROPERTY & CASUALTY Executive Overview Property & Casualty is organized into five reporting segments: the underwriting segments of Personal Lines, Small Commercial, Middle Market and Specialty Commercial (collectively Ongoing Operations ); and the Other Operations segment. Property & Casualty provides a number of coverages, as well as insurance related services, to businesses throughout the United States, including workers compensation, property, automobile, liability, umbrella, specialty casualty, marine, livestock, fidelity, surety, professional liability and directors and officers liability coverages. Property & Casualty also provides automobile, homeowners and home-based business coverage to individuals throughout the United States as well as insurance-related services to businesses. Property & Casualty derives its revenues principally from premiums earned for insurance coverages provided to insureds, investment income, and, to a lesser extent, from fees earned for services provided to third parties and net realized capital gains and losses. Premiums charged for insurance coverages are earned principally on a pro rata basis over the terms of the related policies in force. Service fees principally include revenues from third party claims administration services provided by Specialty Risk Services and revenues from member contact center services provided through the AARP Health program. Total Property & Casualty Financial Highlights Earned Premiums Earned premium growth is an objective for Personal Lines, Small Commercial and Middle Market. Earned premium growth is not a specific objective for Specialty Commercial since Specialty Commercial is largely comprised of transactional businesses where premium writings may fluctuate based on the segment view of perceived market opportunity. Written premiums are earned over the policy term, which is six months for certain Personal Lines auto business and 12 months for substantially all of the remainder of the Company business. Written pricing, new business growth and premium renewal retention are factors that contribute to growth in written and earned premium. Written premiums [1] 2008 2007 2006 Personal Lines $ 3,925 $ 3,947 $ 3,877 Small Commercial 2,696 2,747 2,728 Middle Market 2,242 2,326 2,515 Specialty Commercial 1,361 1,415 1,538 Other Operations 7 5 4 Total $ 10,231 $ 10,440 $ 10,662 Earned premiums [1] Personal Lines $ 3,926 $ 3,889 $ 3,760 Small Commercial 2,724 2,736 2,652 Middle Market 2,299 2,420 2,523 Specialty Commercial 1,382 1,446 1,493 Other Operations 7 5 5 Total $ 10,338 $ 10,496 $ 10,433 [1] The difference between written premiums and earned premiums is attributable to the change in unearned premium reserve. 94 Table of Contents Year ended December 31, 2008 compared to the year ended December 31, 2007 Earned Premiums Total Property & Casualty earned premiums decreased $158, or 2%, primarily due to lower earned premiums in Middle Market and Specialty Commercial, partially offset by increased earned premiums in Personal Lines. Personal Lines Earned premium grew by $37, or 1%, due to a $97, or 4%, increase in AARP earned premiums, partially offset by a $60, or 5%, decrease in Agency and other earned premiums. AARP earned premiums grew primarily due to modest earned pricing increases for both auto and homeowners and the effect of new business premium outpacing non-renewals in the last nine months of 2007. Agency earned premium decreased $43, or 4%, largely due to a decline in new business premium and premium renewal retention since the middle of 2007, partially offset by the effect of modest earned pricing increases. Small Commercial Earned premium decreased slightly, to $2,724, as a decrease in commercial auto was largely offset by an increase in worker compensation. Earned premium decreases were largely due to the effect of non-renewals outpacing new business for commercial auto business in 2008 and to earned pricing decreases, largely offset by new business outpacing non-renewals in workers compensation business over the last nine months of 2007 and first nine months of 2008. Middle Market Earned premium decreased by $121, or 5%, driven primarily by decreases in commercial auto, workers compensation and general liability. Earned premium decreases were driven primarily by a decline in earned pricing in 2008 and the effect of non-renewals outpacing new business in commercial auto and general liability over the last nine months of 2007 and first nine months of 2008, partially offset by the effect of new business outpacing non-renewals in workers compensation since the fourth quarter of 2007. Specialty Commercial Earned premium decreased by $64, or 4%, driven primarily by a decrease in property earned premiums and, to a lesser extent, casualty earned premiums. Property earned premiums decreased due largely to the Company decision to stop writing specialty property business with large, national accounts and lower new business and renewal retention for core excess and surplus lines business. Casualty earned premiums decreased primarily because of lower earned premium from captive programs and a decline in new business premium on loss-sensitive business written with larger accounts over the last nine months of 2007 and first three months of 2008. Year ended December 31, 2007 compared to the year ended December 31, 2006 Earned Premiums Total Property & Casualty earned premiums increased by $63 due to an increase in Personal Lines and Small Commercial, partially offset by a decrease in Middle Market and Specialty Commercial. Personal Lines Earned premium grew by $129, or 3%, primarily due to an increase in AARP and Agency earned premiums. AARP earned premium grew primarily due to an increase in the size of the AARP target market, the effect of direct marketing programs and the effect of cross selling homeowners insurance to insureds who have auto policies. Agency earned premium grew as a result of an increase in the number of agency appointments and further refinement of the Dimensions class plans. Partially offsetting this growth was the effect of the sale of the Omni non-standard auto business in the fourth quarter of 2006 which accounted for $127 of earned premium in 2006. Excluding Omni, Personal Lines earned premiums grew $251, or 7%, for the year ended December 31, 2007. Small Commercial Earned premium increased $84, or 3%, primarily due to new business premiums outpacing non-renewals for workers compensation business over the last six months of 2006 and the first six months of 2007. Middle Market Earned premium decreased by $103, or 4%, driven by decreases in all lines, including commercial auto, general liability, workers compensation and property. Earned premium decreases were driven by declines in earned pricing and premium renewal retention in all lines and a decline in new business premiums in all lines except workers compensation. Specialty Commercial Earned premium decreased by $47, or 3%, primarily driven by a decrease in casualty and property and a decrease in earned premiums assumed under inter-segment arrangements, partially offset by an increase in professional liability, fidelity and surety. 95 Table of Contents Net income 2008 2007 2006 Underwriting results before catastrophes and prior accident year development $ 1,129 $ 984 $ 1,240 Current accident year catastrophes 543 177 199 Unfavorable (favorable) prior accident year reserve development (226 ) 48 296 Underwriting results 812 759 745 Net servicing and other income [1] 31 52 53 Net investment income 1,253 1,687 1,486 Other expenses (222 ) (249 ) (223 ) Net realized capital gains (losses) (1,877 ) (172 ) 9 Income (loss) before income taxes (3 ) 2,077 2,070 Income tax benefit (expense) 95 (570 ) (551 ) Net income $ 92 $ 1,507 $ 1,519 [1] Net of expenses related to service business. Net realized capital gains (losses) 2008 2007 2006 Gross gains on sales $ 180 $ 159 $ 205 Gross losses on sales (448 ) (121 ) (164 ) Impairments (1,533 ) (125 ) (45 ) Periodic net coupon settlements on credit derivatives 2 15 4 Other, net (78 ) (100 ) 9 Net realized capital gains (losses), before-tax $ (1,877 ) $ (172 ) $ 9 Year ended December 31, 2008 compared to the year ended December 31, 2007 Net income decreased by $1,415, from net income of $1,507 in 2007 to net income of $92 in 2008, primarily driven by an increase in net realized capital losses and a decrease in net investment income. Realized capital gains (losses) Gross gains (losses) on sales, net Gross gains and losses on sales in 2008 primarily resulted from the sale of corporate fixed maturities resulting from the decision to reallocate the portfolio to securities with more favorable risk/return profiles. Also included were losses on sales of CLOs in the first quarter for which HIMCO is the collateral manager. For more information regarding losses on the sale of HIMCO managed CLOs, refer to the Variable Interest Entities section of the Investments section of the MD&A. Gross gains and losses on sales in 2007 were primarily comprised of sales of foreign government, corporate, and municipal fixed maturity securities. Impairments Impairments of $1.5 billion in 2008 were primarily of subordinated fixed maturities and preferred equities within the financial services sector, as well as of securitized assets. (See the Other-Than-Temporary Impairments discussion within Investment Results in the Investments section of the MD&A for more information on the impairments recorded in 2008). Other, net Other, net realized capital losses in 2008 were primarily related to net losses on credit derivatives as a result of credit spread widening on credit derivatives that assume credit exposure. Also included were derivative related losses of $7 for the year ended December 31, 2008 due to counterparty default related to the bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers Holdings Inc. Other, net realized capital losses in 2007 primarily resulted from the change in value associated with credit derivatives due to credit spreads widening. Credit spreads widened primarily due to the deterioration in the U.S. housing market, tightened lending conditions, and the market flight to quality securities. Net investment income Investment income decreased $434, or 26%, due to a change from net income to net losses on limited partnerships and other alternative investments in 2008 and decreased fixed maturity income. The net losses on limited partnerships and other alternative investments were largely due to negative returns on hedge funds and real estate partnerships as a result of the lack of liquidity in the financial markets and credit spreads widening. The decrease in income from fixed maturities was attributable to lower income on variable rate securities due to declines in short term interest rates as well as an increased allocation to lower yielding U.S. Treasuries and short-term investments. 96 Table of Contents Underwriting results Underwriting results before catastrophes and prior accident year reserve development increased by $145 as the result of a lower current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes, partially offset by the effect of the decline in earned premiums in Middle Market and Specialty Commercial. The 2008 results benefited from a lower current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes for Small Commercial and Middle Market workers compensation claims, lower claim frequency on Personal Lines auto claims and lower non-catastrophe loss costs on Small Commercial package business, partially offset by higher non-catastrophe losses on Middle Market property and Personal Lines homeowners business. The $366 increase in current accident year catastrophe losses was primarily due to more severe catastrophes in 2008, including losses from hurricane Ike and tornadoes and thunderstorms in the South and Midwest. The change to favorable prior accident year reserve development was largely due to a $210 increase in net favorable reserve development in Ongoing Operations, driven largely by an increase in net reserve releases for workers compensation, professional liability and personal auto liability claims. Refer to the Reserves section of the MD&A for further discussion. Net servicing and other income The $21 decrease in net servicing income was primarily driven by a decrease in servicing income from the AARP Health program, Specialty Risk Services and the Write Your Own flood program and the write-off of software used in administering policies for third parties. Income tax expense Income taxes changed from income tax expense of $570 in 2007 to an income tax benefit of $95 in 2008. Despite near break-even pre-tax income in 2008, there was a net income tax benefit in 2008 because the income tax benefit on realized capital losses was greater than the income tax expense on all other components of pre-tax income. A portion of the Company net investment income was generated from tax-exempt securities. 97 Table of Contents Year ended December 31, 2007 compared to the year ended December 31, 2006 Net income decreased by $12, or 1%, in 2007, primarily driven by a decrease in Ongoing Operations current accident year underwriting results before catastrophes and a change to net realized capital losses, largely offset by an increase in net investment income and a decrease in Other Operations net unfavorable reserve development. Underwriting results Current accident year underwriting results before catastrophes decreased by $256, primarily due to a higher loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development, partially offset by the effect of exiting the Omni non-standard auto business, which generated a current accident year underwriting loss before catastrophes in 2006. The higher current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes was driven by increased severity on Personal Lines auto liability claims, increased frequency on Personal Lines auto property damage claims and, to a lesser extent, increased severity on Personal Lines homeowners claims and a higher loss and loss adjustment expense ratio for both Small Commercial package business and Middle Market workers compensation claims. Current accident year catastrophe losses decreased by $22. The largest catastrophe losses in 2007 were from wildfires in California, spring windstorms in the Southeast and Northeast, tornadoes and thunderstorms in the Midwest and a December ice storm in the Midwest. Catastrophes in 2006 included tornadoes and hail storms in the Midwest and windstorms in Texas and on the East coast. The $248 reduction in net unfavorable prior accident year development was due to a $167 decrease in unfavorable reserve development in Other Operations and an $81 increase in net favorable reserve development in Ongoing Operations. The lower adverse development in Other Operations was primarily due to a $243 charge in 2006 to recognize the effect of the Equitas agreement and strengthening of the allowance for uncollectible reinsurance, partially offset by a $99 strengthening of reserves in 2007, primarily related to an adverse arbitration decision. The $81 increase in net favorable reserve development in Ongoing Operations was primarily due to a $151 release of workers compensation loss and loss adjustment expenses reserves in 2007 related to accident years 2002 to 2006, partially offset by an $83 net release of prior accident year hurricane reserves in 2006. Refer to the Reserves section of the MD&A for further discussion. Realized capital gains (losses) Gross gains (losses) on sales, net Gross gains and losses on sales in 2007 were primarily comprised of sales of foreign government, corporate, and municipal fixed maturity securities. Gross gains on sales in 2006 were primarily from sales of corporate, foreign government and municipal fixed maturity securities. Gross losses on sales in 2006 were primarily from sales of corporate fixed maturities and CMBS. Impairments Impairments in 2007 primarily consisted of impairments of asset-backed securities backed by sub-prime residential mortgage loans and impairments of corporate securities in the financial services and homebuilders sectors. (See the Other-than-Temporary Impairments discussion within Investment Results for more information on the impairments recorded in 2007.) Other, net Other net realized capital losses in 2007 were primarily due to decreases in the fair value of non-qualifying derivatives attributable to credit spreads widening. Credit spreads widened primarily due to the deterioration in the U.S. housing market, tightened lending conditions, and the market flight to quality securities. Net investment income Primarily driving the $201 increase in net investment income was a higher average invested asset base and income earned from a higher portfolio yield. The increase in the average invested asset base contributing to the increase in investment income was primarily due to positive operating cash flows, partially offset by the return of capital to Corporate. Contributing to the increase in net investment income was an increase in income from limited partnerships and other alternative investments, driven by a higher yield on these investments and shifting a greater allocation of investments to these asset classes. Other expenses The $26 increase in other expenses was primarily due to $49 of interest charged by Corporate on the amount of capital held by the Property & Casualty operation in excess of the amount needed to support the capital requirements of the Property & Casualty operation, partially offset by a reduction in the estimated cost of legal settlements in 2007. Income tax expense Income taxes increased by $19, reflecting the increase in pre-tax income from 2006 to 2007, partially offset by a $20 benefit in 2007 from a tax true-up. 98 Table of Contents Key Performance Ratios and Measures The Company considers several measures and ratios to be the key performance indicators for the property and casualty underwriting businesses. The following table and the segment discussions for the years ended December 31, 2008, 2007 and 2006 include various ratios and measures of profitability. Management believes that these ratios and measures are useful in understanding the underlying trends in The Hartford property and casualty insurance underwriting business. However, these key performance indicators should only be used in conjunction with, and not in lieu of, underwriting income for the underwriting segments of Personal Lines, Small Commercial, Middle Market and Specialty Commercial and net income for the Property & Casualty business as a whole, Ongoing Operations and Other Operations. These ratios and measures may not be comparable to other performance measures used by the Company competitors. Ongoing Operations earned premium growth 2008 2007 2006 Personal Lines 1 % 3 % 4 % Small Commercial 3 % 10 % Middle Market (5 %) (4 %) 4 % Specialty Commercial (4 %) (3 %) (12 %) Ongoing Operations (2 %) 1 % 3 % Ongoing Operations combined ratio Combined ratio before catastrophes and prior year development 88.9 90.5 88.0 Catastrophe ratio Current year 5.3 1.7 1.9 Prior years (0.2 ) 0.1 (0.7 ) Total catastrophe ratio 5.0 1.8 1.2 Non-catastrophe prior year development (3.2 ) (1.5 ) 0.1 Combined ratio 90.7 90.8 89.3 Other Operations net income (loss) $ (97 ) $ 30 $ (35 ) Total Property & Casualty measures of net investment income Investment yield, after-tax 3.2 % 4.4 % 4.1 % Average annual invested assets at cost $ 29,797 $ 29,760 $ 27,324 Year ended December 31, 2008 compared to the year ended December 31, 2007 Ongoing Operations earned premium growth Personal Lines The decrease in the earned premium growth rate from 2007 to 2008 was due to a significantly lower growth rate on AARP business and a change to declining earned premium in Agency, partially offset by the effect of the sale of Omni in 2006 which lowered the growth rate in 2007. Excluding Omni, Personal Lines earned premium grew 7% in 2007. The effects of larger declines in auto and homeowners new business premium and a change to declining homeowners renewal retention since the middle of 2007 were largely offset by the effect of a change to modest earned pricing increases in auto. Small Commercial The earned premium growth rate in 2008 was reduced from moderate earned premium increases in 2007 to no growth in 2008. The decrease in the growth rate was primarily attributable to slightly larger earned pricing decreases in 2008 compared to 2007 and a change to decreasing premium renewal retention since the middle of 2007. Middle Market Earned premium declined in the mid-single digits in both 2007 and 2008. The effect of slightly larger earned pricing decreases in 2008 has been largely offset by the effect of a change to new business growth since the second quarter of 2008. Specialty Commercial Earned premium decreased by 4% in 2008 compared to a decrease of 3% in 2007. A larger earned premium decrease in property and a change from earned premium growth in professional liability, fidelity and surety in 2007 to no growth in 2008, was partially offset by an improvement in the rate of earned premium decline in casualty. Property earned premium decreased more significantly in 2008 than in 2007 due, in part, to a decision to stop writing specialty property business with large, national accounts. Also contributing to the larger decrease in property earned premium in 2008 were the effects of a change to decreasing earned pricing and a change to decreasing new business in 2008 on core excess and surplus lines business. The change to no growth in professional liability, fidelity and surety earned premium in 2008 was largely due to larger earned pricing decreases in 2008 than in 2007 and a change to declining new business in professional liability since the third quarter of 2007. 99 Table of Contents Ongoing Operations combined ratio For 2008, the Ongoing Operations combined ratio was relatively flat at 90.7 as a 1.7 point increase in net favorable non-catastrophe prior accident year reserve development and a 1.6 point reduction in the current accident year combined ratio before catastrophes and prior year development was almost entirely offset by a 3.2 point increase in catastrophes, driven by higher current accident year catastrophes. Combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development The combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development decreased by 1.6 points, to 88.9, as the effects of a lower loss and loss adjustment expense ratio for Small Commercial and Middle Market workers compensation claims, lower claim frequency on Personal Lines auto claims and lower non-catastrophe losses on Small Commercial package business were partially offset by earned pricing decreases across the commercial lines businesses and higher non-catastrophe losses on Middle Market property and Personal Lines homeowners business. Catastrophes The catastrophe ratio increased by 3.2 points, primarily due to an increase in current accident year catastrophes in 2008, driven by losses from hurricane Ike and losses from tornadoes and thunderstorms in the South and Midwest. Non-catastrophe prior accident year development Net non-catastrophe prior accident year reserve development in Ongoing Operations was more favorable in 2008 than in 2007. Favorable non-catastrophe reserve development of 3.2 points, or $333, in 2008 included, among other reserve changes, a $156 release of reserves for workers compensation claims, primarily related to accident years 2000 to 2007, a $105 release of general liability claims, primarily related to accident years 2001 to 2007, and a $75 release of reserves for professional liability claims related to accident years 2003 through 2006. See the Reserves section for a discussion of prior accident year reserve development for Ongoing Operations in 2008. Other Operations net income (loss) Other Operations reported a net loss of $97 in 2008 compared to net income of $30 in 2007. The change from net income in 2007 to a net loss in 2008 was primarily due to an increase in net realized capital losses and lower net investment income, partially offset by a decrease in net unfavorable prior accident year reserve development. See the Other Operations segment MD&A for further discussion. Investment yield and average invested assets In 2008, the after-tax investment yield decreased due to a change from net income to net losses from limited partnerships and other alternative investments in 2008 and, to a lesser extent, a lower investment yield for fixed maturities. Average annual invested assets at cost increased modestly due to positive operating cash flows, partially offset by the effects of impairments of securities and dividends paid to Corporate. 100 Table of Contents Year ended December 31, 2007 compared to the year ended December 31, 2006 Ongoing Operations earned premium growth Personal Lines The decrease in the earned premium growth rate from 2006 to 2007 was due to the Company exit from the Omni non-standard auto business. Omni, which was sold in the fourth quarter of 2006, accounted for $127 of earned premium in 2006. Excluding Omni, the Personal Lines earned premium growth rate was 7% in both 2006 and 2007. In 2007, an increase in the growth rate of AARP earned premium was offset by the effect of a decrease in the growth rate of Agency earned premium. Small Commercial The decrease in the earned premium growth rate was primarily attributable to a decrease in new business written premium and premium renewal retention over the last six months of 2006 and the first six months of 2007. Also contributing to the lower growth rate was a decrease in earned pricing. Middle Market The change from an increase in earned premium in 2006 to a decrease in earned premium in 2007 was primarily attributable to earned pricing decreases, a decrease in new business written premium over the last six months of 2006 and the first six months of 2007 and a decrease in premium renewal retention over the first six months of 2007. Specialty Commercial The rate of decline in Specialty Commercial earned premium slowed in 2007, primarily due to a lower earned premium decrease in casualty and property, partially offset by a lower earned premium increase in professional liability, fidelity and surety. Casualty earned premium experienced a larger decrease in 2006, primarily because of a decrease in 2006 earned premium from a single captive insured program that expired in 2005. Earned premium decreases in property were larger in 2006 than in 2007 as a result of a strategic decision in 2006 not to renew certain accounts with properties in catastrophe-prone areas. The growth rate in professional liability, fidelity and surety earned premium slowed in 2007 due to a decrease in earned pricing and a decline in new business growth and premium renewal retention. Ongoing Operations combined ratio For the year ended December 31, 2007, the Ongoing Operations combined ratio increased 1.5 points, to 90.8, due to a 2.5 point increase in the combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development, partially offset by a 0.8 point improvement in prior accident year reserve development and the effect of the sale of Omni in the fourth quarter of 2006. Omni had a higher combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development than other business written by the Company. Combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development The increase in the combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development, from 88.0 to 90.5, was primarily due to a 1.4 point increase in the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes and, to a lesser extent, an increase in the expense ratio. The increase in the loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development was primarily due to increased severity on Personal Lines auto liability claims, increased frequency on Personal Lines auto property damage claims and, to a lesser extent, increased severity on Personal Lines homeowners claims and a higher loss and loss adjustment expense ratio for both Small Commercial package business and Middle Market workers compensation claims. Contributing to the increase in the expense ratio was the effect of a $41 reduction of estimated Florida Citizens assessments in 2006 related to the 2005 Florida hurricanes. Catastrophes The catastrophe ratio increased, primarily due to the effect of net favorable reserve development of prior accident year catastrophe losses in 2006. In 2006, the Company recognized $83 of net reserve releases related to the 2005 and 2004 hurricanes. Non-catastrophe prior accident year development Net non-catastrophe prior accident year reserve development was slightly unfavorable in 2006, but favorable in 2007. Favorable reserve development in 2007 was largely attributable to the release of reserves for workers compensation claims, primarily related to accident years 2002 to 2006. See the Reserves section for a discussion of prior accident year reserve development for Ongoing Operations in 2007. Other Operations net income (loss) Other Operations reported net income of $30 in 2007 compared to a net loss of $35 in 2006. The improvement in results was primarily due to a decrease in unfavorable prior accident year reserve development, partially offset by a change from net realized gains in 2006 to net realized losses in 2007 and a decrease in net investment income. See the Other Operations segment MD&A for further discussion. 101 Table of Contents Investment yield and average invested assets In 2007, the after-tax investment yield increased due to a higher yield on limited partnerships and other alternative investments and mortgage loans as well as due to a change in asset mix, including shifting a greater share of investments to these asset classes. The average annual invested assets at cost increased as a result of positive operating cash flows and an increase in collateral held from increased securities lending activities. How Property & Casualty seeks to earn income Net income is a measure of profit or loss used in evaluating the performance of Total Property & Casualty and the Ongoing Operations and Other Operations segments. Within Ongoing Operations, the underwriting segments of Personal Lines, Small Commercial, Middle Market and Specialty Commercial are evaluated by The Hartford management primarily based upon underwriting results. Underwriting results within Ongoing Operations are influenced significantly by changes in earned premium and the adequacy of the Company pricing. Underwriting profitability over time is also greatly influenced by the Company underwriting discipline, which seeks to manage exposure to loss through favorable risk selection and diversification, its management of claims, its use of reinsurance and its ability to manage its expense ratio which it accomplishes through economies of scale and its management of acquisition costs and other underwriting expenses. Pricing adequacy depends on a number of factors, including the ability to obtain regulatory approval for rate changes, proper evaluation of underwriting risks, the ability to project future loss cost frequency and severity based on historical loss experience adjusted for known trends, the Company response to rate actions taken by competitors, and expectations about regulatory and legal developments and expense levels. Property & Casualty seeks to price its insurance policies such that insurance premiums and future net investment income earned on premiums received will cover underwriting expenses and the ultimate cost of paying claims reported on the policies and provide for a profit margin. For many of its insurance products, Property & Casualty is required to obtain approval for its premium rates from state insurance departments. In setting its pricing, Property & Casualty assumes an expected level of losses from natural or man-made catastrophes that will cover the Company exposure to catastrophes over the long-term. In most years, however, Property & Casualty actual losses from catastrophes will be more or less than that assumed in its pricing due to the significant volatility of catastrophe losses. Insurance Services Office, Inc. ( ISO ) defines a catastrophe loss as an event that causes $25 or more in industry insured property losses and affects a significant number of property and casualty policyholders and insurers. Given the lag in the period from when claims are incurred to when they are reported and paid, final claim settlements may vary from current estimates of incurred losses and loss expenses, particularly when those payments may not occur until well into the future. Reserves for lines of business with a longer lag (or tail ) in reporting are more difficult to estimate. Reserve estimates for longer tail lines are initially set based on loss and loss expense ratio assumptions estimated when the business was priced and are adjusted as the paid and reported claims develop, indicating that the ultimate loss and loss expense ratio will differ from the initial assumptions. Adjustments to previously established loss and loss expense reserves, if any, are reflected in underwriting results in the period in which the adjustment is determined to be necessary. The investment return, or yield, on Property & Casualty invested assets is an important element of the Company earnings since insurance products are priced with the assumption that premiums received can be invested for a period of time before loss and loss adjustment expenses are paid. For longer tail lines, such as workers compensation and general liability, claims are paid over several years and, therefore, the premiums received for these lines of business can generate significant investment income. Due to the need to maintain sufficient liquidity to satisfy claim obligations, the vast majority of Property & Casualty invested assets have been held in fixed maturities, including, among other asset classes, corporate bonds, municipal bonds, government debt, short-term debt, mortgage-backed securities and asset-backed securities. Through its Other Operations segment, Property & Casualty is responsible for managing operations of The Hartford that have discontinued writing new or renewal business as well as managing the claims related to asbestos and environmental exposures. Definitions of key ratios and measures Written and earned premiums Written premium is a statutory accounting financial measure which represents the amount of premiums charged for policies issued, net of reinsurance, during a fiscal period. Earned premium is a U.S. GAAP and statutory measure. Premiums are considered earned and are included in the financial results on a pro rata basis over the policy period. Management believes that written premium is a performance measure that is useful to investors as it reflects current trends in the Company sale of property and casualty insurance products. Written and earned premium are recorded net of ceded reinsurance premium. Reinstatement premiums Reinstatement premium represents additional ceded premium paid for the reinstatement of the amount of reinsurance coverage that was reduced as a result of a reinsurance loss payment. 102 Table of Contents Policies in force Policies in force represent the number of policies with coverage in effect as of the end of the period. The number of policies in force is a growth measure used for Personal Lines, Small Commercial and Middle Market and is affected by both new business growth and premium renewal retention. Written pricing increase (decrease) Written pricing increase (decrease) over the comparable period of the prior year includes the impact of rate filings, the impact of changes in the value of the rating bases and individual risk pricing decisions. A number of factors impact written pricing increases (decreases) including expected loss costs as projected by the Company pricing actuaries, rate filings approved by state regulators, risk selection decisions made by the Company underwriters and marketplace competition. Written pricing changes reflect the property and casualty insurance market cycle. Prices tend to increase for a particular line of business when insurance carriers have incurred significant losses in that line of business in the recent past or the industry as a whole commits less of its capital to writing exposures in that line of business. Prices tend to decrease when recent loss experience has been favorable or when competition among insurance carriers increases. Earned pricing increase (decrease) Written premiums are earned over the policy term, which is six months for certain Personal Lines auto business and 12 months for substantially all of the remainder of the Company business. Because the Company earns premiums over the 6 to 12 month term of the policies, earned pricing increases (decreases) lag written pricing increases (decreases) by 6 to 12 months. New business written premium New business written premium represents the amount of premiums charged for policies issues to customers who were not insured with the Company in the previous policy term. New business written premium plus renewal policy written premium equals total written premium. Premium renewal retention Premium renewal retention represents the ratio of net written premium in the current period that is not derived from new business divided by total net written premium of the prior period. Accordingly, premium renewal retention includes the effect of written pricing changes on renewed business. In addition, the renewal retention rate is affected by a number of other factors, including the percentage of renewal policy quotes accepted and decisions by the Company to non-renew policies because of specific policy underwriting concerns or because of a decision to reduce premium writings in certain lines of business or states. Premium renewal retention is also affected by advertising and rate actions taken by competitors. Loss and loss adjustment expense ratio The loss and loss adjustment expense ratio is a measure of the cost of claims incurred in the calendar year divided by earned premium and includes losses incurred for both the current and prior accident years. Among other factors, the loss and loss adjustment expense ratio needed for the Company to achieve its targeted return on equity fluctuates from year to year based on changes in the expected investment yield over the claim settlement period, the timing of expected claim settlements and the targeted returns set by management based on the competitive environment. The loss and loss adjustment expense ratio is affected by claim frequency and claim severity, particularly for shorter-tail property lines of business, where the emergence of claim frequency and severity is credible and likely indicative of ultimate losses. Claim frequency represents the percentage change in the average number of reported claims per unit of exposure in the current accident year compared to that of the previous accident year. Claim severity represents the percentage change in the estimated average cost per claim in the current accident year compared to that of the previous accident year. As one of the factors used to determine pricing, the Company practice is to first make an overall assumption about claim frequency and severity for a given line of business and then, as part of the ratemaking process, adjust the assumption as appropriate for the particular state, product or coverage. Current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes The current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes is a measure of the cost of non-catastrophe claims incurred in the current accident year divided by earned premiums. Management believes that the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes is a performance measure that is useful to investors as it removes the impact of volatile and unpredictable catastrophe losses and prior accident year reserve development. Current accident year catastrophe ratio The current accident year catastrophe ratio represents the ratio of catastrophe losses (net of reinsurance) to earned premiums for catastrophe claims incurred during the current accident year. A catastrophe is an event that causes $25 or more in industry insured property losses and affects a significant number of property and casualty policyholders and insurers. The catastrophe ratio includes the effect of catastrophe losses, but does not include the effect of reinstatement premiums. 103 Table of Contents Prior accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio The prior year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio represents the increase (decrease) in the estimated cost of settling catastrophe and non-catastrophe claims incurred in prior accident years as recorded in the current calendar year divided by earned premiums. Expense ratio The expense ratio is the ratio of underwriting expenses, excluding bad debt expense, to earned premiums. Underwriting expenses include the amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs and insurance operating costs and expenses. Deferred policy acquisition costs include commissions, taxes, licenses and fees and other underwriting expenses and are amortized over the policy term. Policyholder dividend ratio The policyholder dividend ratio is the ratio of policyholder dividends to earned premium. Combined ratio The combined ratio is the sum of the loss and loss adjustment expense ratio, the expense ratio and the policyholder dividend ratio. This ratio is a relative measurement that describes the related cost of losses and expenses for every $100 of earned premiums. A combined ratio below 100.0 demonstrates underwriting profit; a combined ratio above 100.0 demonstrates underwriting losses. Catastrophe ratio The catastrophe ratio (a component of the loss and loss adjustment expense ratio) represents the ratio of catastrophe losses (net of reinsurance) to earned premiums. By their nature, catastrophe losses vary dramatically from year to year. Based on the mix and geographic dispersion of premium written and estimates derived from various catastrophe loss models, the Company expected catastrophe ratio over the long-term is 3.0 to 3.5 points. See Risk Management Strategy below for a discussion of the Company catastrophe risk management program that serves to mitigate the Company net exposure to catastrophe losses. Catastrophe losses used to calculate the catastrophe ratio do not include the effect of reinstatement premiums or assessments. Combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development The combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development represents the combined ratio for the current accident year, excluding the impact of catastrophes. The Company believes this ratio is an important measure of the trend in profitability since it removes the impact of volatile and unpredictable catastrophe losses and prior accident year reserve development. Underwriting results Underwriting results is a before-tax measure that represents earned premiums less incurred losses, loss adjustment expenses, underwriting expenses and policyholder dividends. The Hartford believes that underwriting results provides investors with a valuable measure of before-tax profitability derived from underwriting activities, which are managed separately from the Company investing activities. Within Ongoing Operations, the underwriting segments of Personal Lines, Small Commercial, Middle Market and Specialty Commercial are evaluated by management primarily based upon underwriting results. Underwriting results is also presented for Ongoing Operations and Other Operations. A reconciliation of underwriting results to net income for Ongoing Operations and Other Operations is set forth in their respective discussions herein. Investment yield The investment yield, or return, on the Company invested assets primarily includes interest income on fixed maturity investments. Based upon the fair value of Property & Casualty investments as of December 31, 2008 and 2007, approximately 82% and 89%, respectively, of invested assets were held in fixed maturities. A number of factors affect the yield on fixed maturity investments, including fluctuations in interest rates and the level of prepayments. The Company also invests in equity securities, mortgage loans, limited partnership arrangements and other alternative investments. Property & Casualty insurance business has been written by a number of writing companies that, under a pooling arrangement, participate in the Hartford Fire Insurance Pool, the lead company of which is the Hartford Fire Insurance Company ( Hartford Fire ). Property & Casualty maintains one portfolio of invested assets for all business written by the Hartford Fire Insurance Pool companies, including business reported in both the Ongoing Operations and Other Operations segments. Separate investment portfolios are maintained within Other Operations for the runoff of international assumed reinsurance claims and for the runoff business of Heritage Holdings, Inc., including its subsidiaries, Excess Insurance Company Ltd., First State Insurance Company and Heritage Reinsurance Company, Ltd. Within the Hartford Fire Insurance Pool, invested assets are attributed to Ongoing Operations and Other Operations pursuant to the Company capital attribution process. The Hartford attributes capital to each line of business or segment using an internally-developed, risk-based capital attribution methodology that incorporates management assessment of the relative risks within each line of business or segment, as well as the capital requirements of external parties, such as regulators and rating agencies. Net investment income earned on the Hartford Fire invested asset portfolio is allocated between Ongoing Operations and Other Operations based on the allocation of invested assets to each segment and the expected investment yields earned by each segment. Net investment income earned on the separate portfolios within Other Operations is recorded entirely within Other Operations. Based on the Company method of allocating net investment income for the Hartford Fire Insurance Pool and the net investment income earned by Other Operations on its separate investment portfolios, in 2008, the after-tax investment yield for Ongoing Operations was 3.2% and the after-tax investment yield for Other Operations was 3.6%. 104 Table of Contents Net realized capital gains (losses) When fixed maturity, equity or other investments are sold, any gain or loss is reported in net realized capital gains (losses). Individual securities may be sold for a variety of reasons, including a decision to change the Company asset allocation in response to market conditions and the need to liquidate funds to meet large claim settlements. Accordingly, net realized capital gains (losses) for any particular period are not predictable and can vary significantly. In addition, net realized capital gains (losses) include other-than-temporary impairments in the fair value of investments, changes in the fair value of non-qualifying derivatives and hedge ineffectiveness on qualifying derivative instruments. Refer to the Investment section of MD&A for further discussion of net investment income and net realized capital gains (losses). Reserves Reserving for property and casualty losses is an estimation process. As additional experience and other relevant claim data become available, reserve levels are adjusted accordingly. Such adjustments of reserves related to claims incurred in prior years are a natural occurrence in the loss reserving process and are referred to as reserve development . Reserve development that increases previous estimates of ultimate cost is called reserve strengthening . Reserve development that decreases previous estimates of ultimate cost is called reserve releases . Reserve development can influence the comparability of year over year underwriting results and is set forth in the paragraphs and tables that follow. The prior accident year development (pts.) in the following table represents the ratio of reserve development to earned premiums. For a detailed discussion of the Company reserve policies, see Notes 1, 11 and 12 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements and the Critical Accounting Estimates section of the MD&A. Based on the results of the quarterly reserve review process, the Company determines the appropriate reserve adjustments, if any, to record. Recorded reserve estimates are changed after consideration of numerous factors, including but not limited to, the magnitude of the difference between the actuarial indication and the recorded reserves, improvement or deterioration of actuarial indications in the period, the maturity of the accident year, trends observed over the recent past and the level of volatility within a particular line of business. In general, changes are made more quickly to more mature accident years and less volatile lines of business. For information regarding reserving for asbestos and environmental claims within Other Operations, refer to the Other Operations segment discussion. As part of its quarterly reserve review process, the Company is closely monitoring reported loss development in certain lines where the recent emergence of paid losses and case reserves could indicate a trend that may eventually lead the Company to change its estimate of ultimate losses in those lines. If, and when, the emergence of reported losses is determined to be a trend that changes the Company estimate of ultimate losses, prior accident year reserves would be adjusted in the period the change in estimate is made. For example, the Company has experienced favorable emergence of reported workers compensation claims for recent accident years and, during 2008, released workers compensation reserves in Small Commercial and Middle Market by a total of $156, primarily related to accident years 2000 to 2007. If reported losses on workers compensation claims for recent accident years continue to emerge favorably, reserves could be reduced further. The Company has also seen favorable emergence during 2008 on Personal Lines auto liability claims. The severity of reported claims for the 2005 through 2007 accident years and the frequency of reported claims for the 2008 accident year have been lower than expected and reserves were released in the third and fourth quarter of 2008 as a result. If these favorable trends continue, future releases are possible. The Company expects to perform its regular reviews of asbestos liabilities in the second quarter of 2009, Other Operations reinsurance recoverables and the allowance for uncollectible reinsurance in the second quarter of 2009 and environmental liabilities in the third quarter of 2009. If there are significant developments that affect particular exposures, reinsurance arrangements or the financial conditions of particular reinsurers, the Company will make adjustments to its reserves, or the portion of liabilities it expects to cede to reinsurers. 105 Table of Contents A rollforward of liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses by segment for Property & Casualty for the year ended December 31, 2008 follows: For the year ended December 31, 2008 Personal Small Middle Specialty Ongoing Other Total Lines Commercial Market Commercial Operations Operations P&C Beginning liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses-gross $ 2,042 $ 3,470 $ 4,697 $ 6,873 $ 17,082 $ 5,071 $ 22,153 Reinsurance and other recoverables 81 177 414 2,316 2,988 934 3,922 Beginning liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses-net 1,961 3,293 4,283 4,557 14,094 4,137 18,231 Provision for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses Current accident year before catastrophes 2,542 1,447 1,460 941 6,390 6,390 Current accident year catastrophes 258 122 116 47 543 543 Prior accident years (51 ) (89 ) (134 ) (81 ) (355 ) 129 (226 ) Total provision for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses 2,749 1,480 1,442 907 6,578 129 6,707 Payments (2,718 ) (1,377 ) (1,418 ) (593 ) (6,106 ) (485 ) (6,591 ) Ending liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses-net 1,992 3,396 4,307 4,871 14,566 3,781 18,347 Reinsurance and other recoverables 60 176 437 2,110 2,783 803 3,586 Ending liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses-gross $ 2,052 $ 3,572 $ 4,744 $ 6,981 $ 17,349 $ 4,584 $ 21,933 Earned premiums $ 3,926 $ 2,724 $ 2,299 $ 1,382 $ 10,331 $ 7 $ 10,338 Loss and loss expense paid ratio [1] 69.2 50.5 61.6 42.8 59.1 Loss and loss expense incurred ratio 70.0 54.3 62.7 65.6 63.7 Prior accident year development (pts.) [2] (1.3 ) (3.3 ) (5.9 ) (5.8 ) (3.4 ) [1] The loss and loss expense paid ratio represents the ratio of paid losses and loss adjustment expenses to earned premiums. [2] Prior accident year development (pts) represents the ratio of prior accident year development to earned premiums. 106 Table of Contents Current accident year catastrophes For 2008, net current accident year catastrophe loss and loss adjustment expenses totaled $543, of which $237 related to hurricane Ike. In addition to the $237 of net catastrophe loss and loss adjustment expenses from hurricane Ike, the Company incurred $20 of assessments due to hurricane Ike. The following table shows total current accident year catastrophe impacts in the year ended December 31, 2008: For the Year Ended December 31, 2008 Personal Small Middle Specialty Ongoing Other Total Lines Commercial Market Commercial Operations Operations P&C Gross incurred claim and claim adjustment expenses for current accident year catastrophes $ 260 $ 124 $ 130 $ 58 $ 572 $ $ 572 Ceded claim and claim adjustment expenses for current accident year catastrophes 2 2 14 11 29 29 Net incurred claim and claim adjustment expenses for current accident year catastrophes 258 122 116 47 543 543 Assessments owed to Texas Windstorm Insurance Association due to hurricane Ike 10 7 3 20 20 Reinstatement premium ceded to reinsurers due to hurricane Ike 1 1 1 Total current accident year catastrophe impacts $ 269 $ 129 $ 119 $ 47 $ 564 $ $ 564 A portion of the gross incurred loss and loss adjustment expenses are recoverable from reinsurers under the Company principal catastrophe reinsurance program in addition to other reinsurance programs. Reinsurance recoveries under the Company principal catastrophe reinsurance program, which covers multiple lines of business, are allocated to the segments in accordance with a pre-established methodology that is consistent with the method used to allocate the ceded premium to each segment. The Company estimate of ultimate loss and loss expenses arising from hurricanes and other catastrophes is based on covered losses under the terms of the policies. The Company does not provide residential flood insurance on its Personal Lines homeowners policies so the Company estimate of hurricane losses on Personal Lines homeowners business does not include any provision for damages arising from flood waters. The Company acts as an administrator for the Write Your Own flood program on behalf of the National Flood Insurance Program under FEMA, for which it earns a fee for collecting premiums and processing claims. Under the program, the Company services both personal lines and commercial lines flood insurance policies and does not assume any underwriting risk. As a result, catastrophe losses in the above table do not include any losses related to the Write Your Own flood program. 107 Table of Contents Prior accident year development recorded in 2008 Included within prior accident year development for the year ended December 31, 2008 were the following reserve strengthenings (releases). Personal Small Middle Specialty Ongoing Other Total Lines Commercial Market Commercial Operations Operations P&C Released workers compensation reserves, primarily related to accident years 2000 to 2007 $ $ (92 ) $ (64 ) $ $ (156 ) $ $ (156 ) Released reserves for general liability claims, primarily related to accident years 2001 to 2007 (15 ) (90 ) (105 ) (105 ) Released reserves for directors and officers claims and errors and omissions claims for accident years 2003 to 2006 (75 ) (75 ) (75 ) Released reserves for personal auto liability claims related to accident years 2005 to 2007 (46 ) (46 ) (46 ) Released commercial auto liability reserves, primarily related to accident years 2002 to 2007 (27 ) (27 ) (27 ) Released reserves for extra-contractual liability claims under non-standard personal auto policies (24 ) (24 ) (24 ) Released reserves for construction defect claims for accident years 2005 and prior (10 ) (10 ) (10 ) Strengthened reserves for general liability and products liability claims primarily for accident years 2004 and prior 17 50 67 67 Strengthened reserves for national account general liability allocated loss adjustment expense reserves related to accident years 2004 and prior 25 25 25 Strengthening of net environmental reserves 53 53 Strengthening of net asbestos reserves 50 50 Other reserve re-estimates, net [1] 19 1 (3 ) (21 ) (4 ) 26 22 Total prior accident year development for the year ended December 31, 2008 $ (51 ) $ (89 ) $ (134 ) $ (81 ) $ (355 ) $ 129 $ (226 ) [1] Includes reserve discount accretion of $26, including $6 in Small Commercial, $9 in Middle Market, $8 in Specialty Commercial and $3 in Other Operations. 108 Table of Contents During 2008, the Company re-estimates of prior accident year reserves included the following significant reserve changes: Ongoing Operations Released workers compensation reserves primarily related to accident years 2000 to 2007 by $156. These reserve releases are a continuation of favorable developments first recognized in 2005 and recognized in both 2006 and 2007. The reserve releases in 2008 resulted from a determination that workers compensation losses continue to develop even more favorably from prior expectations due, in part, to state legal reforms, including in California and Florida, and underwriting actions as well as cost reduction initiatives first instituted in 2003. In particular, the state legal reforms and underwriting actions have resulted in lower than expected medical claim severity. The $156 reserve release represented 3% of the Company net reserves for workers compensation claims as of December 31, 2007. Released reserves for general liability claims primarily related to the 2001 to 2007 accident years by $105. Beginning in the third quarter of 2007, the Company observed that reported losses for high hazard and umbrella general liability claims, primarily related to the 2001 to 2006 accident years, were emerging favorably and this caused management to reduce its estimate of the cost of future reported claims for these accident years, resulting in a reserve release in each quarter since the third quarter of 2007. During 2008, the Company observed that this favorable trend continued with the 2007 accident year. The number of reported claims for this line of business has been lower than expected, a trend first observed in 2005. Over time, management has come to believe that the lower than expected number of claims reported to date will not be offset by a higher than expected number of late reported claims. The $105 reserve release represented 4% of the Company net reserves for general liability claims as of December 31, 2007. Released reserves for professional liability claims for accident years 2003 to 2006 by $75. During 2008, the Company updated its analysis of certain professional liability claims and the new analysis showed that claim severity for directors and officers losses in the 2003 to 2006 accident years were favorable to previous expectations, resulting in a reduction of reserves. The analysis also showed favorable emergence of claim severity on errors and omission policy claims for the 2004 and 2005 accident years, resulting in a release of reserves. The $75 reserve release represented 13% of the Company net reserves for professional liability claims as of December 31, 2007. Released reserves for Personal Lines auto liability claims by $46, principally related to AARP business for the 2005 through 2007 accident years. Beginning in the first quarter of 2008, management observed an improvement in emerged claim severity for the 2005 through 2007 accident years attributed, in part, to changes made in claim handling procedures in 2007. In the third and fourth quarter of 2008, the Company recognized that favorable development in reported severity was a sustained trend and, accordingly, management reduced its reserve estimate. The $46 reserve release represented 3% of the Company net reserves for Personal Lines auto liability claims as of December 31, 2007. Released commercial auto liability reserves by $27, primarily related to accident years 2002 to 2007. Management has observed fewer than previously expected large losses in accident years 2006 and 2007 and lower than previously expected severity on large claims in accident years 2002 to 2005. In 2008, management recognized that favorable development in reported claim severity was a sustained trend and, accordingly, management reduced its estimate of the reserves. The $27 reserve release represented 9% of the Company net reserves for Middle Market commercial auto liability claims as of December 31, 2007. Released reserves for extra-contractual liability claims under non-standard personal auto policies by $24. As part of the agreement to sell its non-standard auto insurance business in November, 2006, the Company continues to be obligated for certain extra-contractual liability claims arising prior to the date of sale. Reserve estimates for extra-contractual liability claims are subject to significant variability depending on the expected settlement of individually large claims and, during 2008, the Company determined that the settlement value of a number of these claims was expected to be less than previously anticipated, resulting in a $24 release of reserves. The $24 reserve release represented 1% of the Company net reserves for Personal Lines auto liability claims as of December 31, 2007. Released reserves for construction defect claims in Specialty Commercial by $10 for accident years 2005 and prior due to lower than expected reported claim activity. Lower than expected claim activity was first noted in the first quarter of 2007 and continued throughout 2007. In the first quarter of 2008, management determined that this was a verifiable trend and reduced reserves accordingly. The $10 reserve release represented 1% of the Company net reserves for Specialty Commercial general liability claims as of December 31, 2007. Strengthened reserves for general liability and products liability claims primarily for accident years 2004 and prior by $67 for losses expected to emerge after 20 years of development. In 2007, management observed that long outstanding general liability claims have been settling for more than previously anticipated and, during the first quarter of 2008, the Company increased the estimate of late development of general liability claims. The $67 reserve strengthening represented 3% of the Company net reserves for general liability claims as of December 31, 2007. Strengthened reserves for allocated loss adjustment expenses on national account general liability claims within Specialty Commercial by $25. Allocated loss adjustment expense reserves on general liability excess and umbrella claims were strengthened for accident years 2004 and prior as the Company observed that the cost of settling these claims has exceeded previous expectations. The $25 reserve strengthening represented 2% of the Company net reserves for Specialty Commercial general liability claims as of December 31, 2007. 109 Table of Contents Other Operations During the third quarter of 2008, the Company completed its annual ground up environmental reserve evaluation. As part of this evaluation, the Company reviewed all of its open direct domestic insurance accounts exposed to environmental liability as well as assumed reinsurance accounts and its London Market exposures for both direct insurance and assumed reinsurance. The Company found estimates for individual cases changed based upon the particular circumstances of each account. These changes were case specific and not as a result of any underlying change in the current environment. In addition, the decline in the reporting of new accounts and sites has been slower than anticipated in our previous review. The net effect of these changes resulted in a $53 increase in net environmental reserves. During the second quarter of 2008, the Company completed its annual ground up asbestos reserve evaluation. As part of this evaluation, the Company reviewed all of its open direct domestic insurance accounts exposed to asbestos liability as well as assumed reinsurance accounts and its London Market exposures for both direct insurance and assumed reinsurance. The Company found estimates for individual cases changed based upon the particular circumstances of each account. These changes were case specific and not as a result of any underlying change in the current environment. The net effect of these changes resulted in a $50 increase in net asbestos reserves. Among other net reserve re-estimates for Other Operations in 2008, the Company recognized favorable prior year development of $30 on its HartRe assumed reinsurance liabilities as the result of lower than expected reported losses and $25 of adverse development for assumed reinsurance obligations of the Company Bermuda operations. A rollforward of liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses by segment for Property & Casualty for the year ended December 31, 2007 follows: For the year ended December 31, 2007 Personal Small Middle Specialty Ongoing Other Total Lines Commercial Market Commercial Operations Operations P&C Beginning liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses-gross $ 1,959 $ 3,421 $ 4,536 $ 6,359 $ 16,275 $ 5,716 $ 21,991 Reinsurance and other recoverables 134 214 479 2,260 3,087 1,300 4,387 Beginning liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses-net 1,825 3,207 4,057 4,099 13,188 4,416 17,604 Provision for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses Current accident year before catastrophes 2,576 1,594 1,561 961 6,692 6,692 Current accident year catastrophes 125 28 15 9 177 177 Prior accident years (4 ) (209 ) (16 ) 84 (145 ) 193 48 Total provision for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses 2,697 1,413 1,560 1,054 6,724 193 6,917 Payments (2,503 ) (1,222 ) (1,248 ) (720 ) (5,693 ) (597 ) (6,290 ) Reallocation of reserves for unallocated loss adjustment expenses [1] (58 ) (105 ) (86 ) 124 (125 ) 125 Ending liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses-net 1,961 3,293 4,283 4,557 14,094 4,137 18,231 Reinsurance and other recoverables 81 177 414 2,316 2,988 934 3,922 Ending liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses-gross $ 2,042 $ 3,470 $ 4,697 $ 6,873 $ 17,082 $ 5,071 $ 22,153 Earned premiums $ 3,889 $ 2,736 $ 2,420 $ 1,446 $ 10,491 $ 5 $ 10,496 Loss and loss expense paid ratio [2] 64.4 44.7 51.5 49.8 54.3 Loss and loss expense incurred ratio 69.3 51.6 64.5 73.0 64.1 Prior accident year development (pts.) [3] (0.1 ) (7.6 ) (0.7 ) 5.8 (1.4 ) [1] Prior to the second quarter of 2007, the Company evaluated the adequacy of the reserves for unallocated loss adjustment expenses on a company-wide basis. During the second quarter of 2007, the Company refined its analysis of the reserves at the segment level, resulting in the reallocation of reserves among segments, including a reallocation of reserves from Ongoing Operations to Other Operations. [2] The loss and loss expense paid ratio represents the ratio of paid loss and loss adjustment expenses to earned premiums. [3] Prior accident year development (pts) represents the ratio of prior accident year development to earned premiums. 110 Table of Contents Prior accident year development recorded in 2007 Included within prior accident year development for the year ended December 31, 2007 were the following reserve strengthenings (releases). Personal Small Middle Specialty Ongoing Other Total Lines Commercial Market Commercial Operations Operations P&C Release of workers compensation loss and loss adjustment expense reserves, primarily for accident years 2002 to 2006 $ $ (151 ) $ $ $ (151 ) $ $ (151 ) Release of general liability loss and loss adjustment expense reserves for accident years 2003 to 2006 (49 ) (49 ) (49 ) Release of workers compensation loss reserves for accident years 1987 to 2000 (33 ) (33 ) (33 ) Release of loss reserves for package business for accident years 2003 to 2006 (30 ) (30 ) (30 ) Release of reserves for surety business for accident years 2003 to 2006 (22 ) (22 ) (22 ) Release of commercial auto liability reserves for accident years 2003 and 2004 (18 ) (18 ) (18 ) Release of reserves on Personal Lines auto liability claims for accident years 2002 to 2006 (16 ) (16 ) (16 ) Release of reserves on errors & omissions policies for accident year 2005 (15 ) (15 ) (15 ) Strengthening of workers compensation loss and loss adjustment expense reserves for accident years 1987 to 2001 47 47 47 Strengthening of workers compensation reserves for accident years 1973 & prior 40 40 40 Strengthening of general liability reserves for accident years more than 20 years old 14 25 39 39 Strengthening of general liability reserves primarily related to accident years 1987 to 1997 34 34 34 Strengthening or reserves primarily as a result of an adverse arbitration decision 99 99 Strengthening of environmental reserves 25 25 Other reserve reestimates, net [1] 12 5 (3 ) 15 29 69 98 Total prior accident year development for the year ended December 31, 2007 $ (4 ) $ (209 ) $ (16 ) $ 84 $ (145 ) $ 193 $ 48 [1] Includes reserve discount accretion of $31, including $6 in Small Commercial, $8 in Middle Market, $11 in Specialty Commercial and $6 in Other Operations. 111 Table of Contents During the year ended December 31, 2007, the Company reestimates of prior accident year reserves included the following significant reserve changes. Ongoing Operations Released Small Commercial workers compensation reserves by $151, primarily related to accident years 2002 to 2006. This reserve release is a continuation of favorable developments first recognized in 2005 and 2006. The workers compensation reserve releases in 2007 resulted from a determination that workers compensation losses continue to develop even more favorably from prior expectations due to the California and Florida legal reforms and underwriting actions as well as cost reduction initiatives first instituted in 2003. In particular, the state legal reforms and underwriting actions have resulted in lower than expected medical claim severity. In addition, the Company determined that paid losses related to workers compensation policies sold through payroll service providers were emerging favorably, leading to a release of reserves for the 2003 to 2006 accident years. The $151 reserve release represented 9% of the Company net reserves for Small Commercial workers compensation claims as of December 31, 2006. Released reserves for Middle Market general liability claims related to the 2003 to 2006 accident years by $49. Beginning in the third quarter of 2007, the Company observed that reported losses for high hazard and umbrella general liability claims for the 2003 to 2006 accident years were emerging favorably and this caused management to reduce its estimate of the cost of future reported claims for these accident years, resulting in a reserve release in the third and fourth quarter of 2007. This reserve development is unrelated to the reserve strengthening in 2005 and 2006 of other Middle Market general liability claims which developed unfavorably due to higher than anticipated loss payments beyond four years of development. The $49 reserve release represented 6% of the Company net reserves for Middle Market general liability claims as of December 31, 2006. Released Small Commercial workers compensation reserves related to accident years 2000 and prior by $33. The severity of workers compensation medical claims for these accident years has emerged favorably to previous expectations. As the continued development of these claims has resulted in a sustained favorable trend, management released reserves in the fourth quarter of 2007. The $33 reserve release represented 2% of the Company net reserves for Small Commercial workers compensation claims as of December 31, 2006. Recorded a $30 net release of reserves for Small Commercial package business related to the 2003 to 2006 accident years. Reserve reviews completed during 2007 identified that the frequency of reported liability claims on Small Commercial package business policies for these accident years was lower than the previously expected frequency. In addition, reported loss costs on property coverages have emerged favorably for the 2006 accident year. In recognition of these trends, in the second and fourth quarter of 2007, management reduced reserves by a total of $30. The $30 reserve release represented 3% of the Company net reserves for Small Commercial package business claims as of December 31, 2006. Released reserves for commercial surety business by $22 for accident years 2003 to 2006. Reported losses for commercial surety business have been emerging favorably resulting in the Company lowering its estimate of ultimate unpaid losses during the third quarter of 2007. The $22 reserve release represented 14% of the Company net reserves for fidelity and surety claims as of December 31, 2006. Released Middle Market commercial auto liability reserves by $18 for accident years 2003 and 2004. Since the first quarter of 2007, reported losses for commercial auto liability claims in these accident years have emerged favorably although management did not determine that this was a verifiable trend until the third quarter of 2007 when it released the reserves. The $18 reserve release represented 6% of the Company net reserves for Middle Market auto liability claims as of December 31, 2006. Released reserves for Personal Lines auto liability claims for accident years 2002 to 2006 by $16. This reserve release was a continuation of trends first observed in 2006. During the first quarter of 2006, the Company released auto liability reserves related to the 2005 accident year due to frequency emerging favorable to initial expectations. During the second quarter of 2006, the Company observed that loss cost severity on auto liability claims for the 2004 accident year was emerging favorable to initial expectations and released reserves to recognize this trend. For each of the 2002 to 2006 accident years, the Company has continued to observe favorable trends in reported severity and, in the fourth quarter of 2007, the Company released an additional $16 in reserves. The $16 reserve release represented 1% of the Company net reserves for Personal Lines auto liability claims as of December 31, 2006. Released reserves for errors and omissions claims for accident year 2005 by $15. During the fourth quarter of 2007, the Company updated its analysis of certain professional liability claims and the new analysis showed that claims under errors and omissions policies were emerging favorable to initial expectations, resulting in this reserve release. The $15 reserve release represented 3% of the Company net reserves for professional liability claims as of December 31, 2006. Strengthened Specialty Commercial workers compensation reserves by $47, primarily related to accident years 1987 to 2001. Management has been observing larger than expected increases in loss cost severity, particularly on high deductible and excess policies. The $47 reserve strengthening represented 2% of the Company net reserves for Specialty Commercial workers compensation claims as of December 31, 2006. 112 Table of Contents Strengthened Middle Market workers compensation reserves by $40 for accident years 1973 and prior, primarily driven by a reduction in reinsurance recoverables from the commutation of certain reinsurance treaties. Due to the commutations, within the past two years, net paid losses on these claims have begun to emerge unfavorably to initial expectations and, during 2007, the Company determined that this trend in higher paid losses would ultimately result in unpaid losses settling for more than management previous estimates. The $40 reserve strengthening represented 2% of net reserves for Middle Market workers compensation claims as of December 31, 2006. Strengthened general liability reserves by $39 for accident years more than 20 years old. The Company has experienced an increase in defense costs for certain mass tort claims and, during 2007, the Company determined that the increase in defense costs was a sustained trend that resulted in an increase in reserves. The $39 reserve strengthening represented 2% of the Company net reserves for general liability claims as of December 31, 2006. Strengthened reserves for Specialty Commercial general and products liability claims by $34, primarily related to the 1987 to 1997 accident years. Reported losses on general and products liability claims have been emerging unfavorably to previous expectations and loss adjustment expenses have been higher than expected on late emerging claims. The $34 reserve strengthening represented 3% of the Company net reserves for Specialty Commercial general liability claims as of December 31, 2006. Also during 2007, the Company refined its processes for allocating IBNR reserves by accident year, resulting in a reclassification of $347 of IBNR reserves from the 2003 to 2006 accident years to the 2002 and prior accident years. This reclassification of reserves by accident year had no effect on total recorded reserves within any segment or on total recorded reserves for any line of business within a segment. Other Operations During the second quarter of 2007, an arbitration panel found that a Hartford subsidiary, established as a captive reinsurance company in the 1970s by The Hartford former parent, ITT Corporation ( ITT ), had additional obligations to ITT primary insurance carrier under ITT captive insurance program, which ended in 1993. When ITT spun off The Hartford in 1995, the former captive became a Hartford subsidiary. The arbitration concerned whether certain claims could be presented to the former captive in a different manner than ITT primary insurance carrier historically had presented them. The Company recorded a charge of $99 principally as a result of this adverse arbitration decision. The Company completed its environmental reserve evaluation and increased its environmental reserves by $25. As part of this evaluation, the Company reviewed all of its open direct domestic insurance accounts exposed to environmental liability as well as assumed reinsurance accounts and its London Market exposures for both direct and assumed reinsurance. The Company found estimates for individual cases changed based upon the particular circumstances of each account. These changes were case specific and not as a result of any underlying change in the current environment. 113 Table of Contents A rollforward of liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses by segment for Property & Casualty for the year ended December 31, 2006 follows: For the year ended December 31, 2006 Personal Small Middle Specialty Ongoing Other Total Lines Commercial Market Commercial Operations Operations P&C Beginning liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses-gross $ 2,152 $ 3,023 $ 4,185 $ 6,060 $ 15,420 $ 6,846 $ 22,266 Reinsurance and other recoverables 385 192 565 2,306 3,448 1,955 5,403 Beginning liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses-net 1,767 2,831 3,620 3,754 11,972 4,891 16,863 Provision for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses Current accident year before catastrophes 2,396 1,509 1,577 1,025 6,507 6,507 Current accident year catastrophes 120 34 36 9 199 199 Prior years (38 ) (75 ) 13 36 (64 ) 360 296 Total provision for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses 2,478 1,468 1,626 1,070 6,642 360 7,002 Payments (2,309 ) (1,092 ) (1,189 ) (725 ) (5,315 ) (835 ) (6,150 ) Net reserves of Omni business sold (111 ) (111 ) (111 ) Ending liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses-net 1,825 3,207 4,057 4,099 13,188 4,416 17,604 Reinsurance and other recoverables 134 214 479 2,260 3,087 1,300 4,387 Ending liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses-gross $ 1,959 $ 3,421 $ 4,536 $ 6,359 $ 16,275 $ 5,716 $ 21,991 Earned premiums $ 3,760 $ 2,652 $ 2,523 $ 1,493 $ 10,428 $ 5 $ 10,433 Loss and loss expense paid ratio [1] 61.4 41.1 47.3 48.4 51.0 Loss and loss expense incurred ratio 65.9 55.3 64.6 71.5 63.7 Prior accident year development (pts.) [2] (1.0 ) (2.8 ) 0.5 2.5 (0.6 ) [1] The loss and loss expense paid ratio represents the ratio of paid loss and loss adjustment expenses to earned premiums. [2] Prior accident year development (pts) represents the ratio of prior accident year development to earned premiums. 114 Table of Contents Prior accident year development recorded in 2006 Included within prior accident year development for the year ended December 31, 2006 were the following reserve strengthenings (releases). Personal Small Middle Specialty Ongoing Other Total Lines Commercial Market Commercial Operations Operations P&C Net release of catastrophe loss reserves for 2004 and 2005 hurricanes $ (23 ) $ (22 ) $ (3 ) $ (35 ) $ (83 ) $ $ (83 ) Release of Personal Lines auto liability reserves for accident year 2005 (31 ) (31 ) (31 ) Strengthening of Personal Lines auto liability reserves for claims with exposure in excess of policy limits 30 30 30 Strengthening of general liability loss and loss adjustment expense reserves for accident years 1998 to 2005 20 20 20 Release of allocated loss adjustment expense reserves for workers compensation and package business for accident years 2003 to 2005 (33 ) (25 ) (58 ) (58 ) Release of Personal Lines auto liability reserves for accident year 2003 to 2005 (22 ) (22 ) (22 ) Strengthening of Specialty Commercial construction defect claim reserves for accident years 1997 and prior 10 35 45 45 Strengthening of Specialty Commercial workers compensation allocated loss adjustment expense reserves 20 20 20 Effect of Equitas agreement and strengthening of allowance for uncollectible reinsurance 243 243 Strengthening of environmental reserves 43 43 Other reserve re-estimates, net [1] 8 (20 ) 11 16 15 74 89 Total prior accident year development for the year ended December 31, 2006 $ (38 ) $ (75 ) $ 13 $ 36 $ (64 ) $ 360 $ 296 [1] Includes reserve discount accretion of $32, including $6 in Small Commercial, $8 in Middle Market, $11 in Specialty Commercial and $7 in Other Operations. During the year ended December 31, 2006, the Company re-estimates of prior accident year reserves included the following significant reserve changes. Ongoing Operations Released net reserves related to prior year hurricanes by a total of $83, including $57 for hurricanes Katrina and Rita in 2005 and $26 for hurricanes Charley, Frances and Jeanne in 2004. Initial reserve estimates for the 2005 and 2004 hurricanes were higher because of the difficulty claim adjusters had in accessing the most significantly impacted areas and initially higher estimates of the cost of building materials and contractors due to demand surge . As the reported claims have matured, the estimated settlement value of the claims has decreased from the initial estimates. The ultimate estimate for hurricane Katrina was increased in the first quarter of 2006 because of higher than expected claim reporting, particularly in Personal Lines. Net loss reserves within Specialty Commercial decreased, primarily because hurricane Katrina losses on specialty property business were reimbursable under a specialty property reinsurance treaty as well as under the Company principal property catastrophe reinsurance program. After the first quarter of 2006, Katrina new claim intake abated and settlement percentages increased, resulting in a reduction of reserves in the last nine months of 2006. In addition, the rate of newly reported compensable claims for Rita and the 2004 hurricanes was less than expected, resulting in a reduction of reserves for these hurricanes. Released Personal Lines auto liability reserves by $31 related to the fourth accident quarter of 2005 as a result of better than expected frequency trends. During the third and fourth quarter of 2005, the Company had reduced the 2005 accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio for Personal Lines auto liability claims related to the first three accident quarters of 2005. Favorable frequency for the fourth accident quarter of 2005 emerged during the fourth quarter of 2005. However, the Company did not release reserves at that time, since reserve indications at only three months of development were not reliable. The Company released reserves in 2006 after further development indicated that early indications of reduced frequency were representative of a real trend. The $31 reserve release represented 2% of the Company net reserves for Personal Lines auto liability claims as of December 31, 2005. 115 Table of Contents Strengthened reserves for personal auto liability claims by $30 due to an increase in estimated severity on claims where the Company is exposed to losses in excess of policy limits. From the Company reserve review during the first quarter of 2006, the Company determined that the facts and circumstances necessitated an increase in the reserve estimate. The $30 of reserve strengthening represented 2% of the Company net reserves for Personal Lines auto liability claims as of December 31, 2005. Strengthened Middle Market general liability loss and loss adjustment expense reserves by $20 for accident years 1998 to 2005, primarily as a result of increasing allocated loss adjustment expenses associated with closing older claims. The $20 of reserve strengthening represented 2% of the Company net reserves for general liability claims as of December 31, 2005. Released allocated loss adjustment expense reserves by $58 for accident years 2003 to 2005, primarily for workers compensation business and package business, as a result of cost reduction initiatives implemented by the Company to reduce allocated loss adjustment expenses for both legal and non-legal expenses. The Company began implementing cost reduction initiatives in late 2003. It was initially uncertain what effect those efforts would have on controlling allocated loss adjustment expenses. During 2004, favorable trends started to emerge, particularly on shorter-tailed auto liability claims, but it was not clear if these trends would be sustained. In early 2005, favorable trends continued and the Company analyzed claims involving legal expenses separate from claims that do not involve legal expenses. This analysis included a review of the trends in the number of claims involving legal expenses, the average expenses incurred and trends in legal expenses. During the second quarter of 2005, the Company released allocated loss adjustment expense reserves on shorter-tailed auto liability claims as the favorable trends on shorter-tailed business emerged more quickly and were determined to be reliable. During both the second and fourth quarter of 2006, the Company determined that the favorable development on package business and workers compensation business had become a verifiable trend and, accordingly, reserves were reduced. The $58 release represented 1% of total net reserves for workers compensation and package business as of December 31, 2005. Released Personal Lines auto liability reserves related to AARP and other affinity business by $22. AARP auto liability reserves for accident year 2004 were reduced as a result of favorable loss cost severity trends. AARP auto liability severity, as measured by reported data, began declining in 2005; however, the Company was uncertain whether this trend would prove persistent over time since paid loss data did not support a decline. During the second quarter of 2006, the Company determined that all the metrics supported a decline in severity estimates and, therefore, the Company released reserves. Auto liability reserves for other affinity business related to accident years 2003 to 2005 were reduced to recognize favorable developments in loss costs that have emerged. The $22 reserve release represented 1% of the Company net reserves for Personal Lines auto liability claims as of December 31, 2005. Strengthened construction defect claim reserves by $45 for accident years 1997 and prior as a result of an increase in claim severity trends. In 2004, two large construction defects claims were reported, but these were not viewed as an indication of an increase in the severity trend for all claims. In 2005, two additional large cases were reported. Management performed an expanded review of construction defects claims in the second quarter of 2006. Based on the expanded review and additional reported claim experience, management concluded that reported losses would likely continue at a higher level in the future and this resulted in strengthening the recorded reserves. The $35 of reserve strengthening in Specialty Commercial represented 4% of the Company net reserves for Specialty Commercial general liability claims as of December 31, 2005. The $10 of strengthening in Middle Market represented 1% of net reserves for Middle Market general liability claims as of December 31, 2005. Strengthened Specialty Commercial workers compensation allocated loss adjustment expense reserves by $20 for loss adjustment expense payments expected to emerge after 20 years of development. During 2005, the Company had done an in-depth study of loss payments expected to emerge after 20 years of development. At that time, it was believed that allocated loss adjustment expenses for a particular subset of business (primary policies on national accounts business) developed more quickly than allocated loss adjustment expenses for smaller insureds and that a similar reserve strengthening for national accounts business was not required. During the second quarter of 2006, the Company reserve review indicated that the development pattern for this business should be adjusted to be more consistent with that for smaller insureds. Because the Company has written very little of this business in recent years, the increase in reserves affects accident years 1995 and prior. The $20 of reserve strengthening represented 1% of the Company net reserves for Specialty Commercial workers compensation claims as of December 31, 2005. Other Operations Reduced the reinsurance recoverable asset associated with older, longer-term casualty liabilities by $243. The Company reviewed the reinsurance recoverables and allowance for uncollectible reinsurance associated with older, long-term casualty liabilities in the second quarter 2006. As a result of this study, and the outcome of an agreement that resolved, with minor exception, all of the Company ceded and assumed domestic reinsurance exposures with Equitas, Other Operations recorded prior accident year development of $243. Strengthened environmental reserves by $43 as a result of an environmental reserve evaluation completed in the third quarter of 2006. As part of this evaluation, the Company reviewed all of its domestic direct and assumed reinsurance accounts exposed to environmental liability. The Company also examined its London Market exposures for both direct insurance and assumed reinsurance. The Company found estimates for individual cases changed based upon the particular circumstances of each account, although the review found no underlying cause or change in the claim environment. The $43 of reserve strengthening represented 2% of the Company net reserves for asbestos and environmental claims as of December 31, 2005. 116 Table of Contents Impact of Re-estimates As explained in connection with the Company discussion of Critical Accounting Estimates, the establishment of property and casualty reserves is an estimation process, using a variety of methods, assumptions and data elements. Ultimate losses may vary significantly from the current estimates. Many factors can contribute to these variations and the need to change the previous estimate of required reserve levels. Subsequent changes can generally be thought of as being the result of the emergence of additional facts that were not known or anticipated at the time of the prior reserve estimate and/or changes in interpretations of information and trends. The table below shows the range of annual reserve re-estimates experienced by The Hartford over the past four years. The amount of prior accident year development (as shown in the reserve rollforward) for a given calendar year is expressed as a percent of the beginning calendar year reserves, net of reinsurance. The percentage relationships presented are significantly influenced by the facts and circumstances of each particular year and by the fact that only the last four years are included in the range. Accordingly, these percentages are not intended to be a prediction of the range of possible future variability. See Impact of key assumptions on reserve volatility within Critical Accounting Estimates for further discussion of the potential for variability in recorded loss reserves. Personal Small Middle Specialty Ongoing Other Total Lines Commercial Market Commercial Operations Operations P&C Range of prior accident year development for the four years ended December 31, 2008 [1] [2] (5.2) (0.2 ) (6.5) (1.0 ) (3.1) 1.6 (1.8) 3.1 (2.5) 0.3 3.1 7.4 (1.2) 1.5 [1] Bracketed prior accident year development indicates favorable development. Unbracketed amounts represent unfavorable development. [2] Over the past ten years, reserve re-estimates for total Property & Casualty ranged from (1.3)% to 21.5%. Excluding the reserve strengthening for asbestos and environmental reserves, over the past ten years reserve re-estimates for total Property & Casualty ranged from (3.0)% to 1.6%. The potential variability of the Company Property & Casualty reserves would normally be expected to vary by segment and the types of loss exposures insured by those segments. Illustrative factors influencing the potential reserve variability for each of the segments are discussed under Critical Accounting Estimates. Risk Management Strategy The Hartford property and casualty operations have processes to manage risk to natural disasters, such as hurricanes and earthquakes, and other perils, such as terrorism. The Hartford risk management processes include, but are not limited to, disciplined underwriting protocols, exposure controls, sophisticated risk modeling, risk transfer, and capital management strategies. In managing risk, The Hartford management processes involve establishing underwriting guidelines for both individual risks, including individual policy limits, and in aggregate, including aggregate exposure limits by geographic zone and peril. The Company establishes risk limits and actively monitors the risk exposures as a percent of Property & Casualty statutory surplus. For natural catastrophe perils, the Company generally limits its estimated loss to natural catastrophes from a single 250-year event prior to reinsurance to less than 30% of statutory surplus of the Property & Casualty operations and its estimated loss to natural catastrophes from a single 250-year event after reinsurance to less than 15% of statutory surplus of the Property & Casualty operations. From time to time, the estimated loss to natural catastrophes from a single 250-year event prior to reinsurance may fluctuate above or below 30% of statutory surplus due to changes in modeled loss estimates, exposures, or statutory surplus. Currently, the Company estimated pre-tax loss to a single 250-year natural catastrophe event prior to reinsurance is 31% of statutory surplus of the Property & Casualty operations and the Company estimated pre-tax loss net of reinsurance is less than 15% of statutory surplus of the Property & Casualty operations. For terrorism, the Company monitors its exposure in major metropolitan areas to a single-site conventional terrorism attack scenario, and manages its potential estimated loss, including exposures resulting from the Company Group Life operations, to less than $1.3 billion, which is approximately 10% of the combined statutory surplus of the Life and Property & Casualty operations as of December 31, 2008. Among the 251 locations specifically monitored by the Company, the largest estimated modeled loss arising from a single event is approximately $1.2 billion. The Company monitors exposures monthly and employs both internally developed and vendor-licensed loss modeling tools as part of its risk management discipline. Use of Reinsurance In managing risk, The Hartford utilizes reinsurance to transfer risk to well-established and financially secure reinsurers. Reinsurance is used to manage aggregations of risk as well as specific risks based on accumulated property and casualty liabilities in certain geographic zones. All treaty purchases related to the Company property and casualty operations are administered by a centralized function to support a consistent strategy and ensure that the reinsurance activities are fully integrated into the organization risk management processes. 117 Table of Contents A variety of traditional reinsurance products are used as part of the Company risk management strategy, including excess of loss occurrence-based products that protect property and workers compensation exposures, and individual risk or quota share arrangements, that protect specific classes or lines of business. There are no significant finite risk contracts in place and the statutory surplus benefit from all such prior year contracts is immaterial. Facultative reinsurance is also used to manage policy-specific risk exposures based on established underwriting guidelines. The Hartford also participates in governmentally administered reinsurance facilities such as the Florida Hurricane Catastrophe Fund ( FHCF ), the Terrorism Risk Insurance Program established under The Terrorism Risk Insurance Program Reauthorization Act of 2007 ( TRIPRA ) and other reinsurance programs relating to particular risks or specific lines of business. The Company has several catastrophe reinsurance programs, including reinsurance treaties that cover property and workers compensation losses aggregating from single catastrophe events. The following table summarizes the primary catastrophe treaty reinsurance coverages that the Company has in place as of January 1, 2009: % of layer(s) Coverage Treaty term reinsured Per occurrence limit Retention Principal property catastrophe program covering property catastrophe losses from a single event 1/1/2009 to 1/1/2010 Varies by layer, but averages 90% across all layers Aggregates to $750 across all layers $250 Property catastrophe losses from a single event on excess and surplus property business 1/1/2009 to 1/1/2010 95% Aggregates to $280 across all layers 20 Layer covering property catastrophe losses from a single wind or earthquake event affecting the northeast of the United States from Virginia to Maine 6/1/2008 to 6/1/2009 90% $300 1,000 Reinsurance with the FHCF covering Florida Personal Lines property catastrophe losses from a single event 6/1/2008 to 6/1/2009 90% 382[1] 83 Workers compensation losses arising from a single catastrophe event 7/1/2008 to 7/1/2009 95% 280 20 [1] The per occurrence limit on the FHCF treaty is $382 for the 6/1/2008 to 6/1/2009 treaty year based on the Company election to purchase additional limits under the Temporary Increase in Coverage Limit (TICL) statutory provision in excess of the coverage the Company is required to purchase from the FHCF. In addition to the property catastrophe reinsurance coverage described in the above table, the Company has other treaties and facultative reinsurance agreements that cover property catastrophe losses on an aggregate excess of loss and on a per risk basis. The principal property catastrophe reinsurance program and other reinsurance programs include a provision to reinstate limits in the event that a catastrophe loss exhausts limits on one or more layers under the treaties. 118 Table of Contents In addition to the reinsurance protection provided by The Hartford reinsurance program described above, the Company has fully collateralized reinsurance coverages from Foundation Re and Foundation Re II for losses sustained from qualifying hurricane and earthquake loss events and other qualifying catastrophe losses. Foundation Re and Foundation Re II are Cayman Islands reinsurance companies which financed the provision of the reinsurance through the issuance of catastrophe bonds. Under the terms of the treaties with Foundation Re and Foundation Re II, the Company is reimbursed for losses from natural disaster events using a customized industry index contract designed to replicate The Hartford own catastrophe losses, with a provision that the actual losses incurred by the Company for covered events, net of reinsurance recoveries, cannot be less than zero. The following table summarizes the terms of the reinsurance treaties with Foundation Re and Foundation Re II that were in place as of January 1, 2009: Bond amount issued by Foundation Re or Covered perils Treaty term Covered losses Foundation Re II Hurricane loss events affecting the Gulf and Eastern Coast of the United States and loss events arising from California, Pacific Northwest, and New Madrid earthquakes. 2/17/2006 to 2/24/2010 26% of $400 in losses in excess of an index loss trigger equating to approximately $1.3 billion in Hartford losses $105 Hurricane loss events affecting the Gulf and Eastern Coast of the United States 11/17/2006 to 11/26/2010 45% of $400 in losses in excess of an index loss trigger equating to approximately $1.85 billion in Hartford losses 180 As of December 31, 2008, there have been no events that are expected to trigger a recovery under any of the reinsurance programs with Foundation Re or Foundation Re II and, accordingly, the Company has not recorded any recoveries from the associated reinsurance treaties. Estimated Catastrophe Exposures The Company uses third party models to estimate the potential loss resulting from various catastrophe events and the potential financial impact those events would have on the Company financial position and results of operations. The following table shows modeled loss estimates before expected reinsurance recoveries and after expected reinsurance recoveries. The loss estimates represent total property losses for hurricane events and property and workers compensation losses for earthquake events resulting from a single event. The estimates provided are based on 250-year return period loss estimates, which have a 0.4% likelihood of being exceeded in any single year. The net loss estimates assume that the Company would be able to recover all losses ceded to reinsurers under its reinsurance programs. There are various methodologies used in the industry to estimate the potential property and workers compensation losses that would arise from various catastrophe events and companies may use different models and assumptions in their estimates. Therefore, the Company estimates of gross and net losses arising from a 250-year hurricane or earthquake event may not be comparable to estimates provided by other companies. Furthermore, the Company estimates are subject to significant uncertainty and could vary materially from the actual losses that would arise from these events. 119 Table of Contents The Company modeled loss estimates are derived by averaging 21 modeled loss events representing a 250-year return period loss. For the peril of earthquake, the 21 events averaged to determine the modeled loss estimate include events occurring in California as well as the Northwestern, Northeastern, Southeastern and Midwestern regions of the United States with associated magnitudes ranging from 6.9 to 7.9 on the Richter scale. For the peril of hurricane, the 21 events averaged to determine the modeled loss estimate include category 3, 4 and 5 events in Florida as well as other Southeastern, Northeastern and Gulf region landfalls. Hurricane Earthquake Net of Expected Net of Expected Before Reinsurance Before Reinsurance Reinsurance Recoveries Reinsurance Recoveries Estimated 250-year probable maximum loss, before-tax $ 1,891 $ 671 $ 953 $ 316 After-tax effect as a percentage of statutory surplus of the Property & Casualty operations as of December 31, 2008 7 % 3 % Terrorism The Company is exposed to losses from terrorist attacks, including losses caused by nuclear, biological, chemical or radiological weapons (NBCR) attacks. For terrorism, private sector catastrophe reinsurance capacity is limited and generally unavailable for terrorism losses caused by nuclear, biological, chemical or radiological weapons attacks. As such, the Company principal reinsurance protection against large-scale terrorist attacks is the coverage currently provided through the Terrorism Risk Insurance Program Reauthorization Act ( TRIPRA ). On December 26, 2007, the President signed TRIPRA extending the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act of 2002 ( TRIA ) through the end of 2014. TRIPRA provides a backstop for insurance-related losses resulting from any act of terrorism certified by the Secretary of the Treasury, in concurrence with the Secretary of State and Attorney General, that result in industry losses in excess of $100. In addition, TRIPRA revised the TRIA definition of a certified act of terrorism by removing the requirement that an act be committed on behalf of any foreign person or foreign interest. As a result, domestic acts of terrorism can now be certified as acts of terrorism under the program, subject to the other requirements of TRIPRA. Under the program, in any one calendar year, the federal government would pay 85% of covered losses from a certified act of terrorism after an insurer losses exceed 20% of the company eligible direct commercial earned premiums of the prior calendar year, up to a combined annual aggregate limit for the federal government and all insurers of $100 billion. If an act of terrorism or acts of terrorism result in covered losses exceeding the $100 billion annual industry aggregate limit, a future Congress would be responsible for determining how additional losses in excess of $100 billion will be paid. Among other items, TRIPRA required that the President Working Group on Financial Markets ( PWG ) continue to perform an analysis regarding the long-term availability and affordability of insurance for terrorism risk. Among the findings detailed in the PWG initial report, released October 2, 2006, were that the high level of uncertainty associated with predicting the frequency of terrorist attacks, coupled with the unwillingness of some insurance policyholders to purchase insurance coverage, makes predicting long term development of the terrorism risk market difficult, and that there is likely little potential for future market development for nuclear, biological, chemical and radiological ( NBCR ) coverage. A December 2008 study by the U.S. Government Accountability Office (GAO) found that property and casualty insurers still generally seek to exclude NBCR coverage from their commercial policies when permitted. However, while nuclear, pollution and contamination exclusions are contained in many property and liability insurance policies, the GAO report concluded that such exclusions may be subject to challenges in court because they were not specifically drafted to address terrorist attacks. Furthermore, workers compensation policies generally have no exclusions or limitations. The GAO found that commercial property and casualty policyholders, including companies that own high-value properties in large cities, generally reported that they could not obtain NBCR coverage. Commercial property and casualty insurers generally remain unwilling to offer NBCR coverage because of uncertainties about the risk and the potential for catastrophic losses. The Texas Windstorm Insurance Association ( TWIA ) The Texas Windstorm Insurance Association ( TWIA ) provides hail and windstorm coverage to Texas residents of 14 counties along the Texas Gulf coast who are unable to obtain insurance from other carriers. Insurance carriers who write property insurance in the state of Texas, including The Hartford, are required to be members of TWIA and are obligated to pay assessments in the event that TWIA losses exceed funds on hand, the available funds in the Texas Catastrophe Reserve Trust Fund ( CRTF ) and any available reinsurance. Assessments are allocated to carriers based on their share of premium writings in the state of Texas, as defined. During 2008, the board of directors of TWIA notified its member companies that it would assess them $100 to cover TWIA losses from hurricane Dolly and a total of $430 for hurricane Ike. For hurricane Dolly, the Company share of the assessment was $4, which was recorded as incurred losses within current accident year catastrophes in 2008. 120 Table of Contents For hurricane Ike, the TWIA board indicated that the first $370 of TWIA losses from hurricane Ike would be covered by the CRTF, but that the cost of TWIA losses and reinstatement premium above that amount would be funded by assessments. Of the $430 in assessments, $230 is to fund the first $230 of TWIA losses in excess of the $370 available in the CRTF and $200 is to fund additional reinsurance premiums that TWIA must pay to reinstate a layer of coverage that reimburses TWIA for up to $1.5 billion of TWIA losses in excess of $600 per occurrence. Thus, TWIA assessment notice for $430 is based on an estimate that TWIA losses from hurricane Ike will total approximately $2.1 billion. If TWIA losses exceed $2.1 billion, the entire amount in excess of $2.1 billion would be recovered from assessing member companies according to their market share. In notifying member companies, TWIA board of directors stated that actual TWIA losses will likely be greater than $2.1 billion and management has accrued a total of $27 in assessments for Ike based on an estimate that TWIA Ike losses will be approximately $2.5 billion and that TWIA assessments to the industry will ultimately be approximately $830. Of the $27 in assessments for Ike recorded in 2008, $7 has been recorded as incurred losses within current accident year catastrophes and $20 has been recorded as insurance operating costs and expenses. Through premium tax credits, member companies may recoup a portion of Ike-related assessments made to cover the first $2.1 billion of TWIA losses and may recoup all of the Ike-related assessments made to fund losses in excess of that amount. None of the assessments for hurricane Dolly may be recouped. Under generally accepted accounting principles, the Company is required to accrue the assessments in the period the assessments become probable and estimable and the obligating event has occurred. However, premium tax credits may not be recorded as an asset until the related premium is earned and TWIA requires that premium tax credits be spread over a period of at least five years. The Company estimates that of the $27 of accrued assessments for Ike, it will ultimately be able to recoup $20 through premium tax credits. Florida Citizens Assessments Citizens Property Insurance Corporation in Florida ( Citizens ) provides property insurance to Florida homeowners and businesses that are unable to obtain insurance from other carriers, including for properties deemed to be high risk . Citizens maintains a Personal Lines account, a Commercial Lines account and a High Risk account. If Citizens incurs a deficit in any of these accounts, Citizens may impose a regular assessment on other insurance carriers in the state to fund the deficits, subject to certain restrictions and subject to approval by the Florida Office of Insurance Regulation. Carriers are then permitted to surcharge policyholders to recover the assessments over the next few years. Citizens may also opt to finance a portion of the deficits through issuing bonds and may impose emergency assessments on other insurance carriers to fund the bond repayments. Unlike with regular assessments, however, insurance carriers only serve as a collection agent for emergency assessments and are not required to remit surcharges for emergency assessments to Citizens until they collect surcharges from policyholders. Under generally accepted accounting principles, the Company is required to accrue for regular assessments in the period the assessments become probable and estimable and the obligating event has occurred. Surcharges to recover the amount of regular assessments may not be recorded as an asset until the related premium is written. Emergency assessments that may be levied by Citizens are not recorded in the income statement. In 2006, Citizens assessed the Company to fund deficits arising from hurricane losses in 2004 and 2005. In 2006, the Company reduced its estimate of Citizens assessments by $41 from the amount that had been originally estimated in 2005. Reinsurance Recoverables The following table shows the components of the gross and net reinsurance recoverable as of December 31, 2008 and 2007: Reinsurance Recoverable December 31, 2008 December 31, 2007 Paid loss and loss adjustment expenses $ 326 $ 347 Unpaid loss and loss adjustment expenses 3,492 3,788 Gross reinsurance recoverable 3,818 4,135 Less: allowance for uncollectible reinsurance (379 ) (404 ) Net reinsurance recoverable $ 3,439 $ 3,731 121 Table of Contents Reinsurance recoverables represent loss and loss adjustment expenses recoverable from a number of entities, including reinsurers and pools. As shown in the following table, a portion of the total gross reinsurance recoverable relates to the Company mandatory participation in various involuntary assigned risk pools and the value of annuity contracts held under structured settlement agreements. Reinsurance recoverables due from mandatory pools are backed by the financial strength of the property and casualty insurance industry. Annuities purchased from third party life insurers under structured settlements are recognized as reinsurance recoverables in cases where the Company has not obtained a release from the claimant. Of the remaining gross reinsurance recoverable as of December 31, 2008 and 2007, the following table shows the portion of recoverables due from companies rated by A.M. Best. Distribution of gross reinsurance recoverable December 31, 2008 December 31, 2007 Gross reinsurance recoverable $ 3,818 $ 4,135 Less: mandatory (assigned risk) pools and structured settlements (638 ) (635 ) Gross reinsurance recoverable excluding mandatory pools and structured settlements $ 3,180 $ 3,500 % of Total % of Total Rated A- (Excellent) or better by A.M. Best [1] $ 2,426 76.3 % $ 2,614 74.7 % Other rated by A.M. Best 52 1.6 % 90 2.6 % Total rated companies 2,478 77.9 % 2,704 77.3 % Voluntary pools 181 5.7 % 195 5.6 % Captives 220 6.9 % 231 6.6 % Other not rated companies 301 9.5 % 370 10.5 % Total $ 3,180 100.0 % $ 3,500 100.0 % [1] Based on A.M. Best ratings as of December 31, 2008 and 2007, respectively. Where its contracts permit, the Company secures future claim obligations with various forms of collateral, including irrevocable letters of credit, secured trusts, funds held accounts and group wide offsets. As part of its reinsurance recoverable review, the Company analyzes recent developments in commutation activity between reinsurers and cedants, recent trends in arbitration and litigation outcomes in disputes between cedants and reinsurers and the overall credit quality of the Company reinsurers. Due largely to investment losses sustained by reinsurers in 2008, the financial strength ratings of some reinsurers have been downgraded and the financial strength ratings of other reinsurers have been put on negative watch. Nevertheless, as indicated in the above table, approximately 98% of the gross reinsurance recoverables due from reinsurers rated by A.M. Best were rated A- (excellent) or better as of December 31, 2008. Due to the inherent uncertainties as to collection and the length of time before such amounts will be due, it is possible that future adjustments to the Company reinsurance recoverables, net of the allowance, could be required, which could have a material adverse effect on the Company consolidated results of operations or cash flows in a particular quarterly or annual period. Annually, the Company completes an evaluation of the reinsurance recoverable asset associated with older, long-term casualty liabilities reported in the Other Operations segment. As a result of this evaluation, the Company reduced its net reinsurance recoverable by $243 in 2006. See the Other Operations section of the MD&A for further discussion. Monitoring Reinsurer Security To manage the potential credit risk resulting from the use of reinsurance, management evaluates the credit standing, financial performance, management and operational quality of each potential reinsurer. Through that process, the Company maintains a list of reinsurers approved for participation on all treaty and facultative reinsurance placements. The Company approval designations reflect the differing credit exposure associated with various classes of business. Participation authorizations are categorized along property, short-tail casualty and long-tail casualty lines. In addition to defining participation eligibility, the Company regularly monitors each active reinsurer credit risk exposure in the aggregate and limits that exposure based upon independent credit rating levels. Unless otherwise specified, the following discussion speaks to changes for the year ended December 31, 2008 compared to the year ended December 31, 2007 and the year ended December 31, 2007 compared to the year ended December 31, 2006. 122 Table of Contents TOTAL PROPERTY & CASUALTY Operating Summary 2008 2007 2006 Earned premiums $ 10,338 $ 10,496 $ 10,433 Net investment income 1,253 1,687 1,486 Other revenues [1] 504 496 473 Net realized capital gains (losses) (1,877 ) (172 ) 9 Total revenues 10,218 12,507 12,401 Losses and loss adjustment expenses Current accident year before catastrophes 6,390 6,692 6,507 Current accident year catastrophes 543 177 199 Prior accident years (226 ) 48 296 Total losses and loss adjustment expenses 6,707 6,917 7,002 Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs 2,095 2,104 2,106 Insurance operating costs and expenses 724 716 580 Other expense 695 693 643 Total benefits, losses and expenses 10,221 10,430 10,331 Income (loss) before income taxes (3 ) 2,077 2,070 Income tax expense (benefit) (95 ) 570 551 Net income [2] $ 92 $ 1,507 $ 1,519 Net Income Ongoing Operations $ 189 $ 1,477 $ 1,554 Other Operations (97 ) 30 (35 ) Total Property & Casualty net income $ 92 $ 1,507 $ 1,519 [1] Primarily servicing revenue. [2] Includes net realized capital gains (losses), after tax, of $(1,223), $(112) and $46 for the years ended December 31, 2008, 2007 and 2006, respectively. Year ended December 31, 2008 compared to the year ended December 31, 2007 Net income decreased by $1,415, from net income of $1,507 in 2007 to net income of $92 in 2008. The decrease in net income was due to a $1,288 decrease in Ongoing Operations net income and a decrease in Other Operations results, from net income of $30 in 2007 to a net loss of $97 in 2008. See the Ongoing Operations and Other Operations segment MD&A discussions for an analysis of the underwriting results and investment performance driving the decrease in net income. Year ended December 31, 2007 compared to the year ended December 31, 2006 Net income decreased by $12, or 1%, as a result of a $77 decrease in Ongoing Operations net income, partially offset by an improvement in Other Operations results, from a net loss of $35 in 2006 to net income of $30 in 2007. See the Ongoing Operations and Other Operations segment MD&A discussions for an analysis of the underwriting results and investment performance driving the change in net income. 123 Table of Contents ONGOING OPERATIONS Ongoing Operations includes the four underwriting segments of Personal Lines, Small Commercial, Middle Market and Specialty Commercial. Operating Summary Net income for Ongoing Operations includes underwriting results for each of its segments, income from servicing businesses, net investment income, other expenses and net realized capital gains (losses), net of related income taxes. Ongoing Operations 2008 2007 2006 Written premiums $ 10,224 $ 10,435 $ 10,658 Change in unearned premium reserve (107 ) (56 ) 230 Earned premiums 10,331 10,491 10,428 Losses and loss adjustment expenses Current accident year before catastrophes 6,390 6,692 6,507 Current accident year catastrophes 543 177 199 Prior accident years (355 ) (145 ) (64 ) Total losses and loss adjustment expenses 6,578 6,724 6,642 Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs 2,095 2,104 2,106 Insurance operating costs and expenses 701 694 569 Underwriting results 957 969 1,111 Net servicing income [1] 31 52 53 Net investment income 1,056 1,439 1,225 Net realized capital losses (1,669 ) (160 ) (17 ) Other expenses (219 ) (248 ) (222 ) Income before income taxes 156 2,052 2,150 Income tax benefit (expense) 33 (575 ) (596 ) Net income $ 189 $ 1,477 $ 1,554 Loss and loss adjustment expense ratio Current accident year before catastrophes 61.9 63.8 62.4 Current accident year catastrophes 5.3 1.7 1.9 Prior accident years (3.4 ) (1.4 ) (0.6 ) Total loss and loss adjustment expense ratio 63.7 64.1 63.7 Expense ratio 26.6 26.3 25.6 Policyholder dividend ratio 0.5 0.4 0.1 Combined ratio 90.7 90.8 89.3 Catastrophe ratio Current accident year 5.3 1.7 1.9 Prior accident years (0.2 ) 0.1 (0.7 ) Total catastrophe ratio 5.0 1.8 1.2 Combined ratio before catastrophes 85.7 89.0 88.1 Combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development 88.9 90.5 88.0 [1] Net of expenses related to service business. Year ended December 31, 2008 compared to the year ended December 31, 2007 Net income Net income decreased by $1,288, from $1,477 in 2007 to $189 in 2008, due primarily to an increase in net realized capital losses and a decrease in net investment income. Net realized capital losses increased by $1,509 The increase in net realized capital losses of $1,509 in 2008 was primarily due to realized losses in 2008 from impairments of subordinated fixed maturities and preferred equity securities in the financial services sector as well as of securitized assets. (See the Other-Than-Temporary Impairments discussion within Investment Results in the Investments section of the MD&A for more information on the impairments recorded in 2008). 124 Table of Contents Net investment income decreased by $383 Primarily driving the $383 decrease in net investment income were a change from net income to net losses on limited partnerships and other alternative investments in 2008 and decreased fixed maturity income. The net losses on limited partnerships and other alternative investments in 2008 were largely due to negative returns on hedge funds and real estate partnerships as a result of the lack of liquidity in the financial markets and credit spread widening. The decrease in income from fixed maturities was attributable to lower income on variable rate securities due to declines in short term interest rates as well as an increased allocation to lower yielding U.S. Treasuries and short-term investments. Underwriting results decreased by $12 Underwriting results decreased by $12 due to: Change in underwriting results Decrease in earned premiums $ (160 ) Losses and loss adjustment expenses Ratio change A decrease in the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes 200 Volume change Decrease in current accident year losses and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes due to the decrease in earned premium 102 Decrease in current accident year losses and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes 302 Catastrophes Increase in current accident year catastrophe losses (366 ) Reserve changes An increase in net favorable prior accident year reserve development 210 Net decrease in losses and loss adjustment expenses 146 Operating expenses Decrease in amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs 9 Increase in insurance operating costs and expenses (7 ) Net decrease in operating expenses 2 Decrease in underwriting results from 2007 to 2008 $ (12 ) Earned premium decreased by $160 Ongoing Operations earned premium decreased by $160, or 2%, primarily due to a 5% decrease in Middle Market and a 4% decrease in Specialty Commercial. Refer to the earned premium discussion in the Executive Overview section of the Property & Casualty MD&A for further discussion of the decrease in earned premium. Losses and loss adjustment expenses decreased by $146 Current accident year losses and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes decreased by $302 Ongoing Operations current accident year losses and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes decreased by $302 due to a decrease in the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes and a decrease in earned premium. The current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes decreased by 1.9 points, to 61.9, due primarily to decreases in Personal Lines, Small Commercial and Middle Market. 125 Table of Contents Personal Lines The current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes in Personal Lines decreased by 1.4 points, primarily due to favorable expected frequency on auto liability claims and the effect of earned pricing increases for both auto and homeowners, partially offset by increased frequency and severity of non-catastrophe losses on homeowners business. Small Commercial The current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes in Small Commercial decreased by 5.2 points, primarily due to a lower loss and loss adjustment expense ratio for workers compensation business and, to a lesser extent, a lower loss and loss adjustment expense ratio for package business. The lower loss and loss adjustment expense ratio for workers compensation business was primarily due to lower expected claim frequency, partially offset by the effect of earned pricing decreases. Middle Market The current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes in Middle Market decreased by 1.0 point, primarily due to a lower loss and loss adjustment expense ratio for workers compensation and general liability business, largely offset by higher non-catastrophe losses on property and marine business and the effect of earned pricing decreases. The higher non-catastrophe losses on property business were driven by increased severity, including a number of large individual claims, and the higher non-catastrophe losses on marine business were primarily driven by increased frequency. Specialty Commercial The current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes in Specialty Commercial increased by 1.5 points, primarily due to a higher loss and loss adjustment ratio on directors and officers insurance in professional liability driven by earned pricing decreases. Current accident year catastrophes increased by $366 Current accident year catastrophe losses of $543, or 5.3 points, in 2008 were higher than current accident year catastrophe losses of $177, or 1.7 points, in 2007, primarily due to losses from hurricane Ike and tornadoes and thunderstorms in the South and Midwest. An increase in net favorable prior accident year reserve development of $210 Net favorable prior accident year reserve development increased from net favorable development of $145, or 1.4 points, in 2007, to net favorable development of $355, or 3.4 points, in 2008. Among other reserve developments, net favorable development in 2008 included a $156 release of workers compensation reserves, primarily related to accident years 2000 to 2007, a $105 release of general liability reserves, primarily related to accident years 2001 to 2007 and a $75 release of reserves for directors and officers insurance and errors and omissions insurance claims related to accident years 2003 to 2006. Refer to the Reserves section of the MD&A for further discussion of the prior accident year reserve development in 2008. Net favorable reserve development of $145 in 2007 included several changes in reserves, including a $151 release of workers compensation loss and loss adjustment expense reserves, primarily for accident years 2002 to 2006. Refer to the Reserves section of the MD&A for further discussion of the prior accident year reserve development in 2007. Operating expenses decreased by $2 The $9 decrease in the amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs was primarily due to the decrease in earned premium, partially offset by the amortization of higher acquisition costs on AARP business and higher underwriting costs in Middle Market. Insurance operating costs and expenses increased by $7, primarily due to higher IT costs and an estimated $20 of assessments owed to TWIA to fund Texas Gulf Coast losses sustained by TWIA in 2008 due to hurricane Ike, partially offset by lower compensation-related costs. The expense ratio increased by 0.3 points, to 26.6, primarily due to the amortization of higher acquisition costs on AARP business and higher underwriting costs in Middle Market and the increase in insurance operating costs and expenses. Net servicing income decreased by $21 The decrease in net servicing income was primarily driven by a decrease in servicing income from the AARP Health program, Specialty Risk Services and the Write Your Own flood program and the write-off of software used in administering policies for third parties. A $608 change from income tax expense to an income tax benefit Income taxes changed from income tax expense of $575 in 2007 to an income tax benefit of $33 in 2008. Despite pre-tax income in 2008, there was a net income tax benefit in 2008 because the income tax benefit on realized capital losses was greater than the income tax expense on all other components of pre-tax income. A portion of the Company net investment income was generated from tax-exempt securities. 126 Table of Contents Year ended December 31, 2007 compared to the year ended December 31, 2006 Net income decreased by $77, or 5%, due primarily to a decrease in underwriting results and an increase in net realized capital losses, partially offset by an increase in net investment income. Underwriting results decreased by $142 Underwriting results decreased by $142, from $1,111 to $969, with a corresponding 1.5 point increase in the combined ratio, from 89.3 to 90.8, due to: Change in underwriting results Earned premiums Excluding Omni, a 2% increase in earned premium $ 185 Decrease in earned premium due to the sale of Omni in the fourth quarter of 2006 (122 ) Net increase in earned premiums 63 Losses and loss adjustment expenses Ratio change An increase in the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes, excluding Omni (176 ) Volume change Increase in current accident year loss and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes due to the increase in earned premium, excluding Omni (114 ) Sale of Omni Decrease in current accident year loss and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes as a result of the sale of Omni 105 Net increase in current accident year loss and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes (185 ) Catastrophes Decrease in current accident year catastrophe losses 22 Reserve changes Increase in net favorable prior accident year reserve development 81 Net increase in losses and loss adjustment expenses (82 ) Operating expenses Decrease in amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs 2 Increase in insurance operating costs and expenses (125 ) Net increase in operating expenses (123 ) Decrease in underwriting results from 2006 to 2007 $ (142 ) Sale of Omni The Company sold its Omni non-standard auto business in the fourth quarter of 2006. Omni accounted for an underwriting loss of $52 in 2006, including $127 of earned premiums, $140 of loss and loss adjustment expenses, $30 of amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs and $9 of insurance operating costs and expenses. Earned premium increased by $63 Ongoing Operations earned premium increased by $63, or 1%, to $10,491, driven by a 3% increase in both Personal Lines and Small Commercial, partially offset by a 4% decrease in Middle Market and a 3% decrease in Specialty Commercial. Excluding Omni, earned premium increased by $185, or 2%. Refer to the earned premium discussion in the Executive Overview section of the Property & Casualty MD&A for further discussion of the increase in earned premium. Losses and loss adjustment expenses increased by $82 Current accident year loss and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes increased by $185 Ongoing Operations current accident year loss and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes increased by $185 in 2007, to $6,692, due largely to an increase in the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio and an increase in earned premium, partially offset by a decrease due to the sale of Omni. Excluding Omni, the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes increased by 1.7 points, to 63.8, due to an increase in the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes of 3.3 points in Personal Lines, 1.4 points in Small Commercial and 1.9 points in Middle Market, partially offset by a decrease in the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes of 1.8 points in Specialty Commercial. 127 Table of Contents Personal Lines Excluding the effect of Omni, the 3.3 point increase in the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes in Personal Lines was primarily due to increased severity on auto liability claims, increased frequency on auto property damage claims and, to a lesser extent, increased severity on homeowners claims, partially offset by the effect of earned pricing increases in homeowners. Small Commercial The 1.4 point increase in the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes in Small Commercial was primarily due to a higher loss ratio and loss adjustment expense ratio for package business and commercial auto claims, partially offset by a lower loss and loss adjustment expense ratio for workers compensation claims. Middle Market The 1.9 point increase in the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes in Middle Market was primarily due to a higher loss and loss adjustment expense ratio for workers compensation, general liability and commercial auto claims driven, in part, by earned pricing decreases. For commercial auto, loss costs increased for both liability and property damage claims. Specialty Commercial The 1.8 point decrease in the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes in Specialty Commercial was primarily due to a lower loss and loss adjustment ratio on directors and officers insurance in professional liability, partially offset by a higher loss and loss adjustment expense ratio on casualty business. Current accident year catastrophes decreased by $22 Current accident year catastrophe losses decreased by $22, from $199, or 1.9 points, in 2006 to $177, or 1.7 points, in 2007. The largest catastrophe losses in 2007 were from wildfires in California, spring windstorms in the Southeast and Northeast, tornadoes and thunderstorms in the Midwest and a December ice storm in the Midwest. Catastrophes in 2006 included tornadoes and hail storms in the Midwest and windstorms in Texas and on the East coast. Increase in net favorable prior accident year reserve development by $81 Net favorable prior accident year reserve development increased from $64, or 0.6 points, in 2006 to $145, or 1.4 points, in 2007. Net favorable reserve development of $145 in 2007 included several changes in reserves, including a $151 release of workers compensation loss and loss adjustment expense reserves, primarily for accident years 2002 to 2006. Refer to the Reserves section of the MD&A for further discussion of the prior accident year reserve development in 2007. The $64 of net favorable prior accident year development in 2006 included several changes in reserves, including an $83 net release of prior accident year hurricane reserves. Refer to the Reserves section of the MD&A for further discussion of the prior accident year reserve development in 2006. Operating expenses increased by $123 The 0.7 point increase in the expense ratio and the 0.3 point increase in the policyholder dividend ratio was primarily due to an increase in insurance operating costs and expenses. Insurance operating costs and expenses increased by $125, partly because insurance operating costs and expenses in 2006 included the effect of a $41 reduction of estimated Citizens assessments related to the 2005 Florida hurricanes. Also contributing to the increase in insurance and operating costs and expenses was a $34 increase in policyholder dividends due largely to a $20 increase in the estimated amount of dividends payable to certain workers compensation policyholders due to underwriting profits. Apart from the effect of Citizens assessments and policyholder dividends, insurance operating costs and expenses increased by $50, primarily due to an increase in IT costs and an increase in non-deferrable salaries and benefits and other internal operating costs. Despite the increase in earned premium, amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs remained relatively flat from 2006 to 2007 due to the effect of the sale of Omni. Excluding the effect of Omni, amortization increased by $28, or 1%, primarily driven by the 2% growth in earned premiums excluding Omni. In 2006, Omni accounted for $127 of earned premiums and $30 of amortization. Net investment income increased by $214 Primarily driving the $214 increase in net investment income was a higher average invested asset base and income earned from a higher portfolio yield. The increase in the average invested asset base contributing to the increase in investment income was primarily due to positive operating cash flows, partially offset by the return of capital to Corporate. Contributing to the increase in net investment income was an increase in income from limited partnerships and other alternative investments, driven by a higher yield on these investments and shifting a greater allocation of investments to these asset classes. 128 Table of Contents Net realized capital losses increased by $143 Net realized capital losses increased from $17 in 2006 to $160 in 2007, primarily due to an increase in impairments and decreases in the fair value of non-qualifying derivatives attributable to changes in value associated with credit derivatives due to credit spread widening. Impairments in 2007 primarily consisted of impairments of asset-backed securities backed by sub-prime residential mortgage loans and impairments of corporate securities in the financial services and homebuilders sectors. (See the Other-Than-Temporary Impairments discussion within Investment Results for more information on the impairments recorded in 2007). Other expenses increased by $26 Other expenses increased by $26, primarily due to $49 of interest charged by Corporate on the amount of capital held by the Property & Casualty operation in excess of the amount needed to support the capital requirements of the Property & Casualty operation, partially offset by a reduction in the estimated cost of legal settlements in 2007. 129 Table of Contents PERSONAL LINES Personal Lines sells automobile, homeowners and home-based business coverages directly to the consumer and through a network of independent agents. Most of the Company personal lines business sold directly to the consumer is to the members of AARP through a direct marketing operation. Up until the sale of the business on November 30, 2006, the Company also sold non-standard auto insurance through the Company Omni Insurance Group, Inc. ( Omni ) subsidiary. Personal Lines also operates a member contact center for health insurance products offered through the AARP Health program. The Hartford exclusive licensing arrangement with AARP continues until January 1, 2020 for automobile, homeowners and home-based business. The AARP Health program agreement continues through 2009. Written Premiums [1] 2008 2007 2006 Business Unit AARP $ 2,813 $ 2,750 $ 2,580 Agency 1,050 1,123 1,100 Other 62 74 197 Total $ 3,925 $ 3,947 $ 3,877 Product Line Automobile $ 2,829 $ 2,848 $ 2,856 Homeowners 1,096 1,099 1,021 Total $ 3,925 $ 3,947 $ 3,877 Earned Premiums [1] 2008 2007 2006 Business Unit AARP $ 2,778 $ 2,681 $ 2,466 Agency 1,080 1,123 1,068 Other 68 85 226 Total $ 3,926 $ 3,889 $ 3,760 Product Line Automobile $ 2,824 $ 2,822 $ 2,792 Homeowners 1,102 1,067 968 Total $ 3,926 $ 3,889 $ 3,760 [1] The difference between written premiums and earned premiums is attributable to the change in unearned premium reserve. Premium Measures 2008 2007 2006 Policies in force at year end Automobile 2,323,882 2,349,402 2,276,165 Homeowners 1,455,954 1,481,542 1,440,399 Total policies in force at year end 3,779,836 3,830,944 3,716,564 New business premium Automobile $ 364 $ 424 $ 469 Homeowners $ 106 $ 140 $ 161 Premium Renewal Retention Automobile 87 % 88 % 87 % Homeowners 89 % 96 % 94 % Written Pricing Increase (Decrease) Automobile 2 % (1 %) Homeowners 2 % 5 % 5 % Earned Pricing Increase (Decrease) Automobile 1 % (1 %) (1 %) Homeowners 3 % 6 % 5 % 130 Table of Contents Earned Premiums Year ended December 31, 2008 compared to the year ended December 31, 2007 Earned premiums increased $37, or 1%, due primarily to earned premium growth in AARP, partially offset by earned premium decreases in Agency and Other. AARP earned premium grew $97, reflecting modest earned pricing increases for both auto and homeowners and the effect of new business premium outpacing non-renewals in the last nine months of 2007. New business has offset non-renewals in 2008 and new business in 2008 has been driven by growth in the size of the AARP target market, the effect of direct marketing programs and the effect of cross selling homeowners insurance to insureds who have auto policies. Agency earned premium decreased by $43 as the effect of a decline in new business premium and premium renewal retention since the middle of 2007 was partially offset by the effect of modest earned pricing increases. The market environment continues to be intensely competitive. The increase in advertising for auto business among the top carriers is also occurring with homeowners business, particularly in non-coastal and non-catastrophe prone areas. In 2008, a number of Personal Lines carriers began to increase rates although a significant portion of the market continues to compete heavily on price. Other earned premium decreased by $17, primarily due to a decision to reduce other affinity business. Auto earned premium was relatively flat in 2008 as the effect of earned pricing increases of 1% was largely offset by a decrease in new business since the middle of 2007. Homeowners earned premium grew 3% largely due to earned pricing increases of 3%. New business premium Both auto and homeowners new business written premium decreased in 2008. Auto new business decreased by $60, or 14%, including decreases in both AARP and Agency. Homeowners new business decreased by $34, or 24%, including decreases in both AARP and Agency. AARP new business written premium decreased primarily due to lower auto and homeowners policy conversion rates, driven by increased competition, including the effect of price decreases by some carriers and the effect of continued advertising among carriers for new business. Agency new business written premium decreased primarily due to price competition driven, in part, by a greater number of agents using comparative rating software to obtain quotes from multiple carriers. Premium renewal retention Premium renewal retention for auto decreased from 88% to 87%, driven primarily by a decrease in policy retention for both AARP and Agency business, partially offset by the effect of modest written pricing increases in 2008. Premium renewal retention for homeowners decreased from 96% to 89% driven by a decrease in retention for both AARP and Agency business. The decrease in premium renewal retention for AARP homeowners business was driven by increased price competition by some carriers and mandated homeowners rate declines in Florida for AARP policies. The decrease in premium renewal retention for Agency homeowners business was due, in part, to Florida policyholders non-renewing as a result of the Company decision to stop renewing Florida homeowners policies sold through agents. Earned pricing increase (decrease) Auto earned pricing increases of 1% represent the portion of the 2% increase in written pricing for 2008 that is reflected in earned premium. While auto written pricing was flat in 2007, in 2008 the Company has increased auto insurance rates in certain states for certain classes to maintain profitability in the face of rising loss costs. Although moderating, written pricing increases in 2008 included the effect of policyholders purchasing newer vehicle models in place of older models. Homeowners earned pricing increases of 3% primarily reflect the earning of a blend of mid-single digit written pricing increases recognized over the last nine months of 2007 and 2% written pricing increases recognized in the first nine months of 2008. Written pricing increases in homeowners were largely driven by increases in coverage limits due to rising replacement costs. Policies in-force The number of policies in-force decreased slightly for both auto and homeowners, primarily due to a 7% decline in the number of Agency policies in-force, partially offset by a 1% increase in the number of AARP policies in-force. Year ended December 31, 2007 compared to the year ended December 31, 2006 Earned premiums increased $129, or 3%, primarily due to earned premium growth in both AARP and Agency, partially offset by a reduction in Other earned premium. AARP earned premium grew $215, or 9%, reflecting growth in the size of the AARP target market, the effect of direct marketing programs and the effect of cross selling homeowners insurance to insureds who have auto policies. Agency earned premium grew $55, or 5%, as a result of an increase in the number of agency appointments and further refinement of the Dimensions class plans first introduced in 2003. Dimensions allows Personal Lines to write a broader class of risks. The plan, which is available through the Company network of independent agents, was enhanced beginning in the third quarter of 2006 as Dimensions with Auto Packages and the enhanced plan is now offered in 34 states with four distinct package offerings as of December 31, 2007. Other earned premium decreased by $141, primarily due to the sale of Omni on November 30, 2006 and a strategic decision to reduce other affinity business. Omni accounted for earned premiums of $127 for the year ended December 31, 2006. 131 Table of Contents The earned premium growth in AARP and Agency was primarily due to auto and homeowners new business written premium outpacing non-renewals over the last six months of 2006 and the first six months of 2007. Auto earned premium grew slightly, by $30, or 1%, for the year ended December 31, 2007, primarily due to new business outpacing non-renewals in AARP and Agency over the last six months of 2006 and the first six months of 2007, partially offset by the effect of the sale of Omni. Before considering the effect of the sale of Omni, auto earned premium grew $152, or 6%, for the year ended December 31, 2007. Homeowners earned premium grew $99, or 10%, primarily due to earned pricing increases and due to new business outpacing non-renewals in AARP business over the last six months of 2006 and the first six months of 2007 and new business outpacing non-renewals in Agency over the last three months of 2006 and the first six months of 2007. New business premium Omni accounted for $25 of new business written premium during the 2006 calendar year. Excluding Omni business, auto new business written premium decreased by $20, or 5%, to $424, for the year ended December 31, 2007. The decrease in auto new business premium was due to a decrease in AARP and Agency auto new business as a result of increased competition. Homeowners new business written premium decreased by $21, or 13%, primarily due to a decrease in Agency new business, partially offset by an increase in AARP new business. Premium renewal retention Premium renewal retention for auto increased from 87% to 88% for the year ended December 31, 2007, primarily due to the sale of the Omni non-standard auto business during 2006, which had a lower premium renewal retention than the Company standard auto business. Excluding Omni business, premium renewal retention decreased slightly, from 89% to 88%, as renewal retention remained flat in AARP and decreased in Agency. Premium renewal retention for homeowners increased from 94% to 96% for the year ended December 31, 2007, primarily due to an increase in retention of Agency business. Earned pricing increase (decrease) The trend in earned pricing during 2007 was primarily a reflection of the written pricing changes in the last six months of 2006 and the first six months of 2007. Written pricing remained flat in auto primarily due to an extended period of favorable results factoring into the rate setting process. Homeowners written pricing continued to increase due largely to increases in insurance to value and an increase in the value of insured properties. Insurance to value is the ratio of the amount of insurance purchased to the value of the insured property. Policies in-force Consistent with the growth in earned premium, the number of policies in-force has increased in auto and homeowners. The growth in policies in-force does not correspond directly with the growth in earned premiums due to the effect of earned pricing changes and because policy in-force counts are as of a point in time rather than over a period of time. 132 Table of Contents Personal Lines - Underwriting Summary 2008 2007 2006 Written premiums $ 3,925 $ 3,947 $ 3,877 Change in unearned premium reserve (1 ) 58 117 Earned premiums 3,926 3,889 3,760 Losses and loss adjustment expenses Current accident year before catastrophes 2,542 2,576 2,396 Current accident year catastrophes 258 125 120 Prior accident years (51 ) (4 ) (38 ) Total losses and loss adjustment expenses 2,749 2,697 2,478 Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs 633 617 622 Insurance operating costs and expenses 264 253 231 Underwriting results $ 280 $ 322 $ 429 Loss and loss adjustment expense ratio Current accident year before catastrophes 64.8 66.2 63.8 Current accident year catastrophes 6.6 3.2 3.2 Prior accident years (1.3 ) (0.1 ) (1.0 ) Total loss and loss adjustment expense ratio 70.0 69.3 65.9 Expense ratio 22.8 22.4 22.7 Combined ratio 92.9 91.7 88.6 Catastrophe ratio Current accident year 6.6 3.2 3.2 Prior accident years 0.2 0.2 (0.4 ) Total catastrophe ratio 6.8 3.4 2.8 Combined ratio before catastrophes 86.1 88.3 85.8 Combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development 87.6 88.6 86.4 Other revenues [1] $ 135 $ 141 $ 135 [1] Represents servicing revenue Combined Ratios 2008 2007 2006 Automobile 91.0 96.2 93.6 Homeowners 97.6 79.8 74.0 Total 92.9 91.7 88.6 Underwriting Results and Ratios Year ended December 31, 2008 compared to the year ended December 31, 2007 Underwriting results decreased by $42, from $322 in 2007 to $280 in 2008, with a corresponding 1.2 point increase in the combined ratio, from 91.7 to 92.9 due to: Change in underwriting results Increase in earned premiums $ 37 Losses and loss adjustment expenses Ratio change A decrease in the current accident loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes 59 Volume change Increase in current accident year losses and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes due to the increase in earned premium (25 ) Decrease in current accident year losses and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes 34 Catastrophes Increase in current accident year catastrophes (133 ) Reserve changes An increase in net favorable prior accident year reserve development 47 Net increase in losses and loss adjustment expenses (52 ) Operating expenses Increase in amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs (16 ) Increase in insurance operating costs and expenses (11 ) Increase in operating expenses (27 ) Decrease in underwriting results from 2007 to 2008 $ (42 ) 133 Table of Contents Earned premium increased by $37 Earned premiums increased $37, or 1%, primarily due to earned premium growth in AARP, partially offset by a decrease in Agency and Other earned premium. Refer to the earned premium section above for further discussion. Losses and loss adjustment expenses increased by $52 Current accident year losses and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes decreased by $34 Personal Lines current accident year losses and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes decreased by $34, to $2,542, due to a decrease in the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes, partially offset by the effect of higher earned premium. The current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes decreased by 1.4 points, to 64.8. The decrease was primarily due to favorable expected frequency on auto liability claims and the effect of earned pricing increases for both auto and homeowners, partially offset by increased frequency and severity of non-catastrophe losses on homeowners business. Current accident year catastrophes increased by $133 Current accident year catastrophe losses of $258, or 6.6 points, in 2008 were higher than current accident year catastrophe losses of $125, or 3.2 points, in 2007, primarily due to losses from hurricane Ike and tornadoes and thunderstorms in the South and Midwest. Net favorable prior accident year reserve development increased by $47 Net favorable reserve development of $51 in 2008 included a $46 release of auto liability reserves, primarily related to accident years 2005 to 2007 and a $24 release of reserves for extra-contractual liability claims under non-standard personal auto policies. Net favorable reserve development of $4 in 2007 included a $16 release of reserves for loss and allocated loss and loss adjustment expenses on Personal Lines auto liability claims for accident years 2002 to 2006. Operating expenses increased by $27 Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs increased by $16, driven primarily by the increase in earned premium and the amortization of a higher amount of acquisition costs for AARP business. Insurance operating costs and expenses increased by $11, primarily due to an estimated $10 of assessments owed to TWIA in 2008. The expense ratio increased 0.4 points, to 22.8, due to the increase in insurance operating costs and expenses and the amortization of a higher amount of acquisition costs on AARP business. Year ended December 31, 2007 compared to the year ended December 31, 2006 Underwriting results decreased by $107, from $429 to $322, with a corresponding 3.1 point increase in the combined ratio, from 88.6 to 91.7, due to: Change in underwriting results Earned premiums Excluding Omni, a 7% increase in earned premium $ 251 Decrease in earned premium due to the sale of Omni in the fourth quarter of 2006 (122 ) Net increase in earned premiums 129 Losses and loss adjustment expenses Volume change Increase in current accident year loss and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes due to the increase in earned premiums, excluding Omni (160 ) Ratio change An increase in the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes, excluding Omni (125 ) Sale of Omni Decrease in current accident year loss and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes as a result of the sale of Omni 105 Net increase in current accident year loss and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes (180 ) Catastrophes Increase in current accident year catastrophe losses (5 ) Reserve changes A decrease in net favorable prior accident year reserve development (34 ) Net increase in losses and loss adjustment expenses (219 ) Operating expenses Decrease in amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs 5 Increase in insurance operating costs and expenses (22 ) Net increase in operating expenses (17 ) Decrease in underwriting results from 2006 to 2007 $ (107 ) 134 Table of Contents Sale of Omni The Company sold its Omni non-standard auto business in the fourth quarter of 2006. Omni accounted for an underwriting loss of $52 in 2006, including $127 of earned premiums, $140 of loss and loss adjustment expenses, $30 of amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs and $9 of insurance operating costs and expenses. Earned premium increased by $129 Personal Lines earned premium increased by $129, or 3%, to $3,889, primarily driven by an increase in AARP and Agency earned premium, partially offset by a decrease of $122 due to the sale of Omni in 2006. Refer to the earned premium discussion for a description of the increase in earned premium. Losses and loss adjustment expenses increased by $219 Current accident year loss and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes increased by $180 Personal Lines current accident year loss and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes increased by $180 in 2007, to $2,576, due to an increase in earned premium and an increase in the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes, partially offset by a decrease due to the sale of Omni. Excluding the effect of Omni, the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes increased by 3.3 points, to 66.2. The increase was primarily due to a higher loss and loss adjustment expense ratio for auto liability claims, increased frequency on auto property damage claims and, to a lesser extent, increased severity on homeowners claims, partially offset by the effect of earned pricing increases in homeowners. The higher loss and loss adjustment expense ratio for auto liability claims was primarily driven by increased bodily injury severity. Current accident year catastrophes increased by $5 Current accident year catastrophe losses of $125, or 3.2 points, in 2007 were slightly higher than current accident year catastrophe losses of $120, or 3.2 points, in 2006. The largest catastrophe losses in 2007 were from wildfires in California, spring windstorms in the Southeast and Northeast, tornadoes and thunderstorms in the Midwest and a December ice storm in the Midwest. Catastrophes losses during 2006 included tornadoes and hail storms in the Midwest and windstorms in Texas and on the East coast. Net favorable prior accident year reserve development decreased by $34 Net favorable prior accident year reserve development decreased from $38, or 1.0 point, in 2006 to $4, or 0.1 points, in 2007. Net favorable reserve development of $4 in 2007 included a $16 release of reserves for loss and allocated loss and loss adjustment expenses on Personal Lines auto liability claims for accident years 2002 to 2006. Net favorable prior accident year reserve development of $38 in 2006 included a $53 reduction in prior accident year reserves for auto liability claims related to accident years 2003 to 2005 and a $23 reduction in hurricane catastrophe reserves related to the 2004 and 2005 hurricanes, partially offset by a $30 increase in reserves for personal auto liability claims due to an increase in estimated severity on claims where the Company is exposed to losses in excess of policy limits. Operating expenses increased by $17 The expense ratio decreased by 0.3 points, to 22.4, in 2007, due largely to an increase in insurance operating costs and expenses. Omni accounted for $9 of insurance operating costs and expenses in 2006. Excluding Omni, insurance operating costs and expenses increased by $31, or 14%, primarily due to the effect of a $19 reduction of estimated Citizen assessments in 2006 related to 2005 Florida hurricanes. Also contributing to the increase in insurance and operating costs was an increase in AARP distribution costs and other insurance operating costs, partially offset by lower IT costs. Omni accounted for $30 of amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs in 2006. Excluding Omni, amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs increased by $25, or 4%, driven primarily by the increase in earned premium. 135 Table of Contents SMALL COMMERCIAL Small Commercial provides standard commercial insurance coverage to small commercial businesses, primarily throughout the United States, with up to $5 in annual payroll, $15 in annual revenues or $15 in total property values. This segment offers workers compensation, property, automobile, liability and umbrella coverages. Premiums [1] 2008 2007 2006 Written premiums $ 2,696 $ 2,747 $ 2,728 Earned premiums $ 2,724 $ 2,736 $ 2,652 [1] The difference between written premiums and earned premiums is attributable to the change in unearned premium reserve. Premium Measures 2008 2007 2006 New business premium $ 446 $ 481 $ 533 Premium renewal retention 82 % 84 % 87 % Written pricing increase (decrease) (2 %) (2 %) 1 % Earned pricing increase (decrease) (2 %) (1 %) 1 % Policies in-force end of period 1,055,463 1,038,542 991,979 Earned Premiums Year ended December 31, 2008 compared to the year ended December 31, 2007 Earned premiums for the Small Commercial segment were down slightly as a decrease in commercial auto was largely offset by an increase in worker compensation. The earned premium decrease was largely due to the effect of non-renewals outpacing new business for commercial auto business in 2008 and to earned pricing decreases, largely offset by new business outpacing non-renewals in workers compensation business over the last nine months of 2007 and the first nine months of 2008. While the Company has focused on increasing new business from its agents and expanding writings in certain territories, actions taken by some of the Company competitors to increase market share and increase business appetite in certain classes of risks and actions taken by the Company to reduce workers compensation rates in certain states have contributed to the decrease in written premiums from 2007 to 2008. New business premium New business written premium was down $35, or 7%, driven by a decrease in new package and commercial automobile business. New business for package and commercial auto business declined due to increased competition despite the use of lower pricing on targeted accounts and an increase in commissions paid to agents. New business written premium for workers compensation was up modestly. Premium renewal retention Premium renewal retention decreased from 84% to 82% due largely to the effect of a decrease in retention of workers compensation business, including the effect of larger written pricing decreases. Earned pricing increase (decrease) Earned pricing decreased for workers compensation and commercial auto and was flat for package business. As written premium is earned over the 12-month term of the policies, the earned pricing changes during 2008 were primarily a reflection of written pricing decreases of 2% over the last nine months of 2007 and 2% over the first nine months of 2008. Policies in-force While earned premium was slightly down for 2008, the number of policies in-force has increased 2%. The growth in policies in-force does not correspond directly with the change in earned premiums due to the effect of changes in earned pricing and changes in the average premium per policy. 136 Table of Contents Year ended December 31, 2007 compared to the year ended December 31, 2006 Earned premiums for the Small Commercial segment increased $84, or 3%, primarily due to new business premiums outpacing non-renewals for workers compensation business over the last six months of 2006 and the first six months of 2007. New business premium New business written premium for Small Commercial decreased by $52, or 10%, as increased competition led to a reduction in new business for workers compensation, package business and commercial auto. While the Company has focused on increasing new business from its agents and expanding writings in certain territories, actions taken by some of the Company competitors to increase market share and increase business appetite in certain classes of risks may be contributing to the Company lower new business growth. Also contributing to the decrease in new business premium is lower average premium per account partly due to writing more liability-only policies. Premium renewal retention Premium renewal retention for Small Commercial decreased due, in part, to lower retention of larger accounts and a reduction in average premium per account. Earned pricing increase (decrease) As written premium is earned over the 12-month term of the policies, the earned pricing changes during 2007 are primarily a reflection of the written pricing changes over the last six months of 2006 and the first six months of 2007. Policies in-force Consistent with the increase in earned premium, the number of policies in force has increased. The growth in policies in force does not correspond directly with the change in earned premiums due to the effect of changes in earned pricing, changes in the average premium per policy and because policy in force counts are as of a point in time rather than over a period of time. Small Commercial Underwriting Summary 2008 2007 2006 Written premiums $ 2,696 $ 2,747 $ 2,728 Change in unearned premium reserve (28 ) 11 76 Earned premiums 2,724 2,736 2,652 Losses and loss adjustment expenses Current accident year before catastrophes 1,447 1,594 1,509 Current accident year catastrophes 122 28 34 Prior accident years (89 ) (209 ) (75 ) Total losses and loss adjustment expenses 1,480 1,413 1,468 Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs 636 635 634 Insurance operating costs and expenses 171 180 128 Underwriting results $ 437 $ 508 $ 422 Loss and loss adjustment expense ratio Current accident year before catastrophes 53.1 58.3 56.9 Current accident year catastrophes 4.5 1.0 1.3 Prior accident years (3.3 ) (7.6 ) (2.8 ) Total loss and loss adjustment expense ratio 54.3 51.6 55.3 Expense ratio 29.1 29.2 28.5 Policyholder dividend ratio 0.5 0.6 0.2 Combined ratio 84.0 81.4 84.1 Catastrophe ratio Current accident year 4.5 1.0 1.3 Prior accident years (0.1 ) 0.2 (0.7 ) Total catastrophe ratio 4.4 1.2 0.6 Combined ratio before catastrophes 79.6 80.3 83.5 Combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development 82.8 88.0 85.6 137 Table of Contents Underwriting results and ratios Year ended December 31, 2008 compared to the year ended December 31, 2007 Underwriting results decreased by $71, from $508 to $437, with a corresponding 2.6 point increase in the combined ratio, from 81.4 to 84.0, due to: Change in underwriting results Decrease in earned premiums $ (12 ) Losses and loss adjustment expenses Ratio change A decrease in the current accident loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes 140 Volume change Decrease in current accident year losses and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes due to the decrease in earned premium 7 Decrease in current accident year losses and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes 147 Catastrophes Increase in current accident year catastrophes (94 ) Reserve changes Decrease in net favorable prior accident year reserve development (120 ) Net increase in losses and loss adjustment expenses (67 ) Operating expenses Increase in amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs (1 ) Decrease in insurance operating costs and expenses 9 Decrease in operating expenses 8 Decrease in underwriting results from 2007 to 2008 $ (71 ) Earned premium decreased by $12 Refer to the earned premium section above for discussion. Losses and loss adjustment expenses increased by $67 Current accident year losses and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes decreased by $147 Small Commercial current accident year losses and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes decreased by $147 in 2008, to $1,447, primarily due to a 5.2 point decrease in the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes, to 53.1. The decrease in this ratio was primarily due to a lower loss and loss adjustment expense ratio for workers compensation business and, to a lesser extent, a lower loss and loss adjustment expense ratio for package business. Workers compensation claim frequency has been trending favorably for recent accident years due to improved workplace safety and underwriting actions and the lower loss and loss adjustment expense ratio for the 2008 accident year includes an assumption that this lower of claim frequency would continue for the 2008 accident year. The loss and loss adjustment expense ratio for the 2007 accident year recorded in 2007 did not give as much credence to this lower level of claim frequency. The effect of lower claim frequency for workers compensation claims was partially offset by the effect of earned pricing decreases. Current accident year catastrophes increased by $94 Current accident year catastrophe losses of $122, or 4.5 points, in 2008 were higher than current accident year catastrophe losses of $28, or 1.0 point, in 2007, primarily due to hurricane Ike and tornadoes and thunderstorms in the South and Midwest. Net favorable prior accident year development decreased by $120 Net favorable prior accident year development of $89 in 2008 included a $92 release of workers compensation reserves related to accident years 2000 to 2007. Net favorable reserve development of $209 in 2007 included a $151 release of workers compensation loss and loss adjustment expense reserves for accident years 2002 to 2006, a $33 release of workers compensation loss reserves accident years 1987 to 2000 and a $30 release of loss reserves for package business for accident years 2003 to 2006. Operating expenses decreased by $8 Insurance operating costs and expenses decreased by $9, primarily due to lower compensation-related and servicing costs, partially offset by an estimated $7 of TWIA assessments in 2008. Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs of $636 was relatively flat consistent with the change in earned premium. The expense ratio decreased slightly in 2008, to 29.1, driven by the decrease in insurance operating costs and expenses. 138 Table of Contents Year ended December 31, 2007 compared to the year ended December 31, 2006 Underwriting results increased by $86, from $422 to $508, with a corresponding 2.7 point improvement in the combined ratio, from 84.1 to 81.4, due to: Change in underwriting results Increase in earned premiums $ 84 Losses and loss adjustment expenses Volume change Increase in current accident year loss and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes due to the increase in earned premium (47 ) Ratio change An increase in the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes (38 ) Net increase in current accident year loss and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes (85 ) Catastrophes Decrease in current accident year catastrophe losses 6 Reserve changes Increase in net favorable prior accident year reserve development 134 Net decrease in losses and loss adjustment expenses 55 Operating expenses Increase in amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs (1 ) Increase in insurance operating costs and expenses (52 ) Increase in operating expenses (53 ) Increase in underwriting results from 2006 to 2007 $ 86 Earned premium increased by $84 Small Commercial earned premium increased by $84, or 3%, to $2,736. Refer to the earned premium discussion for a description of the increase in earned premium. Losses and loss adjustment expenses decreased by $55 Current accident year loss and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes increased by $85 Small Commercial current accident year loss and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes increased by $85 in 2007, to $1,594, due to an increase in earned premium and a 1.4 point increase in the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes, to 58.3. The 1.4 point increase in the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes was primarily due to a higher loss ratio and loss adjustment expense ratio for package business and commercial auto claims, partially offset by a lower loss and loss adjustment expense ratio for workers compensation claims. The higher loss and loss adjustment expense ratio on package business was primarily driven by an increase in the number of individual large losses and the higher loss and loss adjustment expense ratio for auto claims was driven, in part, by earned pricing decreases. Expected loss and loss adjustment expenses on workers compensation claims for the 2007 accident year were lower as the assumed level of medical claim severity was not as high as it had been for the 2006 accident year. Current accident year catastrophes decreased by $6 Current accident year catastrophe losses in 2007 of $28, or 1.0 point, were moderately lower than current accident year catastrophes of $34, or 1.3 points, in 2006. The largest catastrophe losses in 2007 were from spring windstorms in the Southeast and Northeast, tornadoes and thunderstorms in the Midwest and wildfires in California. Catastrophes in 2006 included tornadoes and hail storms in the Midwest. Increase in net favorable prior accident year development by $134 Net favorable prior accident year reserve development increased from $75, or 2.8 points, in 2006 to $209, or 7.6 points, in 2007. Net favorable reserve development of $209 in 2007 included a $151 release of workers compensation loss and loss adjustment expense reserves for accident years 2002 to 2006, a $33 release of workers compensation loss reserves accident years 1987 to 2000 and a $30 release of loss reserves for package business for accident years 2003 to 2006. Net favorable reserve development of $75 in 2006 included a $33 reduction in allocated loss adjustment expense reserves, primarily for workers compensation and package business related to accident years 2003 to 2005, and a $22 reduction in prior accident year catastrophe reserves in 2006 related to hurricanes Katrina, Rita and Wilma in 2005 and hurricanes Charley, Frances and Jeanne in 2004. Operating expenses increased by $53 The 0.7 point increase in the expense ratio and the 0.4 point increase in the policyholder dividend ratio was primarily due to an increase in insurance operating costs and expenses. Insurance operating costs increased by $52 due to an increase in IT and other operating costs, a $10 decrease in estimated Citizens assessments in 2006 and a $10 increase in policyholder dividends in 2007. The increase in policyholder dividends in 2007 was largely attributable to a $10 increase in the estimated amount of dividends payable to certain workers compensation policyholders due to underwriting profits. Despite a 3% increase in earned premium, amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs was relatively flat from 2006 to 2007 due largely to an increase in non-deferrable salaries and benefits and other internal operating costs. 139 Table of Contents MIDDLE MARKET Middle Market provides standard commercial insurance coverage to middle market commercial businesses, primarily throughout the United States, with greater than $5 in annual payroll, $15 in annual revenues or $15 in total property values. This segment offers workers compensation, property, automobile, liability, umbrella, marine and livestock coverages. Premiums [1] 2008 2007 2006 Written premiums $ 2,242 $ 2,326 $ 2,515 Earned premiums $ 2,299 $ 2,420 $ 2,523 [1] The difference between written premiums and earned premiums is attributable to the change in unearned premium reserve. Premium Measures 2008 2007 2006 New business premium $ 420 $ 394 $ 464 Premium renewal retention 79 % 78 % 82 % Written pricing decrease (5 %) (5 %) (5 %) Earned pricing decrease (6 %) (5 %) (5 %) Policies in-force as of end of period 90,478 88,254 86,640 Earned Premiums Year ended December 31, 2008 compared to the year ended December 31, 2007 Earned premiums for the Middle Market segment decreased by $121, or 5%, driven primarily by decreases in commercial auto, workers compensation and general liability. Earned premium decreases were primarily due to a decline in earned pricing in 2008 and the effect of non-renewals outpacing new business in commercial auto and general liability over the last nine months of 2007 and the first nine months of 2008, partially offset by the effect of new business written premium outpacing non-renewals in workers compensation since the fourth quarter of 2007. New business premium New business written premium increased by $26, or 7%, in 2008 as an increase in new business written premium for workers compensation was partially offset by a decrease in new business for general liability, marine and commercial auto. While continued price competition and the effect of some state-mandated rate reductions in workers compensation has lessened the attractiveness of new business in certain lines and regions, the Company has increased new business for workers compensation due, in part, to the effect of targeting business in selected industries and regions of the country. Premium renewal retention Premium renewal retention increased from 78% to 79% due largely to an increase in retention of property and marine business, partially offset by the effect of larger written pricing decreases on workers compensation and property business. The Company continued to take actions to protect renewals in 2008, including the use of reduced pricing on targeted accounts. Earned pricing decrease Earned pricing decreased in all lines of business, including workers compensation, commercial auto, general liability, property and marine. As written premium is earned over the 12-month term of the policies, the earned pricing decreases in 2008 were primarily a reflection of mid-single digit written pricing decreases over the last nine months of 2007 and the first nine months of 2008. A number of carriers have continued to compete fairly aggressively on price, particularly on larger accounts within Middle Market, which has contributed to mid-single digit price decreases across the industry. Policies in-force The number of policies in-force increased by 3%, due largely to growth on smaller accounts. 140 Table of Contents Year ended December 31, 2007 compared to the year ended December 31, 2006 Earned premiums for the Middle Market segment decreased by $103, or 4%. The decrease was primarily due to earned pricing decreases and a decrease in new business written premium and premium renewal retention over the last six months of 2006 and the first six months of 2007. New business premium The decrease in new business written premium was primarily due to continued price competition and the effect of state-mandated rate reductions in workers compensation. New business written premium declined in all lines except workers compensation. As written premium is earned over the 12-month term of the policies, the earned pricing changes during 2007 were primarily a reflection of the written pricing changes over the last six months of 2006 and the first six months of 2007. Premium renewal retention The decrease in premium renewal retention was primarily due to continued price competition and the effect of state-mandated rate reductions in workers compensation. Premium renewal retention decreased in all lines of business, including property, commercial auto, general liability, workers compensation and marine. Earned pricing increase (decrease) Earned pricing decreased in all lines of business, including property, commercial auto, general liability, workers compensation and marine. Policies in-force Despite the decrease in earned premium, the number of policies in force has increased. The change in policies in force does not correspond directly with the change in earned premiums due to a reduction in the average premium per policy and because policy in force counts are as of a point in time rather than over a period of time. Middle Market Underwriting Summary 2008 2007 2006 Written premiums $ 2,242 $ 2,326 $ 2,515 Change in unearned premium reserve (57 ) (94 ) (8 ) Earned premiums 2,299 2,420 2,523 Losses and loss adjustment expenses Current accident year before catastrophes 1,460 1,561 1,577 Current accident year catastrophes 116 15 36 Prior accident years (134 ) (16 ) 13 Total losses and loss adjustment expenses 1,442 1,560 1,626 Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs 513 529 544 Insurance operating costs and expenses 175 174 139 Underwriting results $ 169 $ 157 $ 214 Loss and loss adjustment expense ratio Current accident year before catastrophes 63.5 64.5 62.6 Current accident year catastrophes 5.1 0.6 1.5 Prior accident years (5.9 ) (0.7 ) 0.5 Total loss and loss adjustment expense ratio 62.7 64.5 64.6 Expense ratio 29.0 28.5 26.7 Policyholder dividend ratio 0.9 0.6 0.2 Combined ratio 92.6 93.5 91.5 Catastrophe ratio Current accident year 5.1 0.6 1.5 Prior accident years (0.5 ) (0.1 ) Total catastrophe ratio 4.6 0.5 1.4 Combined ratio before catastrophes 88.1 93.0 90.1 Combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development 93.4 93.5 89.6 141 Table of Contents Underwriting results and ratios Year ended December 31, 2008 compared to the year ended December 31, 2007 Underwriting results increased by $12, from $157 in 2007 to $169 in 2008, with a corresponding 0.9 point decrease in the combined ratio, from 93.5 to 92.6, due to: Change in underwriting results Decrease in earned premiums $ (121 ) Losses and loss adjustment expenses Volume change Decrease in current accident year loss and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes due to the decrease in earned premium 78 Ratio change A decrease in the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes 23 Decrease in current accident year loss and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes 101 Catastrophes Increase in current accident year catastrophe losses (101 ) Reserve changes Increase in net favorable prior accident year reserve development 118 Net decrease in losses and loss adjustment expenses 118 Operating expenses Decrease in amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs 16 Increase in insurance operating costs and expenses (1 ) Decrease in operating expenses 15 Increase in underwriting results from 2007 to 2008 $ 12 Earned premium decreased by $121 Earned premiums for the Middle Market segment decreased by $121, or 5%, driven primarily by decreases in commercial auto, workers compensation and general liability. Refer to the earned premium section for further discussion. Losses and loss adjustment expenses decreased by $118 Current accident year losses and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes decreased by $101 Middle Market current accident year losses and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes decreased by $101 due largely to a decrease in earned premium. Before catastrophes, the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio decreased by 1.0 point, to 63.5, primarily due to a lower loss and loss adjustment expense ratio on workers compensation and general liability business, largely offset by higher non-catastrophe losses on property and marine business and the effect of earned pricing decreases. The higher non-catastrophe losses on property business were driven by increased severity, including a number of large individual claims, and the higher non-catastrophe losses on marine business were primarily driven by increased frequency. Current accident year catastrophes increased by $101 Current accident year catastrophe losses of $116, or 5.1 points, in 2008 were higher than current accident year catastrophe losses of $15, or 0.6 points, in 2007, primarily due to losses from hurricane Ike and tornadoes and thunderstorms in the South and Midwest. Net favorable prior accident year development increased by $118 Net favorable prior accident year reserve development increased from $16, or 0.7 points, in 2007 to $134, or 5.9 points, in 2008. Net favorable reserve development of $134 in 2008 primarily included a $90 release of reserves for high hazard and umbrella general liability claims, primarily related to the 2001 to 2007 accident years, a $64 release of workers compensation reserves, primarily related to accident years 2000 to 2007 and a $27 release of commercial auto liability reserves, primarily related to accident years 2002 to 2007, partially offset by a $50 strengthening of reserves for general liability and products liability claims primarily for accident years 2004 and prior. Net unfavorable reserve development of $16 in 2007 primarily included a $49 release of general liability loss and loss adjustment expense reserves for accident years 2003 to 2006 and an $18 release of commercial auto liability reserves for accident years 2003 and 2004, partially offset by a $40 strengthening of workers compensation reserves for accident years 1973 & prior and a $14 strengthening of general liability reserves for accident years more than 20 years old. 142 Table of Contents Operating expenses decreased by $15 The $16 decrease in the amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs was largely due to the decrease in earned premium, partially offset by the amortization of higher underwriting costs. Insurance operating costs and expenses included policyholder dividends of $21 in 2008 and $14 in 2007 which increased primarily due to a $6 increase in the estimated amount of dividends payable to certain workers compensation policyholders due to underwriting profits. Apart from policyholder dividends, insurance operating costs and expenses decreased by $6 as the effect of lower compensation-related costs was partially offset by higher IT costs and an estimated $3 of TWIA assessments in 2008. The expense ratio increased by 0.5 points, to 29.0, due to the amortization of higher underwriting costs, the TWIA assessments in 2008 and the effect of lower earned premiums, partially offset by the effect of lower compensation-related costs. Year ended December 31, 2007 compared to the year ended December 31, 2006 Underwriting results decreased by $57, from $214 to $157, with a corresponding 2.0 point increase in the combined ratio, from 91.5 to 93.5, due to: Change in underwriting results Decrease in earned premiums $ (103 ) Losses and loss adjustment expenses Volume change Decrease in current accident year loss and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes due to the decrease in earned premium 61 Ratio change An increase in the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes (45 ) Net decrease in current accident year loss and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes 16 Catastrophes Decrease in current accident year catastrophe losses 21 Reserve changes Change to net favorable prior accident year reserve development 29 Net decrease in losses and loss adjustment expenses 66 Operating expenses Decrease in amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs 15 Increase in insurance operating costs and expenses (35 ) Net increase in operating expenses (20 ) Decrease in underwriting results from 2006 to 2007 $ (57 ) Earned premium decreased by $103 Middle Market earned premium decreased by $103, or 4%, to $2,420. Refer to the earned premium discussion for a description of the decrease in earned premium. Losses and loss adjustment expenses decreased by $66 Current accident year loss and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes decreased by $16 Middle Market current accident year loss and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes decreased by $16 in 2007, to $1,561, due to a decrease in earned premium, largely offset by the effect of an increase in the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes. Before catastrophes, the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio increased by 1.9 points, to 64.5, primarily due to a higher loss and loss adjustment expense ratio for workers compensation, general liability and commercial auto claims driven, in part, by earned pricing decreases. For commercial auto, loss costs increased for both liability and property damage claims. Current accident year catastrophes decreased by $21 Current accident year catastrophe losses decreased by $21, from $36, or 1.5 points, in 2006 to $15, or 0.6 points, in 2007. Compared to 2007, there were more severe catastrophes in 2006, including tornadoes and hail storms in the Midwest and windstorms in Texas and on the East coast. The largest catastrophe losses in 2007 were from spring windstorms in the Southeast and wildfires in California. Change to favorable prior accident year development by $29 Prior accident year reserve development changed from net unfavorable prior accident year reserve development of $13, or 0.5 points, in 2006 to net favorable prior accident year reserve development of $16, or 0.7 points, in 2007. Net favorable reserve development of $16 in 2007 included a $49 release of general liability loss and loss adjustment expense reserves for accident years 2003 to 2006 and an $18 release of commercial auto liability reserves for accident years 2003 and 2004, partially offset by a $40 strengthening of workers compensation reserves for accident years 1973 & prior and a $14 strengthening of general liability reserves for accident years more than 20 years old. 143 Table of Contents Net unfavorable reserve development of $13 in 2006 consisted primarily of a $20 increase in general liability loss and loss adjustment expense reserves related to accident years 1998 to 2005 and a $10 increase in marine loss reserves, partially offset by a $25 reduction in allocated loss adjustment expense reserves for workers compensation business related to accident years 2003 to 2005. Operating expenses increased by $20 The 1.8 point increase in the expense ratio and the 0.4 point increase in the policyholder dividend ratio was primarily due to an increase in insurance operating costs and expenses and the decrease in earned premiums. Insurance operating costs and expenses increased by $35, partially due to the effect of a $12 reduction of estimated Citizens assessments related to the 2005 Florida hurricanes recorded in 2006. Also contributing to the increase in insurance operating costs and expenses was an increase in IT costs, an increase in non-deferrable salaries and benefits, and an $8 increase in policyholder dividends. The increase in policyholder dividends was largely due to an $8 increase in the estimated amount of dividends payable to certain workers compensation policyholders due to underwriting profits. Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs decreased by $15, due largely to the decrease in earned premium and corresponding decrease in acquisition costs. 144 Table of Contents SPECIALTY COMMERCIAL Specialty Commercial offers a variety of customized insurance products and risk management services. The segment provides standard commercial insurance products including workers compensation, automobile and liability coverages to large-sized companies. Specialty Commercial also provides professional liability, fidelity and surety and specialty casualty coverages, as well as core property and excess and surplus lines coverages not normally written by standard lines insurers. Specialty Commercial provides other insurance products and services primarily to captive insurance companies, pools and self-insurance groups. In addition, Specialty Commercial provides third-party administrator services for claims administration, integrated benefits and loss control through Specialty Risk Services. Written Premiums [1] 2008 2007 2006 Property $ 50 $ 111 $ 142 Casualty 538 534 582 Professional liability, fidelity and surety 691 689 697 Other 82 81 117 Total $ 1,361 $ 1,415 $ 1,538 Earned Premiums [1] Property $ 87 $ 133 $ 144 Casualty 526 543 579 Professional liability, fidelity and surety 685 685 650 Other 84 85 120 Total $ 1,382 $ 1,446 $ 1,493 [1] The difference between written premiums and earned premiums is attributable to the change in unearned premium reserve. Earned Premiums Year ended December 31, 2008 compared to the year ended December 31, 2007 Earned premiums for the Specialty Commercial segment decreased by $64, or 4%, primarily due to a decrease in property earned premiums and, to a lesser extent, casualty earned premiums. Property earned premiums decreased by $46, or 35%, primarily due to the Company decision to stop writing specialty property business with large, national accounts and the effect of increased competition for core excess and surplus lines business. As a result of increased competition and capacity for core excess and surplus lines business, the Company has experienced a decrease in earned pricing, lower new business growth and lower premium renewal retention since the third quarter of 2007, particularly for catastrophe-exposed business. Casualty earned premiums decreased by $17, or 3%, primarily because of lower earned premium from captive programs and a decline in new business premium on loss-sensitive business written with larger accounts over the last nine months of 2007 and first three months of 2008. Professional liability, fidelity and surety earned premium was flat. Earned premium for professional liability was relatively flat as the effect of earned pricing decreases in 2008 and the effect of a decline in new business written premium over the last nine months of 2007 and the first six months of 2008 were largely offset by the effect of a decrease in the portion of risks ceded to outside reinsurers. Earned premium for fidelity and surety business was also relatively flat as a modest decrease in commercial surety was largely offset by a modest increase in contract surety. Within the Other category, earned premium remained relatively flat from 2007 to 2008. The Other category of earned premiums includes premiums assumed under inter-segment arrangements. Year ended December 31, 2007 compared to the year ended December 31, 2006 Earned premiums for the Specialty Commercial segment decreased by $47, or 3%, for the year ended December 31, 2007, primarily due to a decrease in casualty, property and other earned premiums, partially offset by an increase in professional liability, fidelity and surety earned premiums. Property earned premiums decreased by $11, or 8%, primarily due to lower premium renewal retention and the effect of an arrangement with Berkshire Hathaway to share premiums written under subscription policies. Under the arrangement with Berkshire Hathaway that commenced in the second quarter of 2007, a share of excess and surplus lines business that was previously written entirely by the Company is now being written in conjunction with Berkshire Hathaway under subscription policies, whereby both companies share, or participate, in the business written. The arrangement with Berkshire Hathaway enables the Company to offer its insureds larger policy limits and thereby enhance its competitive position in the marketplace. The decrease in earned premium was partially offset by the effect of earned pricing increases, new business growth, lower reinsurance costs and a decrease in reinstatement premium payable to reinsurers. Renewal retention has decreased in 2007, primarily due to increased competition on national account business as well as in the standard excess and surplus lines market. After experiencing significant rate increases throughout 2006 and smaller rate increases for the first six months of 2007, written pricing decreased in the last six months of the year. While new business decreased in the fourth quarter of 2007, new business increased for the full year, largely because the Company had significantly curtailed new business in 2006 in order to reduce catastrophe loss exposures in certain geographic areas. 145 Table of Contents Casualty earned premiums decreased by $36, or 6%, for the year ended December 31, 2007, primarily because of a decline in new business written premium and lower premium renewal retention on business written through industry trade groups. Also contributing to the decrease in earned premiums was an increase in the estimated return premium due to insureds under retrospectively-rated policies. Professional liability, fidelity and surety earned premium grew $35, or 5%, for the year ended December 31, 2007 due to an increase in earned premiums in professional liability and surety business. The increase in earned premium from professional liability business was primarily due to a decrease in the portion of risks ceded to outside reinsurers and an increase in the mix of lower limit middle market professional liability premium, partially offset by the effect of earned pricing decreases and a decrease in new business written premium. A lower frequency of class action cases in the past couple of years has put downward pressure on rates during 2006 and 2007. The increase in earned premium from surety business was primarily due to an increase in public construction spending and construction costs, resulting in more bonded work programs for current clients and larger bond limits. Within the other category, earned premium decreased by $35, or 29%. The Other category of earned premiums includes premiums assumed under inter-segment arrangements. Beginning in the third quarter of 2006, the Company reduced the premiums assumed by Specialty Commercial under inter-segment arrangements covering certain liability claims. Specialty Commercial Underwriting Summary 2008 2007 2006 Written premiums $ 1,361 $ 1,415 $ 1,538 Change in unearned premium reserve (21 ) (31 ) 45 Earned premiums 1,382 1,446 1,493 Losses and loss adjustment expenses Current accident year before catastrophes 941 961 1,025 Current accident year catastrophes 47 9 9 Prior accident years (81 ) 84 36 Total losses and loss adjustment expenses 907 1,054 1,070 Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs 313 323 306 Insurance operating costs and expenses 91 87 71 Underwriting results $ 71 $ (18 ) $ 46 Loss and loss adjustment expense ratio Current accident year before catastrophes 68.1 66.6 68.4 Current accident year catastrophes 3.4 0.6 0.6 Prior accident years (5.8 ) 5.8 2.5 Total loss and loss adjustment expense ratio 65.6 73.0 71.5 Expense ratio 28.3 27.4 25.6 Policyholder dividend ratio 0.9 0.9 (0.1 ) Combined ratio 94.8 101.3 97.0 Catastrophe ratio Current accident year 3.4 0.6 0.6 Prior accident years (1.2 ) 0.1 (2.6 ) Total catastrophe ratio 2.2 0.7 (2.0 ) Combined ratio before catastrophes 92.6 100.6 99.0 Combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development 97.3 94.9 93.9 Other revenues [1] $ 371 $ 354 $ 337 [1] Represents servicing revenue. 146 Table of Contents Underwriting Results and Ratios Year ended December 31, 2008 compared to the year ended December 31, 2007 Underwriting results increased by $89, with a corresponding 6.5 point decrease in the combined ratio, from 101.3 to 94.8, due to: Change in underwriting results Decrease in earned premiums $ (64 ) Losses and loss adjustment expenses Volume change Decrease in current accident year loss and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes due to the decrease in earned premium 42 Ratio change Increase in the current accident year non-catastrophe loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes (22 ) Net decrease in current accident year losses and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes 20 Catastrophes Increase in current accident year catastrophe losses (38 ) Reserve changes A change to net favorable prior accident year reserve development 165 Net decrease in losses and loss adjustment expenses 147 Operating expenses Decrease in amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs 10 Increase in insurance operating costs and expenses (4 ) Net decrease in operating expenses 6 Increase in underwriting results from 2007 to 2008 $ 89 Earned premium decreased by $64 Earned premiums for the Specialty Commercial segment decreased by $64, or 4%, primarily due to a decrease in property and, to a lesser extent, casualty earned premiums. Refer to the earned premium section above for further discussion. Losses and loss adjustment expenses decreased by $147 Current accident year losses and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes decreased by $20 Specialty Commercial current accident year losses and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes decreased by $20 in 2008, to $941, due to a decrease in earned premium, partially offset by an increase in the loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development. The loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development increased by 1.5 points, to 68.1, primarily due to a higher loss and loss adjustment expense ratio for directors and officers insurance in professional liability, driven by earned pricing decreases, and a lower mix of property business which has a lower loss and loss adjustment ratio than other businesses within Specialty Commercial. Current accident year catastrophes increased by $38 Current accident year catastrophe losses increased $38, or 2.8 points, primarily due to losses from hurricane Ike. Change to net favorable prior accident year reserve development by $165 Prior accident year reserve development changed from net unfavorable prior accident year reserve development of $84, or 5.8 points, in 2007 to net favorable prior accident year reserve development of $81, or 5.8 points, in 2008. Net favorable prior accident year reserve development of $81 in 2008 primarily included a $75 release of reserves for directors and officers insurance and errors and omissions insurance claims related to accident years 2003 to 2006. Prior accident year reserve development in 2007 consisted primarily of a $47 strengthening of workers compensation loss and loss adjustment expense reserves for accident years 1987 to 2001, a $34 strengthening of general liability reserves, primarily related to accident years 1987 to 1997, and a $25 strengthening of general liability reserves for accident years more than 20 years old. Partially offsetting the unfavorable reserve development in 2007 was a $22 release of reserves for surety business for accident years 2003 to 2006. Operating expenses decreased by $6 Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs decreased by $10 due to the decrease in earned premium, partially offset by the effect of an increase in net acquisition costs related to writing a greater mix of higher net commission small commercial and private directors and officers insurance. Insurance operating costs and expenses increased by $4, primarily due to an increase in IT costs. The expense ratio increased by 0.9 points, to 28.3, primarily due to the increase in insurance operating costs and expenses, the increase in net acquisition costs for directors and officers insurance and the effect of the decrease in earned premium. 147 Table of Contents Year ended December 31, 2007 compared to the year ended December 31, 2006 Underwriting results decreased by $64, with a corresponding 4.3 point increase in the combined ratio, to 101.3, due to: Change in underwriting results Decrease in earned premiums $ (47 ) Losses and loss adjustment expenses Volume change Decrease in current accident year loss and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes due to the decrease in earned premium 31 Ratio change Decrease in the current accident year non-catastrophe loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes 33 Total decrease in current accident year loss and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes 64 Reserve changes Increase in net unfavorable prior accident year reserve development (48 ) Net decrease in losses and loss adjustment expenses 16 Operating expenses Increase in amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs (17 ) Increase in insurance operating costs and expenses (16 ) Increase in operating expenses (33 ) Decrease in underwriting results from 2006 to 2007 $ (64 ) Earned premium decreased by $47 Specialty Commercial earned premium decreased by $47, or 3%, to $1,446. Refer to the earned premium discussion for a description of the decrease in earned premium. Losses and loss adjustment expenses decreased by $16 Current accident year loss and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes decreased by $64 Specialty Commercial current accident year loss and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes decreased by $64 in 2007 to $961, due to a decrease in earned premium and a 1.8 point decrease in the loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development, to 66.6. The decrease in the loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development was driven by a lower loss and loss adjustment ratio on directors and officers insurance in professional liability and a decrease in non-catastrophe property loss costs on property business, partially offset by a higher loss and loss adjustment expense ratio on casualty business. Increase in net unfavorable prior accident year development by $48 Net unfavorable prior accident year reserve development increased from $36, or 2.5 points, in 2006 to $84, or 5.8 points, in 2007. Net unfavorable prior accident year reserve development of $84 in 2007 consisted primarily of a $47 strengthening of workers compensation loss and loss adjustment expense reserves for accident years 1987 to 2001, a $34 strengthening of general liability reserves, primarily related to accident years 1987 to 1997, and a $25 strengthening of general liability reserves for accident years more than 20 years old. Partially offsetting the unfavorable reserve development in 2007 was a $22 release of reserves for surety business for accident years 2003 to 2006. Net unfavorable prior accident year reserve development of $36 in 2006 included a $35 strengthening of reserves for construction defects claims on casualty business for accident years 1997 and prior and a $20 strengthening of allocated loss adjustment expense reserves on workers compensation policies for claim payments expected to emerge after 20 years of development, partially offset by a $35 reduction in catastrophe reserves related to the 2005 hurricanes. Operating expenses increased by $33 Insurance operating costs and expenses increased by $16, primarily due to a $16 increase in policyholder dividends. The $16 increase in policyholder dividends was largely due to a $10 reduction in estimated policyholder dividends recorded in 2006 and a $7 increase in estimated policyholder dividends recorded in 2007. The $7 increase in dividends in 2007 was primarily driven by an increase in the estimated amount of dividends payable to certain workers compensation policyholders due to underwriting profits. Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs increased by $17, due largely to an increase in amortization for professional liability, fidelity and surety business driven largely by the increase in earned premiums for that business and a reduction in ceding commissions. The expense ratio increased by 1.8 points, to 27.4, due largely to the reduction in ceding commission on professional liability business and the decrease in earned premiums. 148 Table of Contents OTHER OPERATIONS (INCLUDING ASBESTOS AND ENVIRONMENTAL CLAIMS) Operating Summary 2008 2007 2006 Written premiums $ 7 $ 5 $ 4 Change in unearned premium reserve (1 ) Earned premiums 7 5 5 Losses and loss adjustment expenses prior year 129 193 360 Insurance operating costs and expenses 23 22 11 Underwriting results (145 ) (210 ) (366 ) Net investment income 197 248 261 Net realized capital gains (losses) (208 ) (12 ) 26 Other expenses (3 ) (1 ) (1 ) Net income (loss) before income taxes (159 ) 25 (80 ) Income tax benefit 62 5 45 Net income (loss) $ (97 ) $ 30 $ (35 ) The Other Operations segment includes operations that are under a single management structure, Heritage Holdings, which is responsible for two related activities. The first activity is the management of certain subsidiaries and operations of the Company that have discontinued writing new business. The second is the management of claims (and the associated reserves) related to asbestos, environmental and other exposures. The Other Operations book of business contains policies written from approximately the 1940s to 2003. The Company experience has been that this book of run-off business has, over time, produced significantly higher claims and losses than were contemplated at inception. Year ended December 31, 2008 compared to the year ended December 31, 2007 Other Operations reported a net loss of $97 in 2008 compared to net income of $30 in 2007, driven by the following: A $65 increase in underwriting results, primarily due to a $64 decrease in unfavorable prior year loss development. Reserve development in 2008 included $50 of asbestos reserve strengthening and $53 of environmental reserve strengthening. In 2007, reserve development included $99 principally as a result of an adverse arbitration decision and $25 of environmental reserve strengthening. A $51 decrease in net investment income, primarily as a result of net losses on limited partnerships and other alternative investments in 2008 and decreased fixed maturity income. A $196 increase in net realized capital losses, primarily due to realized losses in 2008 from impairments of subordinated fixed maturities and preferred equity securities in the financial services sector as well as of securitized assets. A $57 increase in income tax benefit, primarily as a result of a change from pre-tax income in 2007 to a pre-tax loss in 2008. Year ended December 31, 2007 compared to the year ended December 31, 2006 Other Operations reported net income of $30 in 2007 compared to a net loss of $35 in 2006, driven by the following: A $156 increase in underwriting results, primarily due to a $167 decrease in unfavorable prior year loss development. Reserve development in 2007 included $99 principally as a result of an adverse arbitration decision and $25 of environmental reserve strengthening. In 2006, reserve development included a $243 reduction in net reinsurance recoverables, $43 of environmental reserve strengthening and $12 of reserve strengthening for assumed reinsurance. A $13 decrease in net investment income, primarily as a result of a decrease in invested assets resulting from net losses and loss adjustment expenses paid. A change from $26 of net realized capital gains in 2006 to $12 of net realized capital losses in 2007, primarily due to an increase in impairments and decreases in the fair value of non-qualifying derivatives attributable to changes in value associated with credit derivatives due to credit spreads widening. A $40 decrease in income tax benefit, primarily as a result of a change from a pre-tax loss in 2006 to pre-tax income in 2007. 149 Table of Contents Asbestos and Environmental Claims The Company continues to receive asbestos and environmental claims. Asbestos claims relate primarily to bodily injuries asserted by people who came in contact with asbestos or products containing asbestos. Environmental claims relate primarily to pollution and related clean-up costs. The Company wrote several different categories of insurance contracts that may cover asbestos and environmental claims. First, the Company wrote primary policies providing the first layer of coverage in an insured liability program. Second, the Company wrote excess policies providing higher layers of coverage for losses that exhaust the limits of underlying coverage. Third, the Company acted as a reinsurer assuming a portion of those risks assumed by other insurers writing primary, excess and reinsurance coverages. Fourth, subsidiaries of the Company participated in the London Market, writing both direct insurance and assumed reinsurance business. With regard to both environmental and particularly asbestos claims, significant uncertainty limits the ability of insurers and reinsurers to estimate the ultimate reserves necessary for unpaid losses and related expenses. Traditional actuarial reserving techniques cannot reasonably estimate the ultimate cost of these claims, particularly during periods where theories of law are in flux. The degree of variability of reserve estimates for these exposures is significantly greater than for other more traditional exposures. In particular, the Company believes there is a high degree of uncertainty inherent in the estimation of asbestos loss reserves. In the case of the reserves for asbestos exposures, factors contributing to the high degree of uncertainty include inadequate loss development patterns, plaintiffs expanding theories of liability, the risks inherent in major litigation, and inconsistent emerging legal doctrines. Furthermore, over time, insurers, including the Company, have experienced significant changes in the rate at which asbestos claims are brought, the claims experience of particular insureds, and the value of claims, making predictions of future exposure from past experience uncertain. Plaintiffs and insureds also have sought to use bankruptcy proceedings, including pre-packaged bankruptcies, to accelerate and increase loss payments by insurers. In addition, some policyholders have asserted new classes of claims for coverages to which an aggregate limit of liability may not apply. Further uncertainties include insolvencies of other carriers and unanticipated developments pertaining to the Company ability to recover reinsurance for asbestos and environmental claims. Management believes these issues are not likely to be resolved in the near future. In the case of the reserves for environmental exposures, factors contributing to the high degree of uncertainty include expanding theories of liability and damages, the risks inherent in major litigation, inconsistent decisions concerning the existence and scope of coverage for environmental claims, and uncertainty as to the monetary amount being sought by the claimant from the insured. It is also not possible to predict changes in the legal and legislative environment and their effect on the future development of asbestos and environmental claims. Although potential Federal asbestos-related legislation was considered by the Senate in 2006, it is uncertain whether such legislation will be reconsidered or enacted in the future and, if enacted, what its effect would be on the Company aggregate asbestos liabilities. The reporting pattern for assumed reinsurance claims, including those related to asbestos and environmental claims, is much longer than for direct claims. In many instances, it takes months or years to determine that the policyholder own obligations have been met and how the reinsurance in question may apply to such claims. The delay in reporting reinsurance claims and exposures adds to the uncertainty of estimating the related reserves. Given the factors described above, the Company believes the actuarial tools and other techniques it employs to estimate the ultimate cost of claims for more traditional kinds of insurance exposure are less precise in estimating reserves for its asbestos and environmental exposures. For this reason, the Company relies on exposure-based analysis to estimate the ultimate costs of these claims and regularly evaluates new information in assessing its potential asbestos and environmental exposures. 150 Table of Contents Reserve Activity Reserves and reserve activity in the Other Operations segment are categorized and reported as asbestos, environmental, or all other . The all other category of reserves covers a wide range of insurance and assumed reinsurance coverages, including, but not limited to, potential liability for construction defects, lead paint, silica, pharmaceutical products, molestation and other long-tail liabilities. In addition, within the all other category of reserves, Other Operations records its allowance for future reinsurer insolvencies and disputes that might affect reinsurance collectability associated with asbestos, environmental, and other claims recoverable from reinsurers. The following table presents reserve activity, inclusive of estimates for both reported and incurred but not reported claims, net of reinsurance, for Other Operations, categorized by asbestos, environmental and all other claims, for the years ended December 31, 2008, 2007 and 2006. Other Operations Losses and Loss Adjustment Expenses Asbestos Environmental All Other [1][6] Total 2008 Beginning liability net [2] [3] $ 1,998 $ 251 $ 1,888 $ 4,137 Losses and loss adjustment expenses incurred 68 54 7 129 Losses and loss adjustment expenses paid (182 ) (36 ) (267 ) (485 ) Ending liability net [2] [3] $ 1,884 [5] $ 269 $ 1,628 $ 3,781 2007 Beginning liability net [2] [3] $ 2,242 $ 316 $ 1,858 $ 4,416 Losses and loss adjustment expenses incurred 43 28 122 193 Losses and loss adjustment expenses paid (287 ) (93 ) (217 ) (597 ) Reallocation of reserves for unallocated loss adjustment expenses [4] 125 125 Ending liability net [2] [3] $ 1,998 $ 251 $ 1,888 $ 4,137 2006 Beginning liability net [2] [3] $ 2,291 $ 360 $ 2,240 $ 4,891 Losses and loss adjustment expenses incurred 314 62 (16 ) 360 Losses and loss adjustment expenses paid (363 ) (106 ) (366 ) (835 ) Ending liability net [2] [3] $ 2,242 $ 316 $ 1,858 $ 4,416 [1] All Other includes unallocated loss adjustment expense reserves and the allowance for uncollectible reinsurance. [2] Excludes asbestos and environmental net liabilities reported in Ongoing Operations of $12 and $6, respectively, as of December 31, 2008, $9 and $6, respectively, as of December 31, 2007, and $9 and $6, respectively, as of December 31, 2006. Total net losses and loss adjustment expenses incurred in Ongoing Operations for the years ended December 31, 2008, 2007 and 2006 includes $16, $10 and $11, respectively, related to asbestos and environmental claims. Total net losses and loss adjustment expenses paid in Ongoing Operations for the years ended December 31, 2008, 2007 and 2006 includes $13, $10 and $12, respectively, related to asbestos and environmental claims. [3] Gross of reinsurance, asbestos and environmental reserves, including liabilities in Ongoing Operations, were $2,498 and $309, respectively, as of December 31, 2008, $2,707 and $290, respectively, as of December 31, 2007, and $3,242 and $362, respectively, as of December 31, 2006. [4] Prior to the second quarter of 2007, the Company evaluated the adequacy of the reserves for unallocated loss adjustment expenses on a company-wide basis. During the second quarter of 2007, the Company refined its analysis of the reserves at the segment level, resulting in the reallocation of reserves among segments, including a reallocation of reserves from Ongoing Operations to Other Operations. [5] The one year and average three year net paid amounts for asbestos claims, including Ongoing Operations, were $189 and $283, respectively, resulting in a one year net survival ratio of 10.0 and a three year net survival ratio of 6.7. Net survival ratio is the quotient of the net carried reserves divided by the average annual payment amount and is an indication of the number of years that the net carried reserve would last (i.e. survive) if the future annual claim payments were consistent with the calculated historical average. [6] The Company includes its allowance for uncollectible reinsurance in the All Other category of reserves. When the Company commutes a ceded reinsurance contract or settles a ceded reinsurance dispute, the portion of the allowance for uncollectible reinsurance attributable to that commutation or settlement, if any, is reclassified to the appropriate cause of loss. In the fourth quarters of 2008, 2007 and 2006, the Company completed evaluations of certain of its non-asbestos and environmental reserves, including its assumed reinsurance liabilities. Based on these evaluations, the Company recognized favorable prior year development of $30 and $18 in 2008 and 2007, respectively, and unfavorable prior year development of $12 in 2006 for its HartRe assumed reinsurance liabilities. The improvement in 2008 and 2007 was the result of lower than expected reported losses. In 2008 and 2007, the favorable HartRe assumed reinsurance development was offset by unfavorable other non-asbestos and environmental prior year development of $30 and $17 in 2008 and 2007, respectively, including $25 of adverse development in 2008 for assumed reinsurance obligations of the Company Bermuda operations. During the third quarters of 2008, 2007 and 2006, the Company completed its annual ground up environmental reserve evaluations. In each of these evaluations, the Company reviewed all of its open direct domestic insurance accounts exposed to environmental liability as well as assumed reinsurance accounts and its London Market exposures for both direct insurance and assumed reinsurance. In all three years, the Company found estimates for individual cases changed based upon the particular circumstances of each account. These changes were case specific and not as a result of any underlying change in the current environment. The Company also found that, during 2008, the decline in the reporting of new accounts and sites has been slower than anticipated in the previous review. The net effect of these changes resulted in $53, $25 and $43 increases in net environmental liabilities in 2008, 2007 and 2006, respectively. The Company currently expects to continue to perform an evaluation of its environmental liabilities annually. 151 Table of Contents In reporting environmental results, the Company divides its gross exposure into Direct, which is subdivided further as: Accounts with future exposure greater than $2.5, Accounts with future exposure less than $2.5, and Other direct; Assumed Reinsurance; and London Market. The unallocated amounts in the Other direct category include an estimate of the necessary reserves for environmental claims related to direct insureds who have not previously tendered environmental claims to the Company. An account may move between categories from one evaluation to the next. For example, an account with future expected exposure of greater than $2.5 in one evaluation may be reevaluated due to changing conditions and re-categorized as less than $2.5 in a subsequent evaluation or vice versa. The following table displays gross environmental reserves and other statistics by category as of December 31, 2008. Summary of Gross Environmental Reserves As of December 31, 2008 Number of Total Gross Environmental Reserves as of September 30, 2008 [1] Accounts [2] Reserves Accounts with future exposure > $2.5 9 $ 44 Accounts with future exposure < $2.5 565 100 Other direct [3] 62 Total Direct 574 206 Assumed Reinsurance 61 London Market 56 Total gross environmental reserves as of September 30, 2008 [1] 323 Gross paid loss activity for the fourth quarter 2008 (16 ) Gross incurred loss activity for the fourth quarter 2008 2 Total gross environmental reserves as of December 31, 2008 [4] [5] $ 309 [1] Gross Environmental Reserves based on the third quarter 2008 environmental reserve study. [2] Number of accounts established as of June 2008. [3] Includes unallocated IBNR. [4] The one year gross paid amount for total environmental claims is $52, resulting in a one year gross survival ratio of 5.9. [5] The three year average gross paid amount for total environmental claims is $95, resulting in a three year gross survival ratio of 3.2. During the second quarters of 2008, 2007 and 2006, the Company completed its annual ground up asbestos reserve evaluations. As part of these evaluations, the Company reviewed all of its open direct domestic insurance accounts exposed to asbestos liability as well as assumed reinsurance accounts and its London Market exposures for both direct insurance and assumed reinsurance. In the second quarter of 2008, the Company found estimates for individual cases changed based upon the particular circumstances of each account. These changes were case specific and not as a result of any underlying change in the current environment. The net effect of these changes resulted in a $50 increase in net asbestos reserves. In 2007 and 2006, these evaluations resulted in no addition to the Company net asbestos reserves. The Company currently expects to continue to perform an evaluation of its asbestos liabilities annually. The Company divides its gross asbestos exposures into Direct, Assumed Reinsurance and London Market. The Company further divides its direct asbestos exposures into the following categories: Major Asbestos Defendants (the Top 70 accounts in Tillinghast published Tiers 1 and 2 and Wellington accounts), which are subdivided further as: Structured Settlements, Wellington, Other Major Asbestos Defendants; Accounts with Future Expected Exposures greater than $2.5, Accounts with Future Expected Exposures less than $2.5 and Unallocated. Structured Settlements are those accounts where the Company has reached an agreement with the insured as to the amount and timing of the claim payments to be made to the insured. The Wellington subcategory includes insureds that entered into the Wellington Agreement dated June 19, 1985. The Wellington Agreement provided terms and conditions for how the signatory asbestos producers would access their coverage from the signatory insurers. The Other Major Asbestos Defendants subcategory represents insureds included in Tiers 1 and 2, as defined by Tillinghast that are not Wellington signatories and have not entered into structured settlements with The Hartford. The Tier 1 and 2 classifications are meant to capture the insureds for which there is expected to be significant exposure to asbestos claims. The Unallocated category includes an estimate of the reserves necessary for asbestos claims related to direct insureds that have not previously tendered asbestos claims to the Company and exposures related to liability claims that may not be subject to an aggregate limit under the applicable policies. An account may move between categories from one evaluation to the next. For example, an account with future expected exposure of greater than $2.5 in one evaluation may be reevaluated due to changing conditions and recategorized as less than $2.5 in a subsequent evaluation or vice versa. 152 Table of Contents The following table displays gross asbestos reserves and other statistics by policyholder category as of December 31, 2008. Summary of Gross Asbestos Reserves As of December 31, 2008 Number of All Time Total All Time Gross Asbestos Reserves as of June 30, 2008 [1] Accounts [2] Paid [3] Reserves Ultimate [3] Major asbestos defendants [5] Structured settlements (includes 3 Wellington accounts) 5 $ 194 $ 408 $ 602 Wellington (direct only) 31 968 67 1,035 Other major asbestos defendants 29 482 168 650 No known policies (includes 3 Wellington accounts) 5 Accounts with future exposure > $2.5 74 715 603 1,318 Accounts with future exposure < $2.5 1,090 282 119 401 Unallocated [6] 1,653 444 2,097 Total Direct 4,294 1,809 6,103 Assumed Reinsurance 1,058 497 1,555 London Market 558 370 928 Total as of June 30, 2008 [1] 5,910 2,676 8,586 Gross paid loss activity for the third quarter and fourth quarter 2008 183 (183 ) Gross incurred loss activity for the third quarter and fourth quarter 2008 5 5 Total as of December 31, 2008 [4] $ 6,093 $ 2,498 $ 8,591 [1] Gross Asbestos Reserves based on the second quarter 2008 asbestos reserve study. [2] An account may move between categories from one evaluation to the next. Reclassifications were made as a result of the reserve evaluation completed in the second quarter of 2008. [3] All Time Paid represents the total payments with respect to the indicated claim type that have already been made by the Company as of the indicated balance sheet date. All Time Ultimate represents the Company estimate, as of the indicated balance sheet date, of the total payments that are ultimately expected to be made to fully settle the indicated payment type. The amount is the sum of the amounts already paid (e.g. All Time Paid ) and the estimated future payments (e.g. the amount shown in the column labeled Total Reserves ). [4] Survival ratio is a commonly used industry ratio for comparing reserve levels between companies. While the method is commonly used, it is not a predictive technique. Survival ratios may vary over time for numerous reasons such as large payments due to the final resolution of certain asbestos liabilities, or reserve re-estimates. The survival ratio is computed by dividing the recorded reserves by the average of the past three years of payments. The ratio is the calculated number of years the recorded reserves would survive if future annual payments were equal to the average annual payments for the past three years. The 3-year gross survival ratio of 5.7 as of December 31, 2008 is computed based on total paid losses of $1.307 billion for the period from January 1, 2006 to December 31, 2008. As of December 31, 2008, the one year gross paid amount for total asbestos claims is $294 resulting in a one year gross survival ratio of 8.5. [5] Includes 25 open accounts at June 30, 2008. Included 26 open accounts at June 30, 2007. [6] Includes closed accounts (exclusive of Major Asbestos Defendants) and unallocated IBNR. For paid and incurred losses and loss adjustment expenses reporting, the Company classifies its asbestos and environmental reserves into three categories: Direct, Assumed Domestic and London Market. Direct insurance includes primary and excess coverage. Assumed reinsurance includes both treaty reinsurance (covering broad categories of claims or blocks of business) and facultative reinsurance (covering specific risks or individual policies of primary or excess insurance companies). London Market business includes the business written by one or more of the Company subsidiaries in the United Kingdom, which are no longer active in the insurance or reinsurance business. Such business includes both direct insurance and assumed reinsurance. Of the three categories of claims (Direct, Assumed Domestic and London Market), direct policies tend to have the greatest factual development from which to estimate the Company exposures. Assumed reinsurance exposures are inherently less predictable than direct insurance exposures because the Company may not receive notice of a reinsurance claim until the underlying direct insurance claim is mature. This causes a delay in the receipt of information at the reinsurer level and adds to the uncertainty of estimating related reserves. London Market exposures are the most uncertain of the three categories of claims. As a participant in the London Market (comprised of both Lloyd of London and London Market companies), certain subsidiaries of the Company wrote business on a subscription basis, with those subsidiaries involvement being limited to a relatively small percentage of a total contract placement. Claims are reported, via a broker, to the lead underwriter and, once agreed to, are presented to the following markets for concurrence. This reporting and claim agreement process makes estimating liabilities for this business the most uncertain of the three categories of claims. 153 Table of Contents The following table sets forth, for the years ended December 31, 2008, 2007 and 2006, paid and incurred loss activity by the three categories of claims for asbestos and environmental. Paid and Incurred Losses and Loss Adjustment Expenses ( LAE ) Development Asbestos and Environmental Asbestos [1] Environmental [1] Paid Incurred Paid Incurred Losses & LAE Losses & LAE Losses & LAE Losses & LAE 2008 Gross Direct $ 207 $ 76 $ 32 $ 69 Assumed Domestic 61 9 (17 ) London Market 19 6 13 Total 287 76 47 65 Ceded (105 ) (8 ) (11 ) (11 ) Net $ 182 $ 68 $ 36 $ 54 2007 Gross Direct $ 251 $ (289 ) $ 90 $ 43 Assumed Domestic 112 72 16 London Market 31 76 8 Total 394 (141 ) 114 43 Ceded (107 ) 184 (21 ) (15 ) Net $ 287 $ 43 $ 93 $ 28 2006 Gross Direct $ 346 $ 5 $ 45 $ 57 Assumed Domestic 199 4 50 (25 ) London Market 66 9 3 Total 611 9 104 35 Ceded (248 ) 305 2 27 Net $ 363 $ 314 $ 106 $ 62 [1] Excludes asbestos and environmental paid and incurred loss and LAE reported in Ongoing Operations. Total gross loss and LAE incurred in Ongoing Operations for the twelve months ended December 31, 2008, 2007, and 2006 includes $15, $9 and $10, respectively, related to asbestos and environmental claims. Total gross loss and LAE paid in Ongoing Operations for the twelve months ended December 31, 2008, 2007, and 2006 includes $12, $10 and $12, respectively, related to asbestos and environmental claims. A number of factors affect the variability of estimates for asbestos and environmental reserves including assumptions with respect to the frequency of claims, the average severity of those claims settled with payment, the dismissal rate of claims with no payment and the expense to indemnity ratio. The uncertainty with respect to the underlying reserve assumptions for asbestos and environmental adds a greater degree of variability to these reserve estimates than reserve estimates for more traditional exposures. While this variability is reflected in part in the size of the range of reserves developed by the Company, that range may still not be indicative of the potential variance between the ultimate outcome and the recorded reserves. The recorded net reserves as of December 31, 2008 of $2.18 billion ($1.90 billion and $275 for asbestos and environmental, respectively) is within an estimated range, unadjusted for covariance, of $1.80 billion to $2.42 billion. The process of estimating asbestos and environmental reserves remains subject to a wide variety of uncertainties, which are detailed in the Critical Accounting Estimates Property & Casualty Reserves, Net of Reinsurance section of Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations. The Company believes that its current asbestos and environmental reserves are reasonable and appropriate. However, analyses of further developments could cause the Company to change its estimates and ranges of its asbestos and environmental reserves, and the effect of these changes could be material to the Company consolidated operating results, financial condition and liquidity. If there are significant developments that affect particular exposures, reinsurance arrangements or the financial condition of particular reinsurers, the Company will make adjustments to its reserves or to the amounts recoverable from its reinsurers. During the second quarter of 2007, an arbitration panel found that a Hartford subsidiary, established as a captive reinsurance company in the 1970s by The Hartford former parent, ITT, had additional obligations to ITT primary insurance carrier under ITT captive insurance program, which ended in 1993. When ITT spun off The Hartford in 1995, the former captive became a Hartford subsidiary. The arbitration concerned whether certain claims could be presented to the former captive in a different manner than ITT primary insurance carrier historically had presented them. Principally as a result of this adverse arbitration decision, the Company recorded a charge of $99. 154 Table of Contents During the second quarters of 2008, 2007 and 2006, the Company completed its annual evaluations of the collectability of the reinsurance recoverables and the adequacy of the allowance for uncollectible reinsurance associated with older, long-term casualty liabilities reported in the Other Operations segment. The evaluations in the second quarters of 2008 and 2007 resulted in no addition to the allowance for uncollectible reinsurance. In the second quarter of 2006, the Company entered into an agreement with Equitas and all Lloyd syndicates reinsured by Equitas (collectively, Equitas ) that resolved, with minor exception, all of the Company ceded and assumed domestic reinsurance exposures with Equitas, including all of the Company reinsurance recoveries from Equitas under the Blanket Casualty Treaty (BCT). As a result of the settlement with Equitas and the 2006 reinsurance recoverable evaluation, the Company reduced its net reinsurance recoverable by $243. In conducting these evaluations of reinsurance recoverables, the Company used its most recent detailed evaluations of ceded liabilities reported in the segment. The Company analyzed the overall credit quality of the Company reinsurers, recent trends in arbitration and litigation outcomes in disputes between cedants and reinsurers, and recent developments in commutation activity between reinsurers and cedants. The Company also considered the effect of the Equitas settlement on the collectability of amounts due from other upper-layer reinsurers under the BCT. The allowance for uncollectible reinsurance reflects management current estimate of reinsurance cessions that may be uncollectible in the future due to reinsurers unwillingness or inability to pay. As of December 31, 2008, the allowance for uncollectible reinsurance for Other Operations totals $254. The Company currently expects to perform its regular comprehensive review of Other Operations reinsurance recoverables annually. Uncertainties regarding the factors that affect the allowance for uncollectible reinsurance could cause the Company to change its estimates, and the effect of these changes could be material to the Company consolidated results of operations or cash flows. Consistent with the Company long-standing reserving practices, the Company will continue to review and monitor its reserves in the Other Operations segment regularly and, where future developments indicate, make appropriate adjustments to the reserves. For a discussion of the Company reserving practices, please see the Critical Accounting Estimates Property & Casualty Reserves, Net of Reinsurance section of Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations. 155 Table of Contents INVESTMENTS General The Hartford investment portfolios are primarily divided between Life and Property & Casualty. The investment portfolios of Life and Property & Casualty are managed by Hartford Investment Management Company ( HIMCO ), a wholly-owned subsidiary of The Hartford. HIMCO manages the portfolios to maximize economic value, while attempting to generate the income necessary to support the Company various product obligations, within internally established objectives, guidelines and risk tolerances. The portfolio objectives and guidelines are developed based upon the asset/liability profile, including duration, convexity and other characteristics within specified risk tolerances. The risk tolerances considered include, for example, asset and credit issuer allocation limits, maximum portfolio below investment grade ( BIG ) holdings and foreign currency exposure. The Company attempts to minimize adverse impacts to the portfolio and the Company results of operations due to changes in economic conditions through asset allocation limits, asset/liability duration matching and through the use of derivatives. For a further discussion of how the investment portfolio credit and market risks are assessed and managed, see the Investment Credit Risk and Capital Markets Risk Management sections of the MD&A. HIMCO portfolio managers may sell securities (except those securities in an unrealized loss position for which the Company has indicated its intent and ability to hold until the price recovers) due to portfolio guidelines or market technicals or trends. For example, the Company may sell securities to manage risk, capture market valuation inefficiencies or relative value opportunities, to remain compliant with internal asset/liability duration matching guidelines, or to modify a portfolio duration to capitalize on interest rate levels or the yield curve slope. HIMCO believes that advantageously buying and selling securities within a disciplined framework, provides the greatest economic value for the Company over the long-term. Return on general account invested assets is an important element of The Hartford financial results. Significant fluctuations in the fixed income or equity markets could weaken the Company financial condition or its results of operations. Additionally, changes in market interest rates may impact the period of time over which certain investments, such as MBS, are repaid and whether certain investments are called by the issuers. Such changes may, in turn, impact the yield on these investments and also may result in re-investment of funds received from calls and prepayments at rates below the average portfolio yield. Net investment income and net realized capital gains and losses reduced the Company consolidated revenues by $11.9 billion for the year ended December 31, 2008, and contributed to the Company consolidated revenues by $4.4 billion and $6.3 billion for the years ended December 31, 2007 and 2006, respectively. Net investment income and net realized capital gains and losses, excluding net investment income from trading securities, reduced the Company consolidated revenues by $1.6 billion for the year ended December 31, 2008, and contributed to the Company consolidated revenues by $4.2 billion and $4.4 billion for the years ended December 31, 2007 and 2006, respectively. The reduction to consolidated revenues for 2008, as compared to prior year periods, is primarily due to a net loss in the value of equity securities, held for trading, and realized capital losses. Fluctuations in interest rates affect the Company return on, and the fair value of, fixed maturity investments, which comprised approximately 54% and 61% of the fair value of its invested assets as of December 31, 2008 and 2007, respectively. Other events beyond the Company control, including changes in credit spreads, a downgrade of an issuer credit rating or default of payment by an issuer, could also adversely impact the fair value of these investments. The Company invests in private placement securities, mortgage loans and limited partnerships and other alternative investments in order to further diversify its investment portfolio. These investment types comprised approximately 20% and 23% of the fair value of its invested assets as of December 31, 2008 and 2007, respectively. These security types are typically less liquid than direct investments in publicly traded fixed income or equity investments. However, generally these securities have higher yields over the life of the investment to compensate for the liquidity risk. A decrease in the fair value of any investment that is deemed other-than-temporary would result in the Company recognition of a net realized capital loss in its financial results prior to the actual sale of the investment. Following the recognition of an other-than-temporary impairment for fixed maturities, the Company accretes the new cost basis to par or to estimated future value over the remaining life of the security based on future estimated cash flows by adjusting the security yields. For a further discussion of the evaluation of other-than-temporary impairments, see the Critical Accounting Estimates section of the MD&A under Evaluation of Other-Than-Temporary Impairments on Available-for-Sale Securities . 156 Table of Contents Life The primary investment objective of Life general account is to maximize economic value within acceptable risk parameters, including the management of the interest rate sensitivity of invested assets, while generating sufficient after-tax income to support policyholder and corporate obligations, as discussed in the Capital Markets Risk Management section of the MD&A under Market Risk Life . The following table identifies the invested assets by type held in the general account. Composition of Invested Assets December 31, 2008 December 31, 2007 Amount Percent Amount Percent Fixed maturities, available-for-sale, at fair value $ 45,182 71.3 % $ 52,542 82.6 % Equity securities, available-for-sale, at fair value 711 1.1 % 1,284 2.0 % Mortgage loans, at amortized cost [1] 5,684 9.0 % 4,739 7.5 % Policy loans, at outstanding balance 2,208 3.5 % 2,061 3.2 % Limited partnerships and other alternative investments [2] 1,129 1.8 % 1,306 2.1 % Short-term investments 6,937 11.0 % 1,158 1.8 % Other investments [3] 1,473 2.3 % 534 0.8 % Total investments excl. equity securities, held for trading 63,324 100.0 % 63,624 100.0 % Equity securities, held for trading, at fair value [4] 30,820 36,182 Total investments $ 94,144 $ 99,806 [1] Consist of commercial and agricultural loans. [2] Includes a real estate joint venture. [3] Primarily relates to derivative instruments. [4] These assets primarily support the International variable annuity business. Changes in these balances are also reflected in the respective liabilities. Total investments decreased $5.7 billion since December 31, 2007 primarily as a result of a decline in value of equity securities, held for trading, and increased unrealized losses on available-for-sale securities due to credit spread widening, offset by positive operating cash flows. The decline in value in equity securities, held for trading, was due to negative market performance of the underlying investment funds supporting the Japanese variable annuity product and policyholder transfers from the accumulation to the annuitization phase of the contract. These losses were partially offset by gains resulting from translation as the Yen strengthened compared to the U.S. dollar. In addition, Life increased its investment in short-term securities in preparation for funding liability outflows and to maintain higher than average liquidity while waiting for market and asset valuations to stabilize. Mortgage loans increased due to diversification opportunities. Limited partnerships and other alternative investments decreased by $177 during 2008. Life continuously evaluates its allocation to limited partnerships and other alternative investments and has taken steps to reduce its exposure to hedge funds, most of which will occur in 2009. In addition, HIMCO does not expect significant additions to limited partnerships and other alternative investments in 2009 except for unfunded commitments. HIMCO closely monitors the impact of these investments in relationship to the overall investment portfolio and the consolidated balance sheets. The following table summarizes Life limited partnerships and other alternative investments. Composition of Limited Partnerships and Other Alternative Investments December 31, 2008 December 31, 2007 Amount Percent Amount Percent Hedge funds [1] $ 273 24.2 % $ 506 38.7 % Mortgage and real estate [2] 259 22.9 % 309 23.7 % Mezzanine debt [3] 95 8.4 % 72 5.5 % Private equity and other [4] 502 44.5 % 419 32.1 % Total $ 1,129 100.0 % $ 1,306 100.0 % [1] Hedge funds include investments in funds of funds as well as direct funds. The hedge funds of funds invest in approximately 25 to 50 different hedge funds within a variety of investment styles. Examples of hedge fund strategies include long/short equity or credit, event driven strategies and structured credit. [2] Mortgage and real estate funds consist of investments in funds whose assets consist of mortgage loans, participations in mortgage loans, mezzanine loans or other notes which may be below investment grade credit quality as well as equity real estate. Also included is the investment in a real estate joint venture. [3] Mezzanine debt funds consist of investments in funds whose assets consist of subordinated debt that often times incorporates equity-based options such as warrants and a limited amount of direct equity investments. [4] Private equity and other funds primarily consist of investments in funds whose assets typically consist of a diversified pool of investments in small non-public businesses with high growth potential. 157 Table of Contents Investment Results The following table summarizes Life net investment income. 2008 2007 2006 (Before-tax) Amount Yield [1] Amount Yield [1] Amount Yield [1] Fixed maturities [2] $ 2,858 5.2 % $ 3,114 5.9 % $ 2,860 5.8 % Equity securities, available-for-sale 96 7.5 % 86 7.0 % 56 7.3 % Mortgage loans 293 5.7 % 255 6.2 % 142 6.3 % Policy loans 139 6.5 % 135 6.5 % 142 6.9 % Limited partnerships and other alternative investments (233 ) (17.2 %) 115 12.0 % 69 12.6 % Other [3] (36 ) (133 ) (22 ) Investment expense (72 ) (75 ) (63 ) Total net investment income excluding equity securities held for trading 3,045 4.8 % 3,497 6.0 % 3,184 5.8 % Equity securities held for trading [4] (10,340 ) 145 1,824 Total net investment income (loss) $ (7,295 ) $ 3,642 $ 5,008 [1] Yields calculated using investment income before investment expenses divided by the monthly weighted average invested assets at cost, amortized cost, or adjusted carrying value, as applicable excluding collateral received associated with the securities lending program and consolidated variable interest entity minority interests. Included in the fixed maturity yield is Other income (loss) as it primarily relates to fixed maturities (see footnote [3] below). Included in the total net investment income yield is investment expense. [2] Includes net investment income on short-term bonds. [3] Includes fees associated with securities lending activities of $70, $97 and $0, respectively, for the years ended December 31, 2008, 2007 and 2006. The income from securities lending activities is included within fixed maturities. Also included are derivatives that qualify for hedge accounting under SFAS 133. These derivatives hedge fixed maturities. [4] Includes investment income and mark-to-market effects of equity securities, held for trading. Year ended December 31, 2008 compared to the year ended December 31, 2007 Net investment income, excluding equity securities, held for trading, decreased $452, or 13%, for the year ended December 31, 2008, compared to the prior year period. The decrease in net investment income was primarily due to lower yield on variable rate securities due to declines in short term interest rates, increased allocation to lower yielding U.S. Treasuries and short-term investments, and a decrease in investment yield for limited partnership and other alternative investments. The decrease in limited partnerships and other alternative investments yield was largely due to negative returns on hedge funds and real estate partnerships as a result of the lack of liquidity in the financial markets and a wider credit spread environment. Based upon the current interest rate and credit environment, Life expects a slightly higher average portfolio yield for 2009 as compared to 2008. The decrease in net investment income on equity securities, held for trading, for the year ended December 31, 2008 compared to the prior year period was primarily attributed to a decline in the value of the underlying investment funds supporting the Japanese variable annuity product due to negative market performance year over year. Year ended December 31, 2007 compared to the year ended December 31, 2006 Net investment income, excluding securities held for trading, increased $313, or 10%, for the year ended December 31, 2007, compared to the prior year period. The increase in net investment income was primarily due to a higher average invested asset base and a higher total portfolio yield. The increase in the average invested assets base as compared to the prior year period was primarily due to positive operating cash flows, investment contract sales such as retail and institutional notes, and universal life-type product sales. Limited partnerships and other alternative investments contributed to the increase in income compared to the prior year period, despite a lower yield, due to a greater allocation of investments to this asset class. While the limited partnership and other alternative investment yield continued to exceed the overall portfolio yield, it decreased compared to the prior year period primarily due to the market performance of Life hedge fund investments largely due to disruptions in the credit market associated with structured securities. Net investment income on equity securities, held for trading, for the year ended December 31, 2007 was primarily attributed to a change in the value of the underlying investment funds supporting the Japanese variable annuity product due to market performance. 158 Table of Contents The following table summarizes Life net realized capital gains and losses results. (Before-tax) 2008 2007 2006 Gross gains on sale $ 422 $ 213 $ 215 Gross losses on sale (399 ) (168 ) (257 ) Impairments (2,424 ) (358 ) (76 ) Japanese fixed annuity contract hedges, net [1] 64 18 (17 ) Periodic net coupon settlements on credit derivatives/Japan (35 ) (40 ) (48 ) SFAS 157 transition impact [2] (650 ) Results of variable annuity hedge program GMWB derivatives, net (713 ) (286 ) (26 ) Macro hedge program 74 (12 ) (14 ) Total results of variable annuity hedge program (639 ) (298 ) (40 ) Other, net [3] (477 ) (186 ) (37 ) Net realized capital losses, before-tax $ (4,138 ) $ (819 ) $ (260 ) [1] Relates to the Japanese fixed annuity product (product and related derivative hedging instruments excluding periodic net coupon settlements). [2] Includes SFAS 157 implementation losses of $616, $10 and $24 related to the embedded derivatives within GMWB-US, GMWB-UK and GMAB liabilities, respectively. [3] Primarily consists of changes in fair value on non-qualifying derivatives, hedge ineffectiveness on qualifying derivative instruments, foreign currency gains and losses, and other investment gains and losses. The circumstances giving rise to the changes in these components are as follows: Year ended December 31, 2008 compared to the years ended December 31, 2007 and 2006 Gross Gains and Losses on Sale Gross gains and losses on sales for the year ended December 31, 2008 primarily resulted from the decision to reallocate the portfolio to securities with more favorable risk/return profiles. Also included was a gain of $141 from the sale of a synthetic CDO, as well as losses on sales of HIMCO managed CLOs in the first quarter. For more information regarding these CLO losses, refer to the Variable Interest Entities section below. During the year ended December 31, 2008, securities sold at a loss were depressed, on average, approximately 2% at the respective period impairment review date and were deemed to be temporarily impaired. Gross gains and losses on sales for the year ended December 31, 2007 were primarily comprised of corporate securities. During the year ended December 31, 2007, securities sold at a loss were depressed, on average, approximately 1% at the respective period impairment review date and were deemed to be temporarily impaired. Gross gains on sales for the year ended December 31, 2006 were primarily within fixed maturities and were concentrated in U.S. government, corporate and foreign government securities. Gross losses on sale for the year ended December 31, 2006 were primarily within fixed maturities and were concentrated in the corporate and CMBS sectors. Impairments See the Other-Than-Temporary Impairments section that follows for information on impairment losses. SFAS 157 See Note 4 in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for a discussion of the SFAS 157 transition impact. Variable Annuity Hedge Program See Note 4 in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for a discussion of variable annuity hedge program gains and losses. Other Other, net losses for the year ended December 31, 2008 were primarily related to net losses of $291 related to transactional foreign currency losses predominately on the internal reinsurance of the Japan variable annuity business, which is entirely offset in AOCI, resulting from appreciation of the Yen and credit derivative losses of $222 due to significant credit spread widening. Also included were losses on HIMCO managed CLOs in the first quarter and derivative related losses of $39 in the third quarter due to counterparty default related to the bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers Holdings Inc. For more information regarding the CLO losses, refer to the Variable Interest Entities section below. Other, net losses for the year ended December 31, 2007 were primarily driven by the change in value of non-qualifying derivatives due to credit spread widening as well as fluctuations in interest rates and foreign currency exchange rates. Credit spreads widened primarily due to the deterioration in the U.S. housing market, tightened lending conditions and the market flight to quality securities. Other, net losses for the year ended December 31, 2006 were primarily driven from the change in value of non-qualifying derivatives due to fluctuations in interest rates and foreign currency exchange rates. These losses were partially offset by a before-tax benefit of $25 received from the WorldCom security settlement. 159 Table of Contents Separate Account Products Separate account products are those for which a separate investment and liability account is maintained on behalf of the policyholder. The Company separate accounts reflect accounts wherein the policyholder assumes substantially all the risk and reward. Investment objectives for separate accounts, which consist of the participants account balances, vary by fund account type, as outlined in the applicable fund prospectus or separate account plan of operations. Separate account products include variable annuities (except those sold in Japan), variable universal life insurance contracts, 401(k), and variable corporate owned life insurance. The assets and liabilities associated with variable annuity products sold in Japan and the United Kingdom do not meet the criteria to be recognized as a separate account because the assets are not legally insulated from the Company. Therefore, these assets are included with the Company general account assets. As of December 31, 2008 and 2007, the Company separate accounts totaled $130.2 billion and $199.9 billion, respectively. Property & Casualty The primary investment objective for Property & Casualty Ongoing Operations segment is to maximize economic value while generating sufficient after-tax income to meet policyholder and corporate obligations. For Property & Casualty Other Operations segment, the investment objective is to ensure the full and timely payment of all liabilities. Property & Casualty investment strategies are developed based on a variety of factors including business needs, regulatory requirements and tax considerations. The following table identifies the invested assets by type held. Composition of Invested Assets December 31, 2008 December 31, 2007 Amount Percent Amount Percent Fixed maturities, available-for-sale, at fair value $ 19,775 81.7 % $ 27,205 88.8 % Equity securities, available-for-sale, at fair value 674 2.8 % 1,208 3.9 % Mortgage loans, at amortized cost [1] 785 3.2 % 671 2.2 % Limited partnerships and other alternative investments [2] 1,166 4.8 % 1,260 4.1 % Short-term investments 1,597 6.6 % 284 0.9 % Other investments [3] 207 0.9 % 38 0.1 % Total investments $ 24,204 100.0 % $ 30,666 100.0 % [1] Consist of commercial and agricultural loans. [2] Includes hedge fund investments outside of limited partnerships and a real estate joint venture. [3] Primarily relates to derivative instruments. Total investments decreased $6.5 billion since December 31, 2007 primarily as a result of increased unrealized losses. Unrealized losses increased as a result of market deterioration due to significant credit spread widening. In addition, P&C increased its investment in short-term securities to maintain higher than average liquidity while waiting for market and asset valuations to stabilize. Limited partnerships and other alternative investments decreased by $94 during 2008. Property & Casualty continuously evaluates its allocation to limited partnerships and other alternative investments and has taken steps to reduce its exposure to hedge funds, some of which will occur in 2009. In addition, HIMCO does not expect significant additions to limited partnerships and other alternative investments in 2009 except for unfunded commitments. HIMCO closely monitors the impact of these investments in relationship to the overall investment portfolio and the consolidated balance sheets. 160 Table of Contents The following table summarizes Property & Casualty limited partnerships and other alternative investments. Composition of Limited Partnerships and Other Alternative Investments December 31, 2008 December 31, 2007 Amount Percent Amount Percent Hedge funds [1] $ 561 48.1 % $ 728 57.8 % Mortgage and real estate [2] 292 25.1 % 291 23.1 % Mezzanine debt [3] 61 5.2 % 48 3.8 % Private equity and other [4] 252 21.6 % 193 15.3 % Total $ 1,166 100.0 % $ 1,260 100.0 % [1] Hedge funds include investments in funds of funds as well as direct funds. The hedge funds of funds invest in approximately 25 to 50 different hedge funds within a variety of investment styles. Examples of hedge fund strategies include long/short equity or credit, event driven strategies and structured credit. [2] Mortgage and real estate funds consist of investments in funds whose assets consist of mortgage loans, participations in mortgage loans, mezzanine loans or other notes which may be below investment grade credit quality as well as equity real estate. Also included is the investment in a real estate joint venture. [3] Mezzanine debt funds consist of investments in funds whose assets consist of subordinated debt that often times incorporates equity-based options such as warrants and a limited amount of direct equity investments. [4] Private equity and other funds primarily consist of investments in funds whose assets typically consist of a diversified pool of investments in small non-public businesses with high growth potential. Investment Results The following table below summarizes Property & Casualty net investment income. 2008 2007 2006 (Before-tax) Amount Yield [1] Amount Yield [1] Amount Yield [1] Fixed maturities [2] $ 1,418 5.4 % $ 1,511 5.7 % $ 1,386 5.5 % Equity securities, available-for-sale 68 6.5 % 50 6.0 % 35 5.5 % Mortgage loans 40 5.5 % 38 6.2 % 16 5.6 % Limited partnerships and other alternative investments (212 ) (15.5 %) 140 14.5 % 64 9.9 % Other [3] (36 ) (27 ) 9 Investment expense (25 ) (25 ) (24 ) Net investment income, before-tax $ 1,253 4.4 % $ 1,687 5.9 % $ 1,486 5.5 % Net investment income, after-tax [4] $ 921 3.2 % $ 1,246 4.4 % $ 1,107 4.1 % [1] Yields calculated using investment income before investment expenses divided by the monthly weighted average invested assets at cost, amortized cost, or adjusted carrying value, as applicable excluding collateral received associated with the securities lending program. Included in the fixed maturity yield is Other income (loss) as it primarily relates to fixed maturities (see footnote [3] below). Included in the total net investment income yield is investment expense. [2] Includes net investment income on short-term bonds. [3] Includes fees associated with securities lending activities of $30, $41 and $0, respectively, for the years ended December 31, 2008, 2007 and 2006. The income from securities lending activities is included within fixed maturities. Also included are derivatives that qualify for hedge accounting under SFAS 133. These derivatives hedge fixed maturities. [4] Due to significant holdings in tax-exempt investments, after-tax net investment income and yield are also included. Year ended December 31, 2008 compared to the year ended December 31, 2007 Before-tax net investment income decreased $434, or 26%, and after-tax net investment income decreased $325, or 26%, compared to the prior year period. The decrease in net investment income was primarily due to lower yield on variable rate securities due to declines in short term interest rates, increased allocation to lower yielding U.S. Treasuries and short-term investments, and a decrease in investment yield for limited partnership and other alternative investments. The decrease in limited partnerships and other alternative investments yield was largely due to negative returns on hedge funds and real estate partnerships as a result of the lack of liquidity in the financial markets and a wider credit spread environment. Based upon the current interest rate and credit environment, Property & Casualty expects a slightly higher average portfolio yield for 2009 as compared to 2008. Year ended December 31, 2007 compared to the year ended December 31, 2006 Before-tax net investment income increased $201, or 14%, and after-tax net investment income increased $139, or 13%, compared to the prior year period. The increase in net investment income was primarily due to a higher average invested asset base and a higher portfolio yield. The increase in the average invested asset base as compared to the prior year period, was primarily due to positive operating cash flows. Limited partnerships and other alternative investments contributed to the increase in income compared to the prior year period due to a higher portfolio yield and greater allocation of investments to this asset class. 161 Table of Contents The following table summarizes Property & Casualty net realized capital gains and losses results. 2008 2007 2006 Gross gains on sale $ 180 $ 159 $ 205 Gross losses on sale (448 ) (121 ) (164 ) Impairments (1,533 ) (125 ) (45 ) Periodic net coupon settlements on credit derivatives 2 15 4 Other, net [1] (78 ) (100 ) 9 Net realized capital gains (losses), before-tax $ (1,877 ) $ (172 ) $ 9 [1] Primarily consists of changes in fair value on non-qualifying derivatives, hedge ineffectiveness on qualifying derivative instruments, and other investment gains and losses. Year ended December 31, 2008 compared to the years ended December 31, 2007 and 2006 Gross Gains and Losses on Sale Gross gains and losses on sales for the year ended December 31, 2008 primarily resulted from the decision to reallocate the portfolio to securities with more favorable risk/return profiles. Also included were losses on sales of HIMCO managed CLOs in the first quarter. For more information regarding these CLO losses, refer to the Variable Interest Entities section below. During the year ended December 31, 2008, securities sold at a loss were depressed, on average, approximately 2% at the respective period impairment review date and were deemed to be temporarily impaired. Gross gains and losses on sales for the year ended December 31, 2007 were primarily comprised of foreign government, corporate, and municipal securities. During the year ended December 31, 2007, securities sold at a loss were depressed, on average, approximately 1% at the respective period impairment review date and were deemed to be temporarily impaired. Gross gains on sales for the year ended December 31, 2006 were concentrated in the corporate, foreign government and municipal sectors. Gross losses on sales for the year ended December 31, 2006 were concentrated in the corporate and CMBS sectors. Impairments See the Other-Than-Temporary Impairments section that follows for information on impairment losses. Other Other, net losses for the year ended December 31, 2008 were primarily related to net losses on credit derivatives of $90 as a result of credit spread widening on credit derivatives that assume credit exposure. Also included were losses on HIMCO managed CLOs in the first quarter and derivative related losses of $7 during the third quarter due to counterparty default related to the bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers Holdings Inc. For more information regarding the CLO losses, refer to the Variable Interest Entities section below. Other, net losses for the year ended December 31, 2007 primarily resulted from the change in value associated with credit derivatives due to credit spreads widening. Credit spreads widened primarily due to the deterioration in the U.S. housing market, tightened lending conditions and the market flight to quality securities. Corporate The investment objective of Corporate is to raise capital through financing activities to support the Life and Property & Casualty operations of the Company and to maintain sufficient funds to support the cost of those financing activities including the payment of interest for The Hartford Financial Services Group, Inc. ( HFSG ) issued debt and dividends to shareholders of The Hartford common stock. As of December 31, 2008 and 2007, Corporate held $155 and $308, respectively, of fixed maturity investments, $1.5 billion and $160, respectively, of short-term investments and $73 and $103, respectively, of equity securities, available-for-sale. Short-term investments are intended to be used for general corporate purposes, which may include the capital and liquidity needs of our operations. For further information, see Capital Resources and Liquidity section under Liquidity Requirements. As of December 31, 2008 and 2007, a put option agreement for the Company contingent capital facility with a fair value of $43 was included in Other invested assets. Realized capital gains for the year ended December 31, 2008, included gains of $110 resulting from a decrease in the liability related to certain warrants associated with the Allianz transaction. For further discussion on Allianz, see the Capital Resources and Liquidity section. Securities Lending The Company participates in securities lending programs to generate additional income, whereby certain domestic fixed income securities are loaned from the Company portfolio to qualifying third party borrowers, in return for collateral in the form of cash or U.S. government securities. Borrowers of these securities provide collateral of 102% of the market value of the loaned securities and can return the securities to the Company for cash at varying maturity dates. As of December 31, 2008, the Company loaned securities with a fair value of $2.9 billion and had received collateral against the loaned securities in the amount of $3.0 billion. The Company reduced its securities lending program by $1.4 billion since December 31, 2007 and plans to significantly reduce its term lending program in 2009 as securities mature. 162 Table of Contents The following table represents when the borrowers can return the loaned securities to the Company and, in turn, when the cash collateral would be returned to the borrower. Cash Collateral December 31, 2008 Thirty days or less $ 917 Thirty one to 90 days 838 Over three to six months 784 Over six to nine months 430 Over nine months to one year Total $ 2,969 Variable Interest Entities ( VIE ) The Company is involved with variable interest entities primarily as a collateral manager and as an investor through normal investment activities. The Company involvement includes providing investment management and administrative services for a fee and holding ownership or other interests as an investor. The Company also has involvement with VIEs as a means of accessing capital. VIEs may or may not be consolidated on the Company consolidated financial statements. When the Company is the primary beneficiary of the VIE, all of the assets and liabilities of the VIE are consolidated into the Company financial statements. The Company also reports a liability for the portion of the VIE that represents the minority interest of other investors in the VIE. When the Company concludes that it is not the primary beneficiary of the VIE, only the fair value of the Company interest in the VIE is recorded in the Company financial statements. As of December 31, 2007, HIMCO was the collateral manager of four VIEs with provisions that allowed for termination if the fair value of the aggregate referenced bank loan portfolio declined below a stated level. These VIEs were market value CLOs that invested in senior secured bank loans through total return swaps. Two of these market value CLOs were consolidated, and two were not consolidated. During the first quarter of 2008, the fair value of the aggregate referenced bank loan portfolio declined below the stated level in all four market value CLOs and the total return swap counterparties terminated the transactions. Three of these CLOs were restructured from market value CLOs to cash flow CLOs without market value triggers and the remaining CLO terminated in January 2009. The Company realized a capital loss of $90, before-tax, from the termination of these CLOs. In connection with the restructurings, the Company purchased interests in two of the resulting VIEs, one of which the Company is the primary beneficiary. These purchases resulted in an increase in the Company maximum exposure to loss for both consolidated and non-consolidated VIEs. At December 31, 2008 and 2007, the Company had relationships with five and seven VIEs, respectively, where the Company was the primary beneficiary. The following table sets forth the carrying value of assets and liabilities, and the Company maximum exposure to loss on these consolidated VIEs. December 31, 2008 December 31, 2007 Maximum Maximum Total Total Exposure Total Total Exposure Assets Liabilities [1] to Loss [2] Assets Liabilities [1] to Loss CLOs $ 339 $ 69 $ 257 $ 128 $ 47 $ 107 Limited partnerships 151 43 108 309 47 262 Other investments 249 59 221 377 71 317 Total $ 739 $ 171 $ 586 $ 814 $ 165 $ 686 [1] Creditors have no recourse against the Company in the event of default by the VIE. [2] The Company maximum exposure to loss represents the maximum loss amount that the Company could recognize as a reduction in net investment income or as a realized capital loss and is the consolidated assets net of liabilities at cost. The Company has no implied or unfunded commitments to these VIEs. CLOs represent one fund at December 31, 2008, which is a cash flow CLO financed by issuing debt in tranches of varying seniority and is a VIE due to the lack of voting equity in the capital structure. The Company provides collateral management services to the CLO and earns a fee for those services and also has investments in debt issued by the CLO. Taking those interests into consideration, the Company has performed a quantitative analysis and determined that it will absorb a majority of the expected losses or residual returns in the fund and as a result is the primary beneficiary. Consolidated assets are classified in cash and fixed maturities and consolidated liabilities are classified in other liabilities. At December 31, 2007, CLOs represent two market value CLOs, one of which converted to the cash flow CLO described above and the second which terminated during the fourth quarter of 2008. 163 Table of Contents At December 31, 2008 and 2007, limited partnerships represent investments in two hedge funds that are financed by issuing equity shares to investors, and are VIEs based on the lack of decision making ability held by the equity investors. The primary source of variability generated by these VIEs is the fund investment portfolio and that variability is passed to equity holders. The Company holds a majority interest in the equity of the funds and as a result will absorb the majority of the funds expected losses or residual returns and therefore is the primary beneficiary. Consolidated assets and liabilities are classified in other investments and other liabilities, respectively. Other investments at December 31, 2008 consist of two investment trusts that are financed by issuing beneficial interests that do not have voting rights to investors. The Company holds a majority of the beneficial interests issued by these trusts and as the majority holder, will absorb a majority of expected losses or residual returns and therefore is the primary beneficiary. The Company was not the primary beneficiary of one of those trusts at December 31, 2007. Consolidated assets and liabilities are classified in fixed maturities and other liabilities, respectively. At December 31, 2007, other investments included three investment trusts, two of which have liquidated and the third remains at December 31, 2008. As of December 31, 2008 and 2007, the Company also held significant variable interests in four and five VIEs, respectively, where the Company is not the primary beneficiary. That determination has been made based on a quantitative analysis of whether the Company will absorb a majority of the expected losses or residual returns of the VIE, considering its variable interests as well as those of other variable interest holders. These investments have been held by the Company for two years. The following table sets forth the carrying value of assets and liabilities that relate to the Company variable interests in unconsolidated VIEs, and the Company maximum exposure to loss resulting from involvement with those VIEs. December 31, 2008 December 31, 2007 Maximum Maximum Exposure Exposure Assets Liabilities to Loss Assets Liabilities to Loss CLOs [1] $ 308 $ $ 349 $ 26 $ $ 37 CDOs [1] 3 15 76 108 Other [2] 42 40 5 43 43 5 Total [3] $ 353 $ 40 $ 369 $ 145 $ 43 $ 150 [1] Maximum exposure to loss represents the Company investment in securities issued by CLOs/CDOs at cost. [2] Maximum exposure to loss represents issuance costs that were incurred to establish the contingent capital facility. [3] The Company has no implied or unfunded commitments to these VIEs. At December 31, 2008, CLOs include one fund that is financed by issuing debt securities in tranches of varying seniority. That fund is a cash flow CLO and a VIE due to the lack of voting equity in its capital structure. The Company holds variable interests through fees earned as the collateral manager and investments in debt and preferred equity issued by the fund with a carrying amount at December 31, 2008 of $306 and $2, respectively. At December 31, 2007, CLOs represent two market value CLOs, one of which converted to the cash flow CLO described above and the second for which the Company is no longer involved with following its conversion from a market value to a cash flow CLO. At December 31, 2008 and 2007, CDOs consist of two VIEs that are financed by issuing debt having no voting rights to investors. The Company has variable interests in each CDO by virtue of its investment in that debt and fees received as the collateral manager. The carrying amount of the investment in debt issued by the CDOs is $3 at December 31, 2008 and is classified in fixed maturities. Other, at December 31, 2008 and 2007, represents the Company variable interest in the Glen Meadow ABC Trust, which is a put option agreement that requires the trust, at any time, to purchase the Company junior subordinated notes in a maximum principal amount not to exceed $500. There is no equity investment and thus the trust is a VIE based on that lack of voting equity. The put option agreement held by the Company is a variable interest in the trust. The carrying amount of that option at December 31, 2008 classified in other assets is $42 and the carrying value of the liability for premiums due under the option contract at December 31, 2008 classified in other liabilities is $40. Other-Than-Temporary Impairments The Company has a comprehensive security monitoring process overseen by a committee of investment and accounting professionals that, on a quarterly basis, identifies securities that could potentially be other-than-temporarily impaired. When a security is deemed to be other-than-temporarily impaired, its cost or amortized cost is written down to current fair value and a realized loss is recorded in the Company consolidated statements of operations. For fixed maturities, the Company accretes the new cost basis to par or to the estimated future value over the expected remaining life of the security by adjusting the security yield. For further discussion regarding the Company other-than-temporary impairment policy, see Evaluation of Other-Than-Temporary Impairments on Available-for-Sale Securities included in the Critical Accounting Estimates section of the MD&A, Note 1 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements and Item 1A, Risk Factors. 164 Table of Contents The following table identifies the Company other-than-temporary impairments by type. 2008 2007 2006 ABS Sub-prime residential mortgages $ 235 $ 212 $ 1 Other 27 19 7 CMBS Bonds 141 18 IOs 61 2 CRE CDOs 398 CMOs/MBS 37 Corporate Financial Services 1,342 67 Other 510 98 103 Equities Financial Services 1,142 36 Other 19 20 8 Other 52 13 Total other-than-temporary impairments $ 3,964 $ 483 $ 121 The following discussion provides an analysis of significant other-than-temporary impairments ( impairments ) recognized during 2008, 2007 and 2006 and the related circumstances giving rise to the impairments. 2008 For the year ended December 31, 2008, impairments of $3,964 were concentrated in subordinated fixed maturities and preferred equities within the financial services sector, as well as, in CMBS securities. Of the $2,484 of impairments on financial services companies for 2008, the Company does not anticipate substantial recovery of $850 due to bankruptcy, financial restructurings or concerns about the issuer ability to continue to make contractual payments. The remaining balance primarily relates to securities that experienced extensive credit spread widening and the Company could not reasonably assert that the security would recover in value in a reasonable period of time or the Company did not wish to assert its intent to hold the security until recovery. To the extent the Company does not sell these securities, the Company expects to recover principal and interest in accordance with the security contractual terms over a period up to and including the security contractual maturity. Impairments on securitized securities totaled $899 for the year ended December 31, 2008. For these securities, the Company determines impairments by modeling cash flows in a severe negative economic outlook scenario. If the results of this cash flow modeling result in an economic loss, an impairment was taken. The Company continues to receive contractual principal and interest payments on the majority of CMBS and sub-prime ABS securities impaired, however the Company is uncertain of its ability to recover principal and interest in accordance with the security original contractual terms. The remaining impairments of $581 were primarily recorded on securities in various sectors, primarily high yield non-financial services corporate securities that experienced significant credit spread widening and for which the Company was uncertain of its intent to retain the investments for a period of time sufficient to allow for recovery. 2007 For the year ended December 31, 2007, impairments of $483 were concentrated in securitized assets and corporate fixed maturities. Impairments for securitized assets totaled $249 and were primarily on securities backed by sub-prime residential mortgage loans rated A and below in the 2006 and 2007 vintage years. Impairments on corporate fixed maturities of $165 were primarily within the financial services and home builders sectors. The majority of these securities experienced extensive credit spread widening and the Company could not reasonably assert that the security would recover in value in a reasonable period of time. For the majority of these securities, the Company expects to recover principal and interest substantially greater than what the market price indicates. The remaining impairments were primarily recorded on securities in various sectors that had declined in value for which the Company was uncertain of its intent to retain the investments for a period of time sufficient to allow for recovery. 2006 For the year ended December 31, 2006, impairments were primarily recorded on corporate fixed maturities and ABS. Other than a $16 impairment on a single issuer in the utilities sector, there were no other significant impairments (i.e., $15 or greater) recorded on any single security or issuer. The impairments on ABS primarily related to investments backed by aircraft lease receivables. Impairments resulted from higher than expected maintenance expenses. 165 Table of Contents INVESTMENT CREDIT RISK The Company has established investment credit policies that focus on the credit quality of obligors and counterparties, limit credit concentrations, encourage diversification and require frequent creditworthiness reviews. Investment activity, including setting of policy and defining acceptable risk levels, is subject to regular review and approval by senior management. The Company invests primarily in securities which are rated investment grade and has established exposure limits, diversification standards and review procedures for all credit risks including borrower, issuer and counterparty. Creditworthiness of specific obligors is determined by consideration of external determinants of creditworthiness, typically ratings assigned by nationally recognized ratings agencies and is supplemented by an internal credit evaluation. Obligor, asset sector and industry concentrations are subject to established Company limits and are monitored on a regular basis. Other than U.S. government and certain U.S. government agencies backed by the full faith and credit of the U.S. government, the Company only exposure to any credit concentration risk of a single issuer greater than 10% of the Company stockholders equity, is the Government of Japan, which represents $2.3 billion, or 25%, of stockholders equity. For further discussion of concentration of credit risk, see the Concentration of Credit Risk section in Note 5 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Derivative Instruments In the normal course of business, the Company uses various derivative counterparties in executing its derivative transactions. The use of counterparties creates credit risk that the counterparty may not perform in accordance with the terms of the derivative transaction. The Company has developed a derivative counterparty exposure policy which limits the Company exposure to credit risk. The derivative counterparty exposure policy establishes market-based credit limits, favors long-term financial stability and creditworthiness of the counterparty and typically requires credit enhancement/credit risk reducing agreements. The Company minimizes the credit risk of derivative instruments by entering into transactions with high quality counterparties rated A2/A or better, which are monitored and evaluated by the Company risk management team and reviewed by senior management. In addition, the internal compliance unit monitors counterparty credit exposure on a monthly basis to ensure compliance with Company policies and statutory limitations. The Company also maintains a policy of requiring that derivative contracts, other than exchange traded contracts, currency forward contracts, and certain embedded derivatives, be governed by an International Swaps and Derivatives Association Master Agreement which is structured by legal entity and by counterparty and permits right of offset. The Company has developed credit exposure thresholds which are based upon counterparty ratings. Credit exposures are measured using the market value of the derivatives, resulting in amounts owed to the Company by its counterparties or potential payment obligations from the Company to its counterparties. Credit exposures are generally quantified daily based on the prior business day market value and collateral is pledged to and held by, or on behalf of, the Company to the extent the current value of derivatives exceeds the contractual thresholds. In accordance with industry standards and the contractual agreements, collateral is typically settled on the next business day. The Company has exposure to credit risk for amounts below the exposure thresholds which are uncollateralized as well as for market fluctuations that may occur between contractual settlement periods of collateral movements. The maximum uncollateralized threshold for a derivative counterparty for a single legal entity is $10, excluding reinsurance derivatives. The Company currently transacts derivatives in five legal entities and therefore the maximum combined threshold for a single counterparty over all legal entities that use derivatives is $50. In addition, the Company may have exposure to multiple counterparties in a single corporate family due to a common credit support provider. As of December 31, 2008, the maximum combined threshold for all counterparties under a single credit support provider over all legal entities that use derivatives is $100. Based on the contractual terms of the collateral agreements, these thresholds may be immediately reduced due to a downgrade in a counterparty credit rating. For the year ended December 31, 2008, the Company has incurred losses of $46 on derivative instruments due to counterparty default related to the bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers Holdings Inc. These losses were a result of the contractual collateral threshold amounts and open collateral calls in excess of such amounts immediately prior to the bankruptcy filing, as well as interest rate and credit spread movements from the date of the last collateral call to the date of the bankruptcy filing. In addition to counterparty credit risk, the Company enters into credit derivative instruments to manage credit exposure. Credit derivatives used by the Company include credit default swaps, credit index swaps, and total return swaps. Credit default swaps involve a transfer of credit risk of one or many referenced entities from one party to another in exchange for periodic payments. The party that purchases credit protection will make periodic payments based on an agreed upon rate and notional amount, and for certain transactions there will also be an upfront premium payment. The second party, who assumes credit exposure, will typically only make a payment if there is a credit event and such payment will be equal to the notional value of the swap contract less the value of the referenced security issuer debt obligation. A credit event is generally defined as default on contractually obligated interest or principal payments or bankruptcy of the referenced entity. Credit index swaps and total return swaps involve the periodic exchange of payments with other parties, at specified intervals, calculated using the agreed upon index and notional principal amounts. Generally, no cash or principal payments are exchanged at the inception of the contract. 166 Table of Contents The Company uses credit derivatives to assume credit risk from and reduce credit risk to a single entity, referenced index, or asset pool. The credit default swaps in which the Company assumes credit risk reference investment grade single corporate issuers, baskets of up to five corporate issuers and diversified portfolios of corporate issuers. The diversified portfolios of corporate issuers are established within sector concentration limits and are typically divided into tranches which possess different credit ratings ranging from AAA through the CCC rated first loss position. In addition to the credit default swaps that assume credit exposure, the Company also purchases credit protection through credit default swaps to economically hedge and manage credit risk of certain fixed maturity investments across multiple sectors of the investment portfolio. The credit default swaps are carried on the balance sheet at fair value. The Company received upfront premium payments on certain credit default swaps, which reduces the Company overall credit exposure. The following table summarizes the credit default swaps used by the Company to manage credit risk within the portfolio, excluding credit default swaps in offsetting positions, which had a notional amount of $2.6 billion as of December 31, 2008. Credit Default Swaps December 31, 2008 December 31, 2007 Initial Initial Notional Premium Notional Premium Amount Received Fair Value Amount Received Fair Value Assuming credit risk $ 1,082 $ (2 ) $ (399 ) $ 2,715 $ (203 ) $ (416 ) Reducing credit risk 3,668 (1 ) 340 5,166 (1 ) 81 Total credit default swaps $ 4,750 $ (3 ) $ (59 ) $ 7,881 $ (204 ) $ (335 ) During 2008, the Company continued to reduce overall credit risk exposure to general credit spread movements by both reducing and rebalancing the total notional amount of the credit default swap portfolio. In addition, all credit derivatives that reference the first loss position of a basket of corporate issuers were terminated during 2008. The Company credit default swap portfolio has experienced and may continue to experience market value fluctuations based upon certain market conditions, including credit spread movement of specific referenced entities. For the year ended December 31, 2008, the Company realized losses of $153, including net periodic coupon settlements, on credit default swaps. Prior to the first quarter of 2008, the Company also assumed credit exposure through credit index swaps referencing AAA rated CMBS indices. During the first and second quarter of 2008, the Company realized a loss of $100 and $3, before-tax, respectively, as a result of these swaps maturing as well as the Company eliminating exposure to the remaining swaps by entering into offsetting positions. As of December 31, 2008, the Company does not have exposure to CMBS through credit derivatives. Available-for-Sale Securities The following table identifies fixed maturities by credit quality on a consolidated basis. The ratings referenced below are based on the ratings of a nationally recognized rating organization or, if not rated, assigned based on the Company internal analysis of such securities. Consolidated Fixed Maturities by Credit Quality December 31, 2008 December 31, 2007 Percent of Percent of Amortized Total Fair Amortized Total Fair Cost Fair Value Value Cost Fair Value Value AAA $ 17,844 $ 13,489 20.7 % $ 28,547 $ 28,318 35.4 % AA 14,093 11,646 17.9 % 11,326 10,999 13.7 % A 18,742 15,831 24.4 % 16,999 17,030 21.3 % BBB 15,749 12,794 19.6 % 15,093 14,974 18.7 % United States Government/Government agencies 9,409 9,568 14.7 % 5,165 5,229 6.5 % BB & below 2,401 1,784 2.7 % 3,594 3,505 4.4 % Total fixed maturities $ 78,238 $ 65,112 100.0 % $ 80,724 $ 80,055 100.0 % The Company investment ratings as a percentage of total fixed maturities experienced a downward shift from AAA since December 31, 2007 primarily due to rating agency downgrades of monoline insurers, as well as, downgrades of sub-prime, CMBS, and financial services sector securities. The movement in both government rated and BB & below securities is attributable to efforts to reallocate the portfolio to higher quality, risk adverse assets through purchases of U.S. Treasuries and sales of high yield securities. 167 Table of Contents The following table identifies available-for-sale securities by type on a consolidated basis. Consolidated Available-for-Sale Securities by Type December 31, 2008 December 31, 2007 Percent Percent Cost or Gross Gross of Total Cost or Gross Gross of Total Amortized Unrealized Unrealized Fair Fair Amortized Unrealized Unrealized Fair Fair Cost Gains Losses Value Value Cost Gains Losses Value Value ABS Auto $ 545 $ $ (124 ) $ 421 0.6 % $ 692 $ $ (16 ) $ 676 0.9 % CLOs [1] 2,865 (735 ) 2,130 3.3 % 2,590 (114 ) 2,476 3.1 % Credit cards 942 (188 ) 754 1.2 % 957 3 (22 ) 938 1.2 % RMBS [2] 2,532 7 (891 ) 1,648 2.5 % 2,999 10 (343 ) 2,666 3.3 % Student loan 764 (277 ) 487 0.7 % 786 1 (40 ) 747 0.9 % Other [3] 1,215 6 (393 ) 828 1.3 % 1,491 19 (98 ) 1,412 1.7 % CMBS Agency backed [4] 433 16 449 0.7 % 445 10 455 0.6 % Bonds 11,144 10 (4,370 ) 6,784 10.4 % 13,196 116 (421 ) 12,891 16.1 % CRE CDOs 1,763 2 (1,302 ) 463 0.7 % 2,243 1 (390 ) 1,854 2.3 % Interest only ( IOs ) 1,396 17 (333 ) 1,080 1.7 % 1,741 117 (27 ) 1,831 2.3 % CMOs Agency backed 849 46 (8 ) 887 1.4 % 1,191 32 (4 ) 1,219 1.5 % Non-agency backed [5] 413 1 (124 ) 290 0.4 % 525 4 (3 ) 526 0.7 % Corporate [6] Basic industry 2,138 33 (338 ) 1,833 2.8 % 2,508 61 (34 ) 2,535 3.2 % Capital goods 2,480 32 (322 ) 2,190 3.3 % 2,194 86 (26 ) 2,254 2.8 % Consumer cyclical 2,335 34 (388 ) 1,981 3.0 % 3,011 87 (60 ) 3,038 3.8 % Consumer non-cyclical 3,435 60 (252 ) 3,243 5.0 % 3,008 89 (37 ) 3,060 3.8 % Energy 1,669 24 (146 ) 1,547 2.4 % 1,595 71 (12 ) 1,654 2.1 % Financial services 8,422 254 (1,543 ) 7,133 10.9 % 11,153 227 (512 ) 10,868 13.5 % Tech. & comm. 3,738 86 (400 ) 3,424 5.3 % 3,763 181 (40 ) 3,904 4.9 % Transportation 508 8 (90 ) 426 0.7 % 401 12 (13 ) 400 0.5 % Utilities 4,859 92 (578 ) 4,373 6.7 % 4,500 181 (104 ) 4,577 5.7 % Other [7] 1,475 (444 ) 1,031 1.6 % 1,985 27 (104 ) 1,908 2.4 % Gov./Gov. agencies Foreign 2,786 100 (65 ) 2,821 4.3 % 999 59 (5 ) 1,053 1.3 % United States 5,883 112 (39 ) 5,956 9.2 % 836 22 (3 ) 855 1.1 % MBS 2,243 42 (7 ) 2,278 3.5 % 2,757 26 (20 ) 2,763 3.5 % Municipal Taxable 1,115 8 (229 ) 894 1.4 % 1,376 33 (23 ) 1,386 1.7 % Tax-exempt 10,291 194 (724 ) 9,761 15.0 % 11,776 394 (67 ) 12,103 15.1 % Red. preferred stock 6 6 Fixed maturities $ 78,238 $ 1,184 $ (14,310 ) $ 65,112 100.0 % $ 80,724 $ 1,869 $ (2,538 ) $ 80,055 100.0 % Equity securities, available-for-sale Financial Services 973 13 (196 ) 790 2,062 13 (224 ) 1,851 Other 581 190 (103 ) 668 549 205 (10 ) 744 Total securities, available-for-sale [8] $ 79,792 $ 1,387 $ (14,609 ) $ 66,570 $ 83,335 $ 2,087 $ (2,772 ) $ 82,650 [1] As of December 31, 2008, 99% of these senior secured bank loan CLOs were AAA rated with an average subordination of 29%. [2] Includes securities with an amortized cost and fair value of $14 and $10, respectively, as of December 31, 2008, and $40 and $37, respectively, as of December 31, 2007, which were backed by pools of loans issued to prime borrowers. Includes securities with an amortized cost and fair value of $91 and $62, respectively, as of December 31, 2008, and $96 and $87, respectively, as of December 31, 2007, which were backed by pools of loans issued to Alt-A borrowers. [3] Includes CDO securities with an amortized cost and fair value of $8 and $5, respectively, as of December 31, 2008, and $16 and $15, respectively, as of December 31, 2007, that contain a below-prime residential mortgage loan component. Typically these CDOs are also backed by assets other than below-prime loans. [4] Represents securities with pools of loans by the Small Business Administration whose issued loans are backed by the full faith and credit of the U.S. government. [5] Includes securities with an amortized cost and fair value of $214 and $135, respectively, as of December 31, 2008, and $270 as of December 31, 2007, which were backed by pools of loans issued to Alt-A borrowers. [6] As of December 31, 2008 and 2007, 95% and 92%, respectively, of corporate securities were rated investment grade. [7] Includes structured investments with an amortized cost and fair value of $526 and $364, respectively, as of December 31, 2008, and $782 and $730, respectively, as of December 31, 2007. The underlying securities supporting these investments are primarily diversified pools of investment grade corporate issuers which can withstand a 15% cumulative default rate, assuming a 35% recovery. [8] Gross unrealized gains represent gains of $860, $526, and $1 for Life, Property & Casualty, and Corporate, respectively, as of December 31, 2008 and $1,339, $734, and $14, respectively, as of December 31, 2007. Gross unrealized losses represent losses of $10,766 $3,835, and $8 for Life, Property & Casualty, and Corporate, respectively, as of December 31, 2008 and $1,985, $781, and $6, respectively, as of December 31, 2007. 168 Table of Contents The Company investment sector allocations as a percentage of total fixed maturities have significantly changed since December 31, 2007 primarily due to efforts to reallocate the portfolio to higher quality, risk averse assets, such as U.S. government/government agencies, and recession resistant sectors, such as consumer non-cyclical, while reducing its exposure to CMBS, financial services and consumer cyclical sectors. The available-for-sale net unrealized loss position increased $12.5 billion since December 31, 2007 primarily as a result of credit spread widening, partially offset by declining interest rates and impairments. Credit spreads widened primarily due to continued deterioration in the U.S. housing market, tightened lending conditions and the market flight to quality securities, as well as, a U.S. recession and a declining global economy. Despite steps taken by the government to stabilize the financial system, liquidity and confidence in the markets have not yet been restored. The sectors most significantly impacted include financial services, residential and commercial mortgage backed investments, and consumer loan backed investments. The following sections illustrate the Company holdings and provide commentary on these sectors. Financial Services Financial companies remain under significant stress driven initially by the housing market collapse which led to massive asset write-downs, an inability to source capital, funding pressure and a loss of confidence in the financial system. Numerous government initiatives were put forth over the course of 2008 to address the seizure in the financial and capital markets, including the injection of capital into financial institutions through the Treasury Capital Purchase Program, and the establishment of the FDIC Temporary Liquidity Guarantee Program ( TLGP ) whereby the FDIC guarantees newly issued unsecured debt for participating institutions. While the government efforts have provided some stability, financial institutions remain vulnerable to ongoing asset write-downs, increasing credit losses associated with a deteriorating economy, weak earnings prospects, and potentially the need for additional capital if losses further weaken current capital positions. The Company has exposure to the financial services sector predominantly through banking, insurance and finance firms. A comparison of fair value to amortized cost is not indicative of the pricing of individual securities as rating downgrades and impairments have occurred. The following table represents the Company exposure to the financial services sector included in the corporate and equity securities, available-for-sale lines in the Consolidated Available-for-Sale Securities by Type table above. Of the Company $7.9 billion on a fair value basis, $3.4 billion is senior debt, $1.9 billion is subordinate and Tier 2 holdings and $2.6 billion is Tier 1 and preferred exposure. The Company exposure to European financial institutions comprises $702 of senior debt, $816 of subordinate and Tier 2 holdings and $875 of Tier 1 and preferred holdings. Financial Services by Credit Quality December 31, 2008 December 31, 2007 Percent of Percent of Amortized Total Fair Amortized Total Fair Cost Fair Value Value Cost Fair Value Value AAA $ 728 $ 628 7.9 % $ 635 $ 614 4.8 % AA 2,067 1,780 22.5 % 4,141 4,008 31.5 % A 5,479 4,606 58.1 % 6,755 6,525 51.3 % BBB 1,015 816 10.3 % 1,378 1,283 10.1 % BB & below 106 93 1.2 % 306 289 2.3 % Total $ 9,395 $ 7,923 100.0 % $ 13,215 $ 12,719 100.0 % 169 Table of Contents Sub-Prime Residential Mortgage Loans The Company has exposure to sub-prime and Alt-A residential mortgage backed securities included in the Consolidated Available-for-Sale Securities by Type table above. These securities continue to be affected by uncertainty surrounding the decline in home prices, negative technical factors and deterioration in collateral performance. The following table presents the Company exposure to ABS supported by sub-prime mortgage loans by current credit quality and vintage year, including direct investments in CDOs that contain a sub-prime loan component, included in the RMBS and ABS other line in the Consolidated Available-for-Sale Securities by Type table above. A comparison of fair value to amortized cost is not indicative of the pricing of individual securities as rating downgrades and impairments have occurred. Credit protection represents the current weighted average percentage, excluding wrapped securities, of the outstanding capital structure subordinated to the Company investment holding that is available to absorb losses before the security incurs the first dollar loss of principal. The table below excludes the Company exposure to Alt-A residential mortgage loans, with an amortized cost and fair value of $305 and $197, respectively, as of December 31, 2008, and $366 and $357, respectively, as of December 31, 2007. These securities were primarily backed by 2007 vintage year collateral and rated A and above. Sub-Prime Residential Mortgage Loans [1] [2] [3] [4] December 31, 2008 [5] AAA AA A BBB BB and Below Total Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Cost Value Cost Value Cost Value Cost Value Cost Value Cost Value 2003 & Prior $ 49 $ 41 $ 162 $ 136 $ 60 $ 43 $ 32 $ 26 $ 34 $ 20 $ 337 $ 266 2004 112 81 349 277 8 7 10 7 479 372 2005 90 71 543 367 154 77 24 16 23 18 834 549 2006 77 69 126 56 18 9 120 50 143 54 484 238 2007 42 27 40 10 38 18 47 26 134 75 301 156 Total $ 370 $ 289 $ 1,220 $ 846 $ 278 $ 154 $ 233 $ 125 $ 334 $ 167 $ 2,435 $ 1,581 Credit protection 40.5% 47.6% 31.4% 21.9% 19.9% 41.0% December 31, 2007 AAA AA A BBB BB and Below Total Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Cost Value Cost Value Cost Value Cost Value Cost Value Cost Value 2003 & Prior $ 93 $ 92 $ 213 $ 199 $ 113 $ 94 $ 8 $ 7 $ 7 $ 7 $ 434 $ 399 2004 133 131 358 324 2 2 2 1 495 458 2005 113 107 796 713 8 5 10 3 33 23 960 851 2006 457 413 67 55 2 3 3 2 8 2 537 475 2007 280 241 71 39 56 47 21 20 25 27 453 374 Total $ 1,076 $ 984 $ 1,505 $ 1,330 $ 181 $ 151 $ 44 $ 33 $ 73 $ 59 $ 2,879 $ 2,557 Credit protection 32.7% 47.3% 21.1% 19.6% 17.1% 39.8% [1] The vintage year represents the year the underlying loans in the pool were originated. [2] The Company exposure to second lien residential mortgages is composed primarily of loans to prime and Alt-A borrowers, of which approximately over half were wrapped by monoline insurers. These securities are included in the table above and have an amortized cost and fair value of $173 and $82, respectively, as of December 31, 2008 and $260 and $217, respectively, as of December 31, 2007. [3] As of December 31, 2008, the weighted average life of the sub-prime residential mortgage portfolio was 3.8 years. [4] Approximately 84% of the portfolio is backed by adjustable rate mortgages. [5] The credit qualities above include downgrades which have shifted the portfolio from higher rated assets to lower rated assets since December 31, 2007. 170 Table of Contents Commercial Mortgage Loans The Company has observed weakness in commercial real estate market fundamentals and expects continued pressure on these fundamentals including increased vacancies, rising delinquencies, lower rent growth and declining property values. The following tables represent the Company exposure to CMBS bonds, commercial real estate CDOs, and IOs by current credit quality and vintage year. A comparison of fair value to amortized cost is not indicative of the pricing of individual securities as rating downgrades and impairments have occurred. Credit protection represents the current weighted average percentage of the outstanding capital structure subordinated to the Company investment holding that is available to absorb losses before the security incurs the first dollar loss of principal. This credit protection does not include any equity interest or property value in excess of outstanding debt. CMBS Bonds [1] December 31, 2008 AAA AA A BBB BB and Below Total Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Cost Value Cost Value Cost Value Cost Value Cost Value Cost Value 2003 & Prior $ 2,057 $ 1,869 $ 455 $ 299 $ 175 $ 102 $ 36 $ 27 $ 37 $ 25 $ 2,760 $ 2,322 2004 667 576 85 35 65 22 23 10 840 643 2005 1,142 847 475 152 325 127 55 27 1,997 1,153 2006 2,562 1,498 385 110 469 168 385 140 40 12 3,841 1,928 2007 981 504 438 128 148 45 134 60 5 1 1,706 738 Total $ 7,409 $ 5,294 $ 1,838 $ 724 $ 1,182 $ 464 $ 633 $ 264 $ 82 $ 38 $ 11,144 $ 6,784 Credit protection 24.4% 16.4% 12.2% 5.3% 4.4% 20.6% December 31, 2007 AAA AA A BBB BB and Below Total Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Cost Value Cost Value Cost Value Cost Value Cost Value Cost Value 2003 & Prior $ 2,666 $ 2,702 $ 495 $ 502 $ 224 $ 227 $ 30 $ 32 $ 46 $ 49 $ 3,461 $ 3,512 2004 709 708 89 87 77 73 23 21 898 889 2005 1,280 1,258 479 454 345 327 85 76 24 21 2,213 2,136 2006 2,975 2,910 415 395 555 526 456 400 24 22 4,425 4,253 2007 1,365 1,342 461 431 180 160 190 165 3 3 2,199 2,101 Total $ 8,995 $ 8,920 $ 1,939 $ 1,869 $ 1,381 $ 1,313 $ 784 $ 694 $ 97 $ 95 $ 13,196 $ 12,891 Credit protection 23.8% 16.4% 13.6% 6.8% 3.7% 20.6% [1] The vintage year represents the year the pool of loans was originated. CMBS CRE CDOs [1] [2] [3] December 31, 2008 [4] AAA AA A BBB BB and Below Total Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Cost Value Cost Value Cost Value Cost Value Cost Value Cost Value 2003 & Prior $ 180 $ 59 $ 96 $ 29 $ 79 $ 17 $ 64 $ 7 $ 31 $ 7 $ 450 $ 119 2004 129 38 17 6 31 9 11 2 14 3 202 58 2005 94 37 62 15 65 12 10 2 1 232 66 2006 242 76 91 25 81 20 15 2 429 123 2007 139 45 106 19 101 11 12 1 358 76 2008 43 13 22 5 24 3 3 92 21 Total $ 827 $ 268 $ 394 $ 99 $ 381 $ 72 $ 115 $ 14 $ 46 $ 10 $ 1,763 $ 463 Credit protection 29.7% 21.3% 18.2% 19.4% 57.0% 25.4% 171 Table of Contents December 31, 2007 AAA AA A BBB BB and Below Total Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Cost Value Cost Value Cost Value Cost Value Cost Value Cost Value 2003 & Prior $ 378 $ 320 $ 88 $ 73 $ 64 $ 42 $ 13 $ 10 $ $ $ 543 $ 445 2004 170 149 17 15 24 17 8 7 219 188 2005 178 153 63 52 60 42 6 5 307 252 2006 517 436 178 136 149 118 46 34 890 724 2007 107 97 92 80 72 58 13 10 284 245 Total $ 1,350 $ 1,155 $ 438 $ 356 $ 369 $ 277 $ 86 $ 66 $ $ $ 2,243 $ 1,854 Credit protection 31.5% 27.1% 16.7% 10.4% 27.5% [1] The vintage year represents the year that the underlying collateral in the pool was originated. Individual CDO market value is allocated by the proportion of collateral within each vintage year. [2] As of December 31, 2008, approximately 36% of the underlying CMBS CRE CDO collateral are seasoned, below investment grade securities. [3] For certain CDOs, the collateral manager has the ability to reinvest proceeds that become available, primarily from collateral maturities. The increase in the 2008 vintage year represents reinvestment under these CDOs. [4] The credit qualities above include downgrades since December 31, 2007. CMBS IOs [1] December 31, 2008 December 31, 2007 AAA AAA Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Cost Value Cost Value 2003 & Prior $ 440 $ 423 $ 548 $ 606 2004 268 199 360 374 2005 354 245 422 430 2006 165 104 194 205 2007 169 109 217 216 Total $ 1,396 $ 1,080 $ 1,741 $ 1,831 [1] The vintage year represents the year the pool of loans was originated. In addition to commercial mortgage backed securities, the Company has whole loan commercial real estate investments. The carrying value of mortgage loans on real estate was $6.5 billion and $5.4 billion as of December 31, 2008 and 2007, respectively. The Company mortgage loans are collateralized by a variety of commercial and agricultural properties. The mortgage loans are diversified both geographically throughout the United States and by property type. At December 31, 2008, the Company held delinquent mortgage loans on three properties with a carrying value of $91 which were deemed impaired and accordingly, a valuation allowance of $26 was established. At December 31, 2007, the Company held no impaired, restructured, delinquent or in-process-of-foreclosure mortgage loans and therefore had no valuation allowance. The following table presents commercial mortgage loans by region and property type. Commercial Mortgage Loans on Real Estate by Region December 31, 2008 December 31, 2007 Carrying Percent of Carrying Percent of Value Total Value Total East North Central $ 162 2.5 % $ 120 2.2 % East South Central 9 0.2 % Middle Atlantic 717 11.1 % 674 12.4 % Mountain 223 3.4 % 200 3.7 % New England 487 7.5 % 404 7.5 % Pacific 1,495 23.1 % 1,200 22.2 % South Atlantic 1,102 17.0 % 1,104 20.4 % West North Central 64 1.0 % 32 0.6 % West South Central 333 5.2 % 286 5.3 % Other [1] 1,886 29.2 % 1,381 25.5 % Total $ 6,469 100.0 % $ 5,410 100.0 % [1] Includes multi-regional properties. 172 Table of Contents Commercial Mortgage Loans on Real Estate by Property Type December 31, 2008 December 31, 2007 Carrying Percent of Carrying Percent of Value Total Value Total Industrial $ 1,118 17.3 % $ 649 12.0 % Lodging 483 7.5 % 524 9.7 % Agricultural 635 9.8 % 362 6.7 % Multifamily 1,131 17.5 % 991 18.3 % Office 1,885 29.1 % 1,929 35.6 % Retail 884 13.7 % 806 14.9 % Other 333 5.1 % 149 2.8 % Total $ 6,469 100.0 % $ 5,410 100.0 % Consumer Loans The Company continues to see weakness in consumer credit fundamentals. Rising delinquency and loss rates have been driven by the recessionary economy and higher unemployment rates. Delinquencies and losses on consumer loans rose during 2008 and the Company expects this trend to continue in the upcoming year. However, the Company expects its ABS consumer loan holdings to face limited credit concerns, as the borrower collateral quality and structural credit enhancement of the securities are sufficient to absorb a significantly higher level of defaults than are currently anticipated. The following table presents the Company exposure to ABS consumer loans by credit quality. ABS Consumer Loans December 31, 2008 AAA AA A BBB BB and Below Total Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Cost Value Cost Value Cost Value Cost Value Cost Value Cost Value Auto [1] $ 135 $ 109 $ 29 $ 27 $ 142 $ 103 $ 209 $ 162 $ 30 $ 20 $ 545 $ 421 Credit card [2] 419 367 6 3 108 97 351 248 58 39 942 754 Student loan [3] 294 159 332 244 138 84 764 487 Total $ 848 $ 635 $ 367 $ 274 $ 388 $ 284 $ 560 $ 410 $ 88 $ 59 $ 2,251 $ 1,662 December 31, 2007 AAA AA A BBB BB and Below Total Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Cost Value Cost Value Cost Value Cost Value Cost Value Cost Value Auto [1] $ 274 $ 270 $ 27 $ 27 $ 151 $ 148 $ 198 $ 192 $ 42 $ 39 $ 692 $ 676 Credit card [2] 166 166 19 19 162 162 610 591 957 938 Student loan [3] 313 297 333 317 140 133 786 747 Total $ 753 $ 733 $ 379 $ 363 $ 453 $ 443 $ 808 $ 783 $ 42 $ 39 $ 2,435 $ 2,361 [1] Includes monoline insured securities with an amortized cost and fair value of $47 and $38, respectively, at December 31, 2008, and amortized cost and fair value of $49 at December 31, 2007. Additionally, approximately 13% of the auto consumer loan-backed securities were issued by lenders whose primary business is to sub-prime borrowers. [2] As of December 31, 2008, approximately 6% of the securities were issued by lenders that lend primarily to sub-prime borrowers. [3] Includes monoline insured securities with an amortized cost and fair value of $102 and $38, respectively, at December 31, 2008, and amortized cost and fair value of $102 and $93, respectively, at December 31, 2007. Additionally, approximately half of the student loan-backed exposure is guaranteed by the Federal Family Education Loan Program, with the remainder comprised of loans to prime-borrowers. Monoline Insured Securities Monoline insurers guarantee the timely payment of principal and interest of certain securities. Municipalities will often purchase monoline insurance to wrap a security issuance in order to benefit from better market execution. Rating agency downgrades of bond insurers have not had a significant impact on the fair value of the Company insured portfolio; however, these downgrades have caused a downshift in rating quality from AAA rated since December 31, 2007. As of December 31, 2008, the fair value of the Company total monoline insured securities was $6.6 billion, with the fair value of the insured municipal securities totaling $6.1 billion. At December 31, 2008 and 2007, the overall credit quality of the municipal bond portfolio, including the benefits of monoline insurance, was AA- and AA+, respectively, and excluding the benefits of monoline insurance, the overall credit quality was AA-. In addition to the insured municipal securities, as of December 31, 2008, the Company has other insured securities with a fair value of approximately $500. These securities include the below prime mortgage-backed securities and other consumer loan receivables discussed above, as well as, corporate securities. The Company also has direct investments in monoline insurers with a fair value of approximately $48 as of December 31, 2008. 173 Table of Contents Security Unrealized Loss Aging The following table presents the Company unrealized loss aging for available-for-sale securities on a consolidated basis by length of time the security was in a continuous unrealized loss position. Consolidated Securities December 31, 2008 December 31, 2007 Cost or Cost or Amortized Fair Unrealized Amortized Fair Unrealized Items Cost Value Loss Items Cost Value Loss Three months or less 1,718 $ 16,425 $ 14,992 $ (1,433 ) 1,581 $ 10,879 $ 10,445 $ (434 ) Greater than three to six months 972 6,533 5,247 (1,286 ) 1,052 11,857 10,954 (903 ) Greater than six to nine months 764 7,053 5,873 (1,180 ) 813 10,086 9,354 (732 ) Greater than nine to twelve months 741 6,459 4,957 (1,502 ) 262 2,756 2,545 (211 ) Greater than twelve months 2,417 25,279 16,071 (9,208 ) 1,735 10,563 10,071 (492 ) Total 6,612 $ 61,749 $ 47,140 $ (14,609 ) 5,443 $ 46,141 $ 43,369 $ (2,772 ) The following tables present the Company unrealized loss aging for available-for-sale securities by length of time the security was in a continuous greater than 20% unrealized loss position. Securitized Assets Depressed over 20% December 31, 2008 December 31, 2007 Cost or Cost or Amortized Fair Unrealized Amortized Fair Unrealized Consecutive Months Items Cost Value Loss Items Cost Value Loss Three months or less 859 $ 11,852 $ 6,779 $ (5,073 ) 138 $ 1,263 $ 835 $ (428 ) Greater than three to six months 102 1,141 420 (721 ) 12 146 91 (55 ) Greater than six to nine months 153 1,966 687 (1,279 ) Greater than nine to twelve months 97 934 218 (716 ) Greater than twelve months 18 240 38 (202 ) 6 40 26 (14 ) Total 1,229 $ 16,133 $ 8,142 $ (7,991 ) 156 $ 1,449 $ 952 $ (497 ) All Other Securities Depressed over 20% December 31, 2008 December 31, 2007 Cost or Cost or Amortized Fair Unrealized Amortized Fair Unrealized Consecutive Months Items Cost Value Loss Items Cost Value Loss Three months or less 1,006 $ 10,597 $ 7,044 $ (3,553 ) 116 $ 635 $ 492 $ (143 ) Greater than three to six months 58 306 150 (156 ) 9 74 21 (53 ) Greater than six to nine months 27 314 178 (136 ) Greater than nine to twelve months 8 115 68 (47 ) Greater than twelve months Total 1,099 $ 11,332 $ 7,440 $ (3,892 ) 125 $ 709 $ 513 $ (196 ) Consolidated Securities Depressed over 20% December 31, 2008 December 31, 2007 Cost or Cost or Amortized Fair Unrealized Amortized Fair Unrealized Consecutive Months Items Cost Value Loss Items Cost Value Loss Three months or less 1,865 $ 22,449 $ 13,823 $ (8,626 ) 254 $ 1,898 $ 1,327 $ (571 ) Greater than three to six months 160 1,447 570 (877 ) 21 220 112 (108 ) Greater than six to nine months 180 2,280 865 (1,415 ) Greater than nine to twelve months 105 1,049 286 (763 ) Greater than twelve months 18 240 38 (202 ) 6 40 26 (14 ) Total 2,328 $ 27,465 $ 15,582 $ (11,883 ) 281 $ 2,158 $ 1,465 $ (693 ) 174 Table of Contents The following tables present the Company unrealized loss aging for available-for-sale securities (included in the tables above) by length of time the security was in a continuous greater than 50% unrealized loss position. Securitized Assets Depressed over 50% (included in the depressed over 20% table above) December 31, 2008 December 31, 2007 Cost or Cost or Amortized Fair Unrealized Amortized Fair Unrealized Consecutive Months Items Cost Value Loss Items Cost Value Loss Three months or less 532 $ 7,150 $ 2,395 $ (4,755 ) 27 $ 124 $ 47 $ (77 ) Greater than three to six months 37 347 56 (291 ) Greater than six to nine months 21 182 26 (156 ) Greater than nine to twelve months Greater than twelve months Total 590 $ 7,679 $ 2,477 $ (5,202 ) 27 $ 124 $ 47 $ (77 ) All Other Securities Depressed over 50% (included in the depressed over 20% table above) December 31, 2008 December 31, 2007 Cost or Cost or Amortized Fair Unrealized Amortized Fair Unrealized Consecutive Months Items Cost Value Loss Items Cost Value Loss Three months or less 129 $ 1,305 $ 549 $ (756 ) 9 $ 3 $ 1 $ (2 ) Greater than three to six months 4 17 1 (16 ) Greater than six to nine months Greater than nine to twelve months Greater than twelve months Total 129 $ 1,305 $ 549 $ (756 ) 13 $ 20 $ 2 $ (18 ) Consolidated Securities Depressed over 50% (included in the depressed over 20% table above) December 31, 2008 December 31, 2007 Cost or Cost or Amortized Fair Unrealized Amortized Fair Unrealized Consecutive Months Items Cost Value Loss Items Cost Value Loss Three months or less 661 $ 8,455 $ 2,944 $ (5,511 ) 36 $ 127 $ 48 $ (79 ) Greater than three to six months 37 347 56 (291 ) 4 17 1 (16 ) Greater than six to nine months 21 182 26 (156 ) Greater than nine to twelve months Greater than twelve months Total 719 $ 8,984 $ 3,026 $ (5,958 ) 40 $ 144 $ 49 $ (95 ) 175 Table of Contents Securitized Assets The majority of securitized assets depressed over 20%, as well as, over 50% for six consecutive months are primarily related to CMBS and sub-prime RMBS. Based upon the Company cash flow modeling in a severe negative economic outlook, which shows no loss of principal and interest, and the Company assertion of its ability and intent to retain the securities until recovery, it has been determined that these securities are temporarily impaired as of December 31, 2008. All Other Securities The majority of all other securities depressed over 20% for six consecutive months or greater in the tables above primarily relate to financial services sector securities that include corporate bonds, as well as, preferred equities issued by large high quality financial institutions that are lower in the capital structure, and as a result have incurred greater price depressions. Based upon the Company analysis of these securities and current macroeconomic conditions, the Company expects to see significant price recovery on these securities over time and, therefore, has determined that these securities are temporarily impaired as of December 31, 2008. For further discussion on these securities, see the discussion below the Consolidated Available-for-Sale Securities by Type table in this section above. Future changes in the fair value of the investment portfolio are primarily dependent on the extent of future issuer credit losses, return of liquidity and changes in general market conditions, including interest rates and credit spread movements. As part of the Company ongoing security monitoring process by a committee of investment and accounting professionals, the Company has reviewed its investment portfolio and concluded that there were no additional other-than-temporary impairments as of December 31, 2008 and 2007. During this analysis, the Company asserts its intent and ability to retain until recovery those securities judged to be temporarily impaired. Once identified, these securities are systematically restricted from trading unless approved by the committee. The committee will only authorize the sale of these securities based on predefined criteria that relate to events that could not have been reasonably foreseen at the time the committee rendered its judgment on the Company intent and ability to retain such securities until recovery. Examples of the criteria include, but are not limited to, the deterioration in the issuer creditworthiness, a change in regulatory requirements or a major business combination or major disposition. The evaluation for other-than-temporary impairments is a quantitative and qualitative process, which is subject to risks and uncertainties in the determination of whether declines in the fair value of investments are other-than-temporary. The risks and uncertainties include changes in general economic conditions, the issuer financial condition and/or future prospects, the effects of changes in interest rates or credit spreads and the expected recovery period. In addition, for securitized assets with contractual cash flows (e.g., ABS and CMBS), projections of expected future cash flows may change based upon new information regarding the performance of the underlying collateral. As of December 31, 2008 and 2007, management expectation of the discounted future cash flows on these securities was in excess of the associated securities amortized cost. For a further discussion, see Evaluation of Other-Than-Temporary Impairments on Available-for-Sale Securities included in the Critical Accounting Estimates section of the MD&A, Other-Than-Temporary Impairments on Available-for-Sale Securities section in Note 1 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements and Item 1A, Risk Factors. 176 Table of Contents CAPITAL MARKETS RISK MANAGEMENT The Hartford has a disciplined approach to managing risks associated with its capital markets and asset/liability management activities. Investment portfolio management is organized to focus investment management expertise on the specific classes of investments, while asset/liability management is the responsibility of a dedicated risk management unit supporting Life and Property & Casualty operations. Derivative instruments are utilized in compliance with established Company policy and regulatory requirements and are monitored internally and reviewed by senior management. During 2008, the continued deterioration in the U.S. housing market, tightened lending conditions, the market flight to quality securities, the U.S. recession, and the declining global economy contributed to substantial spread widening in the Company fixed maturity portfolio. Market Risk The Hartford is exposed to market risk, primarily relating to the market price and/or cash flow variability associated with changes in interest rates, credit spreads including issuer defaults, equity prices or market indices, and foreign currency exchange rates. The Hartford is also exposed to credit and counterparty repayment risk. The Company analyzes interest rate risk using various models including parametric models that forecast cash flows of the liabilities and the supporting investments, including derivative instruments, under various market scenarios. Interest Rate Risk The Company exposure to interest rate risk relates to the market price and/or cash flow variability associated with the changes in market interest rates. The Company manages its exposure to interest rate risk through asset allocation limits, asset/liability duration matching and through the use of derivatives. The Company analyzes interest rate risk using various models including parametric models and cash flow simulation of the liabilities and the supporting investments, including derivative instruments under various market scenarios. Measures the Company uses to quantify its exposure to interest rate risk inherent in its invested assets and interest rate sensitive liabilities include duration and key rate duration. Duration is the weighted average term-to-maturity of a security cash flows, and is used to approximate the percentage change in the price of a security for a 100 basis point change in market interest rates. For example, a duration of 5 means the price of the security will change by approximately 5% for a 1% change in interest rates. The key rate duration analysis considers the expected future cash flows of assets and liabilities assuming non-parallel interest rate movements. To calculate duration, projections of asset and liability cash flows are discounted to a present value using interest rate assumptions. These cash flows are then revalued at alternative interest rate levels to determine the percentage change in fair value due to an incremental change in rates. Cash flows from corporate obligations are assumed to be consistent with the contractual payment streams on a yield to worst basis. The primary assumptions used in calculating cash flow projections include expected asset payment streams taking into account prepayment speeds, issuer call options and contract holder behavior. ABS, CMOs and MBS are modeled based on estimates of the rate of future prepayments of principal over the remaining life of the securities. These estimates are developed using prepayment speeds provided in broker consensus data. Such estimates are derived from prepayment speeds previously experienced at the interest rate levels projected for the underlying collateral. Actual prepayment experience may vary from these estimates. The Company is also exposed to interest rate risk based upon the discount rate assumption associated with the Company pension and other postretirement benefit obligations. The discount rate assumption is based upon an interest rate yield curve comprised of bonds rated Aa or higher with maturities primarily between zero and thirty years. For further discussion of interest rate risk associated with the benefit obligations, see the Critical Accounting Estimates section of the MD&A under Pension and Other Postretirement Benefit Obligations and Note 17 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. As interest rates decline, certain securities such as MBS and CMOs, as well as, other mortgage loan backed securities are more susceptible to paydowns and prepayments. During such periods, the Company generally will not be able to reinvest the proceeds at comparable yields, however in 2008, in general, increases in credit spreads off-set lower interest rates. Lower interest rates will also likely result in lower net investment income, increased hedging cost associated with variable annuities and, if declines are sustained for a long period of time, it may subject the Company to reinvestment risks, higher pension costs expense and possibly reduced profit margins associated with guaranteed crediting rates on certain Life products. Conversely, the fair value of the investment portfolio will increase when interest rates decline and the Company interest expense will be lower on its variable rate debt obligations. The Company believes that an increase in interest rates from the current levels is generally a favorable development for the Company. Rate increases are expected to provide additional net investment income, increase sales of fixed rate Life investment products, reduce the cost of the variable annuity hedging program, limit the potential risk of margin erosion due to minimum guaranteed crediting rates in certain Life products and, if sustained, could reduce the Company prospective pension expense. Conversely, a rise in interest rates will reduce the fair value of the investment portfolio, increase interest expense on the Company variable rate debt obligations and, if long-term interest rates rise dramatically within a six to twelve month time period, certain Life businesses may be exposed to disintermediation risk. Disintermediation risk refers to the risk that policyholders will surrender their contracts in a rising interest rate environment requiring the Company to liquidate assets in an unrealized loss position. In conjunction with the interest rate risk measurement and management techniques, certain of Life fixed income product offerings have market value adjustment provisions at contract surrender. 177 Table of Contents Credit Risk The Company is exposed to credit risk within our investment portfolio and through counterparties. Credit risk relates to the uncertainty of an obligor continued ability to make timely payments in accordance with the contractual terms of the instrument or contract. The Company manages credit risk through established investment credit policies which address quality of obligors and counterparties, credit concentration limits, diversification requirements and acceptable risk levels under expected and stressed scenarios. These policies are reviewed and approved by senior management and by the Company Board of Directors. The derivative counterparty exposure policy establishes market-based credit limits, favors long-term financial stability and creditworthiness of the counterparty and typically requires credit enhancement/credit risk reducing agreements. The Company minimizes the credit risk in derivative instruments by entering into transactions with high quality counterparties rated A2/A or better, which are monitored and evaluated by the Company risk management team and reviewed by senior management. In addition, the internal compliance unit monitors counterparty credit exposure on a monthly basis to ensure compliance with Company policies and statutory limitations. Derivative counterparty credit risk is measured as the amount owed to the Company based upon current market conditions and potential payment obligations between the Company and its counterparties. Credit exposures are generally quantified daily based on the prior business day market value and collateral is pledged to and held by, or on behalf of, the Company to the extent the current value of derivative instruments exceeds the contractual thresholds. In accordance with industry standards and the contractual agreements, collateral is typically settled on the next business day. The Company has exposure to credit risk for amounts below the exposure thresholds which are uncollateralized, as well as, for market fluctuations that may occur between contractual settlement periods of collateral movements. The Company has developed credit exposure thresholds which are based upon counterparty ratings. The maximum uncollateralized threshold for a derivative counterparty for a single legal entity is $10, excluding reinsurance derivatives. The Company currently transacts derivatives in five legal entities and therefore the maximum combined threshold for a single counterparty over all legal entities that use derivatives is $50. In addition, the Company may have exposure to multiple counterparties in a single corporate family due to a common credit support provider. As of December 31, 2008, the maximum combined threshold for all counterparties under a single credit support provider over all legal entities that use derivatives is $100. Based on the contractual terms of the collateral agreements, these thresholds may be immediately reduced due to a downgrade in a counterparty credit rating. In addition to counterparty credit risk, the Company enters into credit derivative instruments, including credit default, index and total return swaps, in which the Company assumes credit risk from or reduces credit risk to a single entity, referenced index, or asset pool, in exchange for periodic payments. For further information on credit derivatives, see the Investment Credit Risk section. The Company is also exposed to credit spread risk related to security market price and cash flows associated with changes in credit spreads. Credit spread widening will reduce the fair value of the investment portfolio and will increase net investment income on new purchases. This will also result in losses associated with credit based non-qualifying derivatives where the Company assumes credit exposure. If issuer credit spreads increase significantly or for an extended period of time, it may result in higher other-than-temporary impairments. Credit spread tightening will reduce net investment income associated with new purchases of fixed maturities and increase the fair value of the investment portfolio. During 2008, credit spread widening resulted in a significant increase in the Company unrealized losses and other-than-temporary impairments. For further discussion of sectors most significantly impacted, see the Investment Credit Risk section. Also, see Capital Resources and Liquidity for a discussion of the widening of credit spread impacts on the Company statutory financial results as it relates to the accounting and reporting for market value adjusted fixed annuities. Equity Risk The Company does not have significant equity risk exposure from invested assets. The Company primary exposure to equity risk relates to the potential for lower earnings associated with certain of the Life businesses such as variable annuities where fee income is earned based upon the fair value of the assets under management. During 2008, Life fee income declined $302 or 6%. In addition, Life offers certain guaranteed benefits, primarily associated with variable annuity products, which increases the Company potential benefit exposure as the equity markets decline. For a further discussion, see Life Equity Risk in this section of the MD&A. The Company is also subject to equity risk based upon the assets that support its pension plans. The asset allocation mix is reviewed on a periodic basis. In order to minimize risk, the pension plans maintain a listing of permissible and prohibited investments. In addition, the pension plans have certain concentration limits and investment quality requirements imposed on permissible investment options. For further discussion of equity risk associated with the pension plans, see the Critical Accounting Estimates section of the MD&A under Pension and Other Postretirement Benefit Obligations and Note 17 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Foreign Currency Exchange Risk The Company foreign currency exchange risk is related to non U.S. dollar denominated investments, which primarily consist of fixed maturity investments, the investment in and net income of the Japanese Life and U.K. Life operations, and non-U.S. dollar denominated liability contracts, including its GMDB, GMAB, GMWB, and GMIB benefits associated with its Japanese and U.K. variable annuities, and a yen denominated individual fixed annuity product. A portion of the Company foreign currency exposure is mitigated through the use of derivatives. 178 Table of Contents Derivative Instruments The Company utilizes a variety of derivative instruments, including swaps, caps, floors, forwards, futures and options through one of four Company-approved objectives: to hedge risk arising from interest rate, equity market, credit spread including issuer default, price or currency exchange rate risk or volatility; to manage liquidity; to control transaction costs; or to enter into replication transactions. Interest rate, volatility, dividend, credit default and index swaps involve the periodic exchange of cash flows with other parties, at specified intervals, calculated using agreed upon rates or other financial variables and notional principal amounts. Generally, no cash or principal payments are exchanged at the inception of the contract. Typically, at the time a swap is entered into, the cash flow streams exchanged by the counterparties are equal in value. Interest rate cap and floor contracts entitle the purchaser to receive from the issuer at specified dates, the amount, if any, by which a specified market rate exceeds the cap strike interest rate or falls below the floor strike interest rate, applied to a notional principal amount. A premium payment is made by the purchaser of the contract at its inception and no principal payments are exchanged. Forward contracts are customized commitments to either purchase or sell designated financial instruments, at a future date, for a specified price and may be settled in cash or through delivery of the underlying instrument. Financial futures are standardized commitments to either purchase or sell designated financial instruments, at a future date, for a specified price and may be settled in cash or through delivery of the underlying instrument. Futures contracts trade on organized exchanges. Margin requirements for futures are met by pledging securities or cash, and changes in the futures contract values are settled daily in cash. Option contracts grant the purchaser, for a premium payment, the right to either purchase from or sell to the issuer a financial instrument at a specified price, within a specified period or on a stated date. Foreign currency swaps exchange an initial principal amount in two currencies, agreeing to re-exchange the currencies at a future date, at an agreed upon exchange rate. There may also be a periodic exchange of payments at specified intervals calculated using the agreed upon rates and exchanged principal amounts. Derivative activities are monitored and evaluated by the Company risk management team and reviewed by senior management. In addition, the internal compliance unit monitors counterparty credit exposure on a monthly basis to ensure compliance with Company policies and statutory limitations. The notional amounts of derivative contracts represent the basis upon which pay or receive amounts are calculated and are not reflective of credit risk. Notional amounts pertaining to derivative instruments used in the management of market risk, excluding the credit derivatives as discussed in the Investment Credit Risk section, at December 31, 2008 and 2007, were $106.6 billion and $101.0 billion, respectively. The increase in the derivative notional amount during 2008 was primarily due to the derivatives associated with the GMWB product feature. For further information, see Note 4 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. For further discussion on credit derivatives, see the Investment Credit Risk section. The following discussions focus on the key market risk exposures within Life and Property & Casualty portfolios. Life Life is responsible for maximizing economic value within acceptable risk parameters, including the management of the interest rate sensitivity of invested assets, while generating sufficient after-tax income to support policyholder and corporate obligations. Life fixed maturity portfolios and certain investment contracts and insurance product liabilities have material market exposure to interest rate risk. In addition, Life operations are significantly influenced by changes in the equity markets. Life profitability depends largely on the amount of assets under management, which is primarily driven by the level of sales, equity market appreciation and depreciation and the persistency of the in-force block of business. Life foreign currency exposure is primarily related to non-U.S. dollar denominated fixed income securities, non-U.S. dollar denominated liability contracts, the investment in and net income of the Japanese and U.K. Life operations and certain foreign currency based individual fixed annuity contracts, and its GMDB, GMAB, GMWB, and GMIB benefits associated with its Japanese and U.K. variable annuities. Interest Rate Risk Life exposure to interest rate risk relates to the market price and/or cash flow variability associated with changes in market interest rates. As stated above, changes in interest rates can potentially impact Life profitability. In certain scenarios where interest rates are volatile, Life could be exposed to disintermediation risk and a reduction in net interest rate spread or profit margins. The investments and liabilities primarily associated with interest rate risk are included in the following discussion. Certain product liabilities, including those containing GMWB, GMIB, GMAB, or GMDB, expose the Company to interest rate risk but also have significant equity risk. These liabilities are discussed as part of the Equity Risk section below. 179 Table of Contents Fixed Maturity Investments Life investment portfolios primarily consist of investment grade fixed maturity securities, including corporate bonds, ABS, CMBS, tax-exempt municipal securities and government bonds. The fair value of Life fixed maturities was $45.2 billion and $52.5 billion at December 31, 2008 and 2007, respectively. The fair value of Life fixed maturities and other invested assets fluctuates depending on the interest rate environment and other general economic conditions. The weighted average duration of the fixed maturity portfolio was approximately 5.3 and 4.6 years as of December 31, 2008 and 2007, respectively. Liabilities Life investment contracts and certain insurance product liabilities, other than non-guaranteed separate accounts, include asset accumulation vehicles such as fixed annuities, guaranteed investment contracts, other investment and universal life-type contracts and certain insurance products such as long-term disability. Asset accumulation vehicles primarily require a fixed rate payment, often for a specified period of time. Product examples include fixed rate annuities with a market value adjustment feature and fixed rate guaranteed investment contracts. The duration of these contracts generally range from less than one year to ten years. In addition, certain products such as universal life contracts and the general account portion of Life variable annuity products, credit interest to policyholders subject to market conditions and minimum interest rate guarantees. The duration of these products is short-term to intermediate-term. While interest rate risk associated with many of these products has been reduced through the use of market value adjustment features and surrender charges, the primary risk associated with these products is that the spread between investment return and credited rate may not be sufficient to earn targeted returns. The Company also manages the risk of certain insurance liabilities similar to how it manages the risk associated with investment type products due to the relative predictability of the aggregate cash flow payment streams. Products in this category may contain significant actuarial (including mortality and morbidity) pricing and cash flow risks. Product examples include structured settlement contracts, on-benefit annuities (i.e., the annuitant is currently receiving benefits thereon) and short-term and long-term disability contracts. The cash outflows associated with these policy liabilities are not interest rate sensitive but do vary based on the timing and amount of benefit payments. The primary risks associated with these products are that the benefits will exceed expected actuarial pricing and/or that the actual timing of the cash flows will differ from those anticipated, resulting in an investment return lower than that assumed in pricing. Average contract duration can range from less than one year to typically up to fifteen years. Derivatives Life utilizes a variety of derivative instruments to mitigate interest rate risk. Interest rate swaps are primarily used to convert interest receipts or payments to a fixed or variable rate. The use of such swaps enables the Company to customize contract terms and conditions to customer objectives and satisfies the operation asset/liability duration matching policy. Occasionally, swaps are also used to hedge the variability in the cash flow of a forecasted purchase or sale due to changes in interest rates. Interest rate caps and floors, swaptions and option contracts are primarily used to hedge against the risk of liability contract holder disintermediation in a rising interest rate environment, and to offset the changes in fair value of corresponding derivatives embedded in certain of the Company fixed maturity investments. Interest rate caps are also used to manage the duration risk in certain portfolios. At December 31, 2008 and 2007, notional amounts pertaining to derivatives utilized to manage interest rate risk totaled $17.0 billion and $16.8 billion, respectively ($15.0 billion and $13.1 billion, respectively, related to investments and $1.9 billion and $3.7 billion, respectively, related to life liabilities). The fair value of these derivatives was $435 and $45 as of December 31, 2008 and 2007, respectively. Calculated Interest Rate Sensitivity The after-tax change in the net economic value of investment contracts (e.g., guaranteed investment contracts) and certain insurance product liabilities (e.g., short-term and long-term disability contracts), for which the payment rates are fixed at contract issuance and the investment experience is substantially absorbed by Life, are included in the following table along with the corresponding invested assets. Also included in this analysis are the interest rate sensitive derivatives used by Life to hedge its exposure to interest rate risk. Certain financial instruments, such as limited partnerships, have been omitted from the analysis due to the fact that the investments are accounted for under the equity method and generally lack sensitivity to interest rate changes. Separate account assets and liabilities and equity securities held for trading and the corresponding liabilities associated with the variable annuity products sold in Japan are excluded from the analysis because gains and losses in separate accounts accrue to policyholders. The calculation of the estimated hypothetical change in net economic value below assumes a 100 basis point upward and downward parallel shift in the yield curve. Change in Net Economic Value As of December 31, 2008 2007 Basis point shift - 100 + 100 - 100 + 100 Amount $ (173 ) $ 114 $ (160 ) $ 60 180 Table of Contents The fixed liabilities included above represented approximately 63% and 45% of Life general account liabilities as of December 31, 2008 and 2007, respectively. The assets supporting the fixed liabilities are monitored and managed within rigorous duration guidelines, and are evaluated on a monthly basis as well as annually using scenario simulation techniques in compliance with regulatory requirements. The after-tax change in fair value of the invested asset portfolios that support certain universal life-type contracts and other insurance contracts are shown in the following table. The cash flows associated with these liabilities are less predictable than fixed liabilities. The Company identifies the most appropriate investment strategy based upon the expected policyholder behavior and liability crediting needs. The calculation of the estimated hypothetical change in fair value below assumes a 100 basis point upward and downward parallel shift in the yield curve. Change in Fair Value As of December 31, 2008 2007 Basis point shift - 100 + 100 - 100 + 100 Amount $ 479 $ (455 ) $ 375 $ (364 ) The selection of the 100 basis point parallel shift in the yield curve was made only as an illustration of the potential hypothetical impact of such an event and should not be construed as a prediction of future market events. Actual results could differ materially from those illustrated above due to the nature of the estimates and assumptions used in the above analysis. The Company sensitivity analysis calculation assumes that the composition of invested assets and liabilities remain materially consistent throughout the year and that the current relationship between short-term and long-term interest rates will remain constant over time. As a result, these calculations may not fully capture the impact of portfolio re-allocations, significant product sales or non-parallel changes in interest rates. Life Equity Product Risk The Company Life operations are significantly influenced by changes in the U.S., Japanese, and other global equity markets. Appreciation or depreciation in equity markets impacts certain assets and liabilities related to the Company variable products and the Company earnings derived from those products. The Company variable products include variable annuities, mutual funds, and variable life insurance sold to retail and institutional customers. These variable products may include product guarantees such as guaranteed minimum withdrawal benefits (GMWB), guaranteed minimum accumulation benefits (GMAB), guaranteed minimum death benefits (GMDB), and guaranteed minimum income benefits (GMIB). Substantially all of the Company variable annuity contracts contain a GMDB and a portion of those contracts also contain one or more living benefits. The Company maximum exposure disclosed below for death and living benefits are calculated independently, however, these exposures are substantially overlapping. Generally, declines in equity markets, such as those experienced in 2008, will and did in 2008: reduce the value of assets under management and the amount of fee income generated from those assets; reduce the value of equity securities, held for trading, for international variable annuities, the related policyholder funds and benefits payable, and the amount of fee income generated from those annuities; increase the liability for GMWB and GMAB benefits resulting in realized capital losses; increase the value of derivative assets used to hedge product guarantees resulting in realized capital gains; increase the Company net amount at risk for GMDB and GMIB benefits; and decrease the Company actual gross profits, resulting in a negative true-up to current period DAC amortization. increase the amount of required statutory capital necessary to maintain targeted risk based capital (RBC) ratios. A prolonged or precipitous equity market decline may: turn customer sentiment toward equity-linked products negative, causing a decline in sales; cause a significant decrease in the range of reasonable estimates of future gross profits used in the Company quantitative assessment of its modeled estimates of gross profits. If, in a given financial statement period, the modeled estimates of gross profits are determined to be unreasonable, the Company will accelerate the amount of DAC amortization in that period. Particularly in the case of variable annuities, an acceleration of DAC amortization could potentially cause a material adverse deviation in that period earnings, but it would not affect the Company cash flow or liquidity position. See Life Estimated Gross Profits Used in the Valuation and Amortization of Assets and Liabilities Associated with Variable Annuity and Other Universal Life-Type Contracts within Critical Accounting Estimates for further information on DAC and related equity market sensitivities. During 2008, the Company recorded an unlock charge of $932. increase costs under the Company hedging program. 181 Table of Contents Guaranteed Minimum Withdrawal Benefits and Guaranteed Minimum Accumulation Benefits The majority of the Company U.S. and U.K. variable annuities are sold with a GMWB living benefit rider or a GMAB living benefit rider, which are accounted for under SFAS 133. Declines in the equity market may increase the Company exposure to benefits, under the GMWB and GMAB contracts, leading to an increase in the Company existing liability for those benefits. For example, a GMWB and/or GMAB contract is in the money if the contract holder guaranteed remaining benefit (GRB) becomes greater than the account value. As of December 31, 2008 and December 31, 2007, 88% and 19%, respectively, of all unreinsured U.S. GMWB in-force contracts were in the money . For U.S. and U.K. GMWB contracts that were in the money the Company exposure to the GRB, after reinsurance, as of December 31, 2008 and December 31, 2007, was $7.7 billion and $146, respectively. For GMAB contracts that were in the money the Company exposure, as of December 31, 2008 and December 31, 2007, was $15 and $38, respectively. However, the only ways the GMWB contract holder can monetize the excess of the GRB over the account value of the contract is upon death or if their account value is reduced to a contractually specified minimum level, through a combination of a series of withdrawals that do not exceed a specific percentage of the premiums paid per year and market declines. If the account value is reduced to the contractually specified minimum level, the contract holder will receive an annuity equal to the remaining GRB and, for the Company life-time GMWB products, the annuity can continue beyond the GRB. As the amount of the excess of the GRB over the account value can fluctuate with equity market returns on a daily basis, and the ultimate life-time GMWB payments can exceed the GRB, the ultimate amount to be paid by the Company, if any, is uncertain and could be significantly more or less than $7.7 billion. For GMAB benefits, the only ways the contract holder can monetize the excess of the GRB over the account value of the contract is upon death or by waiting until the end of the contractual deferral period of 10 years. As the amount of the excess of the GRB over the account value can fluctuate with equity market returns on a daily basis, the ultimate amount to be paid by the Company, if any, is uncertain and could be significantly more or less than $15. Guaranteed Minimum Death Benefits and Guaranteed Minimum Income Benefits In the U.S., the Company sells variable annuity contracts that offer various guaranteed death benefits. Declines in the equity market may increase the Company exposure to death benefits under these contracts. The Company accounts for these death benefit liabilities under SOP 03-1, Accounting and Reporting by Insurance Enterprises for Certain Nontraditional Long-Duration Contracts and for Separate Accounts, and, as such, these liabilities are not carried at fair value under SFAS 157. The Company total gross exposure (i.e., before reinsurance) to U.S. guaranteed death benefits as of December 31, 2008 is $36.3 billion. The Company will incur these guaranteed death benefit payments in the future only if the policyholder has an in-the-money guaranteed death benefit at their time of death. The Company currently reinsures 51% of these death benefit guarantees. Under certain of these reinsurance agreements, the reinsurers exposure is subject to an annual cap. The Company net exposure (i.e. after reinsurance) is $17.8 billion, as of December 31, 2008. This amount is often referred to as the retained net amount at risk. In Japan, the Company offers certain variable annuity products with both a guaranteed death benefit and a guaranteed income benefit. Declines in equity markets as well as a strengthening of the Japanese yen in comparison to the U.S. dollar and other currencies may increase the Company exposure to these guaranteed benefits. This increased exposure may be significant in extreme market scenarios. The Company total gross exposure (i.e., before reinsurance) to these guaranteed death benefits and income benefits offered in Japan as of December 31, 2008 is $9 billion. However, the Company will incur these guaranteed death or income benefits in the future only if the contract holder has an in-the-money guaranteed benefit at either the time of their death or if the account value is insufficient to fund the guaranteed living benefits. The Company currently reinsures 15% of the death benefit guarantees. Under certain of these reinsurance agreements, the reinsurers exposure is subject to an annual cap. For these products, the Company retained net amount at risk is $7.8 billion. Life Product Guarantee Accounting Models The accounting for living and death benefit guarantees can be significantly different and may influence the form of risk management employed by the Company. Many benefit guarantees meet the definition of an embedded derivative under SFAS 133 (GMWB and GMAB) and are recorded at fair value under SFAS 157, incorporating changes in equity indices and equity index volatility, with changes in fair value recorded in earnings. However, for other benefit guarantees, certain contract features that define how the contract holder can access the value and substance of the guaranteed benefit change the accounting from SFAS 133 to SOP 03-1. For contracts where the contract holder can only obtain the value of the guaranteed benefit upon the occurrence of an insurable event such as death (GMDB) or when the benefit received is in substance a long-term financing (GMIB), the accounting for the benefit is prescribed by SOP 03-1. As a result of these significant accounting differences, the liability for guarantees recorded under SOP 03-1 may be significantly different than if it was recorded under SFAS 133 and vice versa. In addition, the conditions in the capital markets in Japan versus those in the U.S. are sufficiently different that if the Company GMWB product currently offered in the U.S. were offered in Japan, the capital market conditions in Japan would have a significant impact on the valuation of the GMWB, irrespective of the accounting model. The same would hold true if the Company GMIB product currently offered in Japan were to be offered in the U.S. Capital market conditions in the U.S. would have a significant impact on the valuation of the GMIB. 182 Table of Contents Life Equity Product Risk Management The Company has made considerable investment in analyzing current and potential future market risk exposures arising from a number of factors, including but not limited to, product guarantees (GMDB, GMWB, GMAB, and GMIB), equity market and interest rate risks (in both the U.S. and Japan), and foreign currency exchange rates. The Company evaluates these risks individually and, increasingly, in the aggregate to determine the risk profiles of all of its products and to judge their potential impacts on financial metrics including U.S. GAAP earnings and statutory surplus. The Company manages the equity market, interest rate and foreign currency exchange risks embedded in these product guarantees through product design, reinsurance, customized derivatives, and dynamic hedging and macro hedging programs. In consideration of current market conditions, the Company risk management program for the variable annuity market will include redesigned product features which serve to lessen the financial risk of the product guarantees and increased rider fees charged for the product guarantees. Depending upon competitors reactions with respect to product suites and related rider charges, the Company strategies of reducing product risk and increasing fees may cause a decline in market share. Reinsurance The Company uses reinsurance to manage the risk exposure for a portion of contracts issued with GMWB riders prior to the third quarter of 2003 and, in addition, in 2008, the Company entered into a reinsurance agreement to reinsure GMWB risks associated with a block of business sold between the third quarter of 2003 and the second quarter of 2006. The Company GMWB reinsurance is accounted for as a freestanding derivative and is reported at fair value under SFAS 157. The Company also uses reinsurance to manage the risk exposure for a majority of the death benefit riders issued in the U.S. and a portion of the death benefit riders issued in Japan. Derivative Hedging Programs The Company maintains derivative hedging programs for its product guarantee risk to meet multiple, and in some cases, competing risk management objectives, including providing protection against tail scenario equity market events, providing resources to pay product guarantee claims, and minimizing U.S. GAAP earnings volatility, statutory surplus volatility and other economic metrics. For reinsurance and derivatives, the Company retains credit risk associated with the third parties. Refer to preceding section Credit Risk for the Company discussion of credit risk. The Company is continually exploring new ways and new markets to manage or layoff the capital markets and policyholder behavior risks associated with its U.S. GMWB living benefits. During 2007 and 2008, the Company entered into customized derivative contracts to hedge certain capital market risk components for the remaining term of specific blocks of non-reinsured U.S. GMWB riders. These customized derivative contracts provide protection from capital markets risks based on policyholder behavior assumptions specified by the Company at the inception of the derivative transactions. The Company retains the risk for actual policyholder behavior that is different from assumptions within the customized derivatives. The Company dynamic hedging program uses derivative instruments to manage the U.S. GAAP earnings volatility associated with variable annuity product guarantees including equity market declines, equity implied volatility, declines in interest rates and foreign currency exchange risk. The Company uses hedging instruments including interest rate futures and swaps, variance swaps, S&P 500, NASDAQ and EAFE index put options and futures contracts. The dynamic hedging program involves a detailed monitoring of policyholder behavior and capital markets conditions on a daily basis and rebalancing of the hedge position as needed depending upon the risk strategy employed. While the Company actively manages this dynamic hedging program, increased U.S. GAAP earnings volatility may result from factors including, but not limited to, policyholder behavior, capital markets dislocation or discontinuity, divergence between the performance of the underlying funds and the hedging indices, and the relative emphasis placed on various risk management objectives. The Company macro hedge program uses derivative instruments to partially hedge the statutory tail scenario risk associated primarily with its U.S. and Japan living and death benefit statutory reserves, providing an additional measure of protection, under tail scenarios, on statutory surplus and the associated RBC ratios. A consequence of the macro hedge program will be additional cost and volatility, under non-tail scenarios, as the macro hedge is intended to partially hedge certain equity-market sensitive liabilities calculated under statutory accounting (see Capital Resources and Liquidity) and changes in the value of the derivatives may not be closely aligned to changes in liabilities determined in accordance with U.S. GAAP, causing volatility in U.S. GAAP earnings. In the fourth quarter of 2008, the global economy experienced severe weakening resulting from the dramatic decline in the equity markets, increasing equity index implied volatility, widening of credit spreads, significant declines in interest rates, and volatility in foreign currency exchanges rates. These significant and precipitous economic events increased, to varying degrees, the Company exposure to death and living benefit guarantees, the statutory product guarantee liabilities, and the level of statutory surplus required to maintain the Company RBC ratios. 183 Table of Contents In response to these severe economic drivers, the Company initiated a redesign of the variable annuity product suite strategy designed to lessen the financial risk of variable annuity product guarantees and increase the rider fees on new sales and on in-force, as contractually permitted. The Company will continue to hedge the risk of the product guarantees with a greater relative emphasis on protection of statutory surplus. This rebalancing of the hedging program affords an additional measure of protection to improve the Company capital efficiency in managing tail risk for statutory surplus during periods of declines in the equity markets. This shift in relative emphasis will likely result in greater U.S. GAAP earnings volatility. In the fourth quarter of 2008, the rebalancing of variable annuity hedging programs resulted in the sale of certain derivative positions, a portion of which proceeds were used to purchase other derivatives for the protection of statutory surplus and the associated target RBC ratios. The Company entered into hedge positions on the S&P 500 index to economically hedge statutory reserves and to provide protection of statutory surplus arising primarily from GMDB and GMWB obligations. Refer to Note 5 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information on hedging derivatives. The following table summarizes the Company U.S. GMWB account value by type of risk management strategy as of December 31, 2008: GMWB Account % of GMWB Risk Management Strategy Duration Value Account Value Entire GMWB risk reinsured with a third party Life of the product $ 10,225 27 % Capital markets risk transferred to a third Designed to cover the party behavior risk retained by the effective life of the Company product 10,464 27 % Dynamic hedging of capital markets risk using various derivative instruments [1] Weighted average of 5 years 17,628 46 % $ 38,317 100 % [1] During the fourth quarter of 2008, the Company maintained a reduced level of dynamic hedge protection on U.S. GAAP earnings while placing a greater relative emphasis on the protection of statutory surplus. This shift in emphasis includes the macro hedge program. Equity Risk Impact on Statutory Capital and Risked Based Capital See Capital Resources and Liquidity, Ratings for information on the equity risk impact on statutory results. Foreign Currency Exchange Risk Life exposure to foreign currency exchange risk exists with respect to non-U.S. dollar denominated investments, Life investment in foreign operations, primarily in Japan and the U.K., and non-U.S. dollar denominated liability contracts, including the yen based individual fixed annuity product and its GMDB, GMAB, GMWB, and GMIB benefits associated with its Japanese and U.K. variable annuities. A significant portion of the Company foreign fixed maturity currency exposure is mitigated through the use of derivatives. 184 Table of Contents Fixed Maturity Investments The risk associated with the non-U.S. dollar denominated fixed maturities relates to potential decreases in value and income resulting from unfavorable changes in foreign exchange rates. The fair value of the non-U.S. dollar denominated fixed maturities, which are primarily denominated in euro, sterling, yen and Canadian dollars, at December 31, 2008 and 2007, were approximately $3.0 billion and $1.6 billion, respectively. In order to manage its currency exposures, Life enters into foreign currency swaps and forwards to hedge the variability in cash flows associated with certain foreign denominated fixed maturities. These foreign currency swap and forward agreements are structured to match the foreign currency cash flows of the hedged foreign denominated securities. At December 31, 2008 and 2007, the derivatives used to hedge currency exchange risk related to non-U.S. dollar denominated fixed maturities had a total notional amount of $1.3 billion and $1.5 billion, respectively, and total fair value of $19 and $(296), respectively. Liabilities Life issues non-U.S. dollar denominated funding agreement liability contracts. The Company hedges the foreign currency risk associated with these liability contracts with currency rate swaps. At December 31, 2008 and 2007, the derivatives used to hedge foreign currency exchange risk related to foreign denominated liability contracts had a total notional amount of $792 and $790, respectively, and a total fair value of $(76) and $32, respectively. The Company enters into foreign currency forward and option contracts that convert euros to yen in order to economically hedge the foreign currency risk associated with certain Japanese variable annuity products. As of December 31, 2008, the derivatives used to hedge foreign currency risk associated with Japanese variable annuity products had a total notional amount of $259 and a total fair value of $35. As of December 31, 2007, there were no derivative positions held as part of this strategy. The yen based fixed annuity product is written by Hartford Life Insurance K.K. ( HLIKK ), a wholly-owned Japanese subsidiary of Hartford Life, Inc. ( HLI ), and subsequently reinsured to Hartford Life Insurance Company, a U.S. dollar based wholly-owned indirect subsidiary of HLI. The underlying investment involves investing in U.S. securities markets, which offer favorable credit spreads. The yen denominated fixed annuity product ( yen fixed annuities ) is recorded in the consolidated balance sheets with invested assets denominated in dollars while policyholder liabilities are denominated in yen and converted to U.S. dollars based upon the December 31, yen to U.S. dollar spot rate. The difference between U.S. dollar denominated investments and yen denominated liabilities exposes the Company to currency risk. The Company manages this currency risk associated with the yen fixed annuities primarily with pay variable U.S. dollar and receive fixed yen currency swaps. As of December 31, 2008 and 2007, the notional value and fair value of the currency swaps were $2.3 billion and $1.8 billion, respectively, and $383 and $(115), respectively. Although economically an effective hedge, a divergence between the yen denominated fixed annuity product liability and the currency swaps exists primarily due to the difference in the basis of accounting between the liability and the derivative instruments (i.e. historical cost versus fair value). The yen denominated fixed annuity product liabilities are recorded on a historical cost basis and are only adjusted for changes in foreign spot rates and accrued income. The currency swaps are recorded at fair value, incorporating changes in value due to changes in forward foreign exchange rates, interest rates and accrued income. An after-tax net gain of $42 and $12 for the years ended December 31, 2008 and 2007, respectively, which includes the changes in value of the currency swaps, excluding net periodic coupon settlements, and the yen fixed annuity contract remeasurement, was recorded in net realized capital gains and losses. Based on the fair values of Life non-U.S. dollar denominated investments and derivative instruments (including its yen based individual fixed annuity product) as of December 31, 2008 and 2007, management estimates that a 10% unfavorable change in exchange rates would decrease the fair values by an after-tax total of $111 and $1, respectively. The estimated impact was based upon a 10% change in December 31 spot rates. The selection of the 10% unfavorable change was made only for illustration of the potential hypothetical impact of such an event and should not be construed as a prediction of future market events. Actual results could differ materially from those illustrated above due to the nature of the estimates and assumptions used in the above analysis. 185 Table of Contents Property & Casualty Property & Casualty attempts to maximize economic value while generating appropriate after-tax income and sufficient liquidity to meet policyholder and corporate obligations. Property & Casualty investment portfolio has material exposure to interest rates. The Company continually monitors these exposures and makes portfolio adjustments to manage these risks within established limits. Interest Rate Risk The primary exposure to interest rate risk in Property & Casualty relates to its fixed maturity securities, including corporate bonds, ABS, municipal bonds, CMBS and government bonds. The fair value of these investments was $19.8 billion and $27.2 billion at December 31, 2008 and 2007, respectively. The fair value of these and Property & Casualty other invested assets fluctuates depending on the interest rate environment and other general economic conditions. A variety of derivative instruments, primarily swaps, are used to manage interest rate risk and had a total notional amount as of December 31, 2008 and 2007 of $2.3 billion and $1.8 billion, respectively, and fair value of $23 and $(15), respectively. One of the measures Property & Casualty uses to quantify its exposure to interest rate risk inherent in its invested assets is duration. The weighted average duration of the fixed maturity portfolio was 4.9 years as of December 31, 2008 and 2007. Calculated Interest Rate Sensitivity The following table provides an analysis showing the estimated after-tax change in the fair value of Property & Casualty fixed maturity investments and related derivatives, assuming 100 basis point upward and downward parallel shifts in the yield curve as of December 31, 2008 and 2007. Certain financial instruments, such as limited partnerships, have been omitted from the analysis due to the fact that the investments are accounted for under the equity method and generally lack sensitivity to interest rate changes. Change in Fair Value As of December 31, 2008 2007 Basis point shift - 100 + 100 - 100 + 100 Amount $ 718 $ (695 ) $ 925 $ (894 ) The selection of the 100 basis point parallel shift in the yield curve was made only as an illustration of the potential hypothetical impact of such an event and should not be construed as a prediction of future market events. Actual results could differ materially from those illustrated above due to the nature of the estimates and assumptions used in the above analysis. The Company sensitivity analysis calculation assumes that the composition of invested assets remains materially consistent throughout the year and that the current relationship between short-term and long-term interest rates will remain constant over time. As a result, these calculations may not fully capture the impact of portfolio re-allocations or non-parallel changes in interest rates. Foreign Currency Exchange Risk Foreign currency exchange risk exists with respect to investments in non-U.S. dollar denominated fixed maturities, primarily euro, sterling and Canadian dollar denominated securities. The risk associated with these securities relates to potential decreases in value resulting from unfavorable changes in foreign exchange rates. The fair value of these fixed maturity securities at December 31, 2008 and 2007 was $864 and $972, respectively. In order to manage its currency exposures, Property & Casualty enters into foreign currency swaps and forward contracts to hedge the variability in cash flow associated with certain foreign denominated securities. These foreign currency swap and forward agreements are structured to match the foreign currency cash flows of the hedged foreign denominated securities. At December 31, 2008 and 2007, the derivatives used to hedge currency exchange risk had a total notional value of $775 and $428, respectively, and total fair value of $13 and ($43), respectively. Based on the fair values of Property & Casualty non-U.S. dollar denominated securities and derivative instruments as of December 31, 2008 and 2007, management estimates that a 10% unfavorable change in exchange rates would decrease the fair values by an after-tax total of approximately $42 and $37, respectively. The estimated impact was based upon a 10% change in December 31 spot rates. The selection of the 10% unfavorable change was made only for illustration of the potential hypothetical impact of such an event and should not be construed as a prediction of future market events. Actual results could differ materially from those illustrated above due to the nature of the estimates and assumptions used in the above analysis. 186 Table of Contents CAPITAL RESOURCES AND LIQUIDITY Capital resources and liquidity represent the overall financial strength of The Hartford and its ability to generate strong cash flows from each of the business segments, borrow funds at competitive rates and raise new capital to meet operating and growth needs. Liquidity Requirements The liquidity requirements of The Hartford have been and will continue to be met by funds from operations as well as the issuance of commercial paper, common stock, debt or other capital securities and borrowings from its contingent capital facility and credit facilities. Current and expected patterns of claim frequency and severity may change from period to period but continue to be within historical norms and, therefore, the Company current liquidity position is considered to be sufficient to meet anticipated demands over the next twelve months. However, if an unanticipated demand were placed on the Company it is likely that the Company would either sell certain of its investments to fund claims which could result in larger than usual realized capital gains and losses, would enter the capital markets to raise further funds to provide the requisite liquidity or take other actions. For a discussion and tabular presentation of the Company current contractual obligations by period including those related to its Life and Property & Casualty insurance operations refer to the Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements and Aggregate Contractual Obligations section below. Also see Item 1A, Risk Factors. Sources of Capital The Hartford endeavors to maintain a capital structure that provides financial and operational flexibility to its insurance subsidiaries, ratings that support its competitive position in the financial services marketplace (see the Ratings section below for further discussion), and strong shareholder returns. As a result, the Company may from time to time raise capital from the issuance of stock, debt or other capital securities and is continuously evaluating strategic opportunities. The issuance of common stock, debt or other capital securities could result in the dilution of shareholder interests or reduced net income due to additional interest expense. The principal sources of operating funds are premiums and investment income, while investing cash flows originate from maturities and sales of invested assets. The primary uses of funds are to pay claims, policy benefits, operating expenses and commissions and to purchase new investments. In addition, The Hartford holds a significant short-term investment position to meet liquidity needs. As of December 31, 2008 and 2007, HFSG held total fixed maturity investments of $1.6 billion and $457, respectively, of which $1.5 billion and $154 were short-term investments, respectively. The funds are intended to be used for general corporate purposes, which may include the capital and liquidity needs of our operations. For a discussion of the Company investment objectives and strategies, see the Investments and Capital Markets Risk Management sections. As of December 31, 2008, the Company key sources of liquidity included $11.8 billion of cash and short-term investments (which includes securities with maturities of one year or less at the time of purchase), of which $3.4 billion was collateral received from, and held on behalf of, derivative counterparties and $341 was collateral pledged to derivative counterparties. The Company also held $6.0 billion of treasury securities, of which $402 had been pledged to derivative counterparties. On November 14, 2008, the Company announced that it applied to participate in the U.S. Treasury Department Capital Purchase Program ( CPP ). In conjunction with this application, the Company also applied to the Office of Thrift Supervision ( OTS ) to become a savings and loan holding company and signed a merger agreement to acquire the parent company of Federal Trust Bank ( FTB ), a federally chartered, FDIC-insured savings bank. Federal Trust Bank is owned by Federal Trust Corporation, a unitary thrift holding company headquartered in Sanford, Florida. The completion of this acquisition will satisfy a key eligibility requirement for participation in the CPP. On January 9, 2009, the Office of Thrift Supervision approved the Company application to become a savings and loan holding company and on January 26, 2009, Federal Trust Corporation shareholders approved the acquisition. The Company purchase of Federal Trust Corporation remains contingent on the U.S. Treasury approval of the Company participation in the CPP. The Company estimates that, if approved for participation in the CPP, it would be eligible for a capital purchase of between $1.1 billion and $3.4 billion under existing Treasury guidelines. The final amount of capital requested will be determined following approval by Treasury. Because the Company application to participate in the CPP is subject to approval by the U.S. Treasury, there can be no assurance that the Company will participate in the CPP or that it will not need to pursue alternate sources of capital. In addition, if we consummate the acquisition of FTB, we have agreed with OTS to contribute approximately $100 to the capital of FTB and to serve as a source of strength to FTB, which could require the contribution of additional capital to FTB in the future. 187 Table of Contents HFSG and HLI are holding companies which rely upon operating cash flow in the form of dividends from their subsidiaries, which enable them to service debt, pay dividends, and pay certain business expenses. Dividends to the Company from its insurance subsidiaries are restricted. The payment of dividends by Connecticut-domiciled insurers is limited under the insurance holding company laws of Connecticut. These laws require notice to and approval by the state insurance commissioner for the declaration or payment of any dividend, which, together with other dividends or distributions made within the preceding twelve months, exceeds the greater of (i) 10% of the insurer policyholder surplus as of December 31 of the preceding year or (ii) net income (or net gain from operations, if such company is a life insurance company) for the twelve-month period ending on the thirty-first day of December last preceding, in each case determined under statutory insurance accounting principles. In addition, if any dividend of a Connecticut-domiciled insurer exceeds the insurer earned surplus, it requires the prior approval of the Connecticut Insurance Commissioner. The insurance holding company laws of the other jurisdictions in which The Hartford insurance subsidiaries are incorporated (or deemed commercially domiciled) generally contain similar (although in certain instances somewhat more restrictive) limitations on the payment of dividends. It is estimated that the Company property-casualty insurance subsidiaries will be permitted to pay up to a maximum of approximately $1.2 billion in dividends to HFSG in 2009 without prior approval from the applicable insurance commissioner. Through at least October 30, 2009, substantially all dividend payments from the Company property-casualty insurance subsidiaries will be subject to prior approval of the Connecticut Insurance Commissioner due to extraordinary dividend limitations under the insurance holding company laws of Connecticut. With respect to dividends to HLI, it is estimated that the Company life insurance subsidiaries non-extraordinary dividend limitation under the insurance holding company laws of Connecticut is approximately $631 in 2009. However, because the life insurance subsidiaries earned surplus is only approximately $597 as of December 31, 2008, the Company life insurance subsidiaries will be permitted to pay dividends up to this amount to HLI in 2009 without prior approval from the applicable insurance commissioner. In 2008, HFSG and HLI received a combined total of $2.8 billion from their insurance subsidiaries. In June 2008, The Hartford Board of Directors authorized an incremental $1 billion stock repurchase program which was in addition to the previously announced $2 billion program. The Company repurchase authorization permits purchases of common stock, which may be in the open market or through privately negotiated transactions. The Company also may enter into derivative transactions to facilitate future repurchases of common stock. The timing of any future repurchases will be dependent upon several factors, including the market price of the Company securities, the Company capital position, consideration of the effect of any repurchases on the Company financial strength or credit ratings, the Company potential participation in the CPP, and other corporate considerations. The repurchase program may be modified, extended or terminated by the Board of Directors at any time. As of December 31, 2008, The Hartford has completed the $2 billion stock repurchase program and has $807 remaining for stock repurchase under the $1 billion repurchase program. For further discussion of common stock acquired in 2008, refer to the Stockholders Equity section below. Shelf Registrations On April 11, 2007, The Hartford filed an automatic shelf registration statement (Registration No. 333-142044) for the potential offering and sale of debt and equity securities with the Securities and Exchange Commission. The registration statement allows for the following types of securities to be offered: (i) debt securities, preferred stock, common stock, depositary shares, warrants, stock purchase contracts, stock purchase units and junior subordinated deferrable interest debentures of the Company, and (ii) preferred securities of any of one or more capital trusts organized by The Hartford ( The Hartford Trusts ). The Company may enter into guarantees with respect to the preferred securities of any of The Hartford Trusts. In that The Hartford is a well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in Rule 405 under the Securities Act of 1933, the registration statement went effective immediately upon filing and The Hartford may offer and sell an unlimited amount of securities under the registration statement during the three-year life of the shelf. Contingent Capital Facility On February 12, 2007, The Hartford entered into a put option agreement (the Put Option Agreement ) with Glen Meadow ABC Trust, a Delaware statutory trust (the ABC Trust ), and LaSalle Bank National Association, as put option calculation agent. The Put Option Agreement provides The Hartford with the right to require the ABC Trust, at any time and from time to time, to purchase The Hartford junior subordinated notes (the Notes ) in a maximum aggregate principal amount not to exceed $500. Under the Put Option Agreement, The Hartford will pay the ABC Trust premiums on a periodic basis, calculated with respect to the aggregate principal amount of Notes that The Hartford had the right to put to the ABC Trust for such period. The Hartford has agreed to reimburse the ABC Trust for certain fees and ordinary expenses. The Company holds a variable interest in the ABC Trust where the Company is not the primary beneficiary. As a result, the Company did not consolidate the ABC Trust, as they did not meet the consolidation requirements under FASB Interpretation No. 46 (revised December 2003), Consolidation of Variable Interest Entities, an interpretation of ARB No. 51 ( FIN 46(R) ). 188 Table of Contents Commercial Paper, Revolving Credit Facility and Line of Credit The table below details the Company short-term debt programs and the applicable balances outstanding. Maximum Available As of Outstanding As of Effective Expiration December 31, December 31, Description Date Date 2008 2007 2008 2007 Commercial Paper The Hartford 11/10/86 N/A $ 2,000 $ 2,000 $ 374 $ 373 Revolving Credit Facility 5-year revolving credit facility 8/9/07 8/9/12 1,900 2,000 Line of Credit Life Japan Operations [1] 9/18/02 1/4/10 55 45 Total Commercial Paper, Revolving Credit Facility and Line of Credit $ 3,955 $ 4,045 $ 374 $ 373 [1] As of December 31, 2008 and 2007, the Company Japanese operation line of credit in yen was 5 billion. The revolving credit facility provides for up to $1.9 billion of unsecured credit, which excludes a $100 commitment from an affiliate of Lehman Brothers. Of the total availability under the revolving credit facility, up to $100 is available to support letters of credit issued on behalf of The Hartford or other subsidiaries of The Hartford. Under the revolving credit facility, the Company must maintain a minimum level of consolidated net worth. In addition, the Company must not exceed a maximum ratio of debt to capitalization. Quarterly, the Company certifies compliance with the financial covenants for the syndicate of participating financial institutions. As of December 31, 2008, the Company was in compliance with all such covenants. The Federal Reserve Board authorized the Commercial Paper Funding Facility ( CPFF ) on October 7, 2008 under Section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act to provide a liquidity backstop to U.S. issuers of commercial paper. The CPFF is intended to improve liquidity in short-term funding markets by increasing the availability of term commercial paper funding to issuers and by providing greater assurance to both issuers and investors that firms will be able to roll over their maturing commercial paper. The Company registered with the CPFF in order to sell up to a maximum of $375 to the facility of which it has issued the full amount as of December 31, 2008. The Company commercial paper must be rated A-1/P-1/F1 by at least two ratings agencies to be eligible for the program. Moody s, S&P and Fitch all recently downgraded our commercial paper rating, rendering the Company ineligible to sell additional commercial paper under the CPFF program going forward. As a result, we will be required to pay the maturing commercial paper issued under the CPFF program from existing sources of liquidity. While The Hartford maximum borrowings available under its commercial paper program are $2.0 billion, which includes the $375 from the CPFF, the Company is dependent upon market conditions, including recent market conditions, to finance the remaining available commercial paper with investors. Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements and Aggregate Contractual Obligations The Company does not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that are reasonably likely to have a material effect on the financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, or capital resources of the Company, except for the contingent capital facility described above and the following: The Company has unfunded commitments to purchase investments in limited partnerships, mortgage and construction loans of about $1.1 billion as disclosed in Note 12 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Warrants issued to Allianz to purchase 34,806,452 shares of the Company common stock, classified at issuance in equity at a fair value of $276. See Note 21 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 189 Table of Contents The following table identifies the Company aggregate contractual obligations as of December 31, 2008: Payments due by period Less than 1-3 3-5 More than Total 1 year years years 5 years Property and casualty obligations [1] $ 22,421 $ 5,940 $ 5,021 $ 2,929 $ 8,531 Life, annuity and disability obligations [2] 392,118 27,358 50,147 49,495 265,118 Operating lease obligations [3] 498 143 217 102 36 Capital lease obligations [3] 100 27 73 Long-term debt obligations [4] 20,246 468 1,569 1,161 17,048 Consumer notes [5] 1,583 73 285 583 642 Purchase obligations [6] 1,917 1,475 377 41 24 Other long-term liabilities reflected on the balance sheet [7] 6,571 6,437 83 51 Total [8] $ 445,454 $ 41,921 $ 57,772 $ 54,311 $ 291,450 [1] The following points are significant to understanding the cash flows estimated for obligations under property and casualty contracts: Reserves for Property & Casualty unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses include case reserves for reported claims and reserves for claims incurred but not reported (IBNR). While payments due on claim reserves are considered contractual obligations because they relate to insurance policies issued by the Company, the ultimate amount to be paid to settle both case reserves and IBNR is an estimate, subject to significant uncertainty. The actual amount to be paid is not finally determined until the Company reaches a settlement with the claimant. Final claim settlements may vary significantly from the present estimates, particularly since many claims will not be settled until well into the future. In estimating the timing of future payments by year, the Company has assumed that its historical payment patterns will continue. However, the actual timing of future payments could vary materially from these estimates due to, among other things, changes in claim reporting and payment patterns and large unanticipated settlements. In particular, there is significant uncertainty over the claim payment patterns of asbestos and environmental claims. Also, estimated payments in 2009 do not include payments that will be made on claims incurred in 2009 on policies that were in force as of December 31, 2008. In addition, the table does not include future cash flows related to the receipt of premiums that may be used, in part, to fund loss payments. Under U.S. GAAP, the Company is only permitted to discount reserves for losses and loss adjustment expenses in cases where the payment pattern and ultimate loss costs are fixed and determinable on an individual claim basis. For the Company, these include claim settlements with permanently disabled claimants. As of December 31, 2008, the total property and casualty reserves in the above table are gross of a reserve discount of $488. [2] Estimated life, annuity and disability obligations include death and disability claims, policy surrenders, policyholder dividends and trail commissions offset by expected future deposits and premiums on in-force contracts. Estimated life, annuity and disability obligations are based on mortality, morbidity and lapse assumptions comparable with Life historical experience, modified for recent observed trends. Life has also assumed market growth and interest crediting consistent with assumptions used in amortizing deferred acquisition costs. In contrast to this table, the majority of Life obligations are recorded on the balance sheet at the current account values and do not incorporate an expectation of future market growth, interest crediting, or future deposits. Therefore, the estimated obligations presented in this table significantly exceed the liabilities recorded in reserve for future policy benefits and unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses, other policyholder funds and benefits payable and separate account liabilities. Due to the significance of the assumptions used, the amounts presented could materially differ from actual results. [3] Includes future minimum lease payments on operating and capital lease agreements. See Notes 12 and 14 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional discussion on lease commitments. [4] Includes contractual principal and interest payments. All long-term debt obligations have fixed rates of interest. See Note 14 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional discussion of long-term debt obligations. [5] Consumer notes include principal payments and contractual interest for fixed rate notes and interest based on current rates for floating rate notes and the market value of embedded derivatives for equity-linked notes. See Note 14 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional discussion of consumer notes. [6] Includes $1.1 billion in commitments to purchase investments including about $1.0 billion of limited partnership and $99 of mortgage and construction loans. Outstanding commitments under these limited partnerships and mortgage and construction loans are included in payments due in less than 1 year since the timing of funding these commitments cannot be reliably estimated. The remaining commitments to purchase investments primarily represent payables for securities purchased which are reflected on the Company consolidated balance sheet. Also included in purchase obligations is $695 relating to contractual commitments to purchase various goods and services such as maintenance, human resources, information technology, and transportation in the normal course of business. Purchase obligations exclude contracts that are cancelable without penalty or contracts that do not specify minimum levels of goods or services to be purchased. [7] Includes cash collateral of $6.3 billion which the Company has accepted in connection with the Company securities lending program and derivative instruments. Since the timing of the return of the collateral is uncertain, the return of the collateral has been included in the payments due in less than 1 year. Also included in other long term liabilities is $91 of net unrecognized tax benefits related to Financial Accounting Standards Board Interpretation No 48, Accounting for Uncertainty in Income Taxes ( FIN 48 ). See Note 13 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional discussion of FIN 48. [8] Does not include estimated voluntary contribution of $200 to the Company pension plan in 2009. 190 Table of Contents Pension Plans and Other Postretirement Benefits While the Company has significant discretion in making voluntary contributions to the U. S. qualified defined benefit pension plan, the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, as amended by the Pension Protection Act of 2006 and further amended by the Worker, Retiree, and Employer Recovery Act of 2008, and Internal Revenue Code regulations mandate minimum contributions in certain circumstances. The Company made contributions to its pension plans of $2, $158, and $402 in 2008, 2007 and 2006, respectively, and contributions to its other postretirement plans of $46 in 2007. No contributions were made to the other postretirement plans in 2008 and 2006. The Company 2008 required minimum funding contribution was immaterial. The Company presently anticipates contributing approximately $200 to its pension plans and other postretirement plans in 2009, based upon certain economic and business assumptions. These assumptions include, but are not limited to, equity market performance, changes in interest rates and the Company other capital requirements. The Company does not have a required minimum funding contribution for the U.S. qualified defined benefit pension plan for 2009 and the funding requirements for all of the pension plans are expected to be immaterial. Capitalization The capital structure of The Hartford as of December 31, 2008 and 2007 consisted of debt and equity, summarized as follows: As of December 31, 2008 2007 Short-term debt (includes current maturities of long-term debt and capital lease obligations) $ 398 $ 1,365 Long-term debt 5,823 3,142 Total debt [1] 6,221 4,507 Equity excluding accumulated other comprehensive income (loss), net of tax ( AOCI ) 16,788 20,062 AOCI, net of tax (7,520 ) (858 ) Total stockholders equity $ 9,268 $ 19,204 Total capitalization including AOCI, net of tax $ 15,489 $ 23,711 Debt to equity 67 % 23 % Debt to capitalization 40 % 19 % [1] Total debt of the Company excludes $1.2 billion and $809 of consumer notes as of December 31, 2008 and 2007, respectively. The Hartford total capitalization as of December 31, 2008 decreased $8.2 billion, or 35%, as compared with December 31, 2007 primarily due to the following: AOCI, net of tax Decreased $6.7 billion primarily due to increases in unrealized losses on securities of $7.1 billion. Equity excluding AOCI, net of tax Decreased $3.3 billion primarily due to a net loss of $2.7 billion, dividends declared of $598 and treasury stock acquired of $1.0 billion in connection with the Company stock purchase program. These decreases were offset by $967 from the issuance of preferred shares and warrants to purchase preferred shares to Allianz. Total Debt The Hartford debt increased $1.7 billion or 38% primarily due to the issuance of $500 in 8.125% junior subordinated debentures in June 2008 and $1.75 billion in 10% junior subordinated debentures issued in October 2008. The $1.75 billion in 10% junior subordinated debentures relate to Allianz investment in The Hartford, and include warrants of $547, which reduced the carrying value of the debt. 191 Table of Contents Investment by Allianz SE in The Hartford In order to strengthen its capital and liquidity position, the Company on October 17, 2008 closed on a $2.5 billion investment by Allianz SE ( Allianz ). Allianz purchased $1.75 billion of the Company 10% Fixed-to-Floating Rate Junior Subordinated Debentures due 2068, and $750 of the Company Series D Non-Voting Contingent Convertible Preferred Stock (the Convertible Preferred ) initially convertible into 24,193,548 shares of the Company common stock (the Common Stock ), upon receipt of applicable approvals, at an issue price of $31.00 per share of Common Stock. Allianz additionally received warrants to purchase an aggregate of $1.75 billion of the Company Series B and Series C Convertible Preferred at an initial exercise price of $25.32 per share. Conversion of the Convertible Preferred referred to above into Common Stock is subject to receipt of certain governmental and regulatory approvals and, in the case of the Series C Convertible Preferred, to the approval of the Company stockholders in accordance with the rules of the New York Stock Exchange. For further detail about the Allianz investment in The Hartford, see Note 21 of Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. The Company has also agreed that, for the one-year period following October 17, 2008, it will pay certain amounts to Allianz if the Company effects or agrees to effect any transaction (or series of transactions) pursuant to which any person or group (within the meaning of the U.S. federal securities laws) is issued common stock or certain equity-related instruments constituting more than 5% of the Company fully-diluted common stock outstanding at the time for an effective price per share (determined as provided in the Investment Agreement) of less than $25.32. Amounts so payable depend on the effective price for the applicable transaction (or the weighted average price for a series of transactions) and range from $50 if the effective price per share is between $25.31 and $23.00, $150 if the effective price per share is between $22.99 and $20.00, $200 if the effective price per share is between $19.99 and $15.00 and $300 if the effective price per share is $14.99 or less. In addition to the receipt of specified regulatory approvals, the conversion into 34,308,872 shares of common stock of the Series C Preferred Stock underlying certain of the Warrants is subject to the approval of the Company stockholders in accordance with applicable regulations of the New York Stock Exchange. Under the Investment Agreement, the Company is obligated to pay Allianz $75 if such stockholder approval is not obtained at the first stockholder meeting to consider such approval, and $50 if such stockholder approval is not obtained at a second such meeting. Because the conversion of the Series C Preferred Stock is subject to stockholder approval and the related payment provision represents a form of net cash settlement outside the Company control, the Warrants to purchase the Series C Preferred Stock and the stockholder approval payment were recorded as a derivative liability at a relative fair value of $273 at issuance. As of December 31, 2008, the Warrants to purchase the Series C Preferred Stock had a fair value of $163. The Company recognized a gain of $110, after-tax, for the year ended December 31, 2008, representing the change in fair value of the Warrants to purchase the Series C Preferred Stock. Debt The following discussion describes the Company debt financing activities for 2008. For additional information regarding debt including Allianz investment in The Hartford, see Notes 14 and 21 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Senior Notes On November 16, 2008, The Hartford repaid its $330, 5.663% senior notes at maturity. On November 1, 2008, The Hartford repaid its $200, 6.375% senior notes at maturity. On August 16, 2008, The Hartford repaid its $425, 5.55% senior notes at maturity. On May 12, 2008, The Hartford issued $500 of 6.0% senior notes due January 15, 2019. The issuance was made pursuant to the Company shelf registration statement (Registration No. 333-142044). On March 4, 2008, The Hartford issued $500 of 6.3% senior notes due March 15, 2018. The issuance was made pursuant to the Company shelf registration statement (Registration No. 333-142044). HFSG used the majority of the proceeds from the total $1 billion in issuances of senior notes to repay its $425 5.55% notes at maturity on August 16, 2008, to repay its $200 6.375% notes at maturity on November 1, 2008 and $330 5.663% notes at maturity on November 16, 2008. 192 Table of Contents Junior Subordinated Debentures On June 6, 2008, the Company issued $500 aggregate principal amount of 8.125% fixed-to-floating rate junior subordinated debentures (the debentures ) due June 15, 2068 for net proceeds of approximately $493, after deducting underwriting discounts and expenses from the offering. The debentures bear interest at an annual fixed rate of 8.125% from the date of issuance to, but excluding, June 15, 2018, payable semi-annually in arrears on June 15 and December 15. From and including June 15, 2018, the debentures will bear interest at an annual rate, reset quarterly, equal to three-month LIBOR plus 4.6025%, payable quarterly in arrears on March 15, June 15, September 15 and December 15 of each year. The Company has the right, on one or more occasions, to defer the payment of interest on the debentures. The Company may defer interest for up to ten consecutive years without giving rise to an event of default. Deferred interest will accumulate additional interest at an annual rate equal to the annual interest rate then applicable to the debentures. If the Company defers interest for five consecutive years or, if earlier, pays current interest during a deferral period, which may be paid from any source of funds, the Company will be required to pay deferred interest from proceeds from the sale of certain qualifying securities. The debentures carry a scheduled maturity date of June 15, 2038 and a final maturity date of June 15, 2068. During the 180-day period ending on a notice date not more than fifteen and not less than ten business days prior to the scheduled maturity date, the Company is required to use commercially reasonable efforts to sell certain qualifying replacement securities sufficient to permit repayment of the debentures at the scheduled maturity date. If any debentures remain outstanding after the scheduled maturity date, the unpaid amount will remain outstanding until the Company has raised sufficient proceeds from the sale of qualifying replacement securities to permit the repayment in full of the debentures. If there are remaining debentures at the final maturity date, the Company is required to redeem the debentures using any source of funds. Subject to the replacement capital covenant described below, the Company can redeem the debentures at its option, in whole or in part, at any time on or after June 15, 2018 at a redemption price of 100% of the principal amount being redeemed plus accrued but unpaid interest. The Company can redeem the debentures at its option prior to June 15, 2018 (a) in whole at any time or in part from time to time or (b) in whole, but not in part, in the event of certain tax or rating agency events relating to the debentures, at a redemption price equal to the greater of 100% of the principal amount being redeemed and the applicable make-whole amount, in each case plus any accrued and unpaid interest. In connection with the offering of the debentures, the Company entered into a replacement capital covenant for the benefit of holders of one or more designated series of the Company indebtedness, initially the Company 6.1% notes due 2041. Under the terms of the replacement capital covenant, if the Company redeems the debentures at any time prior to June 15, 2048 it can only do so with the proceeds from the sale of certain qualifying replacement securities. For a discussion of the 10.0% junior subordinated debentures from the investment of Allianz SE in The Hartford, see Note 21. Capital Lease Obligations The Company recorded capital leases of $92 and $128 in 2008 and 2007, respectively. Capital lease obligations are included in long-term debt, except for the current maturities, which are included in short-term debt, in the consolidated balance sheet as of December 31, 2008 and 2007, respectively. See Note 12 for further information on capital lease commitments. Consumer Notes Institutional began issuing consumer notes through its Retail Investor Notes Program in September 2006. A consumer note is an investment product distributed through broker-dealers directly to retail investors as medium-term, publicly traded fixed or floating rate, or a combination of fixed and floating rate, notes. Consumer notes are part of the Company spread-based business and proceeds are used to purchase investment products, primarily fixed rate bonds. Proceeds are not used for general operating purposes. Consumer notes maturities may extend up to 30 years and have contractual coupons based upon varying interest rates or indexes (e.g. consumer price index) and may include a call provision that allows the Company to extinguish the notes prior to its scheduled maturity date. Certain Consumer notes may be redeemed by the holder in the event of death. Redemptions are subject to certain limitations, including calendar year aggregate and individual limits. The aggregate limit is equal to the greater of $1 or 1% of the aggregate principal amount of the notes as of the end of the prior year. The individual limit is $250 thousand per individual. Derivative instruments are utilized to hedge the Company exposure to market risk in accordance with Company policy. As of December 31, 2008 and 2007, $1,210 and $809, respectively, of consumer notes were outstanding. As of December 31, 2008, these consumer notes have interest rates ranging from 4.0% to 6.3% for fixed notes and, for variable notes, based on December 31, 2008 rates, notes indexed to the consumer price index plus 80 to 267 basis points, or indexed to the S&P 500, Dow Jones Industrials, foreign currency, or the Nikkei 225. The aggregate maturities of consumer notes are as follows: $11 in 2009, $30 in 2010, $131 in 2011, $291 in 2012 and $751 thereafter. For 2008 and 2007, interest credited to holders of consumer notes was $59 and $11, respectively. During 2008, the Company made the decision to discontinue future issuances of consumer notes, this decision does not impact consumer notes currently outstanding. 193 Table of Contents Stockholders Equity Preferred stock On October 17, 2008, the Company issued in a private placement to Allianz SE, 6,048,387 shares of the Company Series D non-voting contingent convertible preferred stock. Effective January 9, 2009, Allianz SE converted the preferred shares into 24.2 million shares of common stock. Treasury stock acquired For the year ended December 31, 2008, The Hartford repurchased $1.0 billion of its common stock (14.7 million shares), of which $500 (7.3 million shares) were repurchased under an accelerated share repurchase transaction described below. For additional information regarding the share repurchase program, see the Liquidity Requirements section above. On June 4, 2008, the Company entered into a collared accelerated share repurchase agreement ( ASR ) with a major financial institution. Under the terms of the agreement, The Hartford paid $500 and received 7.3 million shares. The Company has accounted for this transaction in accordance with EITF Issue No. 99-7, Accounting for an Accelerated Share Repurchase Program. Dividends The Hartford declared $598 and paid $660 in dividends to shareholders in 2008 and declared $643 and paid $636 in dividends to shareholders in 2007. On February 10, 2009, The Hartford Board of Directors declared a quarterly dividend of $0.05 per share payable on April 1, 2009 to shareholders of record as of March 2, 2009. AOCI AOCI, net of tax, decreased by $6.7 billion as of December 31, 2008 compared with December 31, 2007. The decrease in AOCI, net of tax, includes unrealized losses on securities of $7.1 billion, primarily due to widening credit spreads associated with fixed maturities, partially offset by gains on cash-flow hedging instruments of $784, change in foreign currency translation adjustments of $196, and pension and other postretirement plan adjustments of $(515). Because The Hartford investment portfolio has a duration of approximately 5 years, a 100 basis point parallel movement in rates would result in approximately a 5% change in fair value. Movements in short-term interest rates without corresponding changes in long-term rates will impact the fair value of our fixed maturities to a lesser extent than parallel interest rate movements. For additional information on stockholders equity, AOCI, net of tax, pension and other postretirement plans and Allianz investment in The Hartford see Notes 15, 16, 17 and 21, respectively, of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Cash Flow 2008 2007 2006 Net cash provided by operating activities $ 4,192 $ 5,991 $ 5,638 Net cash used for investing activities $ (8,827 ) $ (6,176 ) $ (7,410 ) Net cash provided by financing activities $ 4,274 $ 499 $ 1,915 Cash end of year $ 1,811 $ 2,011 $ 1,424 Year ended December 31, 2008 compared to the year ended December 31, 2007 The decrease in cash from operating activities compared to prior year period was primarily the result of a decrease in net investment income as a result of lower yields and reduced fee income as a result of declines in equity markets. Net purchases of available-for-sale securities continue to account for the majority of cash used for investing activities. Cash from financing activities increased primarily due to $2.5 billion in investment in The Hartford by Allianz SE, increased transfers from the separate account to the general account for investment and universal life-type contracts and net issuances of long-term debt and consumer notes, offset by treasury stock acquired and dividends paid. Year ended December 31, 2007 compared to the year ended December 31, 2006 The increase in cash from operating activities compared to prior year period was primarily the result of premium cash flows in excess of claim payments, partially offset by increases in taxes paid. Net purchases of available-for-sale securities accounted for the majority of cash used for investing activities. Cash from financing activities decreased primarily due to treasury stock acquired and increases in dividends paid; partially offset by higher net receipts from policyholder accounts related to investment and universal life contracts, proceeds from consumer notes, and issuance of long-term debt, net of repayments. Operating cash flows in each of the last three years have been adequate to meet liquidity requirements. Equity Markets For a discussion of the potential impact of the equity markets on capital and liquidity, see Ratings below. 194 Table of Contents Ratings Ratings are an important factor in establishing the competitive position in the insurance and financial services marketplace. There can be no assurance that the Company ratings will continue for any given period of time or that they will not be changed. In the event the Company ratings are downgraded, the level of revenues or the persistency of the Company business may be adversely impacted. On December 23, 2008, A.M. Best affirmed the financial strength rating of A+ of the key life and property/casualty subsidiaries and downgraded the senior debt ratings to a- from a. The outlook assigned to the ratings is negative. On February 6, 2009, Moody downgraded the senior debt ratings to Baa1 from A3 and the insurance financial strength ratings for the Company lead property and casualty and life insurance operating companies to A1 from Aa3. The ratings outlook is negative. On February 9, 2009, S&P lowered its debt rating on The Hartford Financial Services Group Inc. to A- from A. At the same time, it placed all ratings, including the financial strength ratings, on credit watch with negative implications. On February 9, 2009, Fitch Ratings downgraded the senior debt ratings to BBB from A-. Fitch also downgraded the insurer financial strength ratings of our primary life insurance subsidiaries to A from AA- and property/casualty insurance subsidiaries to A+ from AA-. The ratings outlook is negative. The following table summarizes The Hartford significant member companies financial ratings from the major independent rating organizations as of February 10, 2009. A.M. Best Fitch Standard & Poor Moody Insurance Financial Strength Ratings: Hartford Fire Insurance Company A+ A+ AA- A1 Hartford Life Insurance Company A+ A AA- A1 Hartford Life and Accident Insurance Company A+ A AA- A1 Hartford Life and Annuity Insurance Company A+ A AA- A1 Hartford Life Insurance KK (Japan) AA- Hartford Life Limited (Ireland) AA- Other Ratings: The Hartford Financial Services Group, Inc.: Senior debt a- BBB A- Baa1 Commercial paper AMB-1 F2 A-2 P-2 Junior subordinated debentures bbb BBB- BBB Baa2 Hartford Life, Inc.: Senior debt a- BBB A- Baa1 Hartford Life Insurance Company: Short term rating A-1+ P-1 Consumer notes a+ A- AA- A2 These ratings are not a recommendation to buy or hold any of The Hartford securities and they may be revised or revoked at any time at the sole discretion of the rating organization. The agencies consider many factors in determining the final rating of an insurance company. One consideration is the relative level of statutory surplus necessary to support the business written. Statutory surplus represents the capital of the insurance company reported in accordance with accounting practices prescribed by the applicable state insurance department. 195 Table of Contents The table below sets forth statutory surplus for the Company insurance companies. The statutory surplus amounts as of December 31, 2007 in the table below are based on actual statutory filings with the applicable regulatory authorities. The statutory surplus amounts as of December 31, 2008 are estimates, as the respective 2008 statutory filings have not yet been made. 2008 2007 Life Operations $ 6,047 $ 5,786 Japan Life Operations 1,718 1,620 Property & Casualty Operations 6,012 8,509 Total $ 13,777 $ 15,915 The Company has received approval from the Connecticut Insurance Department regarding the use of two permitted practices in the statutory financial statements of its Connecticut-domiciled life insurance subsidiaries as of December 31, 2008. The first permitted practice relates to the statutory accounting for deferred income taxes. Specifically, this permitted practice modifies the accounting for deferred income taxes prescribed by the NAIC by increasing the realization period for deferred tax assets from one year to three years and increasing the asset recognition limit from 10% to 15% of adjusted statutory capital and surplus. The benefits of this permitted practice may not be considered by the Company when determining surplus available for dividends. The second permitted practice relates to the statutory reserving requirements for variable annuities with guaranteed living benefit riders. Actuarial guidelines prescribed by the NAIC require a stand-alone asset adequacy analysis reflecting only benefits, expenses and charges that are associated with the riders for variable annuities with guaranteed living benefits. The permitted practice allows for all benefits, expenses and charges associated with the variable annuity contract to be reflected in the stand-alone asset adequacy test. These permitted practices resulted in an increase to Life operations estimated statutory surplus of $987 as of December 31, 2008. The effects of these permitted practices are included in the 2008 Life operations surplus amount in the table above. Statutory Capital The Company stockholders equity, as prepared using U.S. GAAP was $9.3 billion as of December 31, 2008. The Company estimated aggregate statutory capital and surplus, as prepared in accordance with the National Association of Insurance Commissioners Accounting Practices and Procedures Manual ( US STAT ) was $13.8 billion as of December 31, 2008. Significant differences between U.S. GAAP stockholders equity and aggregate statutory capital and surplus prepared in accordance with US STAT include the following: Costs incurred by the Company to acquire insurance policies are deferred under U.S. GAAP while those costs are expensed immediately under US STAT. Temporary differences between the book and tax basis of an asset or liability which are recorded as deferred tax assets are evaluated for recoverability under U.S. GAAP while those amounts deferred are subject to limitations under US STAT. Certain assumptions used in the determination of Life benefit reserves are prescribed under US Stat and are intended to be conservative, while the assumptions used under U.S. GAAP are generally the Company best estimates. In addition, the methodologies used for determining life reserve amounts are different between US Stat and U.S. GAAP. Annuity reserving and cash-flow testing for death and living benefit reserves under US STAT are generally addressed by the Commissioners Annuity Reserving Valuation Methodology and the related Actuarial Guidelines. Under these Actuarial Guidelines, in general, future cash flows associated with the variable annuity business are included in these methodologies with estimates of future fee revenues, claim payments, expenses, reinsurance impacts and hedging impacts. At December 31, 2008, in determining the cash-flow impacts related to future hedging, assumptions were made in the scenarios that generate reserve requirements, about the potential future decreases in the hedge benefits and increases in hedge costs which resulted in increased reserve requirements. Reserves for death and living benefits under U.S. GAAP are either considered embedded derivatives and recorded at fair value or they may be considered SOP 03-1 reserves. The difference between the amortized cost and fair value of fixed maturity and other investments, net of tax, is recorded as an increase or decrease to the carrying value of the related asset and to equity under U.S. GAAP, while US STAT only records certain securities at fair value, such as equity securities and certain lower rated bonds required by the NAIC to be recorded at the lower of amortized cost or fair value. In the case of the Company market value adjusted (MVA) fixed annuity products, invested assets are marked to fair value (including the impact of credit spreads) and liabilities are marked to fair value (but generally actual credit spreads are not fully reflected) for statutory purposes only. US STAT for life insurance companies establishes a formula reserve for realized and unrealized losses due to default and equity risks associated with certain invested assets (the Asset Valuation Reserve), while U.S. GAAP does not. Also, for those realized gains and losses caused by changes in interest rates, US STAT for life insurance companies defers and amortizes the gains and losses, caused by changes in interest rates, into income over the original life to maturity of the asset sold (the Interest Maintenance Reserve) while U.S. GAAP does not. Goodwill arising from the acquisition of a business is tested for recoverability on an annual basis (or more frequently, as necessary) for U.S. GAAP, while under US STAT goodwill is amortized over a period not to exceed 10 years and the amount of goodwill is limited. In addition, certain assets, including a portion of premiums receivable and fixed assets, are non-admitted (recorded at zero value and charged against surplus) under US STAT. U.S. GAAP generally evaluates assets based on their recoverability. 196 Table of Contents Risk-Based Capital State insurance regulators and the NAIC have adopted risk-based capital requirements for life insurance companies to evaluate the adequacy of statutory capital and surplus in relation to investment and insurance risks. The requirements provide a means of measuring the minimum amount of statutory surplus appropriate for an insurance company to support its overall business operations based on its size and risk profile. A company risk-based statutory surplus is calculated by applying factors and performing calculations relating to various asset, premium, claim, expense and reserve items. Regulators can then measure the adequacy of a company statutory surplus by comparing it to the risk-based capital ( RBC ). Under RBC requirements, regulatory compliance is determined by the ratio of a company total adjusted capital, as defined by the insurance regulators, to its company action level of RBC (known as the RBC ratio), also as defined by insurance regulators. In addition, the rating agencies view RBC ratios along with their proprietary models as key factors in making ratings determinations. Sensitivity In any particular year, statutory surplus amounts and RBC ratios may increase or decrease depending upon a variety of factors. The amount of change in the statutory surplus or RBC ratios can vary based on individual factors and may be compounded in extreme scenarios or if multiple factors occur at the same time. At times the impact of changes in certain market factors or a combination of multiple factors on RBC ratios can be varied and in some instances counterintuitive. Factors include: In general, as equity market levels decline, our reserves for death and living benefit guarantees associated with variable annuity contracts increases, sometimes at a greater than linear rate, reducing statutory surplus levels. In addition, as equity market levels increase, generally surplus levels will increase. RBC ratios will also tend to increase when equity markets increase. However, as a result of a number of factors and market conditions, including the level of hedging costs and other risk transfer activities, reserve requirements for death and living benefit guarantees and RBC requirements could increase resulting in lower RBC ratios. As the value of certain fixed-income and equity securities in our investment portfolio decreases, due in part to credit spread widening, statutory surplus and RBC ratios may decrease. As the value of certain derivative instruments that do not get hedge accounting decreases, statutory surplus and RBC ratios may decrease. Life exposure to foreign currency exchange risk exists with respect to non-U.S. dollar denominated assets and liabilities. Assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies are accounted for at their U.S. dollar equivalent values using exchange rates at the balance sheet date. As foreign currency exchange rates strengthen in comparison to the U.S. dollar, the remeasured value of those non-dollar denominated assets or liabilities will increase causing an increase or decrease to statutory surplus, respectively. Our statutory surplus is also impacted by widening credit spreads as a result of the accounting for the assets and liabilities in our fixed market value adjusted ( MVA ) annuities. Statutory separate account assets supporting the fixed MVA annuities are recorded at fair value. In determining the statutory reserve for the fixed MVA annuities, we are required to use current crediting rates in the U.S. and Japanese LIBOR in Japan. In many capital market scenarios, current crediting rates in the U.S. are highly correlated with market rates implicit in the fair value of statutory separate account assets. As a result, the change in statutory reserve from period to period will likely substantially offset the change in the fair value of the statutory separate account assets. However, in periods of volatile credit markets, such as we are now experiencing, actual credit spreads on investment assets may increase sharply for certain sub-sectors of the overall credit market, resulting in statutory separate account asset market value losses. As actual credit spreads are not fully reflected in the current crediting rates in the U.S. or Japanese LIBOR in Japan, the calculation of statutory reserves will not substantially offset the change in fair value of the statutory separate account assets resulting in reductions in statutory surplus and create funding obligations to the statutory separate account. Most of these factors are outside of the Company control. The Company financial strength and credit ratings are significantly influenced by the statutory surplus amounts and RBC ratios of our insurance company subsidiaries. Due to all of these factors, projecting statutory capital and the related projected RBC ratios is complex. In addition, rating agencies may implement changes to their internal models that have the effect of increasing or decreasing the amount of statutory capital we must hold in order to maintain our current ratings. The Company has reinsured approximately 27% of its risk associated with GMWB and 44% of its risk associated with the aggregate GMDB exposure. These reinsurance agreements serve to reduce the Company exposure to changes in the statutory reserves and the related capital and RBC ratios associated with changes in the equity markets. The Company also continues to explore other solutions for mitigating the capital market risk effect on surplus, such as internal and external reinsurance solutions, migrating towards a more statutory based hedging program, changes in product design, increasing pricing and expense management. 197 Table of Contents Statutory capital at the Property & Casualty subsidiaries has historically been maintained at or above the capital level required to meet AA level ratings from rating agencies. Statutory capital generated by the Property & Casualty subsidiaries in excess of the capital level required to meet AA level ratings is available for use by the enterprise or for corporate purposes, subject to regulatory dividend limitations. The amount of statutory capital can increase or decrease depending on a number of factors affecting Property & Casualty results including, among other factors, the level of catastrophe claims incurred, the amount of reserve development, the effect of changes in interest rates on investment income and the discounting of loss reserves, and the effect of realized gains and losses on investments. In addition, the Company can access the $500 Glen Meadow trust contingent capital facility, maintains the ability to access $1.9 billion of capacity under its revolving credit facility and has been approved by the U.S. Office of Thrift Supervision to acquire Federal Trust Bank which may provide access, if granted, to funds under the U.S. Treasury Capital Purchase Program. Contingencies Legal Proceedings For a discussion regarding contingencies related to The Hartford legal proceedings, please see Item 3, Legal Proceedings . Regulatory Developments For a discussion regarding contingencies related to regulatory developments that affect The Hartford, please see Note 12 of Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. Legislative Initiatives For a discussion of terrorism reinsurance legislation and how it affects The Hartford, see the Risk Management Strategy-Terrorism under the Property & Casualty section of the MD&A. Tax proposals, proposals related to the CPP and regulatory initiatives which have been or are being considered by Congress and/or the United States Treasury Department could have a material effect on the insurance business. These proposals and initiatives include, or could include, changes pertaining to the income tax treatment of insurance companies and life insurance products and annuities, repeal or reform of the estate tax and comprehensive federal tax reform. The nature and timing of any Congressional or regulatory action with respect to any such efforts is unclear. Guaranty Fund and Other Insurance-related Assessments In all states, insurers licensed to transact certain classes of insurance are required to become members of a guaranty fund. In most states, in the event of the insolvency of an insurer writing any such class of insurance in the state, members of the funds are assessed to pay certain claims of the insolvent insurer. A particular state fund assesses its members based on their respective written premiums in the state for the classes of insurance in which the insolvent insurer was engaged. Assessments are generally limited for any year to one or two percent of premiums written per year depending on the state. The Hartford accounts for guaranty fund and other insurance assessments in accordance with Statement of Position No. 97-3, Accounting by Insurance and Other Enterprises for Insurance-Related Assessments . Liabilities for guaranty fund and other insurance-related assessments are accrued when an assessment is probable, when it can be reasonably estimated, and when the event obligating the Company to pay an imposed or probable assessment has occurred. Liabilities for guaranty funds and other insurance-related assessments are not discounted and are included as part of other liabilities in the Consolidated Balance Sheets. As of December 31, 2008 and 2007, the liability balance was $128 and $147, respectively. As of December 31, 2008 and 2007, $17 and $19, respectively, related to premium tax offsets were included in other assets. IMPACT OF NEW ACCOUNTING STANDARDS For a discussion of accounting standards, see Note 1 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 
