CIK: 874761
Company Name: AES CORP
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2010-02-26


ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS Overview of Our Business We are a global power company. We operate two primary lines of business. The first is our Generation business, where we own and/or operate power plants to generate and sell power to wholesale customers such as utilities, other intermediaries and certain end-users. The second is our Utilities business, where we own and/or operate utilities to distribute, transmit and sell electricity to end-user customers in the residential, commercial, industrial and governmental sectors within a defined service area. Our Generation and Utilities businesses comprise approximately 45% and 55% of our consolidated revenue, respectively. We are also continuing to expand our wind generation business and are pursuing additional opportunities in the renewable business including solar and climate solutions, which develops and invests in projects that generate greenhouse gas offsets and or other renewable projects. These initiatives are not material contributors to our operating results, but we believe that certain of these initiatives may become material in the future. For additional information regarding our Business, see Item 1. Business of this Form 10-K. Our Organization and Segments. The management reporting structure is organized along our two lines of business (Generation and Utilities) and three regions: (1) Latin America & Africa; (2) North America; and (3) Europe, Middle East & Asia (collectively EMEA ), each managed by a regional president. The financial reporting segment structure uses the Company management reporting structure as its foundation and reflects how the Company manages the business internally. The Company applied the segment reporting accounting guidance, which provides certain quantitative thresholds and aggregation criteria, and the Company concluded that it has six reportable segments which include: Latin America Generation; Latin America Utilities; North America Generation; North America Utilities; Europe Generation; Asia Generation. Corporate and Other . The Company Europe Utilities, Africa Utilities and Africa Generation operating segments are reported within Corporate and Other because they do not meet the criteria to allow for aggregation with another operating segment or the quantitative thresholds that would require separate disclosure under segment reporting accounting guidance. Additionally, AES Wind Generation is managed within our North America region and the Company climate solutions projects are managed within the region in which they are located. Despite the management of AES Wind Generation by the North America region and climate solutions projects within the regions, the operating results of AES Wind Generation and our climate solutions projects are reported within Corporate and Other because they do not meet the aggregation criteria to be combined into the respective region Generation or Utilities segments or the quantitative thresholds that would require separate disclosure under segment reporting accounting guidance. None of these operating segments are currently material to our financial statement presentation of reportable segments, individually or in the aggregate. Corporate and Other also includes costs related to business development efforts, which with certain exceptions, the Company manages centrally through a development group, corporate overhead costs which are not directly associated with the operations of our six reportable segments and other intercompany charges such as self-insurance premiums which are fully eliminated in consolidation. Key Drivers of Our Results of Operations. Our Generation and Utilities businesses are distinguished by the nature of their customers, operational differences, cost structure, regulatory environment and risk exposure. As a result, each line of business has slightly different drivers which affect operating results. Performance drivers for 94 Table of Contents our Generation businesses include, among other things, plant reliability and efficiency, power prices, volume, management of fixed and variable operating costs, management of working capital including collection of receivables, and the extent to which our plants have hedged their exposure to currency and commodities such as fuel. For our Generation businesses which sell power under short-term contracts or in the spot market, the most crucial factors are the current market price of electricity and the marginal costs of production. Growth in our Generation business is largely tied to securing new PPAs, expanding capacity in our existing facilities and building or acquiring new power plants. Performance drivers for our Utilities businesses include, but are not limited to, reliability of service; management of working capital, including collection of receivables; negotiation of tariff adjustments; compliance with extensive regulatory requirements; and in developing countries, reduction of commercial and technical losses. The operating results of our Utilities businesses are sensitive to changes in economic growth and weather conditions in areas in which they operate. In addition to these drivers, as explained below, the Company also has exposure to currency exchange rate fluctuations. One of the key factors which affects our Generation business is our ability to enter into contracts for the sale of electricity and the purchase of fuel used to produce that electricity. Long-term contracts are intended to reduce the exposure to volatility associated with fuel prices in the market and the price of electricity by fixing the revenue and costs for these businesses. The majority of the electricity produced by our Generation businesses is sold under long-term contracts, or PPAs, to wholesale customers. In turn, most of these businesses enter into long-term fuel supply contracts or fuel tolling arrangements where the customer assumes full responsibility for purchasing and supplying the fuel to the power plant. While these long-term contractual agreements reduce exposure to volatility in the market price for electricity and fuel, the predictability of operating results and cash flows vary by business based on the extent to which a facility generation capacity and fuel requirements are contracted and the negotiated terms of these agreements. Entering into these contracts exposes us to counterparty credit risk. For further discussion of these risks, see Supplier and/or customer concentration may expose the Company to significant financial credit or performance risks. in Item 1A. Risk Factors of this Form 10-K. When fuel costs increase, many of our businesses are able to pass these costs on to their customers. Generation businesses with long-term contracts in place do this by including fuel pass-through or fuel indexing arrangements in their contracts. Utilities businesses can pass costs on to their customers through increases in current or future tariff rates. Therefore, in a rising fuel cost environment, the increased fuel costs for these businesses often result in an increase in revenue to the extent these costs can be passed through (though not necessarily on a one-for-one basis). Conversely, in a declining fuel cost environment, the decreased fuel costs can result in a decrease in revenue. Increases or decreases in revenue at these businesses that have the ability to pass through costs to the customer have a corresponding impact on cost of sales, to the extent the costs can be passed through, resulting in a limited impact on gross margin, if any. Although these circumstances may not have a large impact on gross margin, they can significantly affect gross margin as a percentage of revenue. As a result, gross margin as a percentage of revenue is a less relevant measure when evaluating our operating performance. Global diversification also helps us to mitigate risk. Our portfolio employs a broad range of fuels, including coal, gas, fuel oil, water (hydroelectric power), wind and solar, which reduces the risks associated with dependence on any one fuel source. However, to the extent the mix of fuel sources enabling our generation capabilities in any one market is not diversified, the spread in costs of different fuels may also influence the operating performance and the ability of our subsidiaries to compete within that market. In certain cases, we may attempt to hedge fuel prices to manage this risk, but there can be no assurance that these strategies will be effective. Our presence in mature markets helps mitigate the exposure associated with our businesses in emerging markets. We also attempt to limit risk by hedging much of our interest rate and commodity risk, and by matching the currency of most of our subsidiary debt to the revenue of the underlying business. However, we only hedge a portion of our currency and commodity risks, and our businesses are still subject to these risks, as further described in Item 1A. Risk Factors of this Form 10-K, We may not be adequately hedged against our exposure 95 Table of Contents to changes in commodity prices or interest rates. Continued commodity and power price volatility could impact our financial metrics to the extent this volatility is not hedged. Due to our global presence, the Company has significant exposure to foreign currency fluctuations. The exposure is primarily associated with the impact of the translation of our foreign subsidiaries operating results from their local currency to U.S. dollars that is required for the preparation of our consolidated financial statements. Additionally, there is risk of transaction exposure when an entity enters into transactions, including debt agreements, in currencies other than their functional currency. These risks are further described in Item 1A. Risk Factors in this Form 10-K, Our financial position and results of operations may fluctuate significantly due to fluctuations in currency exchange rates experienced at our foreign operations . In 2009, changes in foreign currency exchange rates have had a significant impact on our operating results. In 2009, our gross margin decreased $137 million compared to 2008. The decrease included the unfavorable impact of $218 million due to changes in foreign currency exchange rates. In 2008, our gross margin increased $334 million compared to 2007, of which $105 million was due to favorable changes in foreign currency exchange rates. If the current foreign currency exchange rate volatility continues, our gross margin and other financial metrics could be affected. Another key driver of our results is our ability to bring new businesses into commercial operations successfully. We currently have approximately 2,000 MW of projects under construction in six countries. Our prospects for increases in operating results and cash flows are dependent upon successful completion of these projects on time and within budget. However, as disclosed in Item 1A. Risk Factors of this Form 10-K, Our business is subject to substantial development uncertainties, construction is subject to a number of risks, including risks associated with site identification, financing and permitting and our ability to meet construction deadlines. Delays or the inability to complete projects and commence commercial operations can result in increased costs, impairment of assets and other challenges involving partners and counterparties to our construction agreements, PPAs and other agreements. Our gross margin is also impacted by the fact that in each country in which we conduct business, we are subject to extensive and complex governmental regulations such as regulations governing the generation and distribution of electricity, and environmental regulations which affect most aspects of our business. Regulations differ on a country by country basis (and even at the state and local municipality levels) and are based upon the type of business we operate in a particular country, and affect many aspects of our operations and development projects. Our ability to negotiate tariffs, enter into long-term contracts, pass through costs related to capital expenditures and otherwise navigate these regulations can have an impact on our revenue, costs and gross margin. Environmental and land use regulations, including proposed regulation of carbon emissions, could substantially increase our capital expenditures or other compliance costs, which could in turn have a material adverse affect on our business and results of operations. For a further discussion of the Regulatory Environment, see Note 12 Contingencies Environmental , included in Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Item 1. Business Regulatory Matters Environmental and Land Use Regulations and Item 1A. Risk Factors Risks Associated with Government Regulation and Laws of this Form 10-K. Other factors that can affect our financial results include gains and losses from the sales of businesses incurrence and release of legal, regulatory or tax reserves and asset impairment. Key Drivers of Results in 2009 In 2009, the Company gross margin and net income attributable to The AES Corporation decreased compared to the prior year, while cash flow from operations remained flat. Our results of operations were impacted in 2009 by factors including: the unfavorable impact of foreign currency translation losses on our international business operations due to the stronger U.S. dollar compared to most foreign currencies in 2009; lower net gains on the sale of investments; 96 Table of Contents lower fuel prices, which led to lower electricity prices and had a negative impact at our generation plants in New York, but benefited gross margin at our generation plants in Chile; and impairments recognized related to our businesses in the United Kingdom and Pakistan. These events were offset in part from: improved operating performance and working capital management at certain of our businesses in Latin America and Asia; gains on foreign currency transactions compared to losses in the prior year; and a decrease in the effective tax rate in 2009 due, in part, to the release of valuation allowances at certain U.S. and Brazilian subsidiaries and non-taxable income recognized in Brazil as a result of the Programa de Recuperacao Fiscal ( REFIS ) program. During the year, net cash provided by operating activities remained relatively flat at $2.2 billion compared to 2008. Please refer to Consolidated Cash Flows Operating Activities for further discussion. To address and mitigate the challenges faced by the Company this year, we were able to partially offset the impact of unfavorable factors on revenue and gross margin through fuel and geographic diversification, operational improvements at certain businesses, asset recoveries and fixed cost reductions. An example of where lower spot electricity prices benefited the Company took place at our generation business operating in the central Chilean market. A decrease in contract and spot market rates contributed to lower revenue. However, gross margin improved as we were able to fulfill our obligations under electricity contracts with purchased energy rather than producing energy from less efficient plants in our portfolio. This mitigated in-part the negative impact that the lower electricity prices had on our generation plants in New York. In 2010, we expect to face continued pressure on prices and demand at our businesses in New York and at certain of our European operations which may have an adverse impact on gross margin and net income attributable to The AES Corporation. In addition, our operating results in 2009 and 2008 included other income from a performance incentive bonus and gains from the sale of our Northern Kazakhstan business that will not recur in 2010. In 2009, we recognized income from the extinguishment of liabilities related to our participation in a tax amnesty program in Brazil which will not recur in 2010. We estimate that our effective tax rate in 2010 will be higher than our reported effective tax rates in 2009 and 2008. This is due, in part, to discrete factors that lowered the effective tax rates in 2009 and 2008 and an anticipated increase in U.S. taxes on distributions from certain non-U.S. subsidiaries in 2010. Management expects improved operating performance at certain businesses and growth from new businesses launched in 2009 or expected to launch operation in 2010 may lessen or offset the impact of these adverse factors on our operations; however, we expect if these favorable effects we anticipate do not occur or if other challenges described above impact our operations more than we currently anticipate, then these adverse factors may continue to present challenges to maintaining our gross margin, net income attributable to The AES Corporation and net cash provided by operating activities. The following briefly describes the key changes in our reported revenue, gross margin, net income attributable to The AES Corporation, Adjusted Earnings per Share (a non-GAAP measure) and net cash provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2009 compared to 2008 and 2007 should be read in conjunction with our Consolidated Results of Operations and Segment Analysis discussion within our Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition . 97 Table of Contents Performance Highlights Year Ended December 31, 2009 2008 2007 (in millions) Revenue $ 14,119 $ 15,358 $ 13,014 Gross Margin $ 3,495 $ 3,632 $ 3,298 Net Income (Loss) Attributable to The AES Corporation $ 658 $ 1,234 $ (95 ) Diluted Earnings per Share from Continuing Operations $ 1.09 $ 1.76 $ 0.67 Adjusted Earnings Per Share (a non-GAAP measure) (1) $ 1.08 $ 1.08 $ 0.94 Net Cash Provided by Operating Activities $ 2,213 $ 2,161 $ 2,354 (1) See reconciliation and definition below under Non-GAAP Measure. Year Ended December 31, 2009 Revenue decreased $1.2 billion, or 8%, to $14.1 billion in 2009 compared with $15.4 billion in 2008. Key drivers of the decrease included: the unfavorable impact of foreign currency of $997 million, largely driven by the Brazilian Real; decreases in volume at Uruguaiana due to the renegotiation of its power sales agreements in 2009 to reduce the energy volume sold, as well as in New York and Hungary and lower dispatch in Northern Ireland due to unfavorable gas prices compared to coal; the impact of lower spot and contract energy prices at our generation business in Chile; lower energy prices and volume at our generation businesses in the Dominican Republic; and partially offset by an increase in tariff rates at our utilities businesses in Latin America primarily reflecting the recovery of energy purchases that were passed through to our customers. Gross margin decreased $137 million, or 4%, to $3.5 billion in 2009 compared with $3.6 billion in 2008. Key drivers of the decrease included: the unfavorable impact of foreign currency of $218 million, largely driven by the Brazilian Real; lower energy prices and higher purchased energy costs at our generation businesses in the Dominican Republic and Argentina; increased pension costs in Brazil and the U.S.; lower volume in New York due to lower spot market rates; partially offset by improved operating performance at our generation businesses in Chile and the Philippines; higher tariffs in Brazil and El Salvador; and bad debt recoveries and a reduction in bad debt expense in Brazil. Net income attributable to The AES Corporation decreased $576 million to $658 million in 2009. Key drivers of the decrease included: a gain recognized in 2008 from the sale of two wholly-owned subsidiaries in Northern Kazakhstan partially offset by a performance incentive bonus recognized in 2009 for management services provided to these subsidiaries and a settlement upon termination of the management agreement in 2009; the reduction in gross margin in 2009 as described above; 98 Table of Contents higher impairment expenses in 2009 as a result of an impairment of goodwill at our business in Kilroot, and an impairment recognized on our assets in Pakistan which is reflected in discontinued operations, offset by a decline in long-lived asset impairment from 2008; partially offset by a reduction in foreign currency transaction losses on net monetary position as a result of reduced losses at our businesses in Chile and the Philippines; a reduction in interest expense due primarily to lower interest rates and debt balances in Brazil and favorable foreign currency translation; and lower income tax expenses driven in part by lower pre-tax income and a decrease in the effective tax rate from 29% in 2008 to 26% in 2009 due, in part, to tax benefits recorded in 2009 upon the release of valuation allowances at U.S. and Brazilian subsidiaries, $165 million of non-taxable income recognized in Brazil as a result of the REFIS program in 2009 and an increase in U.S. taxes on distributions from the Company primary holding company in the second quarter of 2008. In 2008, the $905 million gain recognized on the sale of our two Northern Kazakhstan businesses had a significant impact on net income attributable to The AES Corporation. In 2009, the Company recognized a performance incentive bonus of $80 million in the first quarter for management services provided to these sold businesses, reflected as other income. Additionally, in the second quarter of 2009, the Company recognized an additional gain on the sale of the businesses of $98.5 million upon the termination of the management agreement. While the Company engages in the sale of assets and businesses from time to time, the gain or loss recognized in any such sale will depend on a number of factors related to the asset or business that may be sold. Therefore, the Company does not believe that the decline in net income between 2008 and 2009 represents a trend. All of the amounts related to our two Northern Kazakhstan businesses were reported in continuing operations and will not recur in 2010 or future years. Net cash provided by operating activities increased $52 million, or 2%, to $2.2 billion in 2009 compared with $2.2 billion in 2008. Please refer to Consolidated Cash Flows Operating Activities for further discussion. Year Ended December 31, 2008 Revenue increased 18% to $15.4 billion in 2008 compared with $13.0 billion in 2007. Key drivers of the increase included: higher generation rates in Latin America; the favorable impact of foreign currency of $443 million; and utility tariffs and volume. Gross margin increased 10% to $3.6 billion in 2008 compared with $3.3 billion in 2007. Key drivers of the increase included: higher generation rates in Latin America; favorable foreign currency impact of $105 million; utility volume and tariff; and partially offset by an increase in fixed costs associated with allowances for bad debts and higher purchased energy costs, primarily in Brazil and Cameroon. Net income attributable to The AES Corporation increased $1.3 billion to $1.2 billion in 2008 from a net loss attributable to The AES Corporation of $95 million in 2007. The 2008 results included the following amounts, after taxes and noncontrolling interest unless otherwise noted: the recognition of a gain on the sale of assets in Kazakhstan of $905 million; partially offset by additional tax expense of $144 million related to the repatriation of a portion of the Kazakhstan sale proceeds; 99 Table of Contents impairment charges of $83 million related to asset impairments in Brazil, South Africa and certain liquified natural gas ( LNG ) and other development efforts; and a loss of $34 million related to corporate debt restructuring and an increase in foreign currency transaction losses of $209 million. The 2007 results included the following amounts, after taxes and noncontrolling interest, unless otherwise noted: a loss from the sale of C.A. La Electricidad de Caracas ( EDC ) of $680 million which was reflected in discontinued operations; asset impairment charges of $224 million related to Uruguaiana and AgCert; a gain of $101 million related to the acquisition of a leasehold interest at the Company Eastern Energy business in New York and the recovery of certain tax assets in Latin America; a $55 million loss related to a corporate debt restructuring; and the remaining increase was primarily a result of improved performance in 2008. In both 2008 and 2007, the gain or loss recognized on the sale of a business had a significant impact on net income attributable to The AES Corporation during the applicable period. However, while the Company engages in the sale of assets from time to time, the amount of gain or loss that would be recognized in such sale, if any, will depend on a number of factors related to any asset or business that may be sold. Therefore, the Company does not expect that the increase in net income attributable to The AES Corporation which occurred between 2007 and 2008 will continue in future periods. Net cash from operating activities decreased $193 million, or 8%, to $2.2 billion in 2008 compared with $2.4 billion in 2007. Excluding the decrease in net cash provided by operating activities from EDC in Venezuela, which was sold in May 2007, net cash provided by operating activities would have decreased $37 million. Key drivers of the decrease included: increased employer pension contributions at our U.S. and foreign subsidiaries; and an increase in regulatory assets related to future recoverable purchased energy costs in Brazil; partially offset by a decrease in cash used by a Brazilian subsidiary to pay income taxes in 2008 as a result of tax credits used as the primary payment method in 2008; and improved operations in Latin America and Europe as well as our Africa businesses reported in the Corporate and Other segment. Non-GAAP Measure We define adjusted earnings per share ( Adjusted EPS ) as diluted earnings per share from continuing operations excluding gains or losses of the consolidated entity due to (a) mark-to-market amounts related to derivative transactions, (b) unrealized foreign currency gains or losses, (c) significant gains or losses due to dispositions and acquisitions of business interests, (d) significant losses due to impairments, and (e) costs due to the early retirement of debt. The GAAP measure most comparable to Adjusted EPS is diluted earnings per share from continuing operations. AES believes that Adjusted EPS better reflects the underlying business performance of the Company and is considered in the Company internal evaluation of financial performance. Factors in this determination include the variability due to mark-to-market gains or losses related to derivative transactions, currency gains or losses, losses due to impairments and strategic decisions to dispose or acquire business interests or retire debt which affect results in a given period or periods. Adjusted EPS should not be construed as an alternative to diluted earnings per share from continuing operations, which is determined in accordance with GAAP. 100 Table of Contents Year Ended December 31, Reconciliation of Adjusted Earnings Per Share 2009 2008 2007 Diluted earnings per share from continuing operations $ 1.09 $ 1.76 $ 0.67 Derivative mark-to-market (gains)/losses (1) 0.02 0.05 0.04 Currency transaction (gains)/losses (2) (0.05 ) 0.16 (0.03 ) Disposition/acquisition (gains)/losses (0.19 ) (3) (1.27 ) (5) (0.18 ) (8) Impairment losses 0.21 (4) 0.13 (6) 0.36 (9) Debt retirement (gains)/losses 0.25 (7) 0.08 (10) Adjusted earnings per share $ 1.08 $ 1.08 $ 0.94 (1) Derivative mark-to-market (gains)/losses were net of income tax per share of $0.01, $0.00 and ($0.02) in 2009, 2008 and 2007, respectively. (2) Unrealized foreign currency transaction (gains)/losses were net of income tax per share of $0.01, $0.00 and $0.02 in 2009, 2008 and 2007, respectively. (3) Amount includes: Kazakhstan gain of $98 million, or $0.15 per share, related to the termination of a management agreement as well as a gain of $13 million, or $0.02 per share, related to the reversal of a withholding tax contingency. There were no taxes associated with any of these transactions. In addition, there was a gain on sale associated with the shutdown of the Hefei plant in China of $14 million, or $0.02 per share, net of noncontrolling interest and income tax. There were no taxes associated with any of these transactions. (4) Amount includes: Goodwill impairments at Kilroot of $118 million, or $0.18 per share, and in the Ukraine of $4 million, or $0.01 per share; write-off of development project costs in Latin America and Asia of $19 million ($11 million net of noncontrolling interests, or $0.01 per share) and an impairment of $10 million, or $0.01 per share, of the Company investment in a company developing blue gas (coal to gas) technology. There was no income tax impact associated with any of these transactions. (5) Amount includes: Net gain on Kazakhstan sale of $905 million, or $1.31 per share, and net loss on sale of subsidiary interests in Gener of $31 million, or $0.04 per share. There was no income tax impact associated with these transactions. (6) Amount includes: Impairment charges primarily associated with development projects in North America of $75 million ($34 million net of noncontrolling interests and income tax, or $0.06 per share); Uruguaiana asset write-down of $36 million ($17 million net of noncontrolling interest, or $0.02 per share); South Africa peaker development cost write-off of $31 million ($28 million net of income tax, or $0.04 per share) and a nontaxable impairment of the Company investment in blue gas (coal to gas) technology of $10 million, or $0.01 per share. Impairment losses are net of an income tax benefit of $0.02 per share in 2008. (7) Amount includes: $55 million ($34 million net of income tax, or $0.05 per share) loss on the retirement of Parent Company debt; $131 million, or $0.19 per share, which represented the tax impact on the repatriation of a portion of the Kazakhstan sale proceeds that were used to fund the early retirement of Parent Company debt; and $14 million ($9 million net of income tax, or $0.01 per share) of debt refinancing at IPALCO. Debt Retirement (gains)/losses are net of an income tax benefit of $0.04 per share in 2008. (8) Amount includes: Net gain on sale of subsidiary interests in Gener of $125 million, or $0.18 per share. There is no income tax impact associated with this transaction. (9) Amount includes: Uruguaiana nontaxable asset write-down of $352 million ($163 million net of noncontrolling interest, or $0.24 per share); AgCert investment impairment and receivable write-off of $67 million ($61 million net of income tax, or $0.09 per share); asset impairment charges in North America for a total of $35 million ($21 million net of income tax, or $0.03 per share). Impairment losses are net of an income tax benefit of $0.03 per share in 2007. (10) Amount includes: Loss on retirement of Parent Company debt of $92 million ($55 million net of income tax, or $0.08 per share). Debt Retirement (gains)/losses are net of an income tax benefit of $0.05 per share in 2007. 101 Table of Contents Management Priorities Management continues to focus on the following priorities: Closing the share issuance to CIC On November 6, 2009, we entered into a stock purchase agreement (the Stock Purchase Agreement ) with Terrific Investment Corporation ( Investor ), a wholly-owned subsidiary of China Investment Corporation ( CIC ), pursuant to which the Company agreed to issue and sell to Investor 125,468,788 shares of the Company common stock for $12.60 per share, for an aggregate purchase price of $1.58 billion. Following the issuance of the shares of common stock, Investor ownership in the Company common stock will be approximately 15% percent of the Company total outstanding shares of common stock on a fully diluted basis. The closing of the sale of the shares of common stock of the Company to Investor is subject to certain closing conditions. These closing conditions include the receipt of requisite regulatory approvals, and there being no material adverse change prior to closing with respect to the Company. The transaction is expected to close in the first half of 2010; Improvement of operations in the existing portfolio; Completion of approximately 2,000 MW construction program on time and within budget. During 2009, the Company stopped construction on its Campiche plant, as further described in Key Trends and Uncertainties Operational Challenges below; Prudent deployment of capital to fund growth initiatives of the Company through greenfield development or mergers and acquisitions; Maximizing the use of cash, including establishment of low-cost development options, reducing debt and increasing cash balances; and Integration of new projects. During 2009, the following projects commenced commercial operations: Project Location Fuel Gross MW AES Equity Interest (Percent, Rounded) Dibamba Cameroon Heavy Fuel Oil 86 56% Guacolda 3 (1) Chile Coal 152 35% Santa Lidia Chile Diesel 130 71% Huanghua I (2) China Wind 49 49% InnoVent (3) France Wind 26 40% Amman East Jordan Gas 380 37% Kilroot OCGT United Kingdom Gas 80 99% Armenia Mountain USA PA Wind 101 100% (1) Guacolda is an equity method investment indirectly held by AES through Gener. The AES equity interest reflects the 29% noncontrolling interests in Gener. (2) Huanghua is an equity method investment of AES. (3) InnoVent is an equity method investment of AES. Completing Announced Asset Sales In December 2009, we reached agreements to sell our entire interests in our two generation businesses in Pakistan and our entire interest in our business in Oman for aggregate gross proceeds, before purchase price adjustments, of approximately $200 million. Impairment charges of $150 million, or $105 million net of noncontrolling interest, was recognized in the fourth quarter of 2009 representing the amount by which the net book value of the businesses exceeded the fair value for the Pakistan businesses. These transactions are subject to customary purchase prices adjustments and approvals and are expected to close in the first half of 2010. Until the transactions close, the businesses will be reported as discontinued operations in our consolidated statements of operations. 102 Table of Contents Key Trends and Uncertainties Operational Challenges Our operations continue to face many risks as discussed in Item 1A. Risk Factors of this Form 10-K. We continue to monitor our operations and address challenges as they arise. As discussed in Item 1A. Risk Factors Risks Associated with our Operations Our acquisitions may not perform as expected of this Form 10-K, the Company evaluated its businesses through the completion of the annual goodwill impairment test as of October 1, 2009 and concluded that impairment existed at certain of our businesses in the United Kingdom and the Ukraine. As of December 31, 2009 the book value of goodwill related to these businesses was written off as a result of impairment charges of $122 million recognized in the fourth quarter. During the past year, the Company has successfully completed a number of construction projects, totaling approximately 1,000 MW, on schedule, including Amman East in Jordan, Guacolda 3 and Santa Lidia in Chile, Kilroot OCGT in the United Kingdom, Huanghua I in China, InnoVent and St. Patrick in France, Dibamba in Cameroon and Armenia Mountain in the U.S. However, as discussed in Item 1A. Risk Factors Risks Associated with our Operations Our business is subject to substantial development uncertainties of this Form 10-K, our development projects are subject to uncertainties. The Company has 670 MW under construction at its Maritza project in Bulgaria. Certain delays have occurred in the project. However, at this time, we believe that Maritza will still be completed by the second half of 2010, although there could be further delays in the completion of the project and commencement of commercial operations. In the event of further delays of the project, completion of the project and commencement of commercial operations could be delayed beyond this timeframe. In June 2009, the Supreme Court of Chile affirmed a January 2009 decision of the Valparaiso Court of Appeals that the environmental permit for EEC thermal power plant ( Plant ) was not properly granted and illegal. Construction of the Plant has stopped as a consequence of the Supreme Court decision. In September 2009, the Municipality of Puchuncav issued an order to demolish the Plant on the basis of other permitting issues. In October 2009, EEC and AES Gener filed a judicial claim against the Municipality of Puchuncav before the Civil Judge of the City of Quintero, seeking to revoke the demolition order and asking for an immediate stay of said order. At the request of EEC and Gener, the Civil Judge of Quintero agreed to suspend the order until a final decision on the order is issued. In December 2009, Chilean authorities approved new land use regulations that entitle EEC to reapply for a new environmental permit. Such permit request was requested on January 14, 2010. The new land use regulations were challenged by local groups and this challenge was rejected by the Court of Appeals of Santiago. The local groups have filed a motion to reconsider in the same court. On February 22, 2010 Chilean environmental authorities approved a new environmental permit for EEC. EEC may now request the construction permits so that the Plant construction can resume. However, while we believe that any challenges to a new permit would be without merit, it is possible that third parties may attempt to challenge any new permit issued by the corresponding authorities. EEC and the construction contractor have agreed on a path forward while construction work stoppage is ongoing. However, if EEC is unable to complete the project, AES may be required to record an impairment of the Campiche project proportional to its indirect ownership, which could have a material impact on earnings in the period in which it is recorded. Based on cash investments through December 31, 2009 and potential termination costs, AES could incur an impairment of approximately $189 million. In the event an impairment charge is recognized with regard to the project, the amount of such impairment will depend on a number of factors, including EEC ability to recover project costs. Global Recession The global economic slowdown has caused unprecedented market illiquidity, widening credit spreads, volatile currencies, fluctuating fuel prices and increased counterparty credit risk each of which could impact our operations. 103 Table of Contents Despite these challenges, management continues to believe that the Company can meet its near-term liquidity requirements through a combination of existing cash balances, cash provided by operating activities, financings, and, if needed, borrowings under its secured facility. Although there can be no assurance due to the challenging times currently faced by financial institutions, management believes that the participating banks under its facility will be able to meet their funding commitments. The Company is subject to credit risk, which includes risk related to the ability of counterparties (such as parties to our PPAs, fuel supply agreements, our hedging agreements and other contractual arrangements) to deliver contracted commodities or services at the contracted price or to satisfy their financial or other contractual obligations. While counterparty credit risk has increased in the current crisis and there can be no assurances regarding the future, the Company has not suffered any material effects related to its counterparties during 2009. The Company seeks business acquisitions as one of its growth strategies. We have achieved significant growth in the past as a result of several business acquisitions, which also resulted in the recognition of goodwill. As noted in Item 1A. Risk Factors, there is always a risk that Our acquisitions may not perform as expected . The benefits of goodwill are typically realized through the future operating results of an acquired business. Management believes that the recoverability of goodwill is positively correlated with the economic environments in which our acquired businesses operate and a severe economic downturn could negatively impact the recoverability of goodwill. Also, the evolving environmental regulations around the globe continue to increase the operating costs of our generation businesses. In extreme situations, the environmental regulations could even make a once profitable business, uneconomic. In addition, most of our generation businesses have a finite life and as the acquired businesses reach the end of their finite lives, the carrying amount of goodwill is gradually recovered through their periodic operating results. The accounting guidance, however, prohibits a systematic amortization of goodwill and rather requires an annual impairment evaluation. Thus, as some of our acquired businesses approach the end of their lives, they may incur goodwill impairment charges even if there are no discrete adverse changes in the economic environment. As part of the 2009 annual goodwill impairment evaluation, the Company noted three businesses with an aggregate goodwill balance of $202 million, whose fair values were not higher than their carrying values by more than 10%. It is possible in the future we may incur further goodwill impairment charges on these businesses or even other businesses whose fair values currently exceed their carrying values by more than 10% if any of the following events occur: a significant adverse change in business climate or legal factors, an adverse action or assessment by a regulator, sale of assets at below book value, unanticipated competition, a loss of key personnel, acquisitions not performing as expected, changing environmental regulations that significantly increase the cost of doing business, or the businesses reach the end of their finite lives. The likelihood of the occurrence of these events may increase because of the credit crisis and deteriorating global macroeconomic conditions. The global economic slowdown could also result in a decline in the value of our assets including those at the businesses we operate, our equity investments and projects under development, which could result in asset impairments that could be material to our operations. We continue to monitor our projects and businesses as needed. A decline in asset value could also lead to a material increase in our obligations. For instance certain subsidiaries have defined benefit pension plans. The Company periodically evaluates the value of the pension plan assets to ensure that they will be sufficient to fund their respective pension obligations. In 2009, compared to the year ended December 31, 2008, we experienced an increase in contribution requirements and net periodic pension costs (pension expense) as a result of a decrease in pension plan asset values and an increase in the associated plan obligations at December 31, 2008. In 2010, although we expect cash contribution requirements to decrease from 2009 levels, contributions and pension expenses are expected to exceed 2008 levels. As of December 31, 2009, we expect the Company to make future employer contributions to its defined benefit pension plans in 2010 of approximately $179 million, of which $27 million will be made to its U.S. plans and $152 million to foreign plans, primarily in Brazil (subject to changes in foreign currency exchange rates), compared to employer contributions made in 2009 of $209 million, of which $21 million were made to 104 Table of Contents U.S. plans and $188 million to foreign plans. In Brazilian real ( R$ ) contributions for our subsidiaries in Brazil are expected to decrease from R$348 million in 2009 to R$245 million in 2010. Pension expense in 2010 is currently estimated at $140 million (subject to changes in foreign currency exchange rates) compared to $138 million in 2009. Expense at our subsidiaries in Brazil, in local currency, is expected to be R$169 million in 2010 compared to R$176 million in 2009. See Item 1A. Risk Factors, Some of our subsidiaries participate in defined benefit pension plans and their net pension plan obligations may require additional significant contribution of this Form 10-K. In addition, as described in Overview of Our Business, volatility in foreign currency exchange rates has had an impact on the Company financial results. If the current volatility in foreign currencies continues, our gross margin and other financial metrics could be adversely affected. It is also possible that commodity or power price volatility could impact our financial metrics as further described in Overview of Our Business and Item 7A. Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk Commodity Price Risk of this Form 10-K. In the event that global economic conditions deteriorate further, or continue for a prolonged period, there could be a material adverse impact on the Company. The Company could be materially affected if such events or other events occur such that participating lenders under its secured facility fail to meet their commitments, or the Company is unable to access the capital markets on favorable terms or at all, or is unable to raise funds through the sale of assets, or is otherwise unable to finance or refinance its activities, or if capital market disruptions result in increased borrowing costs (including with respect to interest payments on the Company variable rate debt). The Company could also be adversely affected if the foregoing effects are exacerbated or general economic or political conditions in the markets where the Company operates deteriorate, resulting in a reduction in cash flow from operations, a reduction in the availability and/or an increase in the cost of capital, a reduction in the value of currencies in these markets relative to the U.S. dollar (which could cause currency losses), an increase in the price of commodities used in our operations and construction, or if the value of its assets remain depressed or decline further. Any of the foregoing events or a combination thereof could have a material impact on the Company, its results of operations, liquidity, financial covenants, and/or its credit rating. Regulatory Environment The Company faces certain risks and uncertainties related to numerous environmental laws and regulations, including potential GHG legislation or regulations, and actual or potential laws and regulations pertaining to water discharges, waste management (including disposal of coal combustion by-products), and certain air emissions, such as SO 2 , NO x , particulate matter and mercury. Such risks and uncertainties include risks and uncertainties related to increased capital expenditures or other compliance costs which could have a material adverse effect on certain of our U.S. or international subsidiaries and our consolidated results of operations. The Company continues to assess the possible need for capital expenditures associated with international, federal, regional and state regulation of GHG emission from electric power generation facilities. As discussed in Item 1. Business-Regulatory Matters-Environmental and Land Use Regulations of this Form 10-K, currently in the United States there are no Federal mandatory GHG emissions reduction programs (including CO 2 ) affecting the electric power generation facilities of the Company subsidiaries, but there are numerous state programs and there is a possibility that federal GHG legislation will be enacted in the next several years. As discussed in Item 1. Business-Regulatory Matters-Environmental and Land Use Regulations of this Form 10-K, in 2009, the Company subsidiaries operated businesses which had total approximate CO 2 emissions of 74.2 million metric tonnes (ownership adjusted). Approximately 39.7 million metric tonnes of the 74.2 million metric tonnes were emitted in the United States, and approximately 9.7 million metric tonnes were emitted in U.S. states participating in RGGI. There is substantial uncertainty with respect to whether U.S. federal GHG legislation will be enacted into law and whether the EPA will regulate GHG emissions and there is additional uncertainty regarding the final provisions and implementation of any potential U.S. federal GHG legislation or any EPA rules regulating GHG emissions. In light of these uncertainties, the Company cannot accurately predict the impact on its consolidated results of operations or financial condition from potential U.S. 105 Table of Contents federal GHG legislation or EPA regulation of GHG emissions or make a reasonable estimate of the potential costs to the Company associated with any such legislation or regulation; however, the impact from any such legislation or regulation could have a material adverse effect on certain of our U.S. subsidiaries and on the Company and its consolidated results of operations and financial condition. At this time, other than with regard to the RGGI, the Company cannot estimate the costs of compliance with U.S. state CO 2 emissions reductions legislation or initiatives, due to the fact that these state or regional proposals are in earlier stages of development than RGGI and any final regulations or legislation, if adopted, could vary drastically from current proposals. For forecasting purposes, the Company has modeled the impact of CO 2 compliance based on a 3-year average of CO 2 emissions for its businesses that are subject to RGGI and that may not be able to pass through compliance costs. The model includes a conversion from metric tonnes to short tons as well as the impact of some market recovery by merchant plants and contractual and regulatory provisions. The model also utilizes a price of $2.05 per allowance under RGGI. The source of this allowance price estimate was the clearing price in the sixth and most recent RGGI allowance auction held in December 2009. Based on these assumptions, the Company estimates that the RGGI compliance costs could be approximately $17.5 million per year from 2010 through 2011, which is the last year of the first RGGI compliance period. Given the fact that the assumptions utilized in the model may prove to be incorrect, there is a significant risk that our actual compliance costs under RGGI will differ from our estimates by a material amount and that our model could underestimate our costs of compliance. In the future, the possible impact on our U.S. subsidiaries from any future federal GHG legislation or regulations or any regional or state proposals to regulate and reduce GHG emissions, if enacted, will depend on a number of factors, including but not limited to the degree and timing of reductions of GHG emissions required under any such legislation or regulations, the price and availability of offsets or emissions allowances, the extent to which our subsidiaries would be entitled to receive GHG emissions allowances without having to purchase them, the quantity of allowances which our subsidiaries would have to purchase, our subsidiaries ability to recover or pass through costs incurred to comply with any compliance options, whether federal GHG legislation will preempt state programs or preempt the EPA from regulating GHG emissions, the availability and costs of carbon control technology, the benefits to our renewable businesses, if any, and the benefits to our GHG Emissions Reduction Projects from potentially increased demand for GHG offset credits or allowances. With respect to our operations outside the United States, certain of the businesses operated by the Company subsidiaries are subject to compliance with EU ETS and the Kyoto Protocol in certain countries and other country-specific programs to regulate GHG emissions. To date, compliance with the Kyoto Protocol and EU ETS has not had a material adverse effect on the Company consolidated results of operations, financial condition and cash flows because of, among other factors, the cost of GHG emission allowances and/or the ability of our businesses to pass the cost of purchasing such allowances on to customers or counterparties. However, as discussed in Item 1. Business Regulatory Matters Environmental and Land Use Regulations of this Form 10-K, in the event that such counterparties or regulatory authorities challenge our ability to pass these costs on, and one such counterparty is currently making such a challenge, there can be no assurance that the Company and/or the relevant subsidiary will prevail, or that the cost and burden associated with any such dispute will not be significant. The Kyoto Protocol is currently expected to expire at the end of 2012, and in December 2009, the annual United Nations conference of the parties to the Kyoto Protocol (called COP 15) was held in Copenhagen, Denmark to focus on establishing an international agreement or framework to succeed the Kyoto Protocol when it expires at the end of 2012. COP 15 did not result in any legally binding successor agreement to Kyoto, but countries did agree to continue to work towards a successor international agreement on GHG reductions by the next annual conference. Countries also agreed to submit non-binding emission targets and climate change plans by January 31, 2010, although many countries have not yet submitted such targets or plans. The United States did submit such a non-binding target of reducing GHG emissions by 17% from 2005 levels by 2020. At present, the Company cannot predict whether compliance with the Kyoto Protocol or any other successor agreements will have a material adverse effect on the Company consolidated results of operations, financial condition and cash flows in future periods. 106 Table of Contents The Company also continues to assess the possible need for capital expenditures associated with international, federal and state regulation of emissions of SO 2 , NO x , PM and mercury, and federal regulation of fly ash and other forms of CCB. As discussed in Item 1. Business-Regulatory Matters-Environmental and Land Use Regulations of this Form 10-K, the EPA may issue new regulations with respect to these air emissions and CCB. Although most of the Company U.S. coal-fired plants have advanced pollution control technologies, future EPA regulations concerning emissions of SO 2 , NO x , PM and mercury may require such plants to incur additional capital expenditures to improve such control technologies or to acquire new pollution control technologies. Also, as discussed in Item 3. Legal Proceedings in this Form 10-K, additional capital expenditures may be required by IPL in connection with a Notice of Violation ( NOV ) from the EPA. In addition, as discussed in Item 1. Business-Regulatory Matters-Environmental and Land Use Regulations of this Form 10-K, future EPA regulations of CCB may require certain subsidiaries of the Company to incur additional capital expenditures with respect to the processing and disposal of CCB. The capital expenditures required to comply with future EPA regulations or any EPA NOVs or enforcement actions cannot be estimated. Recent Events In November 2009, our Brazilian subsidiary, Southern Electric Brasil Participa es LTDA. ( SEB ), entered into a share purchase and sale agreement with Andrade Gutierrez Concess es S.A. and an affiliated company (jointly referred to as, AG ) for the sale of SEB shares in Companhia Energ tica de Minas Gerais ( CEMIG ). In consideration for SEB shares in CEMIG, AG will pay to SEB a total purchase price equal to the sum of (i) $25 million plus (ii) the assumption by AG of SEB debt (the BNDES Loan ) with Banco Nacional de Desenvolvimento Econ mico e Social ( BNDES ). The sale is subject to the resolution of all outstanding debts and claims relating to the BNDES Loan and is contingent upon SEB obtaining a full release from any claims of BNDES, the restructuring of the BNDES Loan and the ratification of the settlement by the judicial system. On January 1, 2010, North Rhins, a 22 MW wind generation facility located in Scotland, commenced commercial operations. Additionally, on February 11, 2010, Nueva Ventanas, a 270 MW coal-fired generation plant located in Chile commenced commercial operations. 107 Table of Contents Consolidated Results of Operations Year Ended December 31, Results of operations 2009 2008 2007 $ change 2009 vs. 2008 $ change 2008 vs. 2007 (in millions, except per share amounts) Revenue: Latin America Generation $ 3,651 $ 4,468 $ 3,515 $ (817 ) $ 953 Latin America Utilities 6,092 5,907 5,168 185 739 North America Generation 1,940 2,234 2,169 (294 ) 65 North America Utilities 1,068 1,079 1,052 (11 ) 27 Europe Generation 720 1,096 909 (376 ) 187 Asia Generation 643 553 315 90 238 Corporate and Other (1) 5 21 (114 ) (16 ) 135 Total Revenue $ 14,119 $ 15,358 $ 13,014 $ (1,239 ) $ 2,344 Gross Margin: Latin America Generation $ 1,357 $ 1,398 $ 957 $ (41 ) $ 441 Latin America Utilities 918 886 864 32 22 North America Generation 477 660 702 (183 ) (42 ) North America Utilities 239 261 314 (22 ) (53 ) Europe Generation 189 260 240 (71 ) 20 Asia Generation 179 67 82 112 (15 ) Corporate and Other (2) 136 100 139 36 (39 ) General and administrative (345 ) (371 ) (378 ) 26 7 Interest expense (1,515 ) (1,803 ) (1,755 ) 288 (48 ) Interest income 348 519 489 (171 ) 30 Other expense (111 ) (161 ) (253 ) 50 92 Other income 466 377 358 89 19 Gain on sale of investments 131 909 (778 ) 909 (Loss) gain on sale of subsidiary stock (31 ) 134 31 (165 ) Goodwill impairment (122 ) (122 ) Asset impairment expense (25 ) (175 ) (408 ) 150 233 Foreign currency transaction (losses) gains on net monetary position 33 (184 ) 29 217 (213 ) Other non-operating expense (12 ) (15 ) (57 ) 3 42 Income tax expense (599 ) (771 ) (676 ) 172 (95 ) Net equity in earnings of affiliates 92 33 76 59 (43 ) Income from continuing operations 1,836 1,959 857 (123 ) 1,102 Income from operations of discontinued businesses 69 67 161 2 (94 ) Gain (loss) from disposal of discontinued businesses (150 ) 6 (661 ) (156 ) 667 Net income 1,755 2,032 357 (277 ) 1,675 Noncontrolling interests: Income from continuing operations attributable to noncontrolling interests (1,107 ) (770 ) (403 ) (337 ) (367 ) Income from discontinuing operations attributable to noncontrolling interests 10 (28 ) (49 ) 38 21 Net income (loss) attributable to The AES Corporation $ 658 $ 1,234 $ (95 ) $ (576 ) $ 1,329 Per Share Data: Basic income per share from continuing operations $ 1.09 $ 1.78 $ 0.68 $ (0.69 ) $ 1.10 Diluted income per share from continuing operations $ 1.09 $ 1.76 $ 0.67 $ (0.67 ) $ 1.09 (1) Corporate and Other includes revenue from the Company Europe Utilities, Africa Utilities, Africa Generation and renewables initiatives and inter-segment eliminations of revenue related to transfers of electricity from Tiet (generation) to Eletropaulo (utility) in Latin America. (2) Total Corporate and Other expenses includes the gross margin from our generation and utilities businesses in Africa, our utilities businesses in Europe, AES Wind Generation and other renewables initiatives, development costs, and certain inter-segment eliminations, primarily corporate charges for self insurance premiums. 108 Table of Contents Segment Analysis Latin America Generation The following table summarizes revenue and gross margin for our Generation segment in Latin America for the periods indicated: For the Years Ended December 31, 2009 2008 2007 % Change 2009 vs. 2008 % Change 2008 vs. 2007 ($ in millions) Latin America Generation Revenue $ 3,651 $ 4,468 $ 3,515 -18 % 27 % Gross Margin $ 1,357 $ 1,398 $ 957 -3 % 46 % Fiscal Year 2009 versus 2008 Excluding the unfavorable impact of foreign currency translation of $181 million in Brazil and Argentina, generation revenue decreased $636 million, or 14%, from the previous year primarily due to lower spot and contract prices at Gener of $295 million, lower volume at Uruguaiana of $227 million as a result of the renegotiation of its power sales agreements in 2009 to reduce the energy volume sold, and lower energy prices and volume at our businesses in the Dominican Republic of $174 million. These decreases were partially offset by fewer outages in 2009 at Gener and at our businesses in Argentina of $100 million and higher prices of energy sold at Tiete of $66 million. Excluding the unfavorable impact of foreign currency translation of $94 million in Brazil and Argentina, generation gross margin increased $53 million, or 4%, from the previous year primarily due to higher prices of energy sold at Tiete of $66 million, fewer outages in 2009 at Gener and at our businesses in Argentina of $60 million, lower diesel consumption, partially offset by higher energy purchases and higher gas consumption at Gener of $47 million, lower volume of energy purchased at Uruguaiana of $44 million as a result of the renegotiated power sales agreements and the favorable impact at Uruguaiana of a decrease in bad debt expense of $28 million as a result of the renegotiated power sales agreements. These increases were partially offset by the unfavorable impact of lower energy prices at our businesses in the Dominican Republic of $75 million, lower volume and energy prices of $66 million at our businesses in Argentina, higher purchased energy prices at Uruguaiana of $48 million and higher fuel and higher purchased energy at Panama of $48 million. Even though generation revenue declined by 18%, gross margin decreased 3%. This was primarily due to reduced energy purchases, fewer outages and lower bad debt expense. Fiscal Year 2008 versus 2007 Excluding the favorable impact of foreign currency translation of $77 million, generation revenue increased $876 million, or 25% from the previous year primarily due to higher contract and spot prices and higher volume at Gener in Chile and our businesses in Argentina of approximately $508 million and $188 million, respectively, higher contract and spot prices at our businesses in the Dominican Republic of approximately $132 million and higher spot prices at our businesses in Panama of approximately $45 million. Excluding the favorable impact of foreign currency translation of $44 million, generation gross margin increased $397 million, or 41%, from the previous year primarily due to higher contract and spot prices and higher volume at Gener and our businesses in Argentina of approximately $318 million, higher contract and spot prices at our businesses in the Dominican Republic of approximately $86 million and higher spot prices at our businesses in Panama of approximately $30 million. These increases were partially offset by higher purchased energy prices of approximately $57 million at Uruguaiana in Brazil. 109 Table of Contents Latin America Utilities The following table summarizes revenue and gross margin for our Utilities segment in Latin America for the periods indicated: For the Years Ended December 31, 2009 2008 2007 % Change 2009 vs. 2008 % Change 2008 vs. 2007 ($ in millions) Latin America Utilities Revenue $ 6,092 $ 5,907 $ 5,168 3 % 14 % Gross Margin $ 918 $ 886 $ 864 4 % 3 % Fiscal Year 2009 versus 2008 Excluding the unfavorable impact of foreign currency translation of $442 million primarily in Brazil, utilities revenue increased $627 million, or 11% from the previous year primarily due to an increase in tariff rates of $560 million reflecting the recovery of energy purchases of $453 million that were passed through to customers at our utilities in Brazil and El Salvador and higher volume in Brazil of $62 million. Excluding the unfavorable impact of foreign currency translation of $62 million in Brazil, utilities gross margin increased $94 million, or 11%, from the previous year primarily due to higher tariffs in El Salvador and Brazil of $107 million, a $64 million recovery of a municipality receivable previously written off, a non-recurring PIS/COFINS fine in 2008 of $33 million and higher volume in the region of $32 million. These increases were partially offset by the unfavorable impact of higher fixed costs of $120 million mainly related to pension expense, labor contingencies and maintenance costs in Brazil. Fiscal Year 2008 versus 2007 Excluding the favorable impact of foreign currency translation of $357 million primarily in Brazil, utilities revenue increased $382 million, or 7%, from the previous year primarily due to increased rates primarily associated with higher pass-through purchased energy and transmission costs at Eletropaulo of approximately $148 million and higher volume at Eletropaulo and Sul in Brazil of approximately $162 million and $30 million, respectively. Excluding the favorable impact of foreign currency translation of $67 million primarily in Brazil, utilities gross margin decreased $45 million, or 5%, from the previous year primarily due to a decrease in the non-pass through rates at Eletropaulo as a result of the July 2007 tariff reset of approximately $74 million, increased fixed costs of approximately $71 million at Eletropaulo primarily due to higher provisions for bad debts and higher purchased energy costs at Eletropaulo of approximately $68 million. These decreases were partially offset by higher volume at Eletropaulo of approximately $162 million. North America Generation The following table summarizes revenue and gross margin for our Generation segment in North America for the periods indicated: For the Years Ended December 31, 2009 2008 2007 % Change 2009 vs. 2008 % Change 2008 vs. 2007 ($ in millions) North America Generation Revenue $ 1,940 $ 2,234 $ 2,169 -13 % 3 % Gross Margin $ 477 $ 660 $ 702 -28 % -6 % 110 Table of Contents Fiscal Year 2009 versus 2008 Excluding the unfavorable impact of foreign currency translation in Mexico of $44 million, generation revenue decreased $250 million, or 11%, from the previous year primarily due to a net decrease of $107 million in New York due to a reduction in the volume of electricity sold in the spot market as a result of lower spot rates partially offset by a rate increase on electricity sold under favorable contracts. Additionally, revenue decreased $80 million due to a reduction in natural gas prices at Merida in Mexico, an increase in outages at Warrior Run in Maryland, TEG/TEP in Mexico and New York of $22 million, $21 million and $17 million, respectively, lower rates at Deepwater in Texas of $20 million and the unfavorable impact of commodity derivatives in New York of $11 million and the unfavorable impact in 2009 of derivative amortization at Warrior Run of $9 million. These decreases were partially offset by a $15 million revenue adjustment at Merida in 2008. Excluding the unfavorable impact of foreign currency translation of $9 million, generation gross margin decreased $174 million, or 26%, from the previous year primarily due to a net decrease of $72 million in New York driven by a reduction in the volume of electricity sold in the spot market as a result of lower spot rates partially offset by a rate increase on electricity sold under favorable contracts. Additionally, there was a $29 million unfavorable impact of mark-to-market derivative adjustments on coal supply contracts in Hawaii as a result of a gain of $22 million in 2008 compared to a loss of $7 million in 2009, the unfavorable impact in 2009 of derivative amortization at Warrior Run of $9 million and an increase in outages at Warrior Run and in New York of $22 million and $6 million, respectively. Further, gross margin decreased due to the unfavorable impact of commodity derivatives of $11 million and higher emission allowance purchases of $13 million in New York. These decreases were partially offset by a $15 million revenue adjustment at Merida in 2008. Generation revenue decreased 13%, while generation gross margin decreased 28%, primarily due to the increase in coal prices in New York and the unfavorable impact of derivatives in 2009 in Hawaii that had no corresponding impact on revenue. Fiscal Year 2008 versus 2007 Generation revenue increased $65 million, or 3%, from the previous year primarily due to higher volume of $38 million at TEG/TEP in Mexico, and net higher revenue at Merida in Mexico of $29 million primarily due to the pass-through of higher fuel costs offset by a revenue adjustment. In addition, revenue increased $8 million at Red Oak in New Jersey, due to higher pricing and availability bonuses. At Warrior Run in Maryland, revenue increased $12 million due to the pass-through of higher fuel costs and higher volume due to no significant outages in 2008. These effects were partially offset by lower volume in New York of $23 million primarily due to planned outages and lower capacity factors. Generation gross margin decreased $42 million, or 6%, due to lower gross margin in New York of $46 million mainly due to a planned outage and lower volume, and higher fuel prices and outages of $16 million at Deepwater in Texas. Gross margin decreased $13 million at TEG/TEP due primarily to outages and lower rates due to changes in the sales contract rates associated with the refinancing in 2007. These decreases were partially offset by a net increase in gross margin in Hawaii of $29 million primarily due to a $22 million net mark-to-market derivative gain on a coal supply contract and a one time use tax refund of $6 million. North America Utilities The following table summarizes revenue and gross margin for our Utilities segment in North America for the periods indicated: For the Years Ended December 31, 2009 2008 2007 % Change 2009 vs. 2008 % Change 2008 vs. 2007 ($ in millions) North America Utilities Revenue $ 1,068 $ 1,079 $ 1,052 -1 % 3 % Gross Margin $ 239 $ 261 $ 314 -8 % -17 % 111 Table of Contents Fiscal Year 2009 versus 2008 Utilities revenue decreased $11 million, or 1%, from the previous year primarily due to lower retail volume of $31 million due primarily to milder weather and the economic recession, and a $7 million decrease in wholesale revenue driven by lower market prices. These decreases were partially offset by $32 million of voluntary credits IPL provided to retail customers in 2008. See Item 1. Business Regulatory Matters North America of this Form 10-K for further information regarding these credits. Utilities gross margin decreased $22 million, or 8%, from the previous year primarily due to a decrease in wholesale margin of $16 million due to unfavorable prices and increased pension expense of $25 million largely due to the decline in market value of IPL pension assets during 2008. These decreases were partially offset by an increase in retail margin of $15 million and a $5 million decrease in property tax expenses. The increase in retail margin was primarily due to the $32 million of voluntary customer credits IPL issued to its to retail customers in 2008 partially offset by lower retail sales volumes in 2009. The primary drivers for the percentage decline in utilities gross margin being greater than the percentage decline in revenue for the comparable periods are (i) the $25 million increase in pension expense and (ii) the $32 million of voluntary customer credits IPL issued to its retail customers in 2008. Fiscal Year 2008 versus 2007 Utilities revenue increased $27 million, or 3%, from the previous year primarily due to a $42 million increase in rate adjustments at IPL, related to environmental investments, $42 million of higher fuel and purchased power costs and an $8 million increase in wholesale prices. These increases were offset by $32 million of voluntary customer credits IPL issued to its retail customers in 2008, $16 million of lower retail volume primarily due to unfavorable weather compared to 2007 and an $18 million decrease in wholesale volume. Utilities gross margin decreased $53 million, or 17%, from the previous year primarily due to lower variable retail margin of $42 million driven by the voluntary customer credits IPL issued to its retail customers in 2008 and lower retail volume. In addition, IPL had higher maintenance expenses of $9 million primarily due to storm restoration costs and the timing and duration of major generating unit overhauls, an increase of $6 million in labor and benefits costs and an increase of $3 million in contractor and consulting costs. These decreases to gross margin were offset by a return recovered through rates on approved environmental investments of $14 million. Europe Generation The following table summarizes revenue and gross margin for our Generation segment in Europe for the periods indicated: For the Years Ended December 31, 2009 2008 2007 % Change 2009 vs. 2008 % Change 2008 vs. 2007 ($ in millions) Europe Generation Revenue $ 720 $ 1,096 $ 909 -34 % 21 % Gross Margin $ 189 $ 260 $ 240 -27 % 8 % Fiscal Year 2009 versus 2008 Excluding the unfavorable impact of foreign currency translation of $146 million across the region, driven mainly by our businesses in Hungary, Kilroot in the United Kingdom and our businesses in Kazakhstan, generation revenue decreased $230 million, or 21%, from the previous year primarily due to lower revenue of 112 Table of Contents $101 million as a result of the sale of Ekibastuz and Maikuben in May 2008, lower volume at our businesses in Hungary of $81 million due to the combined impact of the cancellation of one of our PPAs and reduced demand and $67 million at Kilroot, a coal-fired plant, mainly driven by lower dispatch due to favorable gas prices compared to coal. These decreases were partially offset by higher rates of $15 million at our businesses in Kazakhstan. Excluding the unfavorable impact of foreign currency translation of $35 million, driven mainly by Kilroot and our businesses in Kazakhstan, generation gross margin decreased $36 million, or 14%, from the previous year primarily due to lower gross margin of $41 million as a result of the sale of Ekibastuz and Maikuben in May 2008, lower demand in Hungary of $12 million and an overall increase in fixed costs across the region of $16 million, partially offset by higher capacity revenue at Kilroot and higher energy prices at our businesses in Kazakhstan. Fiscal Year 2008 versus 2007 Generation revenue increased $187 million, or 21% from the previous year primarily due to an increase in capacity income and energy payments at Kilroot of approximately $105 million, rate recovery and higher volume of approximately $93 million at our businesses in Hungary. In addition, revenue at Kilroot increased approximately $21 million compared to the previous year primarily due to the unfavorable impact of two major overhauls in 2007. These increases were partially offset by a reduction in revenue of approximately $49 million in Kazakhstan following the sale of Ekibastuz and Maikuben in the second quarter of 2008 that was partially offset by approximately $12 million in management fees earned from continuing management agreements for those businesses. Generation gross margin increased $20 million, or 8% from the previous year primarily due to higher rates and volume of $43 million at Tisza II in Hungary and an increase in capacity income and fewer forced outages at Kilroot of approximately $32 million. These were offset by an increase in fixed costs of $24 million at Kilroot and Tisza II and a reduction in gross margin of $29 million in Kazakhstan following the sale of Ekibastuz and Maikuben in the second quarter of 2008 that was partially offset by $9 million in net gross margin from continuing management agreements for those businesses. Asia Generation The following table summarizes revenue and gross margin for our Generation segment in Asia for the periods indicated: For the Years Ended December 31, 2009 2008 2007 % Change 2009 vs. 2008 % Change 2008 vs. 2007 ($ in millions) Asia Generation Revenue $ 643 $ 553 $ 315 16 % 76 % Gross Margin $ 179 $ 67 $ 82 167 % -18 % Fiscal Year 2009 versus 2008 Excluding the unfavorable impact of foreign currency translation of $23 million, primarily in the Philippines and Sri Lanka, generation revenue increased $113 million, or 20% from the previous year primarily due to the benefit of our new businesses, Masinloc in the Philippines, of $46 million which was acquired in April 2008, and Amman East in Jordan, of $50 million, which commenced single cycle operations in July 2008. Revenue also increased $70 million in 2009 at Masinloc due to improved rates and volume as a result of improved availability and new customer contracts, and $18 million from a one-time favorable energy sales settlement. These increases were partially offset by the decrease in revenue of $71 million at Kelanitissa in Sri Lanka primarily due to a decline in fuel costs which are largely passed through to the customer and higher outages in 2009 as compared to 2008. 113 Table of Contents Excluding the unfavorable impact of foreign currency translation of $6 million, primarily in the Philippines, generation gross margin increased $118 million, or 176% from the previous year primarily due to the impact of our new businesses at Masinloc of $23 million and Amman East of $17 million. The remaining net increase was primarily a result of a $91 million increase at Masinloc due to higher contract sales, where margins are more favorable than spot sales, lower fuel prices, improved availability and the favorable energy sales settlement described above; and higher capacity charges at Kelanitissa of $10 million. These increases were partially offset by higher fixed costs of $20 million at Masinloc. Generation revenue increased 16% while gross margin increased 167% primarily due to higher contract margins at Masinloc as a result of improved operations, availability and lower fuel prices, as well as the larger relative impact on gross margin from the one-time favorable energy sales settlement described above. Fiscal Year 2008 versus 2007 Excluding the favorable impact of foreign currency translation of $4 million, generation revenue increased $234 million, or 74% from the previous year primarily due to revenue generated from our new businesses at Masinloc and Amman East of $149 million and $46 million, respectively, and an increase in rates due to pass-through fuel prices at Kelanitissa of $55 million. Generation gross margin for the twelve months ended December 31, 2008 decreased $15 million, or 18% from the previous year primarily due to a $15 million unfavorable impact on revenue due to an amended PPA accounted for as a lease at Ras Laffan in Qatar. In addition, following the acquisition in April 2008, Masinloc generated a net gross margin loss of $18 million for the year ended December 31, 2008. These unfavorable effects were partially offset by the favorable impact of $14 million from the start up of commercial operations in July 2008 at Amman East. Corporate and Other Corporate and other includes the net operating results from our generation and utilities businesses in Africa, utilities businesses in Europe, AES Wind Generation and other climate solutions and renewables projects which are immaterial for the purposes of separate segment disclosure. The following table excludes the elimination of inter-segment activity and summarizes revenue and gross margin for Corporate and Other entities for the periods indicated: For the Years Ended December 31, 2009 2008 2007 % Change 2009 vs. 2008 % Change 2008 vs. 2007 ($ in millions) Revenue Europe Utilities $ 286 $ 403 $ 330 -29 % 22 % Africa Utilities $ 370 $ 379 $ 330 -2 % 15 % Africa Generation $ 65 $ 65 $ 65 0 % 0 % Wind $ 133 $ 128 $ 63 4 % 103 % Corp/Other $ 16 $ 37 $ 1 -57 % 3600 % Total Corporate and Other $ 870 $ 1,012 $ 789 -14 % 28 % Gross Margin Europe Utilities $ 16 $ 34 $ 21 -53 % 62 % Africa Utilities $ 71 $ 30 $ 46 137 % -35 % Africa Generation $ 41 $ 28 $ 34 46 % -18 % Wind $ 11 $ 19 $ 8 -42 % 138 % Corp/Other $ (22 ) $ (49 ) $ (12 ) -55 % -308 % Total Corporate and Other $ 117 $ 62 $ 97 89 % -36 % 114 Table of Contents Fiscal Year 2009 versus 2008 Excluding the unfavorable impact of foreign currency translation of $162 million, primarily in the Ukraine, Corporate and Other revenue increased $20 million, or 2%, to $870 million in 2009 from $1.0 billion in 2008. The increase was primarily due to higher tariffs in the Ukraine of $27 million. Excluding the unfavorable impact of foreign currency translation of $12 million, primarily in the Ukraine, Corporate and Other gross margin increased $67 million, or 108%, to $117 million in 2009 from $62 million in 2008. The increase was primarily due to a decrease in fixed costs partially offset by higher fuel consumption driven by lower hydrology at Sonel, our integrated utility in Cameroon. Fiscal Year 2008 versus 2007 Excluding the favorable impact of foreign currency translation of $9 million, driven by the favorable impact in Cameroon partially offset by the unfavorable impact in the Ukraine, Corporate and Other revenue increased $214 million, or 27%, to $1.0 billion in 2008 from $789 million in 2007. The increase was primarily due to increased tariffs and volume in the Ukraine of $82 million; an increase of $65 million at our wind generation businesses, primarily due to the expansion of our Buffalo Gap wind facilities in Texas, and an increase in rate and volume of $30 million at Sonel. Corporate and Other gross margin decreased $35 million, or 36%, to $62 million in 2008 from $97 million in 2007. The decrease was primarily due to increased fixed costs of $55 million at our Utilities businesses in the Ukraine and Cameroon. These were partially offset by the expansion of the Buffalo Gap wind facilities and higher volume and tariffs of $59 million in the Ukraine and Cameroon. General and Administrative Expense General and administrative expense includes those expenses related to corporate staff functions and/or initiatives, executive management, finance, legal, human resources, information systems, and certain development costs which are not allocable to our business segments. General and administrative expenses decreased $26 million, or 7%, to $345 million for the year ended December 31, 2009 from $371 million for the year ended December 31, 2008. The decrease is primarily related to 2008 professional fees associated with remediation efforts and a reduction in business development costs. The favorable variance is partially offset by an increase in current year costs associated with the worldwide implementation of SAP. General and administrative expenses decreased $7 million, or 2%, to $371 million for the year ended December 31, 2008 from $378 million for the year ended December 31, 2007. The decrease is primarily due to a reduction in professional fees related to material weakness remediation efforts, partially offset by higher spending on SAP implementation projects and the expansion of our renewables initiatives. Interest expense Interest expense decreased $288 million, or 16%, to $1.5 billion in 2009 primarily due to lower interest rates globally due to economic conditions and as a result of inflationary adjustments to the market price index in Brazil. In addition, the expense decreased as a result of favorable foreign currency translation, mainly in Brazil, lower interest expenses associated with decreased debt balances at Eletropaulo and lower refinancing costs at IPALCO. These decreases were partially offset by higher interest expenses at our Masinloc plant in the Philippines which was acquired in April 2008, and interest expense at Infovias in Brazil where a fee on a non-exercised credit line was written off. 115 Table of Contents Interest expense increased $48 million, or 3%, to $1.8 billion in 2008 primarily due to additional interest expense at Masinloc following its acquisition in April 2008, interest expense associated with derivatives at Eletropaulo, Panama and Puerto Rico, as well as unfavorable foreign currency translation in Brazil. These increases were offset by decreases from the elimination of a financial transaction tax in Brazil, a decrease in regulatory liabilities at Eletropaulo, and a decrease in capitalized interest on development projects at Kilroot. Interest income Interest income decreased $171 million, or 33%, to $348 million in 2009 primarily due to lower interest rates and lower investment balances in Brazil, unfavorable foreign currency translation on the Brazilian Real, and the impact of decreased interest rates and inflationary adjustments on accounts receivable in 2008 at Gener in Chile, and decreased cash balance at the parent company. Interest income increased $30 million, or 6%, to $519 million in 2008 primarily due to interest income on short-term investments and cash equivalents at two of our subsidiaries in Brazil, inflationary adjustments on accounts receivable at Gener, and interest earned on a convertible loan acquired in March 2008. These increases were offset by decreases due to lower interest income related to a gross receipts tax recovery at Tiet recorded during the second quarter of 2007 and decreased interest income related to derivatives at TEG/TEP. Other income Years Ended December 31, 2009 2008 2007 (in millions) Extinguishment of tax liabilities $ 165 $ $ Tax credit settlement 129 Management performance incentive 80 Gain on extinguishment of liabilities 3 199 22 Insurance proceeds 40 18 Gain on sale of assets 14 34 24 Contract settlement gain 135 Gross receipts tax recovery 93 Other 75 104 66 Total other income $ 466 $ 377 $ 358 Other income of $466 million for the year ended December 31, 2009 included $165 million from the reduction in interest and penalties associated with federal tax debts at Eletropaulo and Sul as a result of the Refis program and a $129 million gain related to a favorable court decision enabling Eletropaulo to receive reimbursement of excess non-income taxes paid from 1989 to 1992 in the form of tax credits to be applied against future tax liabilities. The net impact to the Company after income taxes and noncontrolling interests for these items was $44 million. In addition, the Company recognized income in 2009 of $80 million from a performance incentive bonus for management services provided to Ekibastuz and Maikuben in 2008. The management agreement was related to the sale of these businesses in Kazakhstan in May 2008; see further discussion of this transaction in Note 14 Acquisitions and Dispositions. Other income of $377 million for the year ended December 31, 2008 included gains on the extinguishment of a gross receipts tax liability and a legal contingency at Eletropaulo of $117 million and $75 million, respectively, $32 million of cash proceeds related to a favorable legal settlement at Southland in California, $29 million of insurance recoveries for damaged turbines at Uruguaiana, $23 million of gains associated with a sale of land at Eletropaulo and sales of turbines at Itabo, and compensation of $18 million for the impairment associated with the settlement agreement to shut down Hefei. 116 Table of Contents Other income of $358 million for the year ended December 31, 2007 included a $135 million contract settlement gain at Eastern Energy in New York, a $93 million gross receipts tax recovery at Eletropaulo and Tiete, and favorable legal settlements at Eletropaulo and Red Oak in New Jersey. Other expense Years Ended December 31, 2009 2008 2007 (in millions) Loss on extinguishment of liabilities $ $ 70 $ 106 Loss on sale and disposal of assets 42 34 79 Other 69 57 68 Total other expense $ 111 $ 161 $ 253 Other expense of $111 million for the year ended December 31, 2009 included a $13 million loss recognized when three of our businesses in the Dominican Republic received $110 million par value bonds issued by the Dominican Republic government to settle existing accounts receivable for the same amount from the government-owned distribution companies. The loss represented an adjustment to reflect the fair value of the bonds on the date received. Other expense also included losses on the disposal of assets at Eletropaulo and Andres and contingencies at our businesses in Kazakhstan and Alicura. Other expense of $161 million for the year ended December 31, 2008 included $69 million of losses on the retirement of debt at the Parent Company in connection with the refinancing in June 2008, as further discussed in Note 10 Long Term Debt, and IPALCO associated with a $375 million refinancing in April 2008, and losses on disposal of assets primarily at Eletropaulo in Brazil. Other expense of $253 million for the year ended December 31, 2007 included a loss of $90 million on the retirement of Senior Secured Notes at the parent company, a $28 million charge related to an increase in contingencies in Kazakhstan and losses on the sale and disposal of assets at Eletropaulo and Sul in Brazil. Goodwill Impairment In 2009, the Company recognized goodwill impairment expense of $122 million. This was a result of impairment at certain of our businesses in the United Kingdom and Ukraine as a result of the Company annual goodwill impairment evaluation as of October 1. The most significant goodwill impairment was at Kilroot, our generation business in the United Kingdom. Factors contributing to the recognition of impairment included: reduced profit expectations based on latest estimates of future commodity prices and reduced expectations on the recovery of cash flows on the existing plant following the Company decision to forgo capital expenditures to meet emission allowance requirements taking effect in 2024. The fair value of the Company reporting units are inherently sensitive to the assumptions underlying the estimates of fair value. Note 1 General and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, Goodwill and Intangibles , provides a more detailed discussion of those assumptions. As discussed in Key Trends and Uncertainties, in the future, the fair values of the Company reporting units might decline as a result of adverse changes in their operating environments or the businesses reaching the end of their finite lives, which could require the Company to record additional goodwill impairment charges. The Company did not incur any goodwill impairment charge in 2008 and 2007. 117 Table of Contents Asset Impairment Expense As discussed in Note 19 Asset Impairment Expense to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K, asset impairment expense for the year 2009 was $25 million and consisted primarily of the following: In 2009, the Company recognized a pre-tax long-lived asset impairment charge of $11 million related to the Company Piabanha hydro project in Brazil. The Company determined that the carrying value exceeded the future discounted cash flows and abandoned the project. Asset impairment expense for the year 2008 was $175 million. In the fourth quarter of 2008, and in response to the financial market crisis, the Company reviewed and prioritized projects in the development pipeline. From this review, the Company determined that the carrying value exceeded the future discounted cash flows for certain projects. As a result, the Company recorded an impairment charge of $75 million ($34 million, net of noncontrolling interests and income taxes) related to two liquefied natural gas projects in North America and a non-power development project at one of our facilities in North America. During 2008, the Company recognized additional impairment charges of $36 million related to long-lived assets at Uruguaiana. The impairment was triggered by a combination of gas curtailments and increases in the spot market price of energy in 2007 that continued in 2008. Following an initial impairment charge in the fourth quarter of 2007, further charges were incurred in 2008 due to fixed asset purchase agreements in place. During the first half of 2008, the Company withdrew from projects in South Africa and Israel which resulted in impairment charges of $36 million. The Company also recognized an impairment of $18 million related to the shutdown of the Hefei plant in China. Asset impairment expense for the year 2007 was $408 million and consisted primarily of a pre-tax impairment charge of approximately $352 million at Uruguaiana, a gas-fired thermoelectric plant located in Brazil. The impairment was the result of an analysis of Uruguaiana long-lived assets, which was triggered by the combination of gas curtailments and increases in the spot market price of energy. In addition, asset impairments included $25 million from a compressor failure at Placerita, a subsidiary in California and $14 million related to a prepayment advanced to AgCert for a specified amount of future CER credits. Gain on sale of investments Gain on sale of investments of $131 million in 2009 consisted primarily of $98 million recognized in May 2009 related to the termination of the management agreement between the Company and Kazakhmys PLC for Ekibastuz and Maikuben, a gain of $14 million from the sale of the remaining assets associated with the shutdown of the Hefei plant in China and $13 million from the reversal of a contingent liability related to the Kazakhstan sale in 2008. Gain on sale of investments of $909 million in 2008 consisted primarily of the sale in May 2008 of two wholly-owned subsidiaries in Kazakhstan, Ekibastuz and Maikuben for a net gain of $905 million. (Loss) gain on sale of subsidiary stock Loss on sale of subsidiary stock of $31 million in 2008 was the result of sales of AES Gener shares made by our wholly-owned subsidiary Cachagua. In November 2008, Cachagua sold 9.6% of its ownership in Gener to a third party reducing its ownership in Gener to 70.6%. Gain on sale of subsidiary stock in 2007 of $134 million was a result of net gains recognized on sales approximating an 11% ownership interest in Gener reducing our ownership interest in Gener to 80.2%. In accordance with the new accounting guidance for noncontrolling interests, future transactions of this type will be accounted for as equity transactions and will not result in a gain or loss on the sale. 118 Table of Contents Foreign currency transaction gains (losses) on net monetary position The following table summarizes the gains (losses) on the Company net monetary position from foreign currency transaction activities: Years Ended December 31, 2009 2008 2007 (in millions) AES Corporation $ 13 $ 38 $ 31 Chile 65 (102 ) (4 ) Philippines 15 (57 ) Brazil (9 ) (44 ) 5 Argentina (10 ) (22 ) (8 ) Kazakhstan (24 ) 11 10 Colombia (11 ) 5 (7 ) Other (6 ) (13 ) 2 Total (1) $ 33 $ (184 ) $ 29 (1) Includes $(39) million, $10 million and ($22) million of gains (losses) on foreign currency derivative contracts for the years ended December 31, 2009, 2008 and 2007, respectively. The Company recognized foreign currency transaction gains of $33 million for the year ended December 31, 2009. These consisted primarily of gains in Chile, at The AES Corporation and in the Philippines partially offset by losses in Kazakhstan, Colombia, Argentina and Brazil. Gains of $65 million in Chile were primarily due to the appreciation of the Chilean Peso by 20% resulting in gains at Gener (a U.S. Dollar functional currency subsidiary) associated with its net working capital denominated in Chilean Peso, mainly cash and accounts receivables. This gain was partially offset by $14 million in losses on foreign currency derivatives. Gains of $13 million at The AES Corporation were primarily due to the settlement of the senior unsecured credit facility and the revaluation of notes receivable denominated in the Euro, partially offset by losses on debt denominated in British Pounds. Gains of $15 million in the Philippines were primarily due to the appreciation of the Philippine Peso of 3%, resulting in gains at Masinloc, a Philippine Peso functional currency subsidiary, on the remeasurement of U.S. Dollar denominated debt. Losses of $24 million in Kazakhstan were primarily due to net foreign currency transaction losses of $12 million related to energy sales denominated and fixed in the U.S. Dollar and $12 million of foreign currency transaction losses on debt and other liabilities denominated in currencies other than the Kazakh Tenge. Losses of $11 million in Colombia were primarily due to appreciation of the Colombian Peso by 9%, resulting in losses at Chivor (a U.S. Dollar functional currency subsidiary) associated with its Colombian Peso denominated debt and losses on foreign currency derivatives. Losses of $10 million in Argentina were primarily due to the devaluation of the Argentine Peso by 10% in 2009, resulting in losses at Alicura (an Argentine Peso functional currency subsidiary) associated with its U.S. Dollar denominated debt, partially offset by derivative gains. Losses of $9 million in Brazil were primarily due to energy purchases made by Eletropaulo denominated in U.S. Dollar, resulting in foreign currency transaction losses of $18 million, partially offset by gains of $9 million due to the appreciation in 2009 of the Brazilian Real by 25%, resulting in gains at Sul and Uruguaiana associated with U.S. Dollar denominated liabilities. 119 Table of Contents The Company recognized foreign currency transaction losses of $184 million for the year ended December 31, 2008. These consisted primarily of losses in Chile, the Philippines, Brazil and Argentina partially offset by gains at The AES Corporation and in Kazakhstan. Losses of $102 million in Chile were primarily due to the devaluation of the Chilean Peso by 28% in 2008, resulting in losses at Gener, a U.S. Dollar functional currency subsidiary, associated with its net working capital denominated in Chilean Pesos, mainly cash, accounts receivable and VAT receivables. Losses of $57 million in the Philippines were primarily due to remeasurement losses at Masinloc, a Philippine Peso functional currency subsidiary, on U.S. Dollar denominated debt resulting from depreciation of the Philippine Peso of 14% in 2008. Losses of $44 million in Brazil were primarily due to the realization of deferred exchange variance on past energy purchases made by Eletropaulo denominated in U.S. Dollar. Losses of $22 million in Argentina were primarily due to the devaluation of the Argentine Peso by 10% in 2008, resulting in losses at Alicura, an Argentine Peso functional currency subsidiary, associated with its U.S. Dollar denominated debt. Gains of $38 million at The AES Corporation were primarily due to debt denominated in British Pounds and gains on foreign exchange derivatives, partially offset by losses on notes receivable denominated in the Euro. Gains of $11 million in Kazakhstan were primarily due to net foreign currency transaction gains of $16 million related to energy sales denominated and fixed in the U.S. Dollar, offset by $5 million of foreign currency transaction losses on external and intercompany debt denominated in other than the Kazakh Tenge functional currency. Foreign currency transaction gains of $29 million for the year ended December 31, 2007 primarily consisted of gains at The AES Corporation and in Kazakhstan, partially offset by losses in Argentina and Colombia. Gains of $31 million at The AES Corporation were primarily the result of favorable exchange rates for debt denominated in British Pounds and the Euro. Gains of $10 million in Kazakhstan were primarily due to $12 million of gains related to debt denominated in currencies other than the Kazakh Tenge functional currency, partially offset by $3 million of losses related to energy sales denominated and fixed in the U.S. Dollar. Losses of $8 million in Argentina were primarily due to the devaluation of the Argentine Peso by 3% in 2007, resulting in losses of $11 million at Alicura associated with its U.S. Dollar denominated debt. Losses of $7 million in Colombia were primarily due to the appreciation of the Colombian Peso by 11% in 2007 at Chivor, a U.S. Dollar function currency subsidiary. Other non-operating expense Other non-operating expense was $12 million in 2009, consisting primarily of an other-than-temporary impairment of a cost method investment. During the first quarter of 2009, the market value of the investee shares continued to decline due to the downward trends in the capital markets and management concluded that the $10 million decline was other-than-temporary. Other non-operating expense was $15 million in 2008 and related primarily to an impairment of the Company investment in a company developing a blue gas (coal to gas) technology project. The Company made this investment in September 2007 and accounted for the investment in convertible preferred shares under the cost method of accounting. During the fourth quarter of 2008, the market value of the shares materially declined due to downward trends in the capital markets and management concluded that the decline was other-than-temporary and recorded an impairment charge of $10 million. Additionally, the Company recorded an other-than-temporary impairment charge of approximately $5 million related to its investments in other entities developing new energy technology and products. 120 Table of Contents Other non-operating expense was $57 million in 2007 and reflected the impairment in the Company investment in AgCert, a U.K. based corporation, publicly traded on the London Stock Exchange, that produces CER credits. The Company acquired its investment in AgCert in May 2006 and, similar to the circumstances stated above, the market value of the Company investment materially declined during the first half of 2007 and the Company recorded an other-than-temporary impairment charge of $52 million in 2007. An additional charge of $5 million was recognized for the decrease in value of the AgCert warrants also held by the Company. The Company began consolidating AgCert in January 2008 when it became the primary beneficiary. Income taxes Income tax expense on continuing operations decreased $172 million, or 22%, to $599 million in 2009. The Company effective tax rates were 26% for 2009 and 29% for 2008. The decrease in the 2009 effective tax rate was primarily due to tax benefit recorded in 2009 upon the release of valuation allowance at certain U.S. and Brazilian subsidiaries, $165 million of non-taxable income recorded at Brazil as a result of the REFIS program in 2009 and an increase in U.S. taxes on distributions from the Company primary holding company in the second quarter of 2008. Income tax expense on continuing operations increased $95 million, or 14%, to $771 million in 2008. The Company effective tax rates were 29% for 2008 and 46% for 2007. The decrease in the 2008 effective tax rate was primarily due to the gain of $905 million recorded on the sale of the Kazakhstan businesses in the second quarter of 2008, offset by U.S. taxes on distributions from the Company primary holding company to facilitate early retirement of parent debt in 2008. The decrease was also attributable to the implementation of a tax planning strategy that mitigated the impact of the Mexico Flat Rate Business Tax ( IETU ) enacted in the fourth quarter of 2007. The strategy resulted in a reduction to deferred tax expense in 2008 of $24 million and $23 million at TEG and TEP, respectively. Net equity in earnings of affiliates Net equity in earnings of affiliates increased $59 million, or 179%, to $92 million in 2009 primarily due to a cash settlement received by Cartagena, in Spain, in June 2009 for liquidated damages received related to a construction delay from December 2005 to November 2006; increased earnings at Guacolda in Chile mainly due to lower cost of coal; increased earnings of Chigen affiliates from higher tariffs partially offset by lower volume and a valuation write-off in 2008 at an affiliate in Turkey. These increases were partially offset by decreased earnings at OPGC, in India, mainly due to lower tariff and a dividend distribution tax in March 2009 and increased expenses for an equipment overhaul at Elsta in the Netherlands. Net equity in earnings of affiliates decreased $43 million, or 57%, to $33 million in 2008 primarily due to the impact of increased coal prices at Yangcheng, a coal-fired plant in China, a decrease as a result of development costs related to AES Solar, formed in March 2008, and an additional write-off of three projects in Turkey that were abandoned in December 2007. Additionally, earnings decreased due to the sale of an equity investment in a wind project in the fourth quarter of 2007, a decrease in earnings at OPGC, in India, and decreased earnings due to a discontinuance of hedge accounting for a number of interest rate swaps at Guacolda in Chile. These losses were partially offset by a decrease in net losses at Cartagena in Spain primarily from a write-off of deferred financing costs in 2007 that did not recur in 2008. 121 Table of Contents Income from continuing operations attributable to noncontrolling interests Income from continuing operations attributable to noncontrolling interests increased $337 million, or 44%, to $1.1 billion in 2009 primarily due to increases in gross margin and other income, lower interest expense and a decrease in impairments in 2009 at our Brazilian businesses, and increases in gross margin and foreign currency transaction gains at our businesses in Chile. In addition, in the fourth quarter of 2009, income from continuing operations attributable to noncontrolling interests increased $44 million at certain of our wind generation businesses as a result of a charge related to the potential future taxes that could be deemed due in the calculation of the hypothetical liquidation value of certain of our wind tax equity partnerships. Income from continuing operations attributable to noncontrolling interests increased $367 million, or 91%, to $770 million in 2008 primarily due to the decreased losses as a result of the impairment recognized at Uruguaiana during 2007, increased earnings at Eletropaulo, Gener, Itabo, Panama and Tiet , as well as an increase in noncontrolling interests from approximately 20% to approximately 29% as a result of the sale of shares in Gener in November 2008. These increases were partially offset by an impairment recognized in the Bahamas, a net loss at Masinloc, and decreased earnings at Ras Laffan, Sonel, and Caess-EEO & Clesa in El Salvador. Discontinued operations As further discussed in Note 21 Discontinued Operations and Held for Sale Businesses to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K, Discontinued Operations includes the results of seven businesses: Lal Pir and Pak Gen, generation businesses in Pakistan, (held for sale in December 2009); Barka, a generation business in Oman, (held for sale in December 2009); Jiaozuo, a generation business in China, (sold in December 2008); La Electricidad de Caracas ( EDC ), a utility business in Venezuela, (sold in May 2007); Central Valley, a generation business in California (sold in July 2007); and Eden, a utility business in Argentina (sold in June 2007). Prior periods have been restated to reflect these businesses within Discontinued Operations for all periods presented. In 2009, income from operations of discontinued businesses, net of tax and income attributable to noncontrolling interests, was $35 million and reflected the operations of our 35% stake in Barka, a combined cycle gas facility and water desalination plant in Oman, and our 55% stake in Pak Gen and Lal Pir, two oil-fired facilities in Pakistan which are under contract for sale in 2010. Loss on disposal of discontinued businesses, net of tax and loss attributable to noncontrolling interests was $105 million and represented the difference between the net book value of the Company interests in its Pakistan businesses and their estimated fair value. In 2008, income from operations of discontinued businesses, net of tax and income attributable to noncontrolling interests, was $41 million and reflected the operations of Barka, Pak Gen, Lal Pir and Jiaozuo, a coal-fired generation facility in China sold in December 2008. The Company received $73 million for its 70% interest in the business. The net gain on the disposition was $7 million. In 2007, income from operations of discontinued businesses, net of tax and income attributable to noncontrolling interests, was $112 million and reflected the operations of Barka, Pak Gen, Lal Pir, Jiaozuo, EDC, Central Valley and Eden. EDC, Eden, and Central Valley were sold in May, June and July 2007, respectively, therefore their results are reflected in the Company results of operations through their respective sales dates. Loss on the disposal of discontinued businesses net of tax and loss attributable to noncontrolling interests was $661 million and primarily related to the loss on the sale of EDC. Critical Accounting Estimates The Consolidated Financial Statements of AES are prepared in conformity with GAAP, which requires the use of estimates, judgments and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the periods presented. 122 Table of Contents AES significant accounting policies are described in Note 1 General and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K. An accounting estimate is considered critical if: the estimate requires management to make assumptions about matters that were highly uncertain at the time the estimate was made; different estimates reasonably could have been used; or the impact of the estimates and assumptions on financial condition or operating performance is material. Management believes that the accounting estimates employed are appropriate and the resulting balances are reasonable; however, actual results could materially differ from the original estimates, requiring adjustments to these balances in future periods. Management has discussed these critical accounting policies with the Audit Committee, as appropriate. Listed below are the Company most significant critical accounting estimates and assumptions used in the preparation of the Consolidated Financial Statements. Income Tax Reserves We are subject to income taxes in both the United States and numerous foreign jurisdictions. Our worldwide income tax provision requires significant judgment and is based on calculations and assumptions that are subject to examination by the Internal Revenue Service and other taxing authorities. The Company and certain of its subsidiaries are under examination by relevant taxing authorities for various tax years. The Company regularly assesses the potential outcome of these examinations in each of the taxing jurisdictions when determining the adequacy of the provision for income taxes. Accounting guidance for uncertainty in income taxes prescribes a more-likely-than-not recognition threshold. Tax reserves have been established, which the Company believes to be adequate in relation to the potential for additional assessments. Once established, reserves are adjusted only when there is more information available or when an event occurs necessitating a change to the reserves. While the Company believes that the amount of the tax estimates are reasonable, it is possible that the ultimate outcome of current or future examinations may exceed current reserves in amounts that could be material. Goodwill Effective January 1, 2009, the Company adopted the new accounting guidance on fair value measurement of nonfinancial assets and liabilities measured on a nonrecurring basis. We test goodwill at the reporting unit level for impairment annually on October 1 and whenever events or circumstances indicate it is more likely than not that impairment may have occurred. Such indicators could include a significant adverse change in the business climate or a decision to sell or dispose of all or a portion of a reporting unit. As discussed in detail in Note 1 General and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, Goodwill and Other Intangibles included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K goodwill impairment is evaluated using a two-step process. The first step is to identify if a potential impairment exists by comparing the fair value of a reporting unit with its carrying value. Determining whether potential impairment exists requires us to estimate the fair value of the respective reporting unit. The new accounting guidance recommends three approaches to measure fair value: 1) Cost approach; 2) Market approach; and 3) Income approach. Historically, an internally developed discounted cash flow model based on the income approach was used to estimate the fair value of reporting units. The Company incorporated several changes in its internal valuation model to align its valuation approach with the new accounting guidance. In the revised valuation model, the fair value of a reporting unit is estimated using internal budgets and forecasts, adjusted for any market participants assumptions, discounted at the Weighted Average Cost of Capital ( WACC ). If the fair value of a reporting unit exceeds its carrying value, goodwill of the reporting unit is not considered to be impaired and no further analysis is required. In determining the fair value, management relies primarily on the results of the income-based approach as most of the valuation assumptions used to derive the discount rate are market observable, directly or indirectly. 123 Table of Contents Under the income approach, the fair value is the result of the application of a significant number of assumptions related to the discount rate and cash flow forecasts. Many of discount rate-related assumptions are market observable; however, the assumptions underlying our cash flow forecasts involve considerable judgment by management. These include growth rate, terminal value, asset retirement obligations, and macro economic factors such as industry demand, inflation, exchange rates and commodity prices. The fair value of a reporting unit could be sensitive to one or more assumption and different reporting units could be sensitive to different assumptions. Management uses a market-based approach to corroborate the fair value estimated under the income approach and to determine the reasonableness of the fair value derived using the discounted cash flow analysis. As part of the impairment evaluation process, we analyze the sensitivity of a reporting unit fair value to underlying assumptions. The level of scrutiny increases as the gap between a reporting unit fair value and carrying value decreases. Changes in any of these assumptions could result in management reaching a different conclusion regarding the potential impairment of a reporting unit, which could be material. Our impairment analysis inherently involves uncertainties from uncontrollable events that could positively or negatively impact the anticipated future economic and operating conditions. If the carrying value exceeds the reporting unit fair value, this could indicate potential impairment and step two of the goodwill evaluation process is required to determine if goodwill is impaired and to measure the amount of impairment loss to recognize, if any. In determining the implied fair value of goodwill for impairment measurement, the fair value measurement accounting guidance requires measuring all assets and liabilities at fair value. This includes determining the fair value of unrecognized assets and liabilities not recognized on the books as would be done in a business combination. When a step two analysis must be completed, the fair value of individual assets and liabilities is determined using valuations (which in some cases may be based in part on the reports of external valuation specialists), or other observable sources of fair value, as appropriate. In 2009, the Company recognized goodwill impairment of $122 million. This was a result of impairment at certain of our businesses in the United Kingdom and Ukraine. The most significant impairment was at Kilroot, our coal-fired generation business in the United Kingdom. Factors contributing to the recognition of impairment included: reduced profit expectations based on the latest estimates of future commodity prices and reduced expectations regarding the recovery of cash flows on the existing plant following the Company decision to forgo capital expenditures to meet emission allowance requirements taking effect in 2024. Regulatory Assets and Liabilities The Company accounts for certain of its regulated operations in accordance with the regulatory accounting standards. As a result, AES recognizes assets and liabilities that result from the regulated ratemaking process that would not be recognized under GAAP for non-regulated entities. Regulatory assets generally represent incurred costs that have been deferred because such costs are probable of future recovery in customer rates. Regulatory liabilities generally represent obligations to make refunds to customers for previous collections for costs that are not likely to be incurred or included in future rate initiatives. Management continually assesses whether the regulatory assets are probable of future recovery by considering factors such as applicable regulatory changes, recent rate orders applicable to other regulated entities and the status of any pending or potential deregulation legislation. If future recovery of costs ceases to be probable, any asset write-offs would be required to be recognized in operating income. Fair Value Fair Value of Financial Instruments A significant number of the Company financial instruments are carried at fair value with changes in fair value recognized in earnings or other comprehensive income each period. The Company makes estimates regarding the valuation of assets and liabilities measured at fair value in preparing the Consolidated Financial Statements. These assets and liabilities include short and long-term investments in debt and equity securities, included in the balance sheet line items Short-term investments and Other assets (Noncurrent) , derivative 124 Table of Contents assets, included in Other current assets and Other assets (Noncurrent) and derivative liabilities, included in Accrued and other liabilities (current) and Other long-term liabilities . The Company uses valuation techniques and methodologies that maximize the use of observable inputs and minimize the use of unobservable inputs. Where available, fair value is based on observable market prices or parameters or derived from such prices or parameters. Where observable prices are not available, valuation models are applied to estimate the fair value using the available observable inputs. The valuation techniques involve some level of management estimation and judgment, the degree of which is dependent on the price transparency for the instruments or market and the instruments complexity. Investments are generally fair valued based on quoted market prices or other observable market data such as interest rate indices. The Company investments are primarily certificates of deposit, government debt securities and money market funds. Derivatives are valued using observable data as inputs into internal valuation models. The Company derivatives primarily consist of interest rate swaps, foreign currency instruments, and commodity and embedded derivatives. Additional discussion regarding the nature of these financial instruments and valuation techniques can be found in Note 6 Fair Value of Financial Instruments. Accounting for Derivative Instruments and Hedging Activities We enter into various derivative transactions in order to hedge our exposure to certain market risks. We primarily use derivative instruments to manage our interest rate, commodity and foreign currency exposures. We do not enter into derivative transactions for trading purposes. In accordance with the accounting standards for derivatives and hedging, we recognize all derivatives as either assets or liabilities in the balance sheet and measure those instruments at fair value except where derivatives qualify and are designated as normal purchase/normal sale transactions. Changes in fair value of derivatives are recognized in earnings unless specific hedge criteria are met. Income and expense related to derivative instruments are recognized in the same category as generated by the underlying asset or liability. The accounting standards for derivatives and hedging enable companies to designate qualifying derivatives as hedging instruments based on the exposure being hedged. These hedge designations include fair value hedges and cash flow hedges. Changes in the fair value of a derivative that is highly effective and is designated and qualifies as a fair value hedge, are recognized in earnings as offsets to the changes in fair value of the exposure being hedged. The Company has no fair value hedges at this time. Changes in the fair value of a derivative that is highly effective and is designated as and qualifies as a cash flow hedge, are deferred in accumulated other comprehensive income and are recognized into earnings as the hedged transactions occur. Any ineffectiveness is recognized in earnings immediately. For all hedge contracts, the Company provides formal documentation of the hedge and effectiveness testing in accordance with the accounting standards for derivatives and hedging. The Company adopted the fair value measurement accounting standard for financial assets and liabilities on January 1, 2008. The standard provides additional guidance on the definition of fair value and defines fair value as the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date, or exit price. The fair value measurement standard requires the Company to consider and reflect the assumptions of market participants in the fair value calculation. These factors include nonperformance risk (the risk that the obligation will not be fulfilled) and credit risk, both of the reporting entity (for liabilities) and of the counterparty (for assets). These factors were not previously considered in the fair value calculation. Due to the nature of the Company interest rate swaps, which are typically associated with non-recourse debt, credit risk for AES is evaluated at the subsidiary level rather than at the Parent Company level. Nonperformance risk on the Company derivative instruments is an adjustment to the initial asset/liability fair value position that is derived from internally developed valuation models that utilize observable market inputs. 125 Table of Contents As a result of uncertainty, complexity and judgment, accounting estimates related to derivative accounting could result in material changes to our financial statements under different conditions or utilizing different assumptions. As a part of accounting for these derivatives, we make estimates concerning nonperformance, volatilities, market liquidity, future commodity prices, interest rates, credit ratings (both ours and our counterparty s), and exchange rates. The fair value of our derivative portfolio is generally determined using internal valuation models, most of which are based on observable market inputs including interest rate curves and forward and spot prices for currencies and commodities. The Company derives most of its financial instrument market assumptions from market efficient data sources (e.g. Bloomberg and Platt s). In some cases, where market data is not readily available, management uses comparable market sources and empirical evidence to derive market assumptions to determine a financial instrument fair value. In certain instances, the published curve may not extend through the remaining term of the contract and management must make assumptions to extrapolate the curve. Additionally, in the absence of quoted prices, we may rely on indicative pricing quotes from financial institutions to input into our valuation model for certain of our foreign currency swaps. These indicative pricing quotes do not constitute either a bid or ask price and therefore are not considered observable market data. For individual contracts, the use of different valuation models or assumptions could have a material effect on the calculated fair value. Fair Value of Nonfinancial Assets and Liabilities The Company adopted the fair value measurement accounting guidance for nonfinancial assets and liabilities effective January 1, 2009. The most significant of these estimates surround the fair value measurement of long-lived tangible and intangible assets when tested for impairment upon a triggering event or during the annual impairment evaluation for indefinite-lived intangible assets, including goodwill. These estimates include making assumptions regarding useful life, the impact of economic obsolescence and expected future cash flows. Additional factors considered for goodwill are discussed above in the Goodwill section. Fair Value Hierarchy The Company uses valuation techniques and methodologies that maximize the use of observable inputs and minimize the use of unobservable inputs. Where available, fair value is based on observable market prices or parameters or derived from such prices or parameters. Where observable prices are not available, valuation models are applied to estimate the fair value using the available observable inputs. The valuation techniques involve some level of management estimation and judgment, the degree of which is dependent on the price transparency for the instruments or market and the instruments complexity. To increase consistency and enhance disclosure of the fair value of financial instruments, the fair value measurement standard creates a fair value hierarchy to prioritize the inputs used to measure fair value into three categories. A financial instrument level within the fair value hierarchy is based on the lowest level of input significant to the fair value measurement, where Level 1 is the highest and Level 3 is the lowest. For more information regarding the fair value hierarchy, see Note 1 General and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this Form 10-K. New Accounting Pronouncements Effective January 1, 2009, we adopted new accounting provisions related to the following topics as a result of new accounting guidance issued by the Financial Accounting Standards Board ( FASB ). Fair Value Measurement of Nonfinancial Assets and liabilities on a Nonrecurring Basis . As explained above, we adopted the fair value accounting guidance for nonfinancial assets and liabilities. 126 Table of Contents Noncontrolling Interests in Consolidated Financial Statements . This guidance changed our accounting and reporting for minority interests, which are now classified as a component of equity and referred to as noncontrolling interests. This guidance resulted in the reclassification of minority interest previously classified outside of equity into equity with their title renamed to Noncontrolling Interests in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets and statement of changes in equity. Additionally, net income and comprehensive income attributable to noncontrolling interests are reflected separately from consolidated net income and comprehensive income in the accompanying consolidated statements of operations and statements of changes in equity. Financial statements for all periods presented in this form have been reclassified to conform to the new presentation requirements, as required by SEC regulations. Business Combinations This guidance has significantly changed how business acquisitions are accounted for at their acquisition date and in subsequent periods. The new guidance changes the accounting for the business combination at the acquisition date to a fair value based approach rather than the cost allocation approach previously used. Other differences include changes in the accounting for acquisition related costs, contingencies and income taxes. This new guidance is applicable prospectively for business combinations that occurred after January 1, 2009. Determination of the Useful Life of Intangible Assets . The new accounting guidance amended the factors we must consider when developing renewal or extension assumptions used to determine the useful life of a recognized intangible asset. The new guidance requires a consistent approach between the useful life of a recognized intangible asset and the period of expected cash flows used to measure the fair value of an asset as required under the business combination accounting guidance. In addition, enhanced disclosures are required when an intangible asset expected future cash flows are affected by an entity intent and/or ability to renew or extend the arrangement. The new guidance was applied prospectively and the adoption did not have a material impact on our financial condition, results of operations or cash flows. Equity Method Investment Accounting Considerations The new accounting guidance clarified the accounting for certain transactions and impairment considerations involving equity method investments. The adoption of this guidance, which was applied prospectively, did not have a significant impact on our current practice. Fair Value Measurement and Disclosures for Liabilities The new accounting guidance provided clarification that in circumstances in which a quoted price in an active market for the identical liability is not available, a reporting entity is required to measure fair value using either a valuation technique that uses the quoted price of the identical liability when traded as an asset or quoted prices for similar liabilities or similar liabilities when traded as assets or another valuation technique that is consistent with the fair value principles of the income approach or market approach. It also clarified that when estimating the fair value of a liability, a reporting entity is not required to include a separate input or adjustment to other inputs to reflect the existence of a restriction that prevents the transfer of the liability. The adoption of this guidance did not have a material impact on the Company financial statements. Accounting Pronouncements Issued But Not Yet Effective The following accounting standards have been issued, but as of December 31, 2009, are not yet effective for and have not been adopted by AES. ASU No. 2009-17, Consolidations, Improvements to Financial Reporting by Enterprises involved with Variable Interest Entities ( ASU No. 2009-17 ) (former FAS No. 167, Amendments to FASB Interpretation No. 46(R)) In June 2009, the FASB issued an amendment to the accounting and disclosure requirements for the consolidation of variable interest entities ( VIEs ). The amendment requires an entity to qualitatively, rather than quantitatively, assess the determination of the primary beneficiary of a VIE. This determination should be based on whether the entity has 127 Table of Contents the power to direct the activities that most significantly impact the economic performance of the VIE and the obligation to absorb losses or the right to receive benefits of the VIE that could potentially be significant to the VIE. Other key changes include: the requirement for an ongoing reconsideration of the primary beneficiary, the criteria for determining whether service provider or decision maker contracts are variable interests, the consideration of kick-out and removal rights in determining whether an entity is a VIE, the types of events that trigger the reassessment of whether an entity is a VIE and the expansion of the disclosures previously required. As a result of this guidance we will be required to consolidate the assets, liabilities and operating results of certain VIEs, including certain entities currently accounted for under the equity method of accounting, as further described below. It may also require the Company to deconsolidate certain VIEs that are currently consolidated. The impact of the adoption may be applied retrospectively with a cumulative-effect adjustment to retained earnings as of the beginning of the first year restated, or through a cumulative-effect adjustment on the date of adoption. This guidance is effective for fiscal years beginning after November 15, 2009, or January 1, 2010 for AES. Early adoption is prohibited. Based on its review to date, the Company has determined that an entity that had not been previously consolidated will be required to be consolidated upon the adoption of the new standard. Cartagena, the Company generation business in Spain, in which it has a 71% equity interest, is currently accounted for under the equity method of accounting and expected to be consolidated upon the adoption of the new VIE accounting guidance beginning in 2010. Total assets and revenue for Cartagena as of and for the year ended December 31, 2009 were $929 million and $147 million, respectively. The Company is still in the process of quantifying the expected impact of the cumulative adjustment to be recorded upon adoption of the new VIE guidance. AES is in the process of completing its review of the potential impact of the adoption of this guidance and may identify additional entities to consolidate or deconsolidate upon adoption in the first quarter of 2010. Capital Resources and Liquidity Overview As discussed in Highlights of 2009, the Company continued the initiatives started in 2007 to mitigate our refinancing risks and manage our liquidity at the Parent Company as well as our subsidiaries. These efforts included reducing our discretionary growth investments, amending certain of our credit facilities, issuing recourse debt, terminating our senior unsecured credit facility and reducing our planned spending for overhead and development expenses. In addition, in November 2009, the Company announced a binding stock purchase agreement with CIC, to sell 125.5 million shares of AES stock, representing a 15% ownership stake in the Company. The transaction is expected to close in the first half of 2010 and will generate $1.6 billion of new equity to fund future growth opportunities. As of December 31, 2009, the Company had unrestricted cash and cash equivalents of $1.8 billion and short term investments of $1.6 billion. In addition, we had restricted cash and debt service reserves of $1.0 billion. The Company also had non-recourse and recourse aggregate principal amounts of debt outstanding of $14.4 billion and $5.5 billion, respectively. Of the approximately $1.8 billion of our short-term non-recourse debt, $1.1 billion is presented as current because it is due in the next twelve months and $612 million relates to defaulted debt. We expect such current maturities will be repaid from net cash provided by operating activities of the subsidiary to which the debt relates or through opportunistic refinancing activity or some combination thereof. Approximately $214 million of our recourse debt matures within the next twelve months, which we expect to repay using cash on hand at the Parent Company or through net cash provided by operating activities. See further discussion of Parent Company Liquidity below. The Company has two types of debt reported on its balance sheet: non-recourse and recourse debt. Non-recourse debt is used to fund investments and capital expenditures for construction and acquisition of our electric power plants, wind projects and distribution facilities at our subsidiaries. Non-recourse debt is generally secured by the capital stock, physical assets, contracts and cash flows of the related subsidiary. The default risk is limited to the respective business and is without recourse to the Parent Company and other subsidiaries. Recourse 128 Table of Contents debt is direct borrowings by the Parent Company and is used to fund development, construction or acquisition, including funding for equity investments or to provide loans to the Parent Company subsidiaries or affiliates. This Parent Company debt is with recourse to the Parent Company and is structurally subordinated to the debt of the Parent Company subsidiaries or affiliates, except to the extent such subsidiaries or affiliates guarantee the Parent Company debt. We rely mainly on long-term debt obligations to fund our construction activities. We have, to the extent available at acceptable terms, utilized non-recourse debt to fund a significant portion of the capital expenditures and investments required to construct and acquire our electric power plants, distribution companies and related assets. Our non-recourse financing is designed to limit cross default risk to the Parent Company or other subsidiaries and affiliates. Our non-recourse long-term debt is a combination of fixed and variable interest rate instruments. Generally, a portion or all of the variable rate debt is fixed through the use of interest rate swaps. In addition, the debt is typically denominated in the currency that matches the currency of the revenue expected to be generated from the benefiting project, thereby reducing currency risk. In certain cases the currency is matched through the use of derivative instruments. The majority of our non-recourse debt is funded by international commercial banks, with debt capacity supplemented by multilaterals and local regional banks. For more information on our long-term debt, see Note 10 Debt to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K. Given our long-term debt obligations, the Company is subject to interest rate risk on debt balances that accrue interest at variable rates. When possible, the Company will borrow funds at fixed interest rates or hedge its variable rate debt to fix its interest costs on such obligations. In addition, the Company has historically tried to maintain at least 70% of its consolidated long-term obligations at fixed interest rates, including fixing the interest rate through the use of interest rate swaps. These efforts apply to the notional amount of the swaps compared to the amount of related underlying debt. While the Company believes that this represents an economic hedge, the Company is required to mark-to-market all of these interest rate swaps and other derivatives. Presently, the Parent Company only exposure to variable interest rate debt relates to indebtedness under its senior secured credit facilities. On a consolidated basis, of the Company $19.9 billion of total debt outstanding as of December 31, 2009, approximately $4.0 billion bore interest at variable rates that were not subject to a derivative instrument which fixed the interest rate. In addition to utilizing non-recourse debt at a subsidiary level when available, the Parent Company provides a portion, or in certain instances all, of the remaining long-term financing or credit required to fund development, construction or acquisition of a particular project. These investments have generally taken the form of equity investments or intercompany loans, which are subordinated to the project non-recourse loans. We generally obtain the funds for these investments from our cash flows from operations, proceeds from the sales of assets and/or the proceeds from our issuances of debt, common stock and other securities. Similarly, in certain of our businesses, the Parent Company may provide financial guarantees or other credit support for the benefit of counterparties who have entered into contracts for the purchase or sale of electricity with our subsidiaries or lenders. In such circumstances, if a subsidiary defaults on its payment or supply obligation, the Parent Company will be responsible for the subsidiary obligations up to the amount provided for in the relevant guarantee or other credit support. At December 31, 2009, the Parent Company had provided outstanding financial and performance-related guarantees or other credit support commitments to or for the benefit of our subsidiaries, which were limited by the terms of the agreements, of approximately $410 million in aggregate (excluding investment commitments and those collateralized by letters of credit and other obligations discussed below). As a result of the Parent Company below investment grade rating, counterparties may be unwilling to accept our general unsecured commitments to provide credit support. Accordingly, with respect to both new and existing commitments, the Parent Company may be required to provide some other form of assurance, such as a letter of credit, to backstop or replace our credit support. The Parent Company may not be able to provide adequate assurances to such counterparties. To the extent we are required and able to provide letters of credit or other collateral to such counterparties, this will reduce the amount of credit available to us to meet our other 129 Table of Contents liquidity needs. At December 31, 2009, we had $204 million in letters of credit outstanding, which operate to guarantee performance relating to certain project development activities and subsidiary operations. These letters of credit were provided under the senior secured credit facility. During 2009, the Company paid letter of credit fees ranging from 1.63% to 13.34% per annum on the outstanding amounts. We expect to continue to seek, where possible, non-recourse debt financing in connection with the assets or businesses that our affiliates or we may develop, construct or acquire. However, depending on local and global market conditions and the unique characteristics of individual businesses, non-recourse debt may not be available or may not be available on economically attractive terms. See Global Recession discussion above. If we decide not to provide any additional funding or credit support to a subsidiary project that is under construction or has near-term debt payment obligations and that subsidiary is unable to obtain additional non-recourse debt, such subsidiary may become insolvent, and we may lose our investment in that subsidiary. Additionally, if any of our subsidiaries lose a significant customer, the subsidiary may need to withdraw from a project or restructure the non-recourse debt financing. If we or the subsidiary choose not to proceed with a project or are unable to successfully complete a restructuring of the non-recourse debt, we may lose our investment in that subsidiary. Many of our subsidiaries depend on timely and continued access to capital markets to manage their liquidity needs. The inability to raise capital on favorable terms, to refinance existing indebtedness or to fund operations and other commitments during times of political or economic uncertainty may have material adverse effects on the financial condition and results of operations of those subsidiaries. In addition, changes in the timing of tariff increases or delays in the regulatory determinations under the relevant concessions could affect the cash flows and results of operations of our businesses. As of December 31, 2009, the Company has approximately $301 million of trade accounts receivable related to some of its generation businesses in Latin America classified as other long-term assets. These consist primarily of trade accounts receivable that, pursuant to amended agreements or government resolutions, have collection periods that extend beyond December 31, 2010, or one year past the balance sheet date. All payments are being received as scheduled and the Company expects all of these receivables to be fully collectible. Additionally, the current portion of these trade accounts receivable was $137 million at December 31, 2009. AES Solar, one of our equity investments, was formed in March 2008 as a joint venture with Riverstone. Under the terms of the AES Solar joint venture agreement, the Company and Riverstone may each provide up to $500 million of capital through 2013. AES Solar has commitments to purchase solar panels for use in their business and, while the Company is not required to fund AES Solar obligations, it is possible that if we decide not to fund the joint venture in the future it could impact AES Solar development plans or operations. On September 15, 2009, the Company filed a registration statement on Form S-3 with the SEC which will allow the Company to quickly access the capital markets to sell any of a variety of debt and/or equity securities in order to fund refinancings, new investments such as development projects and/or acquisitions, working capital or general corporate purposes. The Form S-3 may also be used to register the resale of securities offered in a private offering of securities. Capital Expenditures The Company spent $2.5 billion, $2.9 billion and $2.5 billion on capital expenditures in 2009, 2008 and 2007, respectively. A significant majority of these costs were funded with non-recourse debt consistent with our financial strategy. At December 31, 2009, the Company had a total of $1.1 billion of availability under long-term non-recourse construction credit facilities. As more fully described in Operational Challenges and Global Recession above, we have taken steps to decrease the amount of new discretionary capital spending. We expect to continue funding projects that are currently in the construction phase using existing capital provided by these non-recourse credit facilities as supplemented by internally generated cash flows, Parent Company liquidity, contribution from existing or new partners and other funding sources. As a result, property, plant and equipment and 130 Table of Contents long-term non-recourse debt are expected to increase over the next few years even though the rate of discretionary spending has been decreased. While we believe we have the resources to continue funding the projects in construction, there can be no assurances that we will continue to fund all these existing construction efforts. As of December 31, 2009, the Parent Company had $91 million in commitments to invest in our subsidiaries projects under construction and to purchase related equipment, excluding $149 million of such obligations already included in the letters of credits discussed above. The Company expects to fund these net investment commitments over time according to the following schedule: $77 million in 2010, $14 million in 2011 and no investments in 2012. The exact payment schedules will be dictated by the construction milestones. We expect to fund these commitments from a combination of current liquidity and internally generated Parent Company cash flow. Environmental Capital Expenditures The Company continues to assess the possible need for capital expenditures associated with international, federal, regional and state regulation of GHG emissions from electric power generation facilities. Legislation and regulations regarding GHG emissions, if enacted, may place significant costs on GHG emissions from fossil fuel-fired electric power generation facilities, particularly coal-fired facilities, and in order to comply, CO 2 emitting facilities may be required to purchase additional GHG emissions allowances or offsets under cap-and-trade programs, pay a carbon tax or install new pollution-control equipment to capture and reduce the amount of GHG emitted from the facilities, in the event that reliable technology to do so is developed. The capital expenditures required to comply with any future GHG legislation and regulations could be significant and unless such costs can be passed on to customers or counterparties, such regulations could impair the profitability of some of the electric power generation facilities operated by our subsidiaries or render certain of them uneconomical to operate, either of which could have a material adverse effect on our consolidated results of operations and financial condition. With respect to our operations outside the United States, certain of the businesses operated by the Company subsidiaries are subject to compliance with EU ETS and the Kyoto Protocol in certain countries and other country-specific programs to regulate GHG emissions. To date, compliance with the Kyoto Protocol and EU ETS has not had a material adverse effect on the Company consolidated results of operations, financial condition and cash flows because of, among other factors, the cost of GHG emission allowances and/or the ability of our businesses to pass the cost of purchasing such allowances on to customers or counterparties. However, in the event that such counterparties or regulatory authorities challenge our ability to pass these costs on, there can be no assurance that the Company and/or the relevant subsidiary would prevail in any such dispute. Furthermore, even if the Company and/or the relevant subsidiary does prevail, it would be subject to the cost and administrative burden associated with such dispute. As discussed in Item 1 Business Regulatory Matters Environmental and Land Use Regulations , in the United States there presently are no federal laws or regulations regulating GHG emissions, although several legislative proposals are currently under consideration. In 2009, the Company subsidiaries operated businesses which had total approximate CO 2 emissions of 74.2 million metric tonnes (ownership adjusted). Approximately 39.7 million metric tonnes of the 74.2 million metric tonnes were emitted in the U.S. (both figures ownership adjusted). Approximately 9.7 million metric tonnes were emitted in U.S. states participating in the RGGI. At this time, the federal legislative proposals under consideration applicable to electric power generation facilities generally incorporate market-based cap-and-trade programs which authorize facilities to comply through the acquisition of emissions allowances in lieu of capital expenditures. Certain of the states, either alone or as part of a regional initiative, in which our subsidiaries operate are in the process of developing programs to reduce GHG emissions, primarily CO 2 , from the electric power generation facilities through cap-and-trade programs, which would allow CO 2 emitting facilities to comply by purchasing additional GHG emission allowances or offsets under cap-and-trade programs or by installing new pollution-control equipment to capture and reduce the amount of GHG emitted from the facilities, in the event that reliable technology to do so is developed. We believe that legislative or regulatory actions, if enacted, may require a material increase in capital expenditures at our subsidiaries. 131 Table of Contents In the future the actual impact on our subsidiaries capital expenditures from any potential federal program to regulate and reduce GHG emissions, if enacted, and the state and regional programs in the process of development, will depend on a number of factors, including among others, the GHG reductions required under any such legislation or regulations, the price and availability of offsets, the extent to which our subsidiaries would be entitled to receive GHG emission allowances without having to purchase them, the quantity of allowances which our subsidiaries would have to purchase, the price of allowances, our subsidiaries ability to recover or pass-through costs incurred to comply with any legislative or regulatory requirements that are ultimately imposed and the use of market-based compliance options such as cap-and-trade programs. Another factor is the success of our climate solutions business, which may generate credits that will help offset our GHG emissions. However, as set forth in the Risk Factor titled Our renewable energy projects and other initiatives face considerable uncertainties including development, operational and regulatory challenges, there is no guarantee that the climate solutions business will be successful. Even if our climate solutions business is successful, the level of benefit is unclear with regard to the impact of legislation or regulation concerning GHG emissions. Potential Sources of Capital On November 6, 2009 we entered into a stock purchase agreement with an affiliate of CIC in which the Company agreed to sell 125.5 million shares of the Company common stock for $12.60 per share, for an aggregate purchase price of $1.58 billion. After this sale, these shares will represent approximately a 15% interest in the Company. The closing of the sale is subject to certain regulatory approvals and is expected to close in the first half of 2010. Additionally, in November 2009, the Company announced the signing of a letter of intent with an affiliate of CIC to raise an additional $571 million of equity for an approximate 35% interest in our wind generation business. In December 2009, the Company announced agreements to sell our entire interests in our businesses in Oman and Pakistan for approximately $200 million. These deals are expected to close in the first half of 2010. Consolidated Cash Flows At December 31, 2009, cash and cash equivalents increased $928 million from December 31, 2008 to $1.8 billion. The increase in cash and cash equivalents was due to $2.2 billion of cash provided by operating activities, $1.9 billion of cash used for investing activities, $610 million of cash provided by financing activities and the favorable effect of foreign currency exchange rates on cash of $22 million. At December 31, 2008, cash and cash equivalents decreased $1.2 billion from December 31, 2007 to $881 million. The decrease in cash and cash equivalents was due to $2.2 billion of cash provided by operating activities, $3.6 billion of cash used for investing activities, $362 million of cash provided by financing activities and the unfavorable effect of foreign currency exchange rates on cash of $96 million. $ Change 2009 2008 2007 2009 vs. 2008 2008 vs. 2007 (in millions) Net cash provided by operating activities $ 2,213 $ 2,161 $ 2,354 $ 52 $ (193 ) Net cash used in investing activities $ 1,917 $ 3,581 $ 1,970 $ (1,664 ) $ 1,611 Net cash provided by financing activities $ 610 $ 362 $ 244 $ 248 $ 118 Operating Activities Net cash provided by operating activities increased $52 million to $2.2 billion during 2009 compared to $2.2 billion during 2008. This net increase was primarily due to the following: an increase of $238 million at our Latin American Generation businesses due to improved working capital management; and 132 Table of Contents an increase of $188 million at our Asia Generation businesses due to improved working capital management and improved gross margin; an increase of $85 million at our Europe Generation businesses primarily due to the collection of the $80 million Kazakhstan management performance incentive bonus in the first quarter 2009; offset by a decrease of $391 million at our Latin American Utilities businesses due to increased working capital requirements, including the payment on the settlement of a swap agreement, increased tax payments associated with a tax amnesty program and increased payments related to the settlement of contingencies and energy purchases, partially offset by increased operating results; and a decrease of $77 million at our North America Generation businesses, primarily due to reduced operating results. Investing Activities Net cash used for investing activities decreased $1.7 billion to $1.9 billion during 2009 compared to net cash used of $3.6 billion during 2008. This decrease was largely attributable to the following: a decrease of $330 million in capital expenditures to $2.5 billion primarily from an overall decrease in expenditures of $227 million at Maritza in Bulgaria, $143 million for our U.S. wind generation projects, $74 million in Brazil, and $64 million in Jordan, partially offset by an increase of $161 million for plant construction at Gener; a decrease of $1.1 billion of acquisitions as a result of no acquisitions in 2009. In 2008, acquisitions consisted primarily of the purchase of Masinloc, a 660 gross MW coal-fired thermal power generation facility purchased during the second quarter of 2008 for approximately $930 million, as discussed in Note 22 Acquisitions and Dispositions to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K. We also acquired Mountain View in the U.S. during the first quarter of 2008; a decrease of $1.3 billion in proceeds from the sales of businesses to $2 million in 2009. The proceeds in 2008 included $1.1 billion from the sale of Ekibastuz and Maikuben, $171 million in net proceeds from the sale of a 10% ownership interest in AES Gener and $73 million in proceeds from the sale of Jiaozuo; a decrease of $597 million from the sale of short-term investments, net of purchases, including increases in net sales of $553 million at our Brazilian subsidiaries, to fund dividend payments. In addition, there was an increase in net sales of $184 million and $78 million at Alicura in Argentina and Masinloc, respectively, due to maturities of investments and an increase in net sales of $79 million at IPALCO as a result of IPL variable rate demand notes being successfully remarketed. This was partially offset by a $317 million increase in net purchases at Gener related to the purchase of time deposits; a $302 million decrease in restricted cash in 2009 including decreases of $216 million at Gener from the use of the proceeds raised in the fourth quarter of 2008 that were restricted to use only for the purchase of additional shares in the first quarter of 2009 to fund future construction, $72 million at Chigen used for debt repayment, and $41 million in New York, partially offset by an increase of $39 million at Masinloc; and a $134 million reduction in cash used for advances to affiliate and equity investments, loan advances and other investing activities. 133 Table of Contents Financing Activities: Net cash provided by financing activities increased $248 million to $610 million during 2009 compared to $362 million during 2008. This increase was primarily attributable to the following: a decrease in net borrowings under revolving credit facilities of $287 million primarily from increased net repayments of $172 million at Lal Pir/Pak Gen in Pakistan due to off-taker collections, $64 million due to increased net repayments at IPALCO to pay off a line of credit in 2009, and a $22 million reduction in net borrowings at Panama for project financing; a decrease of $283 million from issuances of recourse and non-recourse debt primarily due to decreases in the issuance of non-recourse debt of $603 million at Masinloc, $262 million at IPL, and $10 million at our wind development projects at our U.S. businesses in 2009. These decreases were partially offset by increases in the issuance of non-recourse debt of $347 million at Eletropaulo and $316 million at Gener; a $1,135 million decrease in repayments of recourse debt and non-recourse debt, predominantly due to decreases in repayments of recourse debt of $883 million at the Parent Company and non-recourse debt of $257 million at IPL; partially offset by a $249 million increase in distributions to noncontrolling interests, primarily due to $120 million higher dividends distributions at Eletropaulo and $110 million higher dividends declared to noncontrolling interests at Brasiliana Energia; and a $220 million decrease in contributions from noncontrolling interests primarily due to a reduction of $201 million at our U.S. wind generation projects. Contractual Obligations A summary of our contractual obligations, commitments and other liabilities as of December 31, 2009 is presented in the table below (in millions): Contractual Obligations Total Less than 1 year 1-3 years 4-5 years 5 years and more Other Footnote Reference Debt Obligations (1) $ 19,841 $ 1,960 $ 2,588 $ 3,687 $ 11,606 $ 10 Interest Payments on Long- Term Debt (2) 10,254 1,405 2,595 2,114 4,140 n/a Capital Lease Obligations (3) 204 14 25 19 146 11 Operating Lease Obligations (4) 477 55 80 78 264 11 Sale Leaseback Obligations (5) 704 41 87 93 483 11 Electricity Obligations (6) 55,198 2,403 5,794 5,603 41,398 11 Fuel Obligations (7) 10,148 1,681 1,813 1,285 5,369 11 Other Purchase Obligations (8) 17,879 2,217 2,500 1,748 11,414 11 Other Long-term Liabilities Reflected on AES Consolidated Balance Sheet under GAAP (9) 810 66 186 75 390 93 n/a Total $ 115,515 $ 9,842 $ 15,668 $ 14,702 $ 75,210 $ 93 (1) Includes recourse and non-recourse debt presented on the Consolidated Financial Statements. Non-recourse debt borrowings are not a direct obligation of AES, the Parent Company. Recourse debt represents the direct borrowings of AES, the Parent Company. See Note 10 Debt to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K which provides additional disclosure regarding these obligations. These amounts exclude capital lease obligations which are included in the capital lease category, see (3) below. (2) Interest payments are estimated based on final maturity dates of debt securities outstanding at December 31, 2009 and do not reflect anticipated future refinancing, early redemptions or new debt issuances. Variable rate interest obligations are estimated based on rates as of December 31, 2009. 134 Table of Contents (3) Several AES subsidiaries have leases for operating and office equipment and vehicles that are classified as capital leases within Property, Plant and Equipment. Minimum contractual obligations include $129 million of imputed interest. (4) The Company was obligated under long-term non-cancelable operating leases, primarily for office rental and site leases. These amounts exclude amounts related to the sale/leaseback discussed below in item (5). (5) Sale/Leaseback Obligations represent a sales/leaseback with operating lease treatment at one of our New York subsidiaries. (6) Operating subsidiaries of the Company have entered into contracts for the purchase of electricity from third parties. (7) Operating subsidiaries of the Company have entered into fuel purchase contracts subject to termination only in certain limited circumstances. (8) Amounts relate to other contractual obligations where the Company has an enforceable and legally binding agreement to purchase goods or services that specifies all significant terms, including: quantity, pricing, and approximate timing. These amounts include planned capital expenditures that are contractually obligated. (9) These amounts do not include current liabilities on the Consolidated Balance Sheet except for the current portion of uncertain tax obligations. See the indicated notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K for additional information on the items excluded. Derivatives (See Note 5 Derivative Instruments) and incentive compensation are excluded as the Company is not able to reasonably estimate the timing or amount of the future payments. In addition, the amounts do not include: (1) regulatory liabilities (See Note 9 Regulatory Assets and Liabilities), (2) contingencies (See Note 12 Contingencies), (3) pension and other post retirement employee benefit liabilities (see Note 13 Benefit Plans) or (4) any taxes (See Note 20 Income Taxes) except for uncertain tax obligations. Noncurrent uncertain tax obligations are reflected in the Other column of the table above as the Company is not able to reasonably estimate the timing of the future payments. Parent Company Liquidity The following discussion of Parent Company Liquidity has been included because we believe it is a useful measure of the liquidity available to The AES Corporation, or the Parent Company, given the non-recourse nature of most of our indebtedness. Parent Company liquidity as outlined below is a non-GAAP measure and should not be construed as an alternative to cash and cash equivalents which are determined in accordance with GAAP, as a measure of liquidity. Cash and cash equivalents are disclosed in the Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows and the parent only unconsolidated statements of cash flows in Schedule I of this Form 10-K. Parent Company liquidity may differ from similarly titled measures used by other companies. The principal sources of liquidity at the Parent Company level are: dividends and other distributions from our subsidiaries, including refinancing proceeds; proceeds from debt and equity financings at the Parent Company level, including borrowings under our credit facilities; and proceeds from asset sales. Cash requirements at the Parent Company level are primarily to fund: interest; principal repayments of debt; acquisitions; construction commitments; other equity commitments; taxes; and Parent Company overhead and development costs. 135 Table of Contents The Company defines Parent Company Liquidity as cash available to the Parent Company plus available borrowings under existing credit facilities. The cash held at qualified holding companies represents cash sent to subsidiaries of the Company domiciled outside of the U.S. Such subsidiaries have no contractual restrictions on their ability to send cash to the Parent Company. Parent Company Liquidity is reconciled to its most directly comparable U.S. GAAP financial measure, cash and cash equivalents at December 31, 2009 and 2008 as follows: Parent Company Liquidity 2009 2008 (in millions) Cash and cash equivalents $ 1,809 $ 881 Less: Cash and cash equivalents at subsidiaries 1,132 634 Parent and qualified holding companies cash and cash equivalents 677 247 Commitments under Parent credit facilities 785 1,350 Less: Borrowings and letters of credit under the credit facilities (204 ) (207 ) Borrowings available under Parent credit facilities 581 1,143 Total Parent Company Liquidity $ 1,258 $ 1,390 Recourse Debt Transactions: On March 26, 2009, the Parent Company and certain subsidiary guarantors amended the Parent Company existing senior secured credit facility pursuant to the terms of Amendment No. 1 ( Amendment No. 1 ) to the Fourth Amended and Restated Credit and Reimbursement Agreement, dated as of July 29, 2008 (the senior secured credit facility ). The senior secured credit facility previously included a $200 million term loan facility maturing on August 10, 2011 and a $750 million revolving credit facility maturing on June 23, 2010 (the revolving credit facility ). The principal modification set forth in Amendment No. 1 was a one-year extension of $570 million of revolving credit facility commitments from an original maturity date of June 23, 2010 to July 5, 2011. In addition, certain lenders determined that they would increase their commitment under the revolving credit facility by $35 million from March 26, 2009 through July 5, 2011. Accordingly, Amendment No. 1 increased the size of the revolving credit facility from $750 million to $785 million through June 23, 2010. From June 23, 2010 through July 5, 2011, the revolving credit facility size will be $605 million. No modifications were made to the amount or maturity date of the $200 million term loan facility. The extended commitments from this amendment were subject to new pricing that included an upfront fee of 1.25% for participating in the extensions and an increase in undrawn commitment fees from 50 to 100 basis points. The annual interest rate on the drawn loans was also increased by 200 basis points to LIBOR plus 3.50%. Pricing and all other material terms remain unchanged for the revolving credit facility commitments which have not been extended. On April 2, 2009 the Parent Company issued $535 million aggregate principal amount of 9.75% senior unsecured notes due 2016 in a private placement. The notes were priced at a discount to yield 11%. Subsequently, the Parent Company allocated a substantial portion of the proceeds to voluntarily reduce the size of its $600 million senior unsecured credit facility among the Parent Company, Merrill Lynch Bank USA and the banks party thereto (the senior unsecured credit facility ). The majority of the letters of credit issued under the facility supported a project under construction in Bulgaria. On October 7, 2009, the Parent Company voluntarily reduced all of the remaining commitments available under the senior unsecured credit facility and terminated the facility agreement. As a result of the termination, the Company recognized a foreign currency transaction gain of $20 million in the fourth quarter of 2009 related to the sale of Euro purchased as collateral at the inception of the facility. The outstanding letters of credit under the senior unsecured credit facility were transferred to the senior secured credit facility. 136 Table of Contents Recourse Debt: Our recourse debt at year-end was approximately $5.5 billion, $5.2 billion, and $5.6 billion in 2009, 2008 and 2007, respectively. The following table sets forth our Parent Company contingent contractual obligations as of December 31, 2009: Contingent contractual obligations Amount Number of Agreements Maximum Exposure Range for Each Agreement (in millions) (in millions) Guarantees $ 410 31 <$ 1 - $53 Letters of credit under the senior secured credit facility 204 26 <$ 1 - $120 Total $ 614 57 As of December 31, 2009, the Company had $91 million of commitments to invest in subsidiaries under construction and to purchase related equipment, excluding $149 million of such obligations already included in the letters of credit discussed above. The Company expects to fund these net investment commitments over time according to the following schedule: $77 million in 2010, $14 million in 2011 and no investments in 2012. The exact payment schedules will be dictated by the construction milestones. We expect to fund these commitments from a combination of current liquidity and internally generated Parent Company cash flow. We have a diverse portfolio of performance related contingent contractual obligations. These obligations are designed to cover potential risks and only require payment if certain targets are not met or certain contingencies occur. The risks associated with these obligations include change of control, construction cost overruns, subsidiary default, political risk, tax indemnities, spot market power prices, supplies support and liquidated damages under power sales agreements for projects in development, in operation and under construction. While we do not expect that we will be required to fund any material amounts under these contingent contractual obligations during 2010 or beyond, many of the events which would give rise to such obligations are beyond our control. We can provide no assurance that we will be able to fund our obligations under these contingent contractual obligations if we are required to make substantial payments thereunder. While we believe that our sources of liquidity will be adequate to meet our needs for the foreseeable future, this belief is based on a number of material assumptions, including, without limitation, assumptions about our ability to access the capital markets (see Operational Challenges and Global Recession ), the operating and financial performance of our subsidiaries, currency exchange rates, power market pool prices, and the ability of our subsidiaries to pay dividends. In addition, our subsidiaries ability to declare and pay cash dividends to us (at the Parent Company level) is subject to certain limitations contained in loans, governmental provisions and other agreements. We can provide no assurance that these sources will be available when needed or that the actual cash requirements will not be greater than anticipated. We have met our interim needs for shorter-term and working capital financing at the Parent Company level with our senior secured credit facility. See Item 1A. Risk Factors, The AES Corporation is a holding company and its ability to make payments on its outstanding indebtedness, including its public debt securities, is dependent upon the receipt of funds from its subsidiaries by way of dividends, fees, interest, loans or otherwise . of this Form 10-K. Various debt instruments at the Parent Company level, including our senior secured credit facility, contain certain restrictive covenants. The covenants provide for, among other items: limitations on other indebtedness, liens, investments and guarantees; limitations on dividends, stock repurchases and other equity transactions; restrictions and limitations on mergers and acquisitions, sales of assets, leases, transactions with affiliates and off-balance sheet and derivative arrangements; 137 Table of Contents maintenance of certain financial ratios; and financial and other reporting requirements. As of December 31, 2009, we were in compliance with these covenants. Non-Recourse Debt: While the lenders under our non-recourse debt financings generally do not have direct recourse to the Parent Company, defaults thereunder can still have important consequences for our results of operations and liquidity, including, without limitation: reducing our cash flows as the subsidiary will typically be prohibited from distributing cash to the parent level during the time period of any default; triggering our obligation to make payments under any financial guarantee, letter of credit or other credit support we have provided to or on behalf of such subsidiary; causing us to record a loss in the event the lender forecloses on the assets; and triggering defaults in our outstanding debt at the parent level. For example, our senior secured credit facilities and outstanding debt securities at the parent level include events of default for certain bankruptcy related events involving material subsidiaries. In addition, our revolving credit agreement at the parent level includes events of default related to payment defaults and accelerations of outstanding debt of material subsidiaries. Some of our subsidiaries are currently in default with respect to all or a portion of their outstanding indebtedness. The total non-recourse debt classified as current in the accompanying Consolidated Balance Sheets amounts to $1.8 billion. The portion of current debt related to such defaults was $612 million at December 31, 2009, all of which was non-recourse debt related to four subsidiaries Sonel, Jordan, Kelanitissa and Ebute. None of the subsidiaries that are currently in default are subsidiaries that currently meet the applicable definition of materiality in AES corporate debt agreements in order for such defaults to trigger an event of default or permit acceleration under such indebtedness. At December 31, 2009, none of our subsidiaries that are currently in default met the definition of material subsidiary under our recourse senior secured credit facility or other debt agreements. However, as a result of additional dispositions of assets, other significant reductions in asset carrying values or other matters in the future that may impact our financial position and results of operations or the financial position of the individual subsidiary, it is possible that one or more of these subsidiaries could fall within the definition of a material subsidiary and thereby upon an acceleration trigger an event of default and possible acceleration of the indebtedness under the AES Parent Company outstanding debt securities. Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements In May 1999, one of our subsidiaries acquired six electric generating plants from New York State Electric and Gas. Concurrently, the subsidiary sold two of the plants to an unrelated third party for $666 million and simultaneously entered into a leasing arrangement with the unrelated party. In May 2007, the subsidiary purchased a portion of the lessor interest in a trust estate that holds the leased plants. Future minimum lease commitments under the lease agreement have been reduced by the subsidiary interest in the plants. We have accounted for this transaction as a sale/leaseback transaction with operating lease treatment. We expense periodic lease payments as incurred, which amounted to $34 million, $34 million and $42 million for the years ended December 31, 2009, 2008 and 2007, respectively. We are not subject to any additional liabilities or contingencies if the arrangement terminates and we believe that the dissolution of the off-balance sheet arrangement would 138 Table of Contents have minimal effects on our operating cash flows. The terms of the lease include restrictive covenants such as the maintenance of certain coverage ratios. Historically, the plants have satisfied the restrictive covenants of the lease and there are no known trends or uncertainties that would indicate that the lease will be terminated early. See Note 11 Commitments to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K for a more complete discussion of this transaction. IPL, a consolidated subsidiary of the Company, formed IPL Funding Corporation ( IPL Funding ) in 1996 as a special purpose entity to purchase, on a revolving basis, the receivables originated by IPL. IPL Funding is not a qualified special purpose entity and is consolidated by IPL and IPALCO. IPL Funding entered into a sale facility with unrelated parties ( the Purchasers ) pursuant to which the Purchasers agree to purchase from IPL Funding, on a revolving basis, interests in the pool of receivables purchased from IPL up to the lesser of (1) an amount determined pursuant to the sale facility that takes into account certain eligibility requirements and reserves relating to the receivables, or (2) $50 million. Historically that amount has remained at $50 million, but during the fourth quarter of 2009, IPL eligible receivables balance was below $50 million and IPL was required to repay the Purchasers the shortfall, which was approximately $10 million as of December 31, 2009. As collections reduce accounts receivable included in the pool, IPL Funding sells ownership interests in additional receivables acquired from IPL to return the ownership interests sold to the maximum amount permitted by the sale facility. During the second quarter of 2009, this agreement was extended through May 25, 2010. Accounts receivable on the Company consolidated balance sheets are stated net of the $40 million and $50 million sold as of December 31, 2009 and 2008, respectively and include $88 million and $87 million as of December 31, 2009 and 2008, respectively, related to IPL Funding accounts receivable. IPL retains servicing responsibilities for its role as a collection agent on the amounts due on the sold receivables. However, the Purchasers assume the risk of collection on the purchased receivables without recourse to IPL in the event of a loss. While no direct recourse to IPL exists, it risks loss in the event collections are not sufficient to allow for full recovery of its retained interests. No servicing asset or liability is recognized since the servicing fee paid to IPL approximates a market rate. The carrying values of the retained interests are determined by allocating the carrying value of the receivables between the assets sold and the interests retained based on relative fair value. The key assumptions in estimating fair value are credit losses, the selection of discount rates and expected receivables turnover rate. The hypothetical effect on the fair value of the retained interests assuming both a 10% and a 20% unfavorable variation in credit losses or discount rates is not material due to the short turnover of receivables and historically low credit loss history. The losses recognized on the sales of receivables were $1 million, $2 million and $3 million for the years ended December 31, 2009, 2008 and 2007, respectively. These losses are included in other expense on the consolidated statements of operations. The amount of the losses recognized depends on the previous carrying amount of the financial assets involved in the transfer, allocated between the assets sold and the interests that continue to be held by the transferor based on their relative fair value at the date of transfer, and the proceeds received. There were no proceeds from new securitizations for each of the years ended December 31, 2009 and 2008. IPL Funding pays IPL annual service fees totaling $1 million, which is financed by capital contributions from IPL to IPL Funding. The following table shows the receivables sold and retained interests as of December 31, 2009 and 2008: 2009 2008 (in millions) Receivables at IPL Funding $ 128 $ 137 Less: Retained interests 88 87 Net receivables sold $ 40 $ 50 139 Table of Contents The following table shows the cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2009, 2008 and 2007: 2009 2008 2007 (in millions) Cash proceeds from interest retained $ 690 $ 623 $ 541 Cash proceeds from sold receivables $ 315 $ 363 $ 419 IPL and IPL Funding provide certain indemnities to the Purchasers, including indemnification in the event that there is a breach of representations and warranties made with respect to the purchased receivables. IPL Funding and IPL each have agreed to indemnify the Purchasers on an after-tax basis for any and all damages, losses, claims, liabilities, penalties, taxes, costs and expenses at any time imposed on or incurred by the indemnified parties arising out of, or otherwise relating to, the sale facility, subject to certain limitations as defined in the sale facility. Under the sale facility, if IPL fails to maintain certain financial covenants including, but not limited to interest coverage and debt to capital ratios, it would constitute a termination event. As of December 31, 2009, IPL was in compliance with such covenants. In the event that IPL credit rating falls below a threshold identified in the sale facility, the facility agent has the ability to replace IPL as the collection agent and declare a lock-box event. Under a lock-box event or a termination event, the facility agent has the ability to require all proceeds of purchased receivables of IPL to be directed to lock-box accounts within 45 days of notifying IPL. In addition, a termination event would also give the facility agent the option to take control of the lock-box account, give the Purchasers the option to discontinue the purchase of new receivables, and require all proceeds to be used to reduce the Purchaser investment and pay other amounts owed to the Purchasers and the facility agent. This could reduce the operating capital available to IPL by the aggregate amount of any purchased receivables up to $50 million. 140 Table of Contents 
