CIK: 874716
Company Name: IDEXX LABORATORIES INC DE
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2011-02-22


ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS Description of Segments . During 2010, we operated primarily through three business segments: diagnostic and information technology-based products and services for the veterinary market, which we refer to as the Companion Animal Group ( CAG ), water quality products ( Water ) and products for livestock and poultry health, which we refer to as the Livestock and Poultry Diagnostics ( LPD ). Prior to the second quarter of 2010, we referred to LPD as our Production Animal Segment. We also operate two smaller segments that comprise products for milk quality ( Dairy ) and products for the human point-of-care medical diagnostic market ( OPTI Medical ). Financial information about the Dairy and OPTI Medical operating segments and other licensing arrangements is combined and presented in an Other category because they do not meet the quantitative or qualitative thresholds for reportable segments. See Note 15 to the consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2010 included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for financial information about our segments, including geographic information, and about our product and service categories. Items that are not allocated to our operating segments are comprised primarily of corporate research and development expenses that do not align with one of our existing business or service categories, a portion of share-based compensation expense, interest income and expense, and income taxes. In our segment disclosure of gross profit, operating expenses and operating income, these amounts are shown under the caption Unallocated Amounts. We estimate our share-based compensation expense for the year and allocate the estimated expense to the operating segments. This allocation differs from the actual expense and consequently yields a difference between the total allocated share-based compensation expense and the actual expense for the total company resulting in an unallocated amount reported under the Unallocated Category. The following is a discussion of the strategic and operating factors that we believe have the most significant effect on the performance of our business. Companion Animal Group In the CAG segment, we believe we have developed a strategic advantage over companies with more narrow product or service offerings. The breadth and complementary nature of our products and services give us scale in sales and distribution, permit us to offer integrated disease-management diagnostic solutions that leverage the advantages of both point-of-care and outside laboratory testing, and facilitate the flow of medical and business information in the veterinary practice by connecting practice information software systems with reference laboratory test data, in-clinic test data from our IDEXX VetLab suite of analyzers and rapid assay tests, and radiographic data from the IDEXX-PACS and IDEXX EquiView PACS software generated by our digital radiography systems. Instruments and Consumables . Our strategy in our IDEXX VetLab instrument line of business is to provide veterinarians with an integrated set of instruments that, individually and together, provide superior diagnostic information and performance features, enabling veterinarians to practice better medicine and improve practice efficiency and, in doing so, achieve their practice economic objectives, including growth and profitability. We derive substantial revenues and margins from the sale of consumables that are used in these instruments. Additionally, we offer extended maintenance agreements in connection with the sale of our instruments. During the early stage of an instrument life cycle, we derive relatively greater revenues from instrument placements, while consumable sales become relatively more significant in later stages as the installed base of instruments increases and instrument placement revenues begin to decline. Instrument sales have significantly lower gross margins than sales of consumables, and therefore the mix of instrument and consumable sales in a particular period will impact our gross margins in this line of business. 26 Our Catalyst Dx analyzer is our latest generation chemistry analyzer, which was launched in the first quarter of 2008. In addition, we continue to place VetTest instruments through sales, lease, rental and other programs, with substantially all of our revenues from that product line currently derived from consumable sales. The two chemistry analyzers provide for an active installed base of approximately 31,000 units. A substantial portion of 2010 Catalyst Dx analyzer placements were to veterinary clinics that already own our VetTest analyzer, however, an increasing number of placements were to competitive accounts in comparison to 2009. As we continue to experience growth in sales of Catalyst Dx analyzers and the related consumables, we expect to see a decline in the sales of VetTest consumables. Based on projections of future sales volume and the average unit price of consumables used in the Catalyst Dx and VetTest analyzers, we do not expect a future shift to Catalyst Dx consumables to significantly impact gross margin percentage. We do, however, expect near-term downward pressure on gross margin percentage in the instruments and consumables business due to higher relative instrument placement revenues as compared to consumables sales with continued penetration of the Catalyst Dx analyzer. Our long-term success in this area of our business is dependent upon new customer acquisition, customer loyalty and retention and customer utilization of existing and new assays introduced for use on our analyzers. To increase utilization, we seek to educate veterinarians about best medical practices that emphasize the importance of blood and urine chemistry testing for a variety of diagnostic purposes. Utilization can increase either by an increased number of patient samples being run or by an increase in the quantity of instrument consumables used per patient sample. Our strategy is to increase both parameters. The ProCyte Dx analyzer is our latest generation hematology analyzer, which we launched in the third quarter of 2010. In addition we sell the LaserCyte analyzer and VetAutoread analyzer. A substantial portion of ProCyte Dx placements have been made at veterinary clinics that already own a LaserCyte analyzer and a substantial portion of LaserCyte placements continue to be made at veterinary clinics that already own our VetAutoread analyzer. Growth in sales of hematology consumables is attributable to an increase in the installed base of our LaserCyte and ProCyte Dx analyzers. With all of our instrument lines, we seek to differentiate our products from those of other in-clinic instrument manufacturers and reference laboratory diagnostic service providers based on time-to-result, ease-of-use, throughput, breadth of diagnostic menu, flexibility of menu selection, accuracy, reliability, ability to handle compromised samples, analytical capability of software, integration with the IDEXX VetLab Station, education and training, and superior sales and customer service. Our success depends, in part, on our ability to differentiate our products in a way that justifies a premium price. Rapid Assay Products . Our rapid assay line of business consists primarily of single-use kits for point-of-care testing and, to a limited degree, microwell-based kits for laboratory testing for canine and feline diseases and conditions. Our rapid assay strategy is to develop, manufacture, market and sell proprietary tests that address important medical needs for particular diseases prevalent in the companion animal population. We seek to differentiate our tests from those of other in-clinic test providers and reference laboratory diagnostic service providers through ease-of-use and superior performance, including by providing our customers with combination tests that test a single sample for multiple analytes. Where alternative point-of-care offerings exist, we seek to differentiate our tests with superior performance. As in our other lines of business, we also seek to differentiate our products through superior customer service. We further augment our product development and customer service efforts with sales and marketing programs that enhance medical awareness and understanding regarding certain diseases and the importance of diagnostic testing. We also seek to enhance the attractiveness of our tests by providing the SNAPshot Dx analyzer, which automatically reads certain SNAP test results, and records those results in the electronic medical record. We are currently working on enhancing the functionality of the SNAPshot Dx analyzer to read the results of additional tests from our canine and feline family of rapid assay products. Veterinary Reference Laboratory Diagnostic and Consulting Services . We believe that more than half of all diagnostic testing by U.S. veterinarians is provided by outside reference laboratories such as our IDEXX Reference Laboratories. In markets outside the U.S., in-clinic testing is less prevalent and an even greater percentage of diagnostic testing is done in reference laboratories. We attempt to differentiate our reference laboratory testing services from those of our competitors and in-clinic offerings primarily on the basis of quality, customer service, technology employed and specialized test menu. Revenue growth in this line of business is achieved both through increased sales to existing customers and through the acquisition of new customers, including through reference laboratory acquisitions, customer list acquisitions and the opening of new reference laboratories, including laboratories that are co-located with large practice customers. Profitability of this business is largely the result of our ability to achieve efficiencies from both volume and operational improvements. New laboratories that we open typically will operate at a loss until testing volumes reach a level that permits profitability. Acquired laboratories frequently operate less profitably than our existing laboratories and those laboratories may not achieve profitability comparable to our existing laboratories for several years until we complete the implementation of operating improvements and efficiencies. Therefore, in the short term, new and acquired reference laboratories generally will have a negative effect on the operating margin of the reference laboratory diagnostic and consulting services line of business. 27 Practice Information Systems and Digital Radiography . Our strategy in the practice information systems line of business is to provide superior integrated information solutions, backed by superior customer support and education, to allow the veterinarian to practice better medicine and achieve the practice business objectives, including superior client experience, staff efficiency and practice profitability. We differentiate our software systems through enhanced functionality and ease of use. Our veterinary-specific digital radiography systems allow veterinarians to capture digital radiographs with ease and without the use of hazardous chemicals. Our strategy in digital radiography is to offer a system that provides superior image quality and software capability at a competitive price, backed by the same customer support provided for our other products and services in CAG. Water Our strategy in the water testing business is to develop, manufacture, market and sell proprietary products with superior performance, supported by exceptional customer service. Our customers are primarily water utilities, government laboratories and private certified laboratories that highly value strong relationships and customer support. International sales of water testing products represented 49% of total water product sales in 2010, and we expect that future growth in this business will be significantly dependent on our ability to increase international sales. Growth also will be dependent on our ability to enhance and broaden our product line. Most water microbiological testing is driven by regulation, and, in many countries, a test may not be used for compliance testing unless it has been approved by the applicable regulatory body. As a result, we maintain an active regulatory program that involves applying for regulatory approvals in a number of countries, primarily in Europe. Livestock and Poultry Diagnostics We develop, manufacture, market and sell a broad range of tests for various cattle, swine and poultry diseases and conditions, and have an active research and development, and in-licensing program in this area. Our strategy is to offer proprietary tests with superior performance characteristics, with growth primarily coming from disease outbreaks, emerging markets and our Farm Animal Side Test initiative, a line of products and services designed specifically for livestock and poultry veterinarians and producers. Disease outbreaks are episodic and unpredictable, and certain diseases that are prevalent at one time may be substantially contained or eradicated at a later time. In response to outbreaks, testing initiatives may lead to exceptional demand for certain products in certain periods. Conversely, successful eradication programs may result in significantly decreased demand for certain products. The performance of this business, therefore, can fluctuate. In 2010, approximately 88% of our sales in this business were international. Because of the significant dependence of this business on international sales, the performance of the business is particularly subject to the various risks described above that are associated with doing business internationally. See Part I, Item 1A. Risk Factors. Other Dairy . Our strategy in the dairy testing business is to develop, manufacture and sell antibiotic residue testing products that satisfy applicable regulatory requirements for testing of milk by processors and producers and provide reliable field performance. The manufacture of these testing products leverage, almost exclusively, the SNAP platform as well as the production equipment of our rapid assay business, incorporating customized reagents for antibiotic detection. The majority of our sales in this business are international. To successfully increase sales of dairy testing products, we believe that we need to increase penetration in the processor and producer segments of the dairy market, and to develop product line enhancements and extensions. Because of the significant dependence of this business on international sales, the performance of the business is particularly subject to the various risks described above that are associated with doing business internationally. See Part I, Item 1A. Risk Factors. 28 OPTI Medical Systems . Our strategy in the OPTI Medical Systems business for the human market is to develop, manufacture, and sell electrolyte and blood gas analyzers and related consumable products for the medical point-of-care diagnostics market worldwide, with a focus on small- to mid-sized hospitals. We seek to differentiate our products based on ease of use, menu, convenience, international distribution and service, and instrument reliability. Similar to our veterinary instruments and consumables strategy, a substantial portion of the revenues from this product line is derived from the sale of consumables for use on the installed base of electrolyte and blood gas analyzers. During the early stage of an instrument life cycle, relatively greater revenues are derived from instrument placements, while consumable sales become relatively more significant in later stages as the installed base of instruments increases and instrument placement revenues begin to decline. Our long-term success in this area of our business is dependent upon new customer acquisition, customer retention and increased customer utilization of existing and new assays introduced on these instruments. OPTI Medical Systems also manufactures our VetStat analyzer, an instrument and consumable system that is a member of the IDEXX VetLab suite for the veterinary market. In addition, OPTI Medical Systems provides the electrolyte module and dry slide reagents that make up the electrolyte testing functionality of the Catalyst Dx analyzer. Our strategy in the OPTI Medical Systems business for the veterinary market is to utilize this unit know-how, intellectual property and manufacturing capability to continue to expand the menu and instrument capability of the VetStat and Catalyst Dx platforms for veterinary applications while reducing our cost of consumables by leveraging experience and economies of scale. Other Activities . We have developed certain proprietary technology that we believe may have application in areas that do not align with one of our existing business or service categories. Our strategy is to out-license these technologies to partners that are best positioned to complete the development and commercialization of products utilizing these technologies. To the extent we are successful in doing so, we may receive one-time or recurring payments based on the achievement of development or sales milestones. Our ability to succeed in this area of our business depends on our ability to attract and retain qualified scientific personnel to develop proprietary products or technology and our ability to identify suitable third parties to complete the commercialization of these technologies. CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America ( U.S. GAAP ). The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates. Note 3 to the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2010 describes the significant accounting policies used in preparation of these consolidated financial statements. We believe the following critical accounting estimates and assumptions may have a material impact on reported financial condition and operating performance and involve significant levels of judgment to account for highly uncertain matters or are susceptible to significant change. Revenue Recognition We recognize revenue when four criteria are met: (i) persuasive evidence that an arrangement exists; (ii) delivery has occurred or services have been rendered; (iii) the sales price is fixed or determinable; and (iv) collectability is reasonably assured. See Note 3(i) to the consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2010 included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information about our revenue recognition policy and criteria for recognizing revenue. Multiple element arrangements ( MEAs ) . Arrangements to sell products to customers frequently include multiple deliverables. Our most significant MEAs include the sale of one or more of the instruments from the IDEXX VetLab suite of analyzers or digital radiography systems, combined with one or more of the following products: extended maintenance agreements ( EMAs ); consumables; reference laboratory diagnostic and consulting services; and practice management software. Practice management software is frequently sold with post-contract customer support and implementation services. Delivery of the various products or performance of services within the arrangement may or may not coincide. Delivery of our IDEXX VetLab instruments, digital radiography systems, and practice management software generally occurs at the onset of the arrangement. EMAs, consumables, and reference laboratory diagnostic and consulting services typically are delivered over future periods, generally one to five years. In certain arrangements revenue recognized is limited to the amount invoiced or received that is not contingent on the delivery of future products and services. 29 When arrangements outside of the scope of software revenue recognition guidance include multiple elements, we allocate revenue to each element based on the relative selling price and recognize revenue when the elements have standalone value and the four criteria for revenue recognition have been met for each element. We establish the selling price of each element based on vendor-specific objective evidence ( VSOE ) if available, third-party evidence ( TPE ) if VSOE is not available, or best estimate of selling price ( BESP ) if neither VSOE nor TPE is available. We generally determine selling price based on amounts charged separately for the delivered and undelivered elements to similar customers in standalone sales of the specific elements. When arrangements outside of the scope of software revenue recognition guidance include a separately-priced EMA, we recognize revenue related to the EMA at the stated contractual price on a straight-line basis over the life of the agreement to the extent the separately stated price is substantive. If there is no stated contractual price for an EMA, or the separately stated price is not substantive, we recognize revenue according to the MEA policy stated above. When arrangements within the scope of software revenue recognition guidance include multiple elements, we allocate revenue to each element based on relative fair value, when VSOE exists for all elements, or by using the residual method when there is VSOE for the undelivered elements but no such evidence for the delivered elements. Under the residual method, the fair value of the undelivered elements is deferred and the residual revenue is allocated to the delivered elements. Revenue is recognized on any delivered elements when the four criteria for revenue recognition have been met for each element. If VSOE does not exist for the undelivered element, all revenue from the arrangement is deferred until the earlier of the point at which such sufficient VSOE does exist or all elements of the arrangement have been delivered. We generally determine fair value based on amounts charged separately for the delivered and undelivered elements to similar customers in standalone sales of the specific elements. Certain arrangements with customers include discounts on future sales of products and services. We apply judgment in determining whether discounts are significant and incremental. When the future discount offered is not considered significant and incremental, we do not account for the discount as an element of the original arrangement. If the future discount is significant and incremental, we recognize that discount as an element of the original arrangement and allocate the discount to the other elements of the arrangement based on relative selling price. To determine whether a discount is significant and incremental, we look to the discount provided in comparison to standalone sales of the same product to similar customers, the level of discount provided on other elements in the arrangement, and the significance of the discount to the overall arrangement. Determination of whether a discount is significant is subjective. If the discount in the MEA approximates the discount typically provided in standalone sales, that discount is not considered incremental. Customer programs . We record estimated reductions to revenue in connection with customer marketing programs and incentive offerings that may give customers credits, award IDEXX points (under customer reward programs), or provide other incentives. Through the third quarter of 2010, our two most significant customer programs were Practice Developer and SNAP up the Savings TM ( SUTS ). Effective October 1, 2010, we discontinued our Practice Developer program and launched our Real-Time Care TM Protocols and Advanced Lab Protocols customer programs. These customer programs are only offered to North American CAG customers. Our Practice Developer program was a CAG awards program that permitted customers to earn IDEXX points by purchasing quarterly minimums in certain product and service categories, including IDEXX reference laboratory diagnostic and consulting services, Catalyst Dx and VetTest slides, SNAP Reader reagents, LaserCyte and VetAutoread TM tubes, and service and maintenance agreements. Prior to 2010, customers could also earn IDEXX points under the Practice Developer program based on purchases of SNAP tests. SNAP tests were removed from this program at the end of 2009, resulting in no IDEXX points awarded under this program for SNAP tests purchased in 2010. 30 SUTS is our volume incentive program for selected SNAP tests that provides customers with benefits in the form of (1) discounts off invoice at the time of purchase and (2) award points based on total purchase volume of qualified SNAP products during the quarter. In 2009, coinciding with the removal of SNAP products from the Practice Developer program, the SUTS program was redesigned to provide customers the opportunity to earn higher award payouts and to allow for the payout of award points earned quarterly throughout the SUTS program year (which ends on September 30). The 2009 modifications to the SUTS program resulted in increased customer earning of award points in 2010 as compared to prior years. The Real-Time Care TM Protocols and Advanced Lab Protocols customer programs permit IDEXX customers to earn award points by running or ordering certain qualifying tests. Revenue reductions recognized in 2010 related to these two programs were not material as these two programs had only been in place for the last three months of 2010. Estimated revenue reductions are recorded quarterly based on the actual issuance of credits, award points earned but not yet issued, and estimates of credits and award points to be earned in the future based on applicable product inventories held by distributors at the end of the quarter. In our analysis we utilize data supplied from distributors and collected directly from customers, which includes the volume of qualifying products purchased as well as price paid per clinic ( practice-level sales data ) and the number of qualifying tests run as reported to us by our customers via IDEXX SmartService TM connectivity. In addition, we sometimes offer incentives to customers that enter into agreements with us to purchase products or services in future periods. Incentives may be in the form of cash or IDEXX points and are granted to the customer at the inception of the agreement. These types of incentives are considered to be customer acquisition costs and are capitalized and recognized as a reduction of revenue over the term of the customer agreement. Future market conditions and changes in product offerings may cause us to change marketing strategies to increase or decrease customer incentive offerings, possibly resulting in incremental reductions of revenue in future periods as compared to reductions in the current or prior periods. Additionally, certain incentive programs require us to estimate, based on historical experience, and apply judgment to approximate the number of customers who will actually redeem the incentive. Differences between estimated and actual customer participation in programs may impact the amount and timing of revenue recognition. IDEXX points may be applied against the purchase price for IDEXX products and services purchased in the future or applied to trade receivables due to us. The most significant estimate related to IDEXX Point programs is estimating the amount of points expected to expire, or breakage. As IDEXX points are redeemed, we recognize the benefit of breakage using historical forfeiture rates. On November 30 of each year, unused points earned before January 1 of the prior year expire and any variance from the breakage estimate is accounted for as a change in estimate. This variance was not material for the years ended December 31, 2010, 2009 and 2008. Following is a summary of revenue reductions recorded in connection with our customer programs for the years ended December 31, 2010, 2009 and 2008 ( in thousands ): For the Years Ended December 31, 2010 2009 2008 Revenue Reductions Recorded Practice Developer program (1) $ 5,025 $ 6,892 $ 7,521 SNAP up the Savings program (1) 7,487 4,582 4,011 Other programs (1) 11,424 9,175 3,808 Total revenue reductions $ 23,936 $ 20,649 $ 15,340 (1) Practice Developer , SNAP up the Savings and certain other customer program liabilities are settled through the issuance of IDEXX Points. 31 At December 31, 2010, 2009 and 2008, the total accrued revenue reductions were $22.2 million, $17.4 million and $15.2 million, respectively. Following is a summary of changes in the accrual for estimated revenue reductions attributable to IDEXX Points customer programs and incentive offerings and the ending accrued revenue reductions balance for the years ended December 31, 2010, 2009 and 2008 ( in thousands ): For the Years Ended December 31, 2010 2009 2008 Accrued Customer Programs: Balance, beginning of the year $ 17,388 $ 15,183 $ 15,107 Current provision related to Practice Developer program (1) 5,025 6,892 7,521 Current provision related to SNAP up the Savings program (1) 7,487 4,582 4,011 Current provision related to other programs (1) 10,504 9,101 3,808 Customer acquisition costs 6,037 100 - Breakage (334 ) (367 ) (694 ) Actual points redeemed and credits issued (23,859 ) (18,256 ) (14,338 ) Exchange impact on balances denominated in foreign currency (34 ) 153 (232 ) Balance, end of year $ 22,214 $ 17,388 $ 15,183 (1) Practice Developer , SNAP up the Savings and certain other customer program liabilities are settled through the issuance of IDEXX Points. Inventory Valuation We write down inventory for estimated obsolescence when warranted by estimates of future demand, market conditions, remaining shelf life, or product functionality. If actual market conditions or results of estimated functionality are less favorable than those we estimated, additional inventory write-downs may be required, which would have a negative effect on results of operations. Valuation of Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets A significant portion of the purchase price for acquired businesses is assigned to intangible assets. Intangible assets other than goodwill are initially valued at fair value. If a market value is not readily available, the fair value of the intangible asset is estimated based on discounted cash flows using market participant assumptions, which are assumptions that are not specific to IDEXX. The selection of appropriate valuation methodologies and the estimation of discounted cash flows require significant assumptions about the timing and amounts of future cash flows, risks, appropriate discount rates, and the useful lives of intangible assets. When material, we utilize independent valuation experts to advise and assist us in allocating the purchase prices for acquired businesses to the fair values of the identified intangible assets and in determining appropriate amortization methods and periods for those intangible assets. Goodwill is initially valued based on the excess of the purchase price of a business combination over the fair values of acquired net assets, including intangible assets. We assess goodwill for impairment annually in the fourth quarter and whenever events or circumstances indicate impairment may exist. For impairment testing, the fair values of the reporting units that include goodwill are estimated using an income approach by developing forecasts of discounted future cash flows. Model assumptions are based on our projections and best estimates, using appropriate and customary market participant assumptions. Changes in forecasted cash flows or the discount rate would affect the estimated fair values of reporting units and could result in a goodwill impairment charge in a future period. However, at December 31, 2010 a 25% decrease in the current estimated fair value of any of our reporting units would not result in a goodwill impairment charge for any of our reporting units that include goodwill. As a measure to assess the fair values of the reporting units, we aggregate the fair value of each of the reporting units and compare that aggregate total to the overall market capitalization of the Company. As of November 30, 2010, the date that we performed our assessment of goodwill for impairment, the total aggregate fair values of the reporting units approximated the Company market capitalization. No goodwill impairments were identified as a result of the annual or event-driven reviews during the years ended December 31, 2010, 2009 or 2008. 32 During 2008, we sold certain pharmaceutical product lines and pharmaceutical assets that qualified as a business. The pharmaceutical business had $13.7 million of related goodwill, of which $7.2 million was allocated to the product lines sold, based on their respective fair values, and written off in connection with the sale. Fair values were estimated using a discounted cash flow approach. A substantial portion of the remaining goodwill is associated with products that have been licensed to third parties and is included in our Other segment. Realization of this goodwill is dependent upon the success of those third parties in developing and commercializing products, which will result in our receipt of royalties and other payments. We assess the realizability of intangible assets other than goodwill whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable. If an impairment review is triggered, we evaluate the carrying value of intangible assets based on estimated undiscounted future cash flows over the remaining useful life of the assets and compare that value to the carrying value of the assets. The cash flows that are used contain our best estimates, using appropriate and customary assumptions and projections at the time. No impairments were identified during the year ended December 31, 2010. During 2009, we recognized an impairment charge of $1.5 million to write off an acquired intangible asset associated with our equine digital radiography business, which is part of our CAG segment. Based on changes in estimated future demand and market conditions, we determined that we would not fully realize our investment and, therefore, fully expensed this asset. No other impairments were identified during the year ended December 31, 2009. No impairments were identified during the year ended December 31, 2008. Share-Based Compensation Our share-based compensation programs include grants of a mix of restricted stock units and stock options, along with employee stock purchase rights and deferred stock units with vesting conditions. On January 1, 2006 we adopted amendments to the accounting provisions governing share-based payments and adopted the straight-line method to prospectively expense share-based awards granted subsequent to December 31, 2005. The graded-vesting, or accelerated, method was used to calculate the expense for stock options granted prior to January 1, 2006. Had the straight-line method been used for share-based awards granted prior to January 1, 2006, recorded expense for the years ended December 31, 2006 through 2010 would have been higher. The total fair value of future awards may vary significantly from past awards based on a number of factors, including our share-based award practices. Therefore, share-based compensation expense is likely to fluctuate, possibly significantly, from year to year. We use the Black-Scholes-Merton option-pricing model to determine the fair value of options granted. Option-pricing models require the input of highly subjective assumptions, particularly for the expected stock price volatility and the expected term of options. We determine the assumptions to be used in the valuation of option grants as of the date of grant. As such, we may use different assumptions during the year if we grant options at different dates. However, substantially all of our options granted during the years ended December 31, 2010, 2009 and 2008 were granted in the first quarter of each year. The weighted average of each of the valuation assumptions used to determine the fair value of each option grant during each of the previous three years is as follows: For the Years Ended December 31, 2010 2009 2008 Expected stock price volatility 31 % 31 % 25 % Expected term, in years (1) 4.9 4.8 4.9 Risk-free interest rate 2.3 % 1.6 % 2.6 % (1) Options granted after January 1, 2006 have contractual terms of seven years. Options granted prior to January 1, 2006 have contractual terms of 10 years. Changes in the subjective input assumptions, particularly for the expected stock price volatility and the expected term of options, can materially affect the fair value estimate. Our expected stock price volatility assumptions are based on the historical volatility of our stock over periods that are similar to the expected terms of grants and other relevant factors. Lower estimated volatility reduces the fair value of an option. The total fair value of options awarded during the year ended December 31, 2010 ($7.2 million) would have increased or decreased by approximately 8% if the weighted average of the stock price volatility assumptions was increased or decreased by 10% to 34.1% or 27.9%, respectively. The total expense recognized for the year ended December 31, 2010 for options awarded during the same period would have increased or decreased by approximately $0.1 million if the weighted average of the stock price volatility assumption used to value options granted during 2010 was increased or decreased by 10% to 34.1% or 27.9%, respectively. 33 To develop the expected term assumption for option awards, we previously elected to use the simplified method which was based on vesting and contractual terms. Beginning in January 2008, we derived the expected term assumption for options based on historical experience and other relevant factors concerning expected employee behavior with regard to option exercise. The expected term for future awards is determined using a consistent method. Longer expected term assumptions increase the fair value of option awards, and therefore increase the expense recognized per award. The total fair value of options awarded during the year ended December 31, 2010 ($7.2 million) would have increased by 10% or decreased by 12% if the weighted average of the expected term assumptions were increased or decreased by one year, respectively. The total expense recognized for the year ended December 31, 2010 for options awarded during 2010 would have increased or decreased by $0.2 million if the weighted average of the expected term assumptions were increased or decreased by one year, respectively. Share-based compensation expense is based on the number of awards ultimately expected to vest and is, therefore, reduced for an estimate of the number of awards that are expected to be forfeited. The forfeiture estimates are based on historical data and other factors, and compensation expense is adjusted for actual results. Total share-based compensation expense for the year ended December 31, 2010 was $13.1 million, which is net of a reduction of $3.0 million for actual and estimated forfeitures. Changes in estimated forfeiture rates and differences between estimated forfeiture rates and actual experience may result in significant, unanticipated increases or decreases in share-based compensation expense from period to period. The termination of employment by certain employees who hold large numbers of share-based compensation instruments may also have a significant, unanticipated impact on forfeiture experience and, therefore, on share-based compensation expense. Modifications of the terms of outstanding options may result in significant increases or decreases in share-based compensation. There were no modifications to the terms of outstanding options, restricted stock units or deferred stock units with vesting conditions during 2010, 2009 or 2008. The fair value of options, restricted stock units, deferred stock units with vesting conditions, and employee stock purchase rights awarded during the years ended December 31, 2010, 2009 and 2008 totaled $16.0 million, $16.0 million and $18.7 million, respectively. The total unrecognized compensation expense for unvested share-based compensation awards outstanding at December 31, 2010 was $27.1 million, net of approximately $8.8 million related to actual and estimated forfeitures. The weighted average remaining expense recognition period is approximately 1.6 years. Income Taxes We recognize a current tax liability or asset for current taxes payable or refundable, respectively, and a deferred tax liability or asset, as the case may be, for the estimated future tax effects of temporary differences between book and tax treatment of assets and liabilities and carryforwards to the extent they are realizable. The future tax benefit arising from net deductible temporary differences and tax carryforwards, net of valuation allowances, was $8.6 million and $8.0 million at December 31, 2010 and 2009, respectively. On a quarterly basis, we assess our current and projected earnings by jurisdiction to determine whether or not our earnings during the periods when the temporary differences become deductible will be sufficient to realize the related future tax benefits. Should we determine that we would not be able to realize all or part of our net deferred tax asset in the future, an adjustment to the deferred tax asset would be charged to income in the period such determination was made. A reduction of net income before taxes in each subsidiary equal to 5% of revenue, compared to the corresponding reported amounts for the year ended December 31, 2010, would not result in the recognition of incremental valuation allowances except in one subsidiary where a 5% reduction could result in our recording a valuation allowance of $0.4 million for this subsidiary. For those jurisdictions where tax carryforwards are likely to expire unused or the projected operating results indicate that realization is not likely, a valuation allowance is recorded to offset the deferred tax asset within that jurisdiction. In assessing the need for a valuation allowance, we consider future taxable income and ongoing prudent and feasible tax planning strategies. Alternatively, in the event that we were to determine that we would be able to realize our deferred tax assets in the future in excess of the net recorded amount, an adjustment to the deferred tax asset would increase income in the period such determination was made. 34 Our net deductible temporary differences and tax carryforwards are recorded using the enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the periods in which the deferred tax liability or asset is expected to be settled or realized. Should the expected applicable tax rates change in the future, an adjustment to the net deferred tax asset would be credited or charged, as appropriate, to income in the period such determination was made. For example, an increase of one percentage point in our anticipated U.S. state income tax rate would cause us to increase our net deferred tax asset balance by $0.3 million. This increase in the net deferred asset would increase net income in the period that our rate was adjusted. Likewise, a decrease of one percentage point to our anticipated U.S. state income tax rate would have the opposite effect. We periodically assess our exposures related to our worldwide provision for income taxes and believe that we have appropriately accrued taxes for contingencies. Any reduction of these contingent liabilities or additional assessment would increase or decrease income, respectively, in the period such determination was made. We consider the majority of the operating earnings of non-United States subsidiaries to be indefinitely invested outside the U.S. The cumulative earnings of these subsidiaries were $232.5 million at December 31, 2010. No provision has been made for U.S. federal and state, or international taxes that may result from future remittances of these undistributed earnings of non-United States subsidiaries. Should we repatriate these earnings in the future, we would have to adjust the income tax provision in the period in which the decision to repatriate earnings is made. For the operating earnings not considered to be indefinitely invested outside the United States we have accrued taxes on a current basis. We record a liability for uncertain tax positions in accordance with a comprehensive model for the recognition, measurement, and financial statement disclosure. This comprehensive model requires us to assess all tax positions against a more likely than not standard. We record tax benefits for only those positions that we believe will more likely than not be sustained. For positions that we believe that it is more likely than not that we will prevail, we record a benefit considering the amounts and probabilities that could be realized upon ultimate settlement. If our judgment as to the likely resolution of the uncertainty changes, if the uncertainty is ultimately settled or if the statute of limitation related to the uncertainty expires, the effects of the change would be recognized in the period in which the change, resolution or expiration occurs. Our net liability for uncertain tax positions was $5.5 million and $6.0 million as of December 31, 2010 and 2009, respectively, which includes estimated interest expense and penalties. RESULTS OF OPERATIONS AND TRENDS Effects of Certain Factors on Results of Operations Distributor Purchasing and Inventories . The instrument consumables and rapid assay products in our CAG segment are sold in the U.S. and certain other geographies by third party distributors, who purchase products from us and sell them to veterinary practices, which are the end users. As a result, distributor purchasing dynamics have an impact on our reported sales of these products. Distributor purchasing dynamics may be affected by many factors and may be unrelated to underlying end-user demand for our products. Consequently, reported results may reflect fluctuations in distributors inventories and not necessarily reflect changes in underlying end-user demand. Therefore, we believe it is important to track distributor sales to end users and to distinguish between the impact of end-user demand and the impact of distributor purchasing dynamics on reported revenue. Where growth rates are affected by changes in end-user demand, we refer to this as the impact of practice-level sales on growth. Where growth rates are affected by distributor purchasing dynamics, we refer to this as the impact of changes in distributors inventories on growth. If during the current year, distributors inventories grew by less than those inventories grew in the comparable period of the prior year, then changes in distributors inventories have a negative impact on our reported sales growth in the current period. Conversely, if during the current year, distributors inventories grew by more than those inventories grew in the comparable period of the prior year, then changes in distributors inventories have a positive impact on our reported sales growth in the current period. 35 At the end of a quarter, we believe that our U.S. CAG distributors typically hold inventory equivalent to approximately four weeks of our anticipated end-user demand for instrument consumables and rapid assay products. Currency Impact . For the years ended December 31, 2010, 2009 and 2008, approximately 25%, 24% and 24%, respectively, of IDEXX sales were derived from products manufactured in the U.S. and sold internationally in local currencies. Strengthening of the rate of exchange for the U.S. dollar relative to other currencies has a negative impact on our revenues derived in currencies other than the U.S. dollar and on profits of products manufactured in the U.S. and sold internationally, and a weakening of the U.S. dollar has the opposite effect. Similarly, to the extent that the U.S. dollar is stronger in current or future periods relative to the exchange rates in effect in the corresponding prior periods, our growth rate will be negatively affected. The impact of foreign currency denominated operating expenses and foreign currency denominated supply contracts partly offset this exposure. The impact on revenue resulting from changes in foreign currency exchange rates is a non-U.S. GAAP measure that is calculated by applying the difference between the average exchange rates during the current year period and the comparable previous year period to foreign currency denominated revenues for the current year period. During the twelve months ended December 31, 2010, as compared to the twelve months ended December 31, 2009, changes in foreign currency exchange rates increased total company revenue by approximately $2.9 million, due primarily to the weakening of the U.S. dollar against the Canadian dollar, Australian dollar and, to a lesser extent, the Japanese yen. These favorable impacts were partly offset by the strengthening of the U.S. dollar against the Euro between these two periods. Although the changes in foreign currency exchange rates had a net favorable impact on total company revenues for the twelve months ended December 31, 2010, our LPD segment was negatively impacted since the U.S. dollar strengthened against the Euro and, compared to our other segments, a larger portion of LPD sales are denominated in the Euro. During the twelve months ended December 31, 2009, as compared to the twelve months ended December 31, 2008, changes in foreign currency exchange rates reduced total company revenue by approximately $24.0 million, due primarily to the strengthening of the U.S. dollar against the British pound and the Euro and, to a lesser extent, the Canadian dollar. These unfavorable impacts were partly offset by the weakening of the U.S. dollar against the Japanese yen. These changes in foreign currency exchange rates impacted the revenues generated by each of our individual operating segments in a manner similar to the impact on the company as a whole. Economic Conditions . Demand for many of our products and services has been negatively affected by poor economic conditions that have existed over the past two years. In our CAG segment, we believe that negative consumer sentiment resulting from economic conditions has led to fewer patient visits to veterinary clinics, which we continued to observe for the twelve months ended December 31, 2010 relative to the same period in 2009. We believe the reduced patient visits have negatively affected the growth rate of sales of rapid assay tests, instrument consumables, and reference laboratory diagnostic and consulting services. In addition, we believe the rate of growth of sales of our instruments and digital radiography systems, which are larger capital purchases for veterinarians, has been negatively affected by continued caution among veterinarians regarding economic conditions. Weaker economic conditions have also caused our customers to remain sensitive to the pricing of our products and services resulting in lower growth due to limited price increases for certain products. We also believe that current economic conditions have affected purchasing decisions by certain customer groups in our Water and LPD businesses. Lower water testing volumes in the regulated and non-regulated segments of our Water business have resulted from a decline in municipal water studies and new home construction, respectively. Lower LPD testing volumes have resulted from a reduction in non-regulated testing performed by producers and laboratories, as a measure to reduce operating costs, and from a reduction in testing associated with some government mandated eradication programs as a result of lower government funding. We believe that the diversity of our products and services, and the geographic diversity of our markets, will partially mitigate the effects of continuing slow economic growth and negative consumer sentiment. However, until we see improvements in broad factors that measure the economic climate both in the United States and Europe, we expect our growth rates will continue to be negatively affected. 36 Twelve Months Ended December 31, 2010 Compared to Twelve Months Ended December 31, 2009 Revenue Total Company. The following table presents revenue by operating segment: For the Years Ended December 31, Net Revenue (dollars in thousands) 2010 2009 Dollar Change Percentage Change Percentage Change from Currency (1) Percentage Change from Acquisitions/ Divestitures (2) Organic Revenue Growth (3) CAG $ 905,655 $ 843,303 $ 62,352 7.4 % 0.5 % 0.5 % 6.4 % Water 76,514 73,214 3,300 4.5 % 0.8 % - 3.7 % LPD 81,177 77,208 3,969 5.1 % (2.5 %) - 7.6 % Other 40,046 37,908 2,138 5.6 % - - 5.6 % Total $ 1,103,392 $ 1,031,633 $ 71,759 7.0 % 0.3 % 0.4 % 6.3 % (1) The percentage change from currency is a non-U.S. GAAP measure. It represents the percentage change in revenue resulting from the difference between the average exchange rates during the twelve months ended December 31, 2010 and the same period of the prior year applied to foreign currency denominated revenues for the twelve months ended December 31, 2010. (2) Represents the percentage change in revenue during the year ended December 31, 2010 compared to the year ended December 31, 2009 attributed to incremental revenues from businesses acquired or revenues lost from businesses divested or discontinued subsequent to December 31, 2008. (3) Organic revenue is a non-U.S. GAAP measure and represents the percentage change in revenue during the year ended December 31, 2010 compared to the year ended December 31, 2009 net of acquisitions and divestitures and the effect from changes in foreign currency exchange rates. The following revenue analysis and discussion reports on organic revenue. Organic revenue should be considered in addition to, and not as a replacement for or superior to, revenues reported in accordance with U.S. GAAP, and may not be comparable to similarly titled measures reported by other companies. Management believes that reporting organic revenue provides useful information to investors by facilitating easier comparisons of our revenue performance with prior and future periods and to our peers. We exclude the effect of changes in foreign currency exchange rates and the effect of acquisitions and divestitures because changes in foreign currency exchange rates are not under management control, are subject to volatility and can obscure underlying business trends. We exclude the effect of acquisitions and divestitures because the nature, size and number of acquisitions can vary dramatically from period to period and therefore can also obscure underlying business trends. 37 Companion Animal Group. The following table presents revenue by product and service category for CAG: For the Years Ended December 31, Net Revenue (dollars in thousands) 2010 2009 Dollar Change Percentage Change Percentage Change from Currency (1) Percentage Change from Acquisitions/ Divestitures (2) Organic Revenue Growth (3) Instruments and consumables $ 354,239 $ 332,706 $ 21,533 6.5 % 0.1 % - 6.4 % Rapid assay products 146,538 147,078 (540 ) (0.4 %) 0.3 % - (0.7 %) Reference laboratory diagnostic and consulting services 329,666 298,410 31,256 10.5 % 1.0 % 1.2 % 8.3 % Practice information management systems and digital radiography 75,212 65,055 10,157 15.6 % 0.9 % 0.5 % 14.2 % Pharmaceutical products - 54 (54 ) (100 %) - - (100 %) Net CAG revenue $ 905,655 $ 843,303 $ 62,352 7.4 % 0.5 % 0.5 % 6.4 % (1) The percentage change from currency is a non-U.S. GAAP measure. It represents the percentage change in revenue resulting from the difference between the average exchange rates during the twelve months ended December 31, 2010 and the same period of the prior year applied to foreign currency denominated revenues for the twelve months ended December 31, 2010. (2) Represents the percentage change in revenue during the year ended December 31, 2010 compared to the year ended December 31, 2009 attributed to incremental revenues from businesses acquired or revenues lost from businesses divested or discontinued subsequent to December 31, 2008. (3) Organic revenue is a non-U.S. GAAP measure and represents the percentage change in revenue during the year ended December 31, 2010 compared to the year ended December 31, 2009 net of acquisitions and divestitures and the effect from changes in foreign currency exchange rates. Instruments revenue was $85.5 million and $77.3 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2010 and 2009, respectively. Consumables revenue was $228.0 million and $218.5 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2010 and 2009, respectively. Instrument service and accessories revenue was $39.7 million and $35.7 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2010 and 2009, respectively. The remaining sources of revenue are not significant to overall instruments and consumables revenue. The $8.2 million increase in instruments revenue was due primarily to sales of our ProCyte Dx TM instrument, our new hematology analyzer that we began shipping during the third quarter of 2010, and increased sales of our Catalyst Dx instrument and IDEXX VetLab Station . This increase in instrument revenue was partly offset by lower average unit sales prices and lower sales volumes of our LaserCyte instrument, due primarily to a shift in focus of our sales efforts to ProCyte Dx TM . The $9.5 million increase in consumables revenue was due primarily to higher sales volumes of consumables used with our Catalyst Dx instrument, partly offset by lower sales of consumables used with our VetTest instrument as Catalyst Dx instruments continue to replace VetTest instruments at certain customers. The $4.0 million increase in instrument service and accessories revenue was primarily a result of the growth of our active installed base of instruments. The impact from changes in distributors inventory levels was not significant to reported instruments and consumables revenue. The slight decrease in rapid assay revenue was due primarily to lower average unit sales prices of our SNAP tests resulting from competitive pressures and increased price sensitivity in certain segments of our customer base as a result of economic conditions and, to a lesser extent, lower U.S. practice-level sales primarily attributable to economic conditions. These decreases were partly offset by higher sales volumes outside of the U.S. and the favorable impact from changes in distributors inventory levels, which increased reported rapid assay revenue growth by 1%. The increase in reference laboratory diagnostic and consulting services revenue resulted primarily from the impact of higher testing volume and, to a lesser extent, price increases. Higher testing volume was driven largely by the acquisition of new customers. The increase in practice information management systems and digital radiography revenue resulted primarily from higher sales volumes of companion animal digital radiography systems as this market is transitioning from older film-based systems to digital as the standard of care. An increase in service and support revenue related to both digital radiography systems and practice information management systems also contributed to revenue growth. These increases were partly offset by lower average unit sales prices for our digital radiography systems resulting from competitive conditions. 38 Water. The increase in Water revenue resulted primarily from higher Colilert product sales volume partly offset by lower average unit sales prices. The lower average unit sales prices resulted primarily from higher relative sales of Colilert products in geographies where those products are sold at lower average unit sales prices. Livestock and Poultry Diagnostics. The increase in LPD revenue resulted primarily from higher sales volumes of certain bovine tests and, to a lesser extent, higher sales volumes of certain swine tests. The increased sales volume of certain bovine tests was driven primarily by increased sales in Germany where we have won several government tenders for testing in connection with a country-wide eradication program for a virus impacting beef and dairy production yields. These increases were partly offset by lower average unit sales prices due to competitive conditions. Other. The increase in Other revenue was attributable primarily to higher sales volumes of our Dairy SNAP residue test for the detection of melamine and higher sales volume of consumables used with our OPTI Medical Systems instruments. These increases were partly offset by lower sales volumes of our Dairy SNAP Beta Lactam test used for the detection of antibiotic residue in milk. Gross Profit Total Company. The following table presents gross profit and gross profit percentages by operating segment: For the Years Ended December 31, Gross Profit (dollars in thousands) 2010 Percent of Revenue 2009 Percent of Revenue Dollar Change Percentage Change CAG $ 457,519 50.5 % $ 410,356 48.7 % $ 47,163 11.5 % Water 47,676 62.3 % 47,233 64.5 % 443 0.9 % LPD 54,898 67.6 % 51,256 66.4 % 3,642 7.1 % Other 18,297 45.7 % 17,067 45.0 % 1,230 7.2 % Unallocated amounts 233 N/A 369 N/A (136 ) (36.9 %) Total Company $ 578,623 52.4 % $ 526,281 51.0 % $ 52,342 9.9 % Companion Animal Group. Gross profit for CAG increased due to higher sales and an increase in the gross profit percentage to 51% from 49%. The increase in gross profit percentage was attributable primarily to improvements in the cost to manufacture and service our IDEXX VetLab instruments and increased volume leverage and other efficiency gains in our reference laboratory diagnostics and consulting services business. Lower depreciation on instruments placed at customer sites under usage agreements also contributed to the increase in gross profit percentage, as we have reduced this type of placement activity and an increasing number of prior placements have become fully depreciated and ownership has transferred to the customer. These favorable impacts were partly offset by the net unfavorable impact of changes in foreign currency exchange rates. The net unfavorable impact of changes in foreign currency exchange rates was due primarily to lower hedging gains during the twelve months ended December 31, 2010 in comparison to the same period of the prior year and the strengthening of the U.S. dollar against the Euro partly offset by the weakening of the U.S. dollar against the Canadian dollar, Australian dollar, and Japanese yen . Water. Gross profit for Water increased slightly as higher sales were partly offset by a decrease in the gross profit percentage to 62% from 65%. The decrease in the gross profit percentage for Water was due primarily to the net unfavorable impact of changes in foreign currency exchange rates and higher overall manufacturing costs. The net unfavorable impact of changes in foreign currency exchange rates was due to lower hedging gains during the twelve months ended December 31, 2010 in comparison to the same period of the prior year and the strengthening of the U.S. dollar against the Euro partly offset by the weakening of the U.S. dollar against the Australian dollar and the Canadian dollar. These unfavorable impacts were partly offset by higher relative sales of higher margin products. 39 Livestock and Poultry Diagnostics. Gross profit for LPD increased due to higher sales and an increase in the gross profit percentage to 68% from 66%. The increase in gross profit percentage was due primarily to higher relative sales of higher margin products and lower overall manufacturing costs. These increases were partly offset by lower overall average unit sales prices, increased royalty costs, and the net unfavorable impact of changes in foreign currency exchange rates due to the strengthening of the U.S. dollar against the Euro and lower hedging gains during the twelve months ended December 31, 2010 in comparison to the same period of the prior year . Other. Gross profit for Other increased due to higher sales volume and an increase in the gross profit percentage to 46% from 45%. The increase in gross profit percentage was due to lower costs of service in our OPTI Medical and Dairy businesses, lower relative sales of lower margin Dairy instruments, and reduced overall manufacturing costs in our OPTI Medical business. These increases were partly offset by the net unfavorable impact of changes in foreign currency exchange rates. Operating Expenses and Operating Income Total Company. The following tables present operating expenses and operating income by operating segment: For the Years Ended December 31, Operating Expenses (dollars in thousands) 2010 Percent of Revenue 2009 Percent of Revenue Dollar Change Percentage Change CAG $ 297,793 32.9 % $ 274,235 32.5 % $ 23,558 8.6 % Water 16,600 21.7 % 15,618 21.3 % 982 6.3 % LPD 35,810 44.1 % 33,985 44.0 % 1,825 5.4 % Other 13,714 34.2 % 13,642 36.0 % 72 0.5 % Unallocated amounts 10,825 N/A 12,832 N/A (2,007 ) (15.6 %) Total Company $ 374,742 34.0 % $ 350,312 34.0 % $ 24,430 7.0 % Operating Income (dollars in thousands) 2010 Percent of Revenue 2009 Percent of Revenue Dollar Change Percentage Change CAG $ 159,726 17.6 % $ 136,121 16.1 % $ 23,605 17.3 % Water 31,076 40.6 % 31,615 43.2 % (539 ) (1.7 %) LPD 19,088 23.5 % 17,271 22.4 % 1,817 10.5 % Other 4,583 11.4 % 3,425 9.0 % 1,158 33.8 % Unallocated amounts (10,592 ) N/A (12,463 ) N/A 1,871 (15.0 %) Total Company $ 203,881 18.5 % $ 175,969 17.1 % $ 27,912 15.9 % Companion Animal Group. The following table presents CAG operating expenses by functional area: For the Years Ended December 31, Operating Expenses (dollars in thousands) 2010 Percent of Revenue 2009 Percent of Revenue Dollar Change Percentage Change Sales and marketing $ 151,068 16.7 % $ 141,681 16.8 % $ 9,387 6.6 % General and administrative 102,775 11.3 % 92,122 10.9 % 10,653 11.6 % Research and development 43,950 4.9 % 40,432 4.8 % 3,518 8.7 % Total operating expenses $ 297,793 32.9 % $ 274,235 32.5 % $ 23,558 8.6 % The increase in sales and marketing expense resulted primarily from increased personnel-related costs, including an investment in field sales technical support personnel. The increase in general and administrative expense resulted primarily from increased legal and other fees incurred in connection with our response to the FTC subpoena, discussed in more detail under the heading Part I, Item 1A. Risk Factors in this Annual Report on Form 10-K; increased personnel-related costs; an increase in costs attributable to information technology investments; the unfavorable impact from changes in foreign currency exchange rates; and an increase in bad debt expense in connection with the bankruptcy of one of our U.S. distributors, Professional Veterinary Products, Inc. ( PVP ). These increases were partly offset by the absence of an impairment charge of $1.5 million that was recorded in the fourth quarter of 2009 to write off an acquired intangible asset associated with our equine digital radiography business. The increase in research and development expense resulted primarily from increased personnel-related costs. 40 Water. The following table presents Water expenses by functional area: For the Years Ended December 31, Operating Expenses (dollars in thousands) 2010 Percent of Revenue 2009 Percent of Revenue Dollar Change Percentage Change Sales and marketing $ 7,877 10.3 % $ 7,115 9.7 % $ 762 10.7 % General and administrative 6,320 8.3 % 5,851 8.0 % 469 8.0 % Research and development 2,403 3.1 % 2,652 3.6 % (249 ) (9.4 %) Total operating expenses $ 16,600 21.7 % $ 15,618 21.3 % $ 982 6.3 % The increase in sales and marketing expense resulted primarily from increased personnel-related costs. The increase in general and administrative expense resulted from an increase in costs attributable to information technology investments and increased personnel-related costs. The decrease in research and development expense was due primarily to decreased spending related to qualifying additional suppliers of certain raw materials and a reduction in personnel-related costs. Livestock and Poultry Diagnostics. The following table presents LPD operating expenses by functional area: For the Years Ended December 31, Operating Expenses (dollars in thousands) 2010 Percent of Revenue 2009 Percent of Revenue Dollar Change Percentage Change Sales and marketing $ 13,793 17.0 % $ 12,650 16.4 % $ 1,143 9.0 % General and administrative 12,246 15.1 % 12,845 16.6 % (599 ) (4.7 %) Research and development 9,771 12.0 % 8,490 11.0 % 1,281 15.1 % Total operating expenses $ 35,810 44.1 % $ 33,985 44.0 % $ 1,825 5.4 % The increase in sales and marketing expense resulted primarily from an increase in personnel-related costs. The decrease in general and administrative expense resulted primarily from decreased personnel-related costs and lower amortization on our existing intangible assets. These decreases were partly offset by the net unfavorable impact of changes in foreign currency exchange rates and an increase in costs attributable to information technology investments. The increase in research and development expense was due primarily to an increase in personnel-related costs. Other. Operating expenses for Other increased $0.1 million to $13.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2010. This increase was due primarily to higher personnel-related costs in our Dairy business attributable, in part, to the development of business in China, partly offset by an incremental milestone payment earned in 2010 related to the sale of product rights previously included in our pharmaceutical product lines. Milestone payments in the third and fourth quarters of 2010 totaling $3.0 million were earned due to the achievement of certain sales milestones by the third party that purchased the product rights. In the fourth quarter of 2009, we earned a milestone payment of $2.0 million from the same third party as the result of the achievement of certain development milestones for this product. Because we have no obligation to deliver product or services, or otherwise provide support to the third party under this agreement, and because collectability is reasonably assured, these milestone payments, and any other related milestone payments we earn in the future, are included in results of operations when earned, but are not classified as revenue because the transaction was accounted for as the sale of a business. We may receive up to $6.5 million of future payments based on the achievement of future sales milestones by this third party. Unallocated Amounts. Operating expenses that are not allocated to our operating segments decreased $2.0 million to $10.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2010 due to the absence of an impairment charge in 2010 in comparison to 2009 and lower research and development personnel-related costs. The impairment charge recorded in 2009 was to write off software to manage the various aspects of product development and product lifecycles. These decreases were partly offset by the write-off in 2010 of certain design costs related to a facilities project that has changed in scope. 41 Interest Income and Interest Expense Interest income was $0.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2010 compared to $0.5 million for the same period of the prior year. The increase in interest income was due primarily to higher average invested cash balances. Interest expense was $2.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2010 compared to $1.9 million for the same period of the prior year. The increase in interest expense was due primarily to higher effective interest rates and, to a lesser extent, higher average balances outstanding on our unsecured short-term revolving credit facility ( Credit Facility ). With the commencement of our interest rate swap agreements on March 31, 2010, we effectively fixed our interest rate at 2% plus 0.375 to 0.875 percentage points ( Credit Spread ) on $80 million of funds borrowed under the Credit Facility through March 31, 2012. As the fixed rate under the interest rate swap agreements is higher than the weighted average interest rate of debt outstanding during 2009, interest expense was higher for the year ended December 31, 2010 as compared to the same period of the prior year. Provision for Income Taxes Our effective income tax rate was 30.1% for the year ended December 31, 2010 and 30.0% for the year ended December 31, 2009. The slight increase in the tax rate is due primarily to an increase in earnings taxed at domestic rates that are higher than international rates, partly offset by tax benefits related to U.S. manufacturing activities that were fully phased in effective January 1, 2010. In 2011, it is reasonably possible that we could recognize up to $1.1 million of income tax benefits that have not been recognized at December 31, 2010. The income tax benefits are primarily due to the lapse in the statutes of limitations for various U.S. and international tax jurisdictions. Twelve Months Ended December 31, 2009 Compared to Twelve Months Ended December 31, 2008 Revenue Total Company. The following table presents revenue by operating segment: For the Years Ended December 31, Net Revenue (dollars in thousands) 2009 2008 Dollar Change Percentage Change Percentage Change from Currency (1) Percentage Change from Acquisitions/ Divestitures (2) Organic Revenue Growth (3) CAG $ 843,303 $ 834,056 $ 9,247 1.1 % (2.3 %) (2.0 %) 5.4 % Water 73,214 74,469 (1,255 ) (1.7 %) (3.4 %) - 1.7 % LPD 77,208 80,762 (3,554 ) (4.4 %) (3.4 %) - (1.0 %) Other 37,908 34,743 3,165 9.1 % (0.4 %) - 9.5 % Total $ 1,031,633 $ 1,024,030 $ 7,603 0.7 % (2.4 %) (1.6 %) 4.7 % (1) The percentage change from currency is a non-U.S. GAAP measure. It represents the percentage change in revenue resulting from the difference between the average exchange rates during the twelve months ended December 31, 2009 and the same period of the prior year applied to foreign currency denominated revenues for the twelve months ended December 31, 2009. (2) Represents the percentage change in revenue during the year ended December 31, 2009 compared to the year ended December 31, 2008 attributed to incremental revenues from businesses acquired or revenues lost from businesses divested or discontinued subsequent to December 31, 2007. (3) Organic revenue is a non-U.S. GAAP measure and represents the percentage change in revenue during the year ended December 31, 2009 compared to the year ended December 31, 2008 net of acquisitions and divestitures and the effect from changes in foreign currency exchange rates. 42 The following revenue analysis and discussion reports on organic revenue. Organic revenue should be considered in addition to, and not as a replacement for or superior to, revenues reported in accordance with U.S. GAAP, and may not be comparable to similarly titled measures reported by other companies. Management believes that reporting organic revenue provides useful information to investors by facilitating easier comparisons of our revenue performance with prior and future periods and to our peers. We exclude the effect of changes in foreign currency exchange rates and the effect of acquisitions and divestitures because changes in foreign currency exchange rates are not under management control, are subject to volatility and can obscure underlying business trends. We exclude the effect of acquisitions and divestitures because the nature, size and number of acquisitions can vary dramatically from period to period and therefore can also obscure underlying business trends. Companion Animal Group. The following table presents revenue by product and service category for CAG: For the Years Ended December 31, Net Revenue (dollars in thousands) 2009 2008 Dollar Change Percentage Change Percentage Change from Currency (1) Percentage Change from Acquisitions/ Divestitures (2) Organic Revenue Growth (3) Instruments and consumables $ 332,706 $ 318,533 $ 14,173 4.4 % (2.7 %) - 7.1 % Rapid assay products 147,078 146,867 211 0.1 % (0.7 %) - 0.8 % Reference laboratory diagnostic and consulting services 298,410 288,244 10,166 3.5 % (3.0 %) 0.7 % 5.8 % Practice information management systems and digital radiography 65,055 61,291 3,764 6.1 % (0.8 %) 0.2 % 6.7 % Pharmaceutical products 54 19,121 (19,067 ) (99.7 %) - (99.6 %) (0.1 %) Net CAG revenue $ 843,303 $ 834,056 $ 9,247 1.1 % (2.3 %) (2.0 %) 5.4 % (1) The percentage change from currency is a non-U.S. GAAP measure. It represents the percentage change in revenue resulting from the difference between the average exchange rates during the twelve months ended December 31, 2009 and the same period of the prior year applied to foreign currency denominated revenues for the twelve months ended December 31, 2009. (2) Represents the percentage change in revenue during the year ended December 31, 2009 compared to the year ended December 31, 2008 attributed to incremental revenues from businesses acquired or revenues lost from businesses divested or discontinued subsequent to December 31, 2007. (3) Organic revenue is a non-U.S. GAAP measure and represents the percentage change in revenue during the year ended December 31, 2009 compared to the year ended December 31, 2008 net of acquisitions and divestitures and the effect from changes in foreign currency exchange rates. The increase in instruments and consumables revenue was due to higher sales volumes, partly offset by lower average unit sales prices on instruments. Higher sales volumes were driven primarily by sales of our Catalyst Dx analyzer, which was launched at the end of the first quarter of 2008. This impact was partly offset by a decrease in sales of our other IDEXX VetLab instruments, most notably of LaserCyte analyzers, due primarily to market penetration and a shift in focus of our sales efforts to our newer instruments. Higher sales volume was also attributable to sales of consumables used with the Catalyst Dx instrument, partly offset by lower sales of consumables used with our VetTest instrument as Catalyst Dx instruments have replaced VetTest instruments at certain customers. Instrument service revenue also contributed to revenue growth as our active installed base of instruments covered under service contracts continued to increase. Lower average unit sales prices for instruments were primarily related to sales of our LaserCyte analyzers, resulting from discounts associated with customer purchase programs. Changes in distributors inventory levels did not have a meaningful impact on reported instruments and consumables revenue growth. The slight increase in rapid assay revenue was due to higher practice-level sales resulting from increased sales volumes of our SNAP canine combination test products and SNAP cPL , which is our test for pancreatitis in dogs, partly offset by lower sales volumes of our SNAP feline combination test products. To a lesser extent, higher average unit sales prices also contributed to the increase in rapid assay revenue. Changes in distributors inventory levels did not have a meaningful impact on reported rapid assay revenue growth. The increase in reference laboratory diagnostic and consulting services revenue resulted primarily from the impact of higher testing volume and price increases. Higher testing volume was the result of growth in our customer base and the impact of new test offerings. 43 The increase in practice information management systems and digital radiography revenue resulted primarily from higher sales volumes of companion animal digital radiography systems and peripheral equipment and support services related to our practice information management systems. These favorable items were partly offset by lower sales of equine digital radiography systems, lower average unit prices for companion animal digital radiography systems, and lower sales of Cornerstone practice information management systems. The decrease in pharmaceutical products revenue was due primarily to the pharmaceutical transaction in the fourth quarter of 2008 in which we sold a substantial portion of our pharmaceutical assets and product lines. As a result, we did not have significant pharmaceutical product revenue in 2009. Water. The increase in Water revenue resulted primarily from higher average unit sales prices, partly offset by lower sales volume of certain Water products. Higher average unit sales prices were attributable to a favorable mix of product sales within certain markets; the impact of price increases for certain products sold in the U.S.; and higher relative sales in geographies where products are sold at higher average unit sales prices. Livestock and Poultry Diagnostics. The decrease in LPD revenue resulted primarily from the impact of the timing of revenue recognition on shipments to a customer, where revenue for shipments to that customer is recognized on the cash basis of accounting due to uncertain collectability and lower average unit sales prices. These unfavorable items were partly offset by higher overall sales volumes. Other. The increase in Other revenue was due primarily to higher sales volumes of Dairy and OPTI Medical products. Higher Dairy volume was primarily attributable to SNAP antibiotic residue tests, a SNAP residue test for the detection of melamine that we launched in the second quarter of 2009, and an instrument that we launched in 2008. These favorable items were partly offset by lower average unit sales prices for OPTI Medical products. Gross Profit Total Company. The following table presents gross profit and gross profit percentages by operating segment: For the Years Ended December 31, Gross Profit (dollars in thousands) 2009 Percent of Revenue 2008 Percent of Revenue Dollar Change Percentage Change CAG $ 410,356 48.7 % $ 412,199 49.4 % $ (1,843 ) (0.4 %) Water 47,233 64.5 % 47,052 63.2 % 181 0.4 % LPD 51,256 66.4 % 55,005 68.1 % (3,749 ) (6.8 %) Other 17,067 45.0 % 15,131 43.6 % 1,936 12.8 % Unallocated amounts 369 N/A 379 N/A (10 ) (2.6 %) Total Company $ 526,281 51.0 % $ 529,766 51.7 % $ (3,485 ) (0.7 %) Companion Animal Group. Gross profit for CAG decreased due to a decrease in the gross profit percentage of less than one percentage point to 49%. The decrease in the gross profit percentage was due primarily to the absence of higher margin pharmaceutical product sales in 2009; higher relative sales of lower margin products and services, primarily IDEXX VetLab instruments and reference laboratory diagnostic and consulting services; higher product overhead spending due, in part, to investment in facilities and production equipment to meet anticipated future demand; and the impact of lower volumes of most of our instruments, except for Catalyst Dx and SNAPshot Dx analyzers. These unfavorable impacts were partly offset by gross profit improvement in our reference laboratory diagnostic and consulting services line of business due, in part, to higher selling prices and operational efficiencies. Lower depreciation expense associated with IDEXX VetLab instruments previously placed under rental agreements also favorably impacted gross profit percentage. Water. Gross profit for Water increased due to an increase in the gross profit percentage to 64.5% from 63%. The increase in the gross profit percentage was due primarily to the impact of lower royalty costs and, to a lesser extent, higher average unit sales prices. These favorable items were partly offset by higher overall manufacturing costs and higher costs related to product distribution. 44 Livestock and Poultry Diagnostics. Gross profit for LPD decreased due to lower sales volume and a decrease in the gross profit percentage to 66% from 68%. The decrease in gross profit percentage was due primarily to higher costs of product manufacturing and the impact of lower revenue recognized related to a customer where revenue is recognized on the cash basis of accounting due to uncertain collectability. These unfavorable impacts were partly offset by higher hedging gains and lower royalty costs. Other. Gross profit for Other increased due to higher sales volume and an increase in the gross profit percentage to 45% from 44%. The increase in gross profit percentage was due to lower overall costs of product manufacturing in our OPTI Medical and Dairy businesses and, to a lesser extent, greater relative sales of higher margin Dairy SNAP tests and OPTI Medical instrument consumables. These favorable items were partly offset by lower average unit sales prices of OPTI Medical products. Operating Expenses and Operating Income Total Company. The following tables present operating expenses and operating income by operating segment: For the Years Ended December 31, Operating Expenses (dollars in thousands) 2009 Percent of Revenue 2008 Percent of Revenue Dollar Change Percentage Change CAG $ 274,235 32.5 % $ 282,579 33.9 % $ (8,344 ) (3.0 %) Water 15,618 21.3 % 15,722 21.1 % (104 ) (0.7 %) LPD 33,985 44.0 % 33,245 41.2 % 740 2.2 % Other 13,642 36.0 % 13,576 39.1 % 66 0.5 % Unallocated amounts 12,832 N/A 12,188 N/A 644 5.3 % Total Company $ 350,312 34.0 % $ 357,310 34.9 % $ (6,998 ) (2.0 %) Operating Income (dollars in thousands) 2009 Percent of Revenue 2008 Percent of Revenue Dollar Change Percentage Change CAG $ 136,121 16.1 % $ 129,620 15.5 % $ 6,501 5.0 % Water 31,615 43.2 % 31,330 42.1 % 285 0.9 % LPD 17,271 22.4 % 21,760 26.9 % (4,489 ) (20.6 %) Other 3,425 9.0 % 1,555 4.5 % 1,870 120.3 % Unallocated amounts (12,463 ) N/A (11,809 ) N/A (654 ) (5.5 %) Total Company $ 175,969 17.1 % $ 172,456 16.8 % $ 3,513 2.0 % Companion Animal Group. The following table presents CAG operating expenses by functional area: For the Years Ended December 31, Operating Expenses (dollars in thousands) 2009 Percent of Revenue 2008 Percent of Revenue Dollar Change Percentage Change Sales and marketing $ 141,681 16.8 % $ 143,644 17.2 % $ (1,963 ) (1.4 %) General and administrative 92,122 10.9 % 93,008 11.2 % (886 ) (1.0 %) Research and development 40,432 4.8 % 45,927 5.5 % (5,495 ) (12.0 %) Total operating expenses $ 274,235 32.5 % $ 282,579 33.9 % $ (8,344 ) (3.0 %) As previously described, we sold a substantial portion of our pharmaceutical assets and product lines and restructured the remainder of this business in the fourth quarter of 2008. As a result, we did not incur meaningful expenses related to this business in 2009. In relation to restructuring the remainder of the pharmaceutical business, certain research and development personnel were realigned to our corporate research and development team, for which expenses are not allocated to our operating segments. A portion of the decrease in spending explained within the CAG section is due to this restructuring. 45 The decrease in sales and marketing expense resulted primarily from the effects of the pharmaceutical transaction and from the favorable impact of exchange rates on foreign currency denominated expenses. These decreases were partly offset by higher personnel and personnel-related costs due, in part, to the addition of customer support, sales and marketing personnel, and an increase in facility expenses related to completion of significant phases of our headquarters expansion project in 2009. The decrease in general and administrative expense resulted primarily from the favorable impact of exchange rates on foreign currency denominated expenses, the effects of the pharmaceutical transaction and lower bad debt expense. These decreases were partly offset by an impairment charge of $1.5 million to write off an acquired intangible asset associated with our equine digital radiography business. To a lesser extent, the decreases noted were also offset by an increase in spending related to general support functions in the U.S. and Europe and incremental expenses associated with businesses acquired subsequent to January 1, 2009, comprised mainly of administrative expenses of a recurring nature to support the acquired businesses and transaction related expenses. The decrease in research and development expense resulted primarily from a decrease in spending related to the pharmaceutical business. Water. The following table presents Water expenses by functional area: For the Years Ended December 31, Operating Expenses (dollars in thousands) 2009 Percent of Revenue 2008 Percent of Revenue Dollar Change Percentage Change Sales and marketing $ 7,115 9.7 % $ 7,504 10.1 % $ (389 ) (5.2 %) General and administrative 5,851 8.0 % 5,674 7.6 % 177 3.1 % Research and development 2,652 3.6 % 2,544 3.4 % 108 4.2 % Total operating expenses $ 15,618 21.3 % $ 15,722 21.1 % $ (104 ) (0.7 %) The decrease in sales and marketing expense resulted primarily from the favorable impact of exchange rates on foreign currency denominated expenses, lower spending on consulting services and a decrease in spending on travel. The increase in general and administrative expense resulted from higher bad debt expense and higher spending on corporate support function expenses, partly offset by lower legal expenses and the favorable impact of exchange rates on foreign currency denominated expenses. The increase in research and development expense was due primarily to an increase in spending associated with enhancing the functionality of an existing product, qualifying second source suppliers of certain raw materials and new product development. These increases were partly offset by lower spending related to product registration related fees and the favorable impact of exchange rates on foreign currency denominated expenses. Livestock and Poultry Diagnostics. The following table presents LPD operating expenses by functional area: For the Years Ended December 31, Operating Expenses (dollars in thousands) 2009 Percent of Revenue 2008 Percent of Revenue Dollar Change Percentage Change Sales and marketing $ 12,650 16.4 % $ 12,982 16.1 % $ (332 ) (2.6 %) General and administrative 12,845 16.6 % 12,416 15.4 % 429 3.5 % Research and development 8,490 11.0 % 7,847 9.7 % 643 8.2 % Total operating expenses $ 33,985 44.0 % $ 33,245 41.2 % $ 740 2.2 % The decrease in sales and marketing expense resulted primarily from the favorable impact of exchange rates on foreign currency denominated expenses and lower spending on marketing activities. The increase in general and administrative expense resulted primarily from increased personnel costs and higher legal spending, partly offset by the favorable impact of exchange rates on foreign currency denominated expenses and lower intangible asset amortization expense. The increase in research and development expense resulted primarily from an increase in spending on product development, increased personnel-related expenses and increased spending on supplies, partly offset by the favorable impact of exchange rates on foreign currency denominated expenses. 46 Other. Operating expenses for Other increased $0.1 million to $13.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2009. The unfavorable impact of an increase in deferred compensation expense associated with an employee plan assumed in the acquisition of OPTI Medical, higher personnel-related costs and higher bad debt expense were almost entirely offset by the receipt of a milestone payment related to our former pharmaceutical business and, to a lesser extent, by lower spending on marketing materials and advertising in our OPTI Medical and Dairy businesses. In the fourth quarter of 2009, we received a milestone payment of $2.0 million related to the sale of product rights in connection with the disposition of our pharmaceutical division in the fourth quarter of 2008. The receipt of this payment was due to the achievement of certain development milestones by the third party that purchased the product rights. Because we have no obligation to deliver product or services, or otherwise provide support to the third party under this agreement, receipt of milestone payments are included in results of operations, but are not classified as revenue as the transaction was accounted for as the sale of a product line. Unallocated Amounts. Operating expenses that are not allocated to our operating segments increased $0.6 million to $12.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2009 due to the write-off of capitalized costs related to an information technology project and higher expense related to share-based compensation. The impairment charge recorded in 2009 was to write off software to manage the various aspects of product development and product lifecycles. These increases were partly offset by the impact of the fourth quarter 2008 sale of our Acarexx and SURPASS pharmaceutical products and a product that was under development, and the subsequent restructuring of the remaining pharmaceutical division. In 2008, we recognized a loss on the transaction and restructuring of approximately $1.5 million, of which $1.1 million was recorded in general and administrative expense, $0.3 million was recorded in sales and marketing expense and $0.1 million was recorded in research and development expense. Interest Income and Interest Expense Interest income was $0.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2009 compared to $2.3 million for the same period of the prior year. The decrease in interest income was due to lower effective interest rates, partly offset by higher average invested cash balances. Interest expense was $1.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2009 compared to $4.6 million for the same period of the prior year. The decrease in interest expense was due to lower effective interest rates on outstanding debt balances, partly offset by lower capitalized interest and higher average borrowings under our Credit Facility. Provision for Income Taxes Our effective income tax rate was 30.0% for the year ended December 31, 2009 and 31.7% for the year ended December 31, 2008 . The decrease in tax rate was due primarily to the recognition of tax benefits resulting from the expiration of certain statutes of limitations, settlement of an audit in an international tax jurisdiction and the write-off of non-deductible goodwill related to the pharmaceutical product lines sold in the fourth quarter of 2008. These benefits were partly offset by a reduction in international deferred tax liabilities in 2008 due to a change in the statutory tax rates for a jurisdiction in which we operate. This benefit of approximately $1.5 million reduced our effective income tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2008 by 0.9 percentage points. RECENT ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS A discussion of recent accounting pronouncements is included in Note 3 to the consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2010 included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES We fund the capital needs of our business through cash on hand, funds generated from operations, and amounts available under our Credit Facility. At December 31, 2010 and December 31, 2009, we had $156.9 million and $106.7 million, respectively, of cash and cash equivalents, and working capital of $175.5 million and $120.0 million, respectively. Additionally, at December 31, 2010, we had remaining borrowing availability of $70.0 million under our $200 million Credit Facility. We believe that, if necessary, we could obtain additional borrowings at prevailing market interest rates to fund our growth objectives. We further believe that current cash and cash equivalents, funds generated from operations, and available borrowings will be sufficient to fund our operations, capital purchase requirements, and strategic growth needs for the next twelve months, and that these resources will be sufficient in the long-term to fund our business as currently conducted. 47 We consider the majority of the operating earnings of certain non-United States subsidiaries to be indefinitely invested outside the U.S. Changes to this position could have adverse tax consequences. We manage our worldwide cash requirements considering available funds among all of our subsidiaries. Our foreign cash balances are generally available without restrictions to fund ordinary business operations outside the U.S. As the majority of our cash is invested outside of the U.S., we expect to continue to utilize amounts available under our Credit Facility to fund our operations in the U.S. As a result, we expect our cash balance to continue to grow for the foreseeable future as sources of foreign cash flows are expected to be greater than uses outside of the U.S. The following table presents additional selected information concerning working capital: For the Three Months Ended December 31, 2010 September 30, 2010 June 30, 2010 March 31, 2010 December 31, 2009 Days sales outstanding (1) 38.7 41.9 41.8 41.7 38.9 Inventory turns (2) 1.8 1.7 1.9 2.0 2.2 (1) Days sales outstanding represents the average of the accounts receivable balances at the beginning and end of each quarter divided by revenue for that quarter, the result of which is then multiplied by 91.25 days. (2) Inventory turns represents inventory-related cost of product sales for the 12 months preceding each quarter-end divided by the inventory balance at the end of the quarter. Sources and Uses of Cash The following table presents cash provided (used): For the Years Ended December 31, (dollars in thousands) 2010 2009 Dollar Change Net cash provided by operating activities $ 178,833 $ 174,952 $ 3,881 Net cash (used) provided by investing activities (43,190 ) (53,621 ) 10,431 Net cash (used) provided by financing activities (86,769 ) (95,295 ) 8,526 Net effect of changes in exchange rates on cash 1,313 1,824 (511 ) Net increase in cash and cash equivalents $ 50,187 $ 27,860 $ 22,327 Operating Activities. Cash provided by operating activities was $178.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2010, compared to $175.0 million for the same period in 2009. The total net income and net non-cash charges, excluding the impact of reclassifying the tax benefit from exercises of stock options and vesting of restricted stock units to a financing activity, was $200.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2010, compared to $190.4 million for the same period in 2009, resulting in incremental operating cash flows of $9.7 million. This was attributable to a $19.1 million increase in net income partly offset by a decrease in net non-cash charges, primarily a $4.2 million decrease in deferred taxes and a $3.8 million decrease in depreciation and amortization. The decrease in depreciation was primarily due to lower depreciation from instruments placed at customer sites under usage agreements. The total of the changes in operating assets and liabilities and reclassifications of the tax benefit from exercises of stock options and vesting of restricted stock units decreased cash by $21.3 million and $15.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2010 and 2009, respectively, resulting in an incremental decrease in cash of $5.8 million. 48 The following table presents cash flows from changes in operating assets and liabilities, and the tax benefit from exercises of stock options and vesting of restricted stock units: For the Years Ended December 31, (dollars in thousands) 2010 2009 Dollar Change Accounts receivable $ (6,914 ) $ (1,155 ) $ (5,759 ) Inventories (19,469 ) 6,223 (25,692 ) Other assets (13,208 ) (7,842 ) (5,366 ) Accounts payable 3,482 (9,156 ) 12,638 Accrued liabilities 30,604 705 29,899 Deferred revenue 2,370 925 1,445 Tax benefit from exercises of stock options and vesting of restricted stock units (18,126 ) (5,194 ) (12,932 ) Total change in cash due to changes in operating assets and liabilities and the tax benefit from exercises of stock options and vesting of restricted stock units $ (21,261 ) $ (15,494 ) $ (5,767 ) During the year ended December 31, 2010, as compared to the same period of the prior year, the increase in accrued liabilities resulted primarily from increased tax accruals, as result of higher pre-tax income and lower accelerated tax depreciation deductions as compared to the same period of the prior year. The timing of inventory receipts, most significantly of slides used with our chemistry analyzers and of hematology instruments and consumables, contributed to a decrease in cash flow , which was partly offset by associated increases in cash flow from the timing of payments for inventory . Inventory receipts during the year ended December 31, 2010 included the ProCyte Dx analyzer and related consumables, which we launched in the third quarter of 2010. We historically have experienced proportionally lower or net negative cash flows from operating activities during the first quarter and proportionally higher or net positive cash flows from operating activities for the remainder of the year and for the annual period. Several factors contribute to the seasonal fluctuations in cash flows generated by operating activities, including the following: We have management and non-management employee incentive programs that provide for the payment of annual bonuses in the first quarter following the year for which the bonuses were earned. We have agreements with certain suppliers that require us to make minimum annual inventory purchases, in some cases in order to retain exclusive distribution rights, and we have other agreements with suppliers that provide for lower pricing based on annual purchase volumes. We may place a higher volume of purchase orders for inventory during the fourth quarter in order to meet our minimum commitments or realize volume pricing discounts and we receive that inventory in the fourth or first quarters and pay in the first quarter. The specific facts and circumstances that we consider in determining the timing and level of inventory purchases throughout the year related to these agreements may yield inconsistent cash flows from operations, most typically in the first and fourth quarters. The timing of inventory receipts also impacts our inventory turnover metrics. To the extent we receive large inventory shipments at the end of a quarter our inventory turnover will be negatively affected. Investing Activities. Cash used by investing activities was $43.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2010, compared to cash used of $53.6 million for the same period of 2009. The decrease in cash used for the year ended December 31, 2010 in comparison to the same period of the prior year is due primarily to less cash used for the renovation of our headquarters facilities and information technology projects. During the year ended December 31, 2010, we used approximately $6.9 million and $11.0 million for the renovation of our headquarters facility and investments in information technology projects, respectively, compared to $13.3 million and $13.8 million during the same period of the prior year. This decrease was partly offset by additional investments in manufacturing equipment, a $4 million investment in a company that owns and operates veterinary hospitals, primarily in the eastern United States (see Note 4 to the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K) and lower proceeds received in connection with the disposition of assets during the year ended December 31, 2010. During the year ended December 31, 2009, we received net proceeds of $5.5 million from the sale of our pharmaceutical product lines and from the sale of property and equipment. Our total capital expenditure plan for 2011 is approximately $45 million, which includes approximately $10.5 million for the renovation and expansion on our headquarters facility. 49 Financing Activities. Cash used by financing activities was $86.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2010 compared to cash used of $95.3 million for the same period in 2009. The decrease in cash used by financing activities was due primarily to an increase in net borrowings under the Credit Facility. At December 31, 2010, we had $129.0 million outstanding under the Credit Facility, of which $2.0 million was borrowed by our Canadian subsidiary and denominated in Canadian dollars. The general availability of funds under the Credit Facility was further reduced by $1.0 million for a letter of credit issued related to our workers compensation policy covering claims for the years ended December 31, 2010 and 2009. The Credit Facility contains financial and other affirmative and negative covenants, as well as customary events of default, which provide for the acceleration of amounts outstanding under the Credit Facility, or restrict our ability to borrow thereunder, in the event of noncompliance. One of our financial covenants requires our ratio of debt to earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization, defined as the consolidated leverage ratio under the terms of the Credit Facility, not to exceed 3-to-1. At December 31, 2010, we were in compliance with the covenants of the Credit Facility. The decrease in cash used by financing activities was also attributable to the $12.5 million increase in proceeds from the exercise of stock options and employee stock purchase plans and the related $12.9 million increase in tax benefits from the exercises of stock options and vesting of restricted stock units. During the years ended December 31, 2010 and 2009, we received $28.9 million and $16.4 million, respectively, on the exercise of stock options and purchase of shares under the employee stock purchase plan, due primarily to an increase in the number of options exercised and, to a lesser extent, an increase in the weighted average exercise price. Exercise activity increased during 2010 as compared to the same period of the prior year primarily due to the adoption by our chief executive officer of a securities trading plan designed to comply with Rule 10b5-1 under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended. As a result of the increase in exercise activity and of the stock performance, the tax benefit from exercises of stock options and vesting of restricted stock units increased $12.9 million to $18.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2010, compared to $5.2 million for the same period of the prior year. The decrease in cash used by financing activities was partly offset by the incremental $60 million used to repurchase treasury stock during the year ended December 31, 2010 compared to the year ended December 31, 2009. Our board of directors has authorized the repurchase of up to 44 million shares of our common stock in the open market or in negotiated transactions. From the inception of the program in August 1999 to December 31, 2010, we repurchased 40.2 million shares. During the year ended December 31, 2010, we purchased 2.5 million shares for an aggregate cost of $143.1 million compared to purchases of 1.9 million shares for an aggregate cost of $83.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2009. We believe that the repurchase of our common stock is a favorable investment, and we also repurchase to offset the dilutive effect of our share-based compensation programs. Repurchases of our common stock may vary depending upon the level of other investing activities and the share price. See Item 5 and Note 18 to the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information about our share repurchases. Other Commitments, Contingencies and Guarantees Under our workers compensation insurance policies for U.S. employees since January 1, 2003, we have retained the first $250,000 in claim liability per incident and an aggregate claim liability based on multiple elements, including payroll, for each year. The insurance company provides insurance for claims above the individual occurrence and aggregate limits. We estimate claim liability based on claims incurred and the estimated ultimate cost to settle the claims. Based on this analysis, we have recognized expenses of $0.9 million, $0.5 million, and $0.8 million for claims incurred during the years ended December 31, 2010, 2009 and 2008, respectively. Claims incurred during the years ended December 31, 2010 and 2009 are relatively undeveloped and significant additional healthcare and wage indemnification costs could arise from those claims. Our liability for claims incurred during the years ended December 31, 2010 and 2009 could exceed our estimates and we could be liable for up to $1.8 million and $1.4 million, respectively, in excess of the expense we have recognized. For the six years ended on or prior to December 31, 2008, based on our retained claim liability per incident and our aggregate claim liability, our maximum liability at December 31, 2010 is $0.8 million in excess of the amounts deemed probable and previously recognized. In connection with these policies, we have outstanding letters of credit totaling $1.8 million that have been issued in favor of our insurance providers as security for these claims. 50 We have commitments outstanding for additional purchase price payments of up to $7.6 million in connection with the acquisitions of businesses and intangible assets that occurred prior to the January 1, 2009 revisions to the accounting principles and requirements for business combinations. All of these commitments are contingent upon the achievement by certain acquired businesses of specified milestones. Of the total outstanding commitments of $7.6 million, $0.1 million has been accrued for at December 31, 2010. We are contractually obligated to make the following payments in the years below: (in thousands) Total 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 After 2015 Long-term debt obligations (1) $ 4,726 $ 1,091 $ 2,181 $ 1,454 $ - Operating leases 76,951 13,777 22,736 13,619 26,819 Purchase obligations (2) 84,999 82,999 2,000 - - Minimum royalty payments 6,714 813 1,841 1,490 2,570 Total contractual cash obligations $ 173,390 $ 98,680 $ 28,758 $ 16,563 $ 29,389 (1) Long-term debt amounts include interest payments associated with long-term debt. (2) Purchase obligations include agreements to purchase goods or services that are enforceable and legally binding and that specify all significant terms, including fixed or minimum quantities, pricing, and approximate timing of purchase transactions. These commitments do not reflect unrecognized tax benefits of $5.0 million and deferred compensation liabilities of $2.2 million as of December 31, 2010 as the timing of recognition is uncertain. Refer to Note 12 of the consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2010 included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional discussion of unrecognized tax benefits. 
