CIK: 874766
Company Name: HARTFORD FINANCIAL SERVICES GROUP INC DE
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2012-02-24


Item 7. MANAGEMENT S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS (Dollar amounts in millions, except for per share data, unless otherwise stated) Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations ( MD&A ) addresses the financial condition of The Hartford Financial Services Group, Inc. and its subsidiaries (collectively, The Hartford or the Company ) as of December 31, 2011, compared with December 31, 2010, and its results of operations for each of the three years in the period ended December 31, 2011. This discussion should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and related Notes beginning on page F-1. The Hartford made changes to its reporting segments in 2011 to reflect the manner in which the Company is currently organized for purposes of making operating decisions and assessing performance. Accordingly, segment data for prior reporting periods has been adjusted to reflect the new segment reporting, see Note 3 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statement for further discussion. Additionally, certain reclassifications have been made to prior year financial information to conform to the current year presentation. INDEX Description Page Consolidated Results of Operations 34 Outlooks 37 Critical Accounting Estimates 39 The Hartford Operations Overview 64 Key Performance Measures and Ratios 70 Property & Casualty Commercial 76 Group Benefits 79 Consumer Markets 80 Individual Annuity 83 Individual Life 85 Retirement Plans 87 Mutual Funds 89 Life Other Operations 90 Property & Casualty Other Operations 92 Corporate 93 Enterprise Risk Management 94 Capital Resources and Liquidity 121 Impact of New Accounting Standards 131 33 Table of Contents CONSOLIDATED RESULTS OF OPERATIONS Increase Increase (Decrease) From (Decrease) From Net income (loss) by segment 2011 2010 2009 2010 to 2011 2009 to 2010 Property & Casualty Commercial $ 528 $ 995 $ 899 $ (467 ) $ 96 Group Benefits 90 185 193 (95 ) (8 ) Commercial Markets 618 1,180 1,092 (562 ) 88 Consumer Markets 5 143 140 (138 ) 3 Individual Annuity (14 ) 527 (444 ) (541 ) 971 Individual Life 133 229 15 (96 ) 214 Retirement Plans 15 47 (222 ) (32 ) 269 Mutual Funds 98 132 34 (34 ) 98 Wealth Management 232 935 (617 ) (703 ) 1,552 Life Other Operations 358 (90 ) (698 ) 448 608 Property & Casualty Other Operations (117 ) (53 ) (78 ) (64 ) 25 Corporate (434 ) (435 ) (726 ) 1 291 Total net income (loss) $ 662 $ 1,680 $ (887 ) $ (1,018 ) $ 2,567 Year ended December 31, 2011 compared to the year ended December 31, 2010 The decrease in net income from 2010 to 2011 was primarily due to the following items: An Unlock charge of $530, after-tax, in 2011 compared to an Unlock benefit of $111, after-tax, in 2010. The charge in 2011 was primarily driven by assumption changes which reduced expected future gross profits including additional costs associated with implementing the Japan hedging strategy and the U.S. variable annuity macro hedge program, as well as actual separate account returns below our aggregated estimated return. The Unlock benefit for 2010 was attributable to actual separate account returns being above our aggregated estimated return and the impact of assumption updates primarily related to decreasing lapse and withdrawal rates and lower hedge costs. For further discussion of Unlocks see the Critical Accounting Estimates within the MD&A. Current accident year catastrophe losses of $484, after-tax, in 2011 compared to $294, after-tax, in 2010. The losses in 2011 primarily relate to more severe tornadoes and wind storms in the Midwest and Southeast, Hurricane Irene, and winter storms in the Northeast and Midwest. The losses in 2010 include severe windstorm events, including a hail storm in Arizona, tornadoes and hail in the Midwest, Plains States and the Southeast and winter storms in the Mid-Atlantic and Northeast. The Company recorded reserve strengthening of $31, after-tax, in 2011, compared to reserve releases of $294, after-tax, in 2010, in its property and casualty insurance prior accident years development, excluding asbestos and environmental reserves. For additional information regarding prior accident years development, see Critical Accounting Estimates within the MD&A. An asbestos reserve strengthening of $189, after-tax, in 2011, compared to $110, after-tax, in 2010 resulting from the Company annual review of its asbestos liabilities in Property & Casualty Other Operations. The reserve strengthening in 2011 was primarily driven by higher frequency and severity of mesothelioma claims, particularly against certain smaller, more peripheral insureds, while the reserve strengthening in 2010 was primarily driven by increases in claim severity and expenses. For further information, see Property & Casualty Other Operations Claims within the Property and Casualty Insurance Product Reserves, Net of Reinsurance section in Critical Accounting Estimates. A $73, after-tax, charge in the second quarter of 2011 related to the write-off of capitalized costs associated with a policy administration software project that was discontinued. Partially offsetting these decreases in net income were following items: Income (loss) from discontinued operations, net of tax, increased due to a realized gain on the sale of Specialty Risk Services of $150, after-tax, in the first quarter of 2011, which was partially offset by a loss of $74, after-tax, from the disposition of Federal Trust Corporation in the second quarter of 2011. In 2010, loss from discontinued operations, net of tax, primarily relates to goodwill impairment on Federal Trust Corporation of approximately $100, after-tax, recorded in the second quarter of 2010. The first quarter of 2010 includes an accrual for a litigation settlement of $73, before-tax, for a class action lawsuit related to structured settlements. 34 Table of Contents Income tax expense (benefit) in 2010 includes a valuation allowance expense of $87 compared to a benefit of $78 in 2011. See Note 13 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for a reconciliation of the tax provision at the U.S. Federal statutory rate to the provision for income taxes. In the second quarter of 2011, the Company recorded a $52 income tax benefit related to a resolution of a tax matter with the IRS for the computation of dividends received deduction ( DRD ) for years 1998, 2000 and 2001. For additional information see Note 13 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. See the segment sections of the MD&A for a discussion on their respective performances. Year ended December 31, 2010 compared to the year ended December 31, 2009 The change from net loss in 2009 to net income in 2010 was primarily due to the following items: An Unlock benefit of $111, after-tax, in 2010 compared to an Unlock charge of $1.0 billion, after-tax, in 2009. The Unlock benefit for 2010 was attributable to actual separate account returns being above our aggregated estimated return and the impact of assumption updates primarily related to decreasing lapse and withdrawal rates, partially offset by hedging, annuitization estimates on Japan products, and long-term expected rate of return updates. The Unlock charge for 2009 was primarily driven by actual separate account returns being significantly below our aggregated estimated return for the first quarter of 2009, partially offset by actual returns being greater than our aggregated estimated return for the remainder of 2009. For further discussion of Unlocks see the Critical Accounting Estimates within the MD&A. Net realized capital losses decreased primarily due to lower impairment losses, lower valuation allowances on mortgage loans, and net gains on sales in 2010 compared to net losses on sales in 2009. These changes were partially offset by losses on the variable annuity hedge program in 2010 compared to gains in 2009. For further discussion, see Net Realized Capital Gains (Losses) within Investment Results of Key Performance Measures and Ratios of this MD&A. Partially offsetting these changes in net income (loss) were the following items: An asbestos reserve strengthening of $110, after-tax, in 2010, compared to $90, after-tax, in 2009 resulting from the Company annual review of its asbestos liabilities within Property & Casualty Other Operations. The reserve strengthening in 2010 and 2009 was primarily driven by increases in claim severity and expenses, particularly attributed to litigation in certain jurisdictions, and, to a lesser extent, development on primarily peripheral accounts. For further information, see Property & Casualty Other Operations Claims within the Property and Casualty Insurance Product Reserves, Net of Reinsurance section in Critical Accounting Estimates. Current accident year catastrophe losses of $294, after-tax, in 2010 compared to $199, after-tax, in 2009. The losses in 2010, primarily relate to severe windstorm events, particularly from hail in the Midwest, Plains States and the Southeast and from winter storms in the Mid-Atlantic and Northeast. The losses in 2009, primarily relate to ice storms, windstorms, and tornadoes across many states. The first quarter of 2010 includes an accrual for a litigation settlement of $73, before-tax, for a class action lawsuit related to structured settlements. The loss from discontinued operations, net of tax, increased in 2010 primarily due to a goodwill impairment on Federal Trust Corporation of approximately $100, after-tax, partially offset by a net realized capital gain of $41, after-tax, on the sale of the Hartford Investments Canada Corporation ( HICC ). Income tax expense (benefit) in 2010 includes a valuation allowance expense of $87 compared to an expense of $30 in 2009. In addition, 2009 included nondeductible costs associated with warrants of $78. See Note 13 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for a reconciliation of the tax provision at the U.S. Federal statutory rate to the provision for income taxes. See the segment sections of the MD&A for a discussion on their respective performances. 35 Table of Contents Income Taxes The effective tax rates for 2011, 2010 and 2009 were (150%), 26%, and 49%, respectively. The differences between the effective rate and the U.S. statutory rate of 35% for 2011, 2010 and 2009 were due principally to tax-exempt interest earned on invested assets and the DRD. These items decreased tax expense on the 2011 and 2010 pre-tax income and increased the tax benefit on the 2009 pre-tax loss. The 2011 effective tax rate also includes a deferred tax asset valuation allowance decrease, and the 2010 and 2009 effective tax rates include a deferred tax asset valuation allowance increase. The 2009 effective tax rate also includes the tax effect of non-deductible costs associated with warrants. The separate account DRD is estimated for the current year using information from the most recent return, adjusted for current year equity market performance and other appropriate factors, including estimated levels of corporate dividend payments and level of policy owner equity account balances. The actual current year DRD can vary from estimates based on, but not limited to, changes in eligible dividends received in the mutual funds, amounts of distributions from these mutual funds, amounts of short-term capital gains at the mutual fund level and the Company taxable income before the DRD. The Company recorded benefits of $201, $145 and $181 related to the DRD in the years ended December 31, 2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively. These amounts included benefits (charges) related to prior years tax returns of $3, $(3) and $29 in 2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively. In Revenue Ruling 2007-61, issued on September 25, 2007, the IRS announced its intention to issue regulations with respect to certain computational aspects of the DRD on separate account assets held in connection with variable annuity contracts. Revenue Ruling 2007-61 suspended Revenue Ruling 2007-54, issued in August 2007 that purported to change accepted industry and IRS interpretations of the statutes governing these computational questions. No regulations have been issued to date. Any regulations that the IRS may ultimately propose for issuance in this area will be subject to public notice and comment, at which time insurance companies and other members of the public will have the opportunity to raise legal and practical questions about the content, scope and application of such regulations. As a result, the ultimate timing and substance of any such regulations are unknown, but they could result in the elimination of some or all of the separate account DRD tax benefit that the Company receives. Management believes that it is highly likely that any such regulations would apply prospectively only. The Company receives a foreign tax credit for foreign taxes paid including payments from its separate account assets. This credit reduces the Company U.S. tax liability. The separate account foreign tax credit is estimated for the current year using information from the most recent filed return, adjusted for the change in the allocation of separate account investments to the international equity markets during the current year. The actual current year foreign tax credit can vary from the estimates due to actual foreign tax credits passed through from the mutual funds. The Company recorded benefits of $11, $4 and $16 related to the separate account foreign tax credit in the years ended December 31, 2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively. These amounts included benefits (charges) related to prior years tax returns of $2, $(4) and $3 in 2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively. The Company unrecognized tax benefits were unchanged during 2011 and 2010, remaining at $48 as of December 31, 2011, 2010 and 2009. This entire amount, if it were recognized, would affect the effective tax rate in the period it is released. 36 Table of Contents OUTLOOKS The Hartford provides projections and other forward-looking information in the following discussions, which contain many forward-looking statements, particularly relating to the Company future financial performance. These forward-looking statements are estimates based on information currently available to the Company, are made pursuant to the safe harbor provisions of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 and are subject to the precautionary statements set forth on page 3 of this Form 10-K and the risk factors set forth under Item 1A and other similar information contained in this Form 10-K and in other filings made from time to time by the Company with the SEC. Actual results are likely to differ, and in the past have differed, materially from those forecast by the Company, depending on the outcome of various factors, including, but not limited to, those set forth in each discussion below and in Item 1A, Risk Factors. Overview As previously announced, we are evaluating our strategy and business portfolio with the goal of delivering shareholder value. As this review is ongoing and no decisions have yet been made, the following discussion of our outlooks and the forward-looking statements contained therein assume a continuation of our current business focus and, as such, are subject to change based on any actions taken as a result of our ongoing review. The Hartford focuses on growing its three customer-oriented divisions, Commercial Markets, Consumer Markets, and Wealth Management, through enhanced product development, leveraging synergies of the divisions product offerings to meet customer needs, and increased efficiencies throughout the organization. Slow economic and employment expansion may adversely impact the performance of The Hartford insurance protection businesses where insureds may change their level of insurance, and asset accumulation businesses may see customers changing their level of savings based on anticipated economic conditions. In addition, the performance of The Hartford divisions is subject to uncertainty due to capital market conditions, which impact the earnings of its asset management businesses and valuations and earnings in its investment portfolio. The current and future interest rate environment also affects the performance of the Company divisions. A sustained low interest rate environment would result in lower net investment income, lower estimated gross profits on certain Wealth Management products, lower margins and increased pension expense. Commercial Markets Commercial Markets focuses on growth through market-differentiated products and services while maintaining a disciplined underwriting approach. In Property & Casualty Commercial, improving market conditions are expected to continue, which should enable the Company to achieve price increases, while a slowly recovering economy is anticipated to drive an increase in insurance exposures. As such, the Company expects low to mid single-digit written premium growth in 2012. This growth reflects the combination of our current market position, a broadening of underwriting expertise focused on selected industries, a leveraging of the payroll model, and numerous initiatives launched in the past several years. More specifically, this growth is anticipated to be driven by continued momentum in small commercial, including programs aimed at growing total policy counts, the rollout of new product enhancements and the continued expansion of ease of doing business technology, while management expects middle market and specialty growth to be tempered as a result of pricing actions taken to restore returns to adequate levels. The Property & Casualty Commercial combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development is expected to remain in the mid to upper 90s for 2012 as compared to the 97.2% achieved in 2011. Earned price increases are expected to flow through the book, while loss costs are not expected to change dramatically. In Group Benefits, premiums are expected to decline in 2012, as compared to 2011, reflecting the competitive environment coupled with pricing actions implemented with the goal of improving profitability. Over time, as employers design benefit strategies to attract and retain employees, while attempting to control their benefit costs, management believes that the need for the Company products will expand. The Company believes that this combined with the significant number of employees who currently do not have coverage or adequate levels of coverage, creates continued opportunities for our products and services. The Company expects Group Benefits loss ratio in 2012 to improve from the 2011 loss ratio of 79.5% as a result of the pricing actions taken, given the expectation of persistent elevated disability incidence. Consumer Markets The Company expects written premium to decline in 2012, compared to 2011, including a decrease in both AARP direct and Agency business. Despite an improvement in policy retention in 2011 and an expected further increase in new business in 2012, management expects that non-renewed premium will exceed new business in 2012 resulting in an overall decline in written premium. In 2012, management expects that policy retention will improve but continue to be affected by the impact of renewal written pricing increases in a price sensitive market. Within the Agency channel, policy retention will also be affected by continued pricing and underwriting actions to improve profitability, including efforts to reposition the book into more mature, preferred market business. The Company expects new business to increase in 2012, primarily driven by AARP member business, both direct and through independent agents, as well as new business from affinities other than AARP and other targeted consumer direct marketing. New business is expected to benefit from the introduction of the Open Road Advantage auto product and the Hartford Home Advantage product. As of January 2012, the Open Road Advantage auto product was available in 44 states and the Hartford Home Advantage product was available in 38 states. Management expects that the combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development will be flat to slightly lower in 2012, as compared to 2011, as an improvement in the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes will be largely offset by an expected increase in the underwriting expense ratio. For both auto and home, the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes is expected to improve in 2012, driven by earned pricing increases and lower claim frequency, partially offset by an expected modest increase in average claim severity. While management expects that industry non-catastrophe claim frequency will be relatively flat to slightly increasing in 2012, management expects The Hartford will have slightly lower claim frequency given its continued shift to a more preferred book of business. 37 Table of Contents Wealth Management Wealth Management currently focuses on driving profitable growth through innovation, product diversification and multichannel distribution. Additionally, management is focused on improving profit margins and generating statutory surplus in each of its operating segments. Individual Annuity continues to build out a portfolio of solutions to meet the needs of consumers planning for and living in retirement. In 2011, several of these solutions were incorporated in the Personal Retirement Manager II ( PRM II ). While initial indicators of sales activity have improved, the product ultimate success in contributing to Individual Annuity growth will depend on, among other things, our ability to market and distribute the product through new and existing distribution channels and market receptivity to the new product features. Further, Individual Annuity diversified its suite of product solutions through the introduction of a new fixed indexed annuity product. In addition, the Individual Annuity hedge program may contribute to earnings volatility since the program generates mark to market gains and losses, while not all the underlying liabilities being hedged are marked to market. Individual Life continues to differentiate itself through the creative offering of riders. The recently launched LongevityAccess rider, which allows policyholders to begin taking income from a policy at age 90, in tandem with the increasingly popular LifeAccess rider, which allows policyholders to take distributions from their policies in cases of chronic illness, gives The Hartford an ability to help people protect against premature death, outliving one assets, or deteriorating health. In addition to building out distribution through property & casualty agents, the Company continues to expand its distribution into career life insurance professionals through the Monarch program. The Retirement Plans business continues to experience strong sales. In addition to our core 401(k) market, we have seen growth in larger ($5-$25) corporate plans. The property & casualty channel will become an increasingly important area of focus for us given our conviction that this channel is underpenetrated and well suited for this business. In the fourth quarter, we introduced The Hartford Lifetime Income product, a patented income solution delivered through 401(k) plans, which provides a guaranteed paycheck for life and has been a major catalyst for growth in this business. Our Mutual Fund business has been offering new funds to improve our participation in asset classes where we see potential growth opportunities. In addition, the Company announced in the fourth quarter of 2011 that Wellington Management Company, LLP ( Wellington Management ) will serve as the sole sub-advisor for The Hartford mutual funds, including equity and fixed income funds, pending a fund-by-fund review by The Hartford mutual funds board of directors. Runoff Operations In the fourth quarter of 2011, The Hartford established a new Runoff Operations division consisting of Life Other Operations and Property & Casualty Other Operations in order to better differentiate between our ongoing and runoff businesses. The objective of the Runoff Operations division is to focus on managing profitability, improving capital efficiency and effectiveness, and limiting and managing risk associated with the businesses residing in the division. Life Other Operations consists of the Hartford international variable annuity business, institutional annuities business and Private Placement Life Insurance business. The international variable annuity business within Life Other Operations will continue to be a significant driver of earnings and earnings variability as a result of the hedge program associated with the Company international annuities. This hedge program generates mark to market gains and losses while the underlying liabilities being hedged are primarily not marked to market resulting in unpredictable earnings volatility period to period. Property & Casualty Other Operations, is focused on managing our asbestos environmental and other legacy liabilities. The results of the annual ground up study of asbestos reserves and the annual environmental reserve update will be the primary driver impacting the results for this business. 38 Table of Contents CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES The preparation of financial statements, in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America ( U.S. GAAP ), requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ, and in the past have differed, from those estimates. The Company has identified the following estimates as critical in that they involve a higher degree of judgment and are subject to a significant degree of variability: property and casualty insurance product reserves, net of reinsurance; estimated gross profits used in the valuation and amortization of assets and liabilities associated with variable annuity and other universal life-type contracts; evaluation of other-than-temporary impairments on available-for-sale securities and valuation allowances on mortgage loans; living benefits required to be fair valued (in other policyholder funds and benefits payable); goodwill impairment; valuation of investments and derivative instruments; pension and other postretirement benefit obligations; valuation allowance on deferred tax assets; and contingencies relating to corporate litigation and regulatory matters. Certain of these estimates are particularly sensitive to market conditions, and deterioration and/or volatility in the worldwide debt or equity markets could have a material impact on the Consolidated Financial Statements. In developing these estimates management makes subjective and complex judgments that are inherently uncertain and subject to material change as facts and circumstances develop. Although variability is inherent in these estimates, management believes the amounts provided are appropriate based upon the facts available upon compilation of the financial statements. Property and Casualty Insurance Product Reserves, Net of Reinsurance The Hartford establishes reserves on its property and casualty insurance products to provide for the estimated costs of paying claims under insurance policies written by the Company. These reserves include estimates for both claims that have been reported and those that have not yet been reported, and include estimates of all expenses associated with processing and settling these claims. Incurred but not reported ( IBNR ) reserves represent the difference between the estimated ultimate cost of all claims and the actual reported loss and loss adjustment expenses ( reported losses ). Reported losses represent cumulative loss and loss adjustment expenses paid plus case reserves for outstanding reported claims. Company actuaries evaluate the total reserves (IBNR and case reserves) on an accident year basis. An accident year is the calendar year in which a loss is incurred, or, in the case of claims-made policies, the calendar year in which a loss is reported. Reserve estimates can change over time because of unexpected changes in the external environment. Potential external factors include (1) changes in the inflation rate for goods and services related to covered damages such as medical care, hospital care, auto parts, wages and home repair; (2) changes in the general economic environment that could cause unanticipated changes in the claim frequency per unit insured; (3) changes in the litigation environment as evidenced by changes in claimant attorney representation in the claims negotiation and settlement process; (4) changes in the judicial environment regarding the interpretation of policy provisions relating to the determination of coverage and/or the amount of damages awarded for certain types of damages; (5) changes in the social environment regarding the general attitude of juries in the determination of liability and damages; (6) changes in the legislative environment regarding the definition of damages; and (7) new types of injuries caused by new types of injurious exposure: past examples include lead paint, construction defects and tainted Chinese-made drywall. Reserve estimates can also change over time because of changes in internal Company operations. Potential internal factors include (1) periodic changes in claims handling procedures; (2) growth in new lines of business where exposure and loss development patterns are not well established; or (3) changes in the quality of risk selection in the underwriting process. In the case of assumed reinsurance, all of the above risks apply. In addition, changes in ceding company case reserving and reporting patterns can create additional factors that need to be considered in estimating the reserves. Due to the inherent complexity of the assumptions used, final claim settlements may vary significantly from the present estimates, particularly when those settlements may not occur until well into the future. Through both facultative and treaty reinsurance agreements, the Company cedes a share of the risks it has underwritten to other insurance companies. The Company net reserves for loss and loss adjustment expenses include anticipated recovery from reinsurers on unpaid claims. The estimated amount of the anticipated recovery, or reinsurance recoverable, is net of an allowance for uncollectible reinsurance. 39 Table of Contents Reinsurance recoverables include an estimate of the amount of gross loss and loss adjustment expense reserves that may be ceded under the terms of the reinsurance agreements, including IBNR unpaid losses. The Company calculates its ceded reinsurance projection based on the terms of any applicable facultative and treaty reinsurance, often including an estimate by reinsurance agreement of how IBNR losses will ultimately be ceded. The Company provides an allowance for uncollectible reinsurance, reflecting management best estimate of reinsurance cessions that may be uncollectible in the future due to reinsurers unwillingness or inability to pay. The Company analyzes recent developments in commutation activity between reinsurers and cedants, recent trends in arbitration and litigation outcomes in disputes between reinsurers and cedants and the overall credit quality of the Company reinsurers. Where its contracts permit, the Company secures future claim obligations with various forms of collateral, including irrevocable letters of credit, secured trusts, funds held accounts and group-wide offsets. The allowance for uncollectible reinsurance was $290 as of December 31, 2011, including $83 related to Property & Casualty Commercial and $207 related to Property & Casualty Other Operations. The Company estimate of reinsurance recoverables, net of an allowance for uncollectible reinsurance, is subject to similar risks and uncertainties as the estimate of the gross reserve for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses. The Hartford, like other insurance companies, categorizes and tracks its insurance reserves for its segments by line of business . Furthermore, The Hartford regularly reviews the appropriateness of reserve levels at the line of business level, taking into consideration the variety of trends that impact the ultimate settlement of claims for the subsets of claims in each particular line of business. In addition, Property & Casualty Other Operations categorizes reserves as asbestos and environmental ( A&E ), whereby the Company reviews these reserve levels by type of event, rather than by line of business. Adjustments to previously established reserves, which may be material, are reflected in the operating results of the period in which the adjustment is determined to be necessary. In the judgment of management, information currently available has been properly considered in the reserves established for losses and loss adjustment expenses. The following table shows loss and loss adjustment expense reserves by line of business as of December 31, 2011, net of reinsurance: Property & Casualty Consumer Property & Casualty Total Property and Commercial Markets Other Operations Casualty Insurance Reserve Line of Business Commercial property $ 187 $ $ $ 187 Homeowners 467 467 Auto physical damage 16 29 45 Auto liability 564 1,523 2,087 Package business 1,282 1,282 Workers compensation 7,471 7,471 General liability 2,641 31 2,672 Professional liability 702 702 Fidelity and surety 210 210 Assumed reinsurance 349 349 All other non-A&E 810 810 A&E 21 2 2,212 2,235 Total reserves-net 13,094 2,052 3,371 18,517 Reinsurance and other recoverables 2,343 9 681 3,033 Total reserves-gross $ 15,437 $ 2,061 $ 4,052 $ 21,550 Reserving Methodology (See Reserving for Asbestos and Environmental Claims within Property & Casualty Other Operations for a discussion of how A&E reserves are set) How reserves are set Reserves are set by line of business within the various segments. A single line of business may be written in more than one segment. Case reserves are established by a claims handler on each individual claim and are adjusted as new information becomes known during the course of handling the claim. Lines of business for which loss data (e.g., paid losses and case reserves) emerge (i.e., is reported) over a long period of time are referred to as long-tail lines of business. Lines of business for which loss data emerge more quickly are referred to as short-tail lines of business. The Company shortest-tail lines of business are property and auto physical damage. The longest tail lines of business include workers compensation, general liability, professional liability and assumed reinsurance. For short-tail lines of business, emergence of paid loss and case reserves is credible and likely indicative of ultimate losses. For long-tail lines of business, emergence of paid losses and case reserves is less credible in the early periods and, accordingly, may not be indicative of ultimate losses. 40 Table of Contents The Company reserving actuaries, who are independent of the business units, regularly review reserves for both current and prior accident years using the most current claim data. For most lines of business, these reserve reviews incorporate a variety of actuarial methods and judgments and involve rigorous analysis. These selections incorporate input, as judged by the reserving actuaries to be appropriate, from claims personnel, pricing actuaries and operating management on reported loss cost trends and other factors that could affect the reserve estimates. Most reserves are reviewed fully each quarter, including loss and loss adjustment expense reserves for property, auto physical damage, auto liability, package business, workers compensation, most general liability, professional liability and fidelity and surety. Other reserves are reviewed semi-annually (twice per year) or annually. These include, but are not limited to, reserves for losses incurred in accident years older than twelve and twenty years, for Consumer Markets and Property & Casualty Commercial, respectively, assumed reinsurance, latent exposures, such as construction defects and unallocated loss adjustment expense. For reserves that are reviewed semi-annually or annually, management monitors the emergence of paid and reported losses in the intervening quarters to either confirm that the estimate of ultimate losses should not change or, if necessary, perform a reserve review to determine whether the reserve estimate should change. An expected loss ratio is used in initially recording the reserves for both short-tail and long-tail lines of business. This expected loss ratio is determined through a review of prior accident years loss ratios and expected changes to earned pricing, loss costs, mix of business, ceded reinsurance and other factors that are expected to impact the loss ratio for the current accident year. For short-tail lines, IBNR for the current accident year is initially recorded as the product of the expected loss ratio for the period, earned premium for the period and the proportion of losses expected to be reported in future calendar periods for the current accident period. For long-tailed lines, IBNR reserves for the current accident year are initially recorded as the product of the expected loss ratio for the period and the earned premium for the period, less reported losses for the period. In addition to the expected loss ratio, the actuarial techniques or methods used primarily include paid and reported loss development and frequency / severity techniques as well as the Bornhuetter-Ferguson method (a combination of the expected loss ratio and paid development or reported development method). Within any one line of business, the methods that are given more influence vary based primarily on the maturity of the accident year, the mix of business and the particular internal and external influences impacting the claims experience or the methods. The output of the reserve reviews are reserve estimates that are referred to herein as the actuarial indication . As of December 31, 2011 and 2010, net property and casualty insurance product reserves for losses and loss adjustment expenses reported under accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America ( U.S. GAAP ) were approximately equal to net reserves reported on a statutory basis. Under U.S. GAAP, liabilities for unpaid losses for permanently disabled workers compensation claimants are discounted at rates that are no higher than risk-free interest rates and which generally exceed the statutory discount rates set by regulators, such that workers compensation reserves for statutory reporting are higher than the reserves for U.S. GAAP reporting. Largely offsetting the effect of the difference in discounting is that a portion of the U.S. GAAP provision for uncollectible reinsurance is not recognized under statutory accounting. Most of the Company property and casualty insurance product reserves are not discounted. However, the Company has discounted liabilities funded through structured settlements and has discounted certain reserves for indemnity payments due to permanently disabled claimants under workers compensation policies. Provided below is a general discussion of which methods are preferred by line of business. Because the actuarial estimates are generated at a much finer level of detail than line of business (e.g., by distribution channel, coverage, accident period), this description should not be assumed to apply to each coverage and accident year within a line of business. Also, as circumstances change, the methods that are given more influence will change. Property and Auto Physical Damage. These lines are fast-developing and paid and reported development techniques are used as these methods use historical data to develop paid and reported loss development patterns, which are then applied to current paid and reported losses by accident period to estimate ultimate losses. The Company relies primarily on reported development techniques although a review of frequency and severity and the initial loss expectation based on the expected loss ratio is used for the most immature accident months. The advantage of frequency / severity techniques is that frequency estimates are generally easier to predict and external information can be used to supplement internal data in making severity estimates. Personal Auto Liability. For auto liability, and bodily injury in particular, the Company performs a greater number of techniques than it does for property and auto physical damage. In addition, because the paid development technique is affected by changes in claim closure patterns and the reported development method is affected by changes in case reserving practices, the Company uses Berquist-Sherman techniques which adjust these patterns to reflect current settlement rates and case reserving techniques. The Company generally uses the reported development method for older accident years as a higher percentage of ultimate losses are reflected in reported losses than in cumulative paid losses and the frequency/severity and Berquist-Sherman methods for more recent accident years. Recent periods are influenced by changes in case reserve practices and changing disposal rates; the frequency/severity techniques are not affected as much by these changes and the Berquist-Sherman techniques specifically adjust for these changes. Auto Liability for Commercial Lines and Short-Tailed General Liability. The Company performs a variety of techniques, including the paid and reported development methods and frequency / severity techniques. For older, more mature accident years, the Company finds that reported development techniques are best. For more recent accident years, the Company typically prefers frequency / severity techniques that make separate assumptions about loss activity above and below a selected capping level. 41 Table of Contents Long-Tailed General Liability, Fidelity and Surety and Large Deductible Workers Compensation . For these long-tailed lines of business, the Company generally relies on the expected loss ratio and reported development techniques. The Company generally weights these techniques together, relying more heavily on the expected loss ratio method at early ages of development and more on the reported development method as an accident year matures. Workers Compensation . Workers compensation is the Company single largest reserve line of business so a wide range of methods are reviewed in the reserve analysis. Methods performed include paid and reported development, variations on expected loss ratio methods, and an in-depth analysis on the largest states. Historically, paid development patterns in the Company workers compensation business have been stable, so paid techniques are preferred. Although paid techniques may be less predictive of the ultimate liability when a low percentage of ultimate losses are paid as in early periods of development, recent changes in the frequency of workers compensation claims have caused the Company to place greater reliance in paid methods with continued consideration of the state-by-state analysis and the expected loss ratio approach. Professional Liability. Reported and paid loss developments patterns for this line tend to be volatile. Therefore, the Company typically relies on frequency and severity techniques. Assumed Reinsurance and All Other. For these lines, the Company tends to rely on the reported development techniques. In assumed reinsurance, assumptions are influenced by information gained from claim and underwriting audits. Allocated Loss Adjustment Expenses (ALAE). For some lines of business (e.g., professional liability and assumed reinsurance), ALAE and losses are analyzed together. For most lines of business, however, ALAE is analyzed separately, using paid development techniques and an analysis of the relationship between ALAE and loss payments. Unallocated Loss Adjustment Expense (ULAE). ULAE is analyzed separately from loss and ALAE. For most lines of business, incurred ULAE costs to be paid in the future are projected based on an expected cost per claim year and the anticipated claim closure pattern and the ratio of paid ULAE to paid loss. The final step in the reserve review process involves a comprehensive review by senior reserving actuaries who apply their judgment and, in concert with senior management, determine the appropriate level of reserves based on the information that has been accumulated. Numerous factors are considered in this process including, but not limited to, the assessed reliability of key loss trends and assumptions that may be significantly influencing the current actuarial indications, pertinent trends observed over the recent past, the level of volatility within a particular line of business, and the improvement or deterioration of actuarial indications in the current period as compared to the prior periods. Total recorded net reserves, excluding asbestos and environmental, were 1.8% higher than the actuarial indication of the reserves as of December 31, 2011. See the Reserve Development section for a discussion of changes to reserve estimates recorded in 2011. Current trends contributing to reserve uncertainty The Hartford is a multi-line company in the property and casualty insurance business. The Hartford is therefore subject to reserve uncertainty stemming from a number of conditions, including but not limited to those noted above, any of which could be material at any point in time. Certain issues may become more or less important over time as conditions change. As various market conditions develop, management must assess whether those conditions constitute a long-term trend that should result in a reserving action (i.e., increasing or decreasing the reserve). Within Property & Casualty Commercial and Property & Casualty Other Operations, the Company has exposure to claims asserted for bodily injury as a result of long-term or continuous exposure to harmful products or substances. Examples include, but are not limited to, pharmaceutical products, silica and lead paint. The Company also has exposure to claims from construction defects, where property damage or bodily injury from negligent construction is alleged. In addition, the Company has exposure to claims asserted against religious institutions and other organizations relating to molestation or abuse. Such exposures may involve potentially long latency periods and may implicate coverage in multiple policy periods. These factors make reserves for such claims more uncertain than other bodily injury or property damage claims. With regard to these exposures, the Company is monitoring trends in litigation, the external environment, the similarities to other mass torts and the potential impact on the Company reserves. In Consumer Markets, reserving estimates are generally less variable than for the Company other property and casualty segments because of the coverages having relatively shorter periods of loss emergence. Estimates, however, can still vary due to a number of factors, including interpretations of frequency and severity trends and their impact on recorded reserve levels. Severity trends can be impacted by changes in internal claim handling and case reserving practices in addition to changes in the external environment. These changes in claim practices increase the uncertainty in the interpretation of case reserve data, which increases the uncertainty in recorded reserve levels. In addition, the introduction of new products has led to a different mix of business by type of insured than the Company experienced in the past. Such changes in mix increase the uncertainty of the reserve projections, since historical data and reporting patterns may not be applicable to the new business. In standard commercial lines, workers compensation is the Company single biggest line of business and the line of business with the longest pattern of loss emergence. Medical costs make up more than 50% of workers compensation payments. As such, reserve estimates for workers compensation are particularly sensitive to changes in medical inflation, the changing use of medical care procedures and changes in state legislative and regulatory environments. In addition, a changing economic environment can affect the ability of an injured worker to return to work and the length of time a worker receives disability benefits. The Company has recently experienced a sharp increase in workers compensation claim frequency, while only seeing a partial offset from moderating severity trends. These factors increase the uncertainty in the estimate of reserves. 42 Table of Contents In specialty lines, many lines of insurance are long-tail , including large deductible workers compensation insurance, as such, reserve estimates for these lines are more difficult to determine than reserve estimates for shorter-tail lines of insurance. Estimating required reserve levels for large deductible workers compensation insurance is further complicated by the uncertainty of whether losses that are attributable to the deductible amount will be paid by the insured; if such losses are not paid by the insured due to financial difficulties, the Company would be contractually liable. Another example of reserve variability relates to reserves for directors and officers insurance. There is potential volatility in the required level of reserves due to the continued uncertainty regarding the number and severity of class action suits, including uncertainty regarding the Company exposure to losses arising from the collapse of the sub-prime mortgage market. Additionally, the Company exposure to losses under directors and officers insurance policies is primarily in excess layers, making estimates of loss more complex. The recent financial market turmoil has increased the number of shareholder class action lawsuits against our insureds or their directors and officers and this trend could continue for some period of time. Impact of changes in key assumptions on reserve volatility As stated above, the Company practice is to estimate reserves using a variety of methods, assumptions and data elements. Within its reserve estimation process for reserves other than asbestos and environmental, the Company does not consistently use statistical loss distributions or confidence levels around its reserve estimate and, as a result, does not disclose reserve ranges. The reserve estimation process includes assumptions about a number of factors in the internal and external environment. Across most lines of business, the most important assumptions are future loss development factors applied to paid or reported losses to date. The trend in loss costs is also a key assumption, particularly in the most recent accident years, where loss development factors are less credible. The following discussion includes disclosure of possible variation from current estimates of loss reserves due to a change in certain key indicators of potential losses. Each of the impacts described below is estimated individually, without consideration for any correlation among key indicators or among lines of business. Therefore, it would be inappropriate to take each of the amounts described below and add them together in an attempt to estimate volatility for the Company reserves in total. The estimated variation in reserves due to changes in key indicators is a reasonable estimate of possible variation that may occur in the future, likely over a period of several calendar years. It is important to note that the variation discussed is not meant to be a worst-case scenario, and therefore, it is possible that future variation may be more than the amounts discussed below. Recorded reserves for auto liability, net of reinsurance, are $2.1 billion across all lines, $1.5 billion of which is in Consumer Markets. Personal auto liability reserves are shorter-tailed than other lines of business (such as workers compensation) and, therefore, less volatile. However, the size of the reserve base means that future changes in estimates could be material to the Company results of operations in any given period. The key indicator for Consumer Markets auto liability is the annual loss cost trend, particularly the severity trend component of loss costs. A 2.5 point change in annual severity for the two most recent accident years would change the estimated net reserve need by $80, in either direction. A 2.5 point change in annual severity is within the Company historical variation. Recorded reserves for workers compensation, net of reinsurance, are $7.5 billion. Loss development patterns are a key indicator for this line of business, particularly for more mature accident years. Historically, loss development patterns have been impacted by, among other things, medical cost inflation. The Company has reviewed the historical variation in reported loss development patterns. If the reported loss development patterns change by 3%, the estimated net reserve need would change by $400, in either direction. A 3% change in reported loss development patterns is within the Company historical variation, as measured by the variation around the average development factors as reported in statutory accident year reports. Recorded reserves for general liability, net of reinsurance, are $2.7 billion. Loss development patterns are a key indicator for this line of business, particularly for more mature accident years. Historically, loss development patterns have been impacted by, among other things, emergence of new types of claims (e.g., construction defect claims) or a shift in the mixture between smaller, more routine claims and larger, more complex claims. The Company has reviewed the historical variation in reported loss development patterns. If the reported loss development patterns change by 9%, the estimated net reserve need would change by $200, in either direction. A 9% change in reported loss development patterns is within the Company historical variation, as measured by the variation around the average development factors as reported in statutory accident year reports. Similar to general liability, assumed casualty reinsurance is affected by reported loss development patterns. In addition to the items identified above that would affect both direct and reinsurance liability claim development patterns, there is also an impact to reporting patterns for any changes in claim notification from ceding companies to the reinsurer. Recorded net reserves for HartRe assumed reinsurance business, excluding asbestos and environmental liabilities, within Property & Casualty Other Operations were $349 as of December 31, 2011. If the reported loss development patterns underlying the Company net reserves for HartRe assumed casualty reinsurance change by 5%, the estimated net reserve need would change by approximately $95, in either direction. A 5% change in reported loss development patterns is within the Company historical variation, as measured by the variation around the average development factors as reported in statutory accident year reports. 43 Table of Contents Reserving for Asbestos and Environmental Claims within Property & Casualty Other Operations How A&E reserves are set In establishing reserves for asbestos claims, the Company evaluates its insureds estimated liabilities for such claims using a ground-up approach. The Company considers a variety of factors, including the jurisdictions where underlying claims have been brought, past, pending and anticipated future claim activity, disease mix, past settlement values of similar claims, dismissal rates, allocated loss adjustment expense, and potential bankruptcy impact. Similarly, a ground-up exposure review approach is used to establish environmental reserves. The Company evaluation of its insureds estimated liabilities for environmental claims involves consideration of several factors, including historical values of similar claims, the number of sites involved, the insureds alleged activities at each site, the alleged environmental damage at each site, the respective shares of liability of potentially responsible parties at each site, the appropriateness and cost of remediation at each site, the nature of governmental enforcement activities at each site, and potential bankruptcy impact. Having evaluated its insureds probable liabilities for asbestos and/or environmental claims, the Company then evaluates its insureds insurance coverage programs for such claims. The Company considers its insureds total available insurance coverage, including the coverage issued by the Company. The Company also considers relevant judicial interpretations of policy language and applicable coverage defenses or determinations, if any. Evaluation of both the insureds estimated liabilities and the Company exposure to the insureds depends heavily on an analysis of the relevant legal issues and litigation environment. This analysis is conducted by the Company lawyers and is subject to applicable privileges. For both asbestos and environmental reserves, the Company also compares its historical direct net loss and expense paid and reported experience, and net loss and expense paid and reported experience year by year, to assess any emerging trends, fluctuations or characteristics suggested by the aggregate paid and reported activity. Once the gross ultimate exposure for indemnity and allocated loss adjustment expense is determined for its insureds by each policy year, the Company calculates its ceded reinsurance projection based on any applicable facultative and treaty reinsurance and the Company experience with reinsurance collections. Uncertainties Regarding Adequacy of Asbestos and Environmental Reserves A number of factors affect the variability of estimates for asbestos and environmental reserves including assumptions with respect to the frequency of claims, the average severity of those claims settled with payment, the dismissal rate of claims with no payment and the expense to indemnity ratio. The uncertainty with respect to the underlying reserve assumptions for asbestos and environmental adds a greater degree of variability to these reserve estimates than reserve estimates for more traditional exposures. While this variability is reflected in part in the size of the range of reserves developed by the Company, that range may still not be indicative of the potential variance between the ultimate outcome and the recorded reserves. The recorded net reserves as of December 31, 2011 of $2.24 billion ($1.90 billion and $328 for asbestos and environmental, respectively) is within an estimated range, unadjusted for covariance, of $1.75 billion to $2.59 billion. The process of estimating asbestos and environmental reserves remains subject to a wide variety of uncertainties, which are detailed in Note 12 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. The Company believes that its current asbestos and environmental reserves are appropriate. However, analyses of future developments could cause the Company to change its estimates and ranges of its asbestos and environmental reserves, and the effect of these changes could be material to the Company consolidated operating results, financial condition and liquidity. Consistent with the Company long-standing reserving practices, the Company will continue to review and monitor its reserves in the Property & Casualty Other Operations segment regularly and, where future developments indicate, make appropriate adjustments to the reserves. 44 Table of Contents Total Property and Casualty Insurance Product Reserves, Net of Reinsurance, Results In the opinion of management, based upon the known facts and current law, the reserves recorded for the Company property and casualty businesses at December 31, 2011 represent the Company best estimate of its ultimate liability for losses and loss adjustment expenses related to losses covered by policies written by the Company. However, because of the significant uncertainties surrounding reserves, and particularly asbestos exposures, it is possible that management estimate of the ultimate liabilities for these claims may change and that the required adjustment to recorded reserves could exceed the currently recorded reserves by an amount that could be material to the Company results of operations, financial condition and liquidity. Reserve Roll-forwards and Development Based on the results of the quarterly reserve review process, the Company determines the appropriate reserve adjustments, if any, to record. Recorded reserve estimates are changed after consideration of numerous factors, including but not limited to, the magnitude of the difference between the actuarial indication and the recorded reserves, improvement or deterioration of actuarial indications in the period, the maturity of the accident year, trends observed over the recent past and the level of volatility within a particular line of business. In general, adjustments are made more quickly to more mature accident years and less volatile lines of business. Such adjustments of reserves are referred to as reserve development . Reserve development that increases previous estimates of ultimate cost is called reserve strengthening . Reserve development that decreases previous estimates of ultimate cost is called reserve releases . Reserve development can influence the comparability of year over year underwriting results and is set forth in the paragraphs and tables that follow. A roll-forward follows of property and casualty insurance product liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses for the year ended December 31, 2011: For the year ended December 31, 2011 Property & Total Property & Casualty Property and Casualty Consumer Other Casualty Commercial Markets Operations Insurance Beginning liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses, gross $ 14,727 $ 2,177 $ 4,121 $ 21,025 Reinsurance and other recoverables 2,361 17 699 3,077 Beginning liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses, net 12,366 2,160 3,422 17,948 Provision for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses Current accident year before catastrophes 4,139 2,536 6,675 Current accident year catastrophes 320 425 745 Prior accident years 125 (75 ) 317 367 Total provision for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses 4,584 2,886 317 7,787 Payments (3,856 ) (2,994 ) (368 ) (7,218 ) Ending liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses, net 13,094 2,052 3,371 18,517 Reinsurance and other recoverables 2,343 9 681 3,033 Ending liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses, gross $ 15,437 $ 2,061 $ 4,052 $ 21,550 Earned premiums $ 6,127 $ 3,747 Loss and loss expense paid ratio [1] 62.9 79.9 Loss and loss expense incurred ratio 74.8 77.0 Prior accident years development (pts) [2] 2.0 (2.0 ) [1] The loss and loss expense paid ratio represents the ratio of paid losses and loss adjustment expenses to earned premiums. [2] Prior accident years development (pts) represents the ratio of prior accident years development to earned premiums. 45 Table of Contents Prior accident years development recorded in 2011 Included within prior accident years development for the year ended December 31, 2011 were the following loss and loss adjustment expense reserve strengthenings (releases): For the year ended December 31, 2011 Property & Casualty Property & Casualty Consumer Other Total Property and Commercial Markets Operations Casualty Insurance Auto liability $ (4 ) $ (93 ) $ $ (97 ) Homeowners (1 ) (1 ) Professional liability 29 29 Package business (76 ) (76 ) Workers compensation 171 171 General liability (40 ) (40 ) Fidelity and surety (7 ) (7 ) Commercial property (4 ) (4 ) Net asbestos reserves 294 294 Net environmental reserves 26 26 Change in workers compensation discount, including accretion 38 38 Catastrophes 12 25 37 Other reserve re-estimates, net 6 (6 ) (3 ) (3 ) Total prior accident years development $ 125 $ (75 ) $ 317 $ 367 During 2011, the Company re-estimates of prior accident years reserves included the following significant reserve changes: Released reserves for personal auto liability claims, primarily for accident years 2006 through 2010. Favorable trends in reported severity have persisted or improved over this time period. As these accident years develop, the uncertainty around the ultimate losses is reduced and management places more weight on the emerged experience. Strengthened reserves in professional liability for accident years 2007 through 2008, primarily in the directors and officers ( D&O ) line of business. Detailed reviews of claims involving the sub-prime mortgage market collapse, and shareholder class action lawsuits, resulted in a higher estimate of future claim costs for these exposures. Released reserves in package business liability coverages and general liability, in accident years 2005 through 2009. As these accident years developed, claim severity has emerged lower than expected. Strengthened reserves in workers compensation in accident years 2008 through 2010. Accident year 2010 loss costs trends were higher than expected as an increase in frequency outpaced a moderation of severity trends. Strengthening in accident years 2009 and 2008 was the result of higher than expected loss emergence for these years. Strengthening in more recent years is partially offset by releases in accident years 2007 and prior. Severity emergence in these older accident years continues to be favorable. Strengthened prior year catastrophe reserves, primarily related to a severe wind and hail storm in Arizona during the fourth quarter of 2010. Severity of property damage associated with this event increased more than expected. Refer to the Property & Casualty Other Operations Claims section for discussion concerning the Company annual evaluations of net environmental and net asbestos reserves, and related reinsurance. 46 Table of Contents A roll-forward follows of property and casualty insurance product liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses for the year ended December 31, 2010: For the year ended December 31, 2010 Property & Total Property & Casualty Property and Casualty Consumer Other Casualty Commercial Markets Operations Insurance Beginning liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses, gross $ 15,051 $ 2,109 $ 4,491 $ 21,651 Reinsurance and other recoverables 2,570 11 860 3,441 Beginning liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses, net 12,481 2,098 3,631 18,210 Provision for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses Current accident year before catastrophes 3,579 2,737 6,316 Current accident year catastrophes 152 300 452 Prior accident years (361 ) (86 ) 251 (196 ) Total provision for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses 3,370 2,951 251 6,572 Payments (3,485 ) (2,889 ) (460 ) (6,834 ) Ending liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses, net 12,366 2,160 3,422 17,948 Reinsurance and other recoverables 2,361 17 699 3,077 Ending liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses, gross $ 14,727 $ 2,177 $ 4,121 $ 21,025 Earned premiums $ 5,744 $ 3,947 Loss and loss expense paid ratio [1] 60.7 73.2 Loss and loss expense incurred ratio 58.7 74.8 Prior accident years development (pts) [2] (6.3 ) (2.2 ) [1] The loss and loss expense paid ratio represents the ratio of paid losses and loss adjustment expenses to earned premiums. [2] Prior accident years development (pts) represents the ratio of prior accident years development to earned premiums. Prior accident years development recorded in 2010 Included within prior accident years development for the year ended December 31, 2010 were the following loss and loss adjustment expense reserve strengthenings (releases): For the year ended December 31, 2010 Property & Casualty Property & Casualty Consumer Other Total Property and Commercial Markets Operations Casualty Insurance Auto liability $ (54 ) $ (115 ) $ $ (169 ) Professional liability (88 ) (88 ) Workers compensation (70 ) (70 ) General liability (108 ) (108 ) Package business (19 ) (19 ) Commercial property (16 ) (16 ) Fidelity and surety (5 ) (5 ) Homeowners 23 23 Net environmental reserves 67 67 Net asbestos reserves 189 189 All other non-A&E 11 11 Uncollectible reinsurance (30 ) (30 ) Change in workers compensation discount, including accretion 26 26 Catastrophes 1 10 11 Other reserve re-estimates, net 2 (4 ) (16 ) (18 ) Total prior accident years development $ (361 ) $ (86 ) $ 251 $ (196 ) During 2010, the Company re-estimates of prior accident years reserves included the following significant reserve changes: Released reserves for commercial auto liability claims as the Company lowered its reserve estimate to recognize a lower severity trend during 2009 that continued into 2010 on larger claims in accident years 2002 to 2009. In addition, reserves were released for personal auto liability claims for accident years 2004 to 2009, as favorable trends in reported severity have persisted, most notably for accident years 2008 and 2009. As these accident years develop, the uncertainty around the ultimate losses is reduced and management places more weight on the emerged experience. Released reserves for professional liability claims, primarily related to D&O claims in accident years 2004 to 2008. For these accident years, reported losses for claims under D&O policies have emerged favorably to initial expectations due to lower than expected claim severity. Released reserves for workers compensation business, primarily related to accident years 2006 and 2007. Management updated reviews of state reforms affecting these accident years and determined impacts to be more favorable than previously estimated. 47 Table of Contents Released reserves for general liability claims, primarily related to accident years 2005 through 2008. The Company observed that claim emergence for these accident years continued to be lower than anticipated and believed this would continue, and therefore reduced its reserve estimate in response. Partially offsetting this release was strengthening on loss adjustment expense reserves during the second quarter of 2010 due to higher than expected allocated loss expenses for claims in accident years 2000 and prior. Released reserves for package business claims, primarily related to accident years 2005 through 2009. The Company observed that claim emergence within the liability portion of the package coverage for these accident years continued to be lower than anticipated and believed this lower level of claim activity would continue, and therefore reduced its reserve estimate in response. Strengthened reserves for homeowners claims, as the Company observed a lengthening of the claim reporting period for homeowners claims which resulted in increasing management estimate of the ultimate cost to settle these claims. The Company also began spending more on independent adjuster fees to better assess property damages. The Company reviewed its allowance for uncollectible reinsurance in the second quarter of 2010 and reduced its allowance, in part, by a reduction in gross ceded loss recoverables. Refer to the Property & Casualty Other Operations Claims section for discussion concerning the Company annual evaluations of net environmental and net asbestos reserves, and related reinsurance. A roll-forward follows of property and casualty insurance product liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses for the year ended December 31, 2009: For the year ended December 31, 2009 Property & Total Property & Casualty Property and Casualty Consumer Other Casualty Commercial Markets Operations Insurance Beginning liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses, gross $ 15,273 $ 2,083 $ 4,577 $ 21,933 Reinsurance and other recoverables 2,742 46 798 3,586 Beginning liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses, net 12,531 2,037 3,779 18,347 Provision for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses Current accident year before catastrophes 3,582 2,707 1 6,290 Current accident year catastrophes 78 228 306 Prior accident years (394 ) (33 ) 241 (186 ) Total provision for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses 3,266 2,902 242 6,410 Payments (3,316 ) (2,841 ) (390 ) (6,547 ) Ending liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses, net 12,481 2,098 3,631 18,210 Reinsurance and other recoverables 2,570 11 860 3,441 Ending liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses, gross $ 15,051 $ 2,109 $ 4,491 $ 21,651 Earned premiums $ 5,903 $ 3,959 Loss and loss expense paid ratio [1] 56.2 71.8 Loss and loss expense incurred ratio 55.3 73.3 Prior accident years development (pts) [2] (6.7 ) (0.8 ) [1] The loss and loss expense paid ratio represents the ratio of paid losses and loss adjustment expenses to earned premiums. [2] Prior accident years development (pts) represents the ratio of prior accident years development to earned premiums. 48 Table of Contents Prior accident years development recorded in 2009 Included within prior accident years development for the year ended December 31, 2009 were the following loss and loss adjustment expense reserve strengthenings (releases): For the year ended December 31, 2009 Property & Casualty Property & Casualty Consumer Other Total Property and Commercial Markets Operations Casualty Insurance Auto liability $ (47 ) $ (77 ) $ $ (124 ) Professional liability (127 ) (127 ) General liability, umbrella and high hazard liability (112 ) (112 ) Workers compensation (92 ) (92 ) Package business 38 38 Fidelity and surety 28 28 Homeowners 18 18 Net environmental reserves 75 75 Net asbestos reserves 138 138 All other non-A&E 35 35 Uncollectible reinsurance (20 ) (20 ) (40 ) Change in workers compensation discount, including accretion 24 24 Catastrophes (23 ) (23 ) Other reserve re-estimates, net (63 ) 26 13 (24 ) Total prior accident years development $ (394 ) $ (33 ) $ 241 $ (186 ) During 2009, the Company re-estimates of prior accident years reserves included the following significant reserve changes: Released reserves for personal auto liability claims, for accident years 2005 to 2007, as the Company recognized that favorable development in reported severity, first observed in early 2008, which was attributed, in part, to changes made in claim handling procedures in 2007, was a sustained trend for those accident years. In the third and fourth quarters of 2009, management also recognized sustained favorable development trends in AARP for accident years 2006 to 2008 and released reserves for those accident years. Released reserves for commercial auto liability claims, primarily related to accident years 2003 to 2008. In the fourth quarter of 2009, the Company recognized that the full value of large auto liability claims was being recognized as case reserves at an earlier age. The increased adequacy of case reserves caused the Company to decrease its estimate of reserves for IBNR loss and loss adjustment expenses. The Company released reserves for D&O and errors and omissions ( E&O ) claims in 2009 related to the 2003 to 2008 accident years. For these accident years, reported losses for claims under D&O and E&O policies had been emerging favorably to initial expectations due to lower than expected claim severity. Released reserves for general liability claims, primarily related to accident years 2003 to 2007. Beginning in the third quarter of 2007, the Company observed that reported losses for high hazard and umbrella general liability claims, primarily related to the 2001 to 2006 accident years, were emerging favorably and this caused management to reduce its estimate of the cost of future reported claims for these accident years, resulting in reserve releases from the third quarter of 2007 through 2009. During 2009, management determined that the lower level of loss emergence was also evident in accident year 2007 and had continued for accident years 2003 to 2006 and, as a result, the Company reduced the reserves. Largely offsetting the releases, the Company recognized that the cost of late emerging exposures were likely to be higher than previously expected, and also recognized additional ceded losses on accident years 1999 and prior. Released workers compensation reserves, primarily related to additional ceded losses on accident years 1999 and prior and lower allocated loss adjustment expense reserves in accident years 2003 to 2007. During the first quarter of 2009, the Company observed lower than expected allocated loss adjustment expense payments on older accident years. As a result, the Company reduced its estimate for future expense payments on more recent accident years. Strengthened reserves for liability claims under package business, primarily related to allocated loss adjustment expenses for accident years 2000 to 2005 and 2007 and 2008. During the first quarter of 2009, the Company identified higher than expected expense payments on older accident years related to the liability coverage. Additional analysis in the second quarter of 2009 showed that this higher level of loss adjustment expense was likely to continue into more recent accident years. As a result, in the second quarter of 2009, the Company increased its estimates for future expense payments for the 2007 and 2008 accident years. Largely offsetting the strengthenings, the Company recognized the cost of late emerging exposures were likely to be higher than previously expected, and also recognized a lower than expected frequency of high severity claims. 49 Table of Contents Strengthened reserves for surety business, primarily related to accident years 2004 to 2007. The net strengthening consisted of $55 strengthening of reserves for customs bonds, partially offset by a $27 release of reserves for contract surety claims. During 2008, the Company became aware that there were a large number of late reported surety claims related to customs bonds. Continued high volume of late reported claims during 2009 caused the Company to strengthen the reserves. Because the pattern of claim reporting for customs bonds has not been similar to the reporting pattern of other surety bonds, future claim activity is difficult to predict. It is possible that as additional claim activity emerges, our estimate of both the number of future claims and the cost of those claims could change substantially. Strengthened reserves for homeowners claims. In 2008, the Company began to observe increasing claim settlement costs for the 2005 to 2008 accident years and, in the first quarter of 2009, determined that this higher cost level would continue, resulting in reserve strengthening for these accident years. In addition, beginning in 2008, the Company observed unfavorable emergence of homeowners casualty claims for accident years 2003 and prior, primarily related to underground storage tanks. Following a detailed review of these claims in the first quarter of 2009, management increased its estimate of the magnitude of this exposure and strengthened homeowners casualty claim reserves. The Company reviewed its allowance for uncollectible reinsurance in the second quarter of 2009 and reduced its allowance driven, in part, by a reduction in gross ceded loss recoverables. Refer to the Property & Casualty Other Operations Claims section for discussion concerning the Company annual evaluations of net environmental and net asbestos reserves, and related reinsurance. 50 Table of Contents Property & Casualty Other Operations Claims Reserve Activity Reserves and reserve activity in Property & Casualty Other Operations are categorized and reported as asbestos, environmental, or all other . The all other category of reserves covers a wide range of insurance and assumed reinsurance coverages, including, but not limited to, potential liability for construction defects, lead paint, silica, pharmaceutical products, molestation and other long-tail liabilities. The following table presents reserve activity, inclusive of estimates for both reported and incurred but not reported claims, net of reinsurance, for Property & Casualty Other Operations, categorized by asbestos, environmental and all other claims, for the years ended December 31, 2011, 2010 and 2009. Property & Casualty Other Operations Losses and Loss Adjustment Expenses Asbestos Environmental All Other [1] Total 2011 Beginning liability net [2] [3] $ 1,787 $ 334 $ 1,302 $ 3,423 Losses and loss adjustment expenses incurred 294 26 (3 ) 317 Losses and loss adjustment expenses paid (189 ) (40 ) (140 ) (369 ) Ending liability net [2] [3] $ 1,892 [4] $ 320 $ 1,159 $ 3,371 2010 Beginning liability net [2] [3] $ 1,892 $ 307 $ 1,432 $ 3,631 Losses and loss adjustment expenses incurred 189 67 (5 ) 251 Losses and loss adjustment expenses paid (294 ) (40 ) (125 ) (459 ) Ending liability net [2] [3] $ 1,787 $ 334 $ 1,302 $ 3,423 2009 Beginning liability net [2] [3] $ 1,884 $ 269 $ 1,628 $ 3,781 Losses and loss adjustment expenses incurred 138 75 29 242 Losses and loss adjustment expenses paid (181 ) (40 ) (171 ) (392 ) Reclassification of asbestos and environmental liabilities 51 3 (54 ) Ending liability net [2] [3] $ 1,892 $ 307 $ 1,432 $ 3,631 [1] All Other includes unallocated loss adjustment expense reserves. All Other also includes The Company allowance for uncollectible reinsurance. When the Company commutes a ceded reinsurance contract or settles a ceded reinsurance dispute, the portion of the allowance for uncollectible reinsurance attributable to that commutation or settlement, if any, is reclassified to the appropriate cause of loss. [2] Excludes amounts reported in Property & Casualty Commercial and Consumer Markets reporting segments (collectively Ongoing Operations ) for asbestos and environmental net liabilities of $15 and $8, respectively, as of December 31, 2011, $11 and $5, respectively, as of December 31, 2010, and $10 and $5, respectively, as of December 31, 2009; total net losses and loss adjustment expenses incurred for the years ended December 31, 2011, 2010 and 2009 of $27, $15 and $16, respectively, related to asbestos and environmental claims; and total net losses and loss adjustment expenses paid for the years ended December 31, 2011, 2010 and 2008 of $20, $14 and $19, respectively, related to asbestos and environmental claims. [3] Gross of reinsurance, asbestos and environmental reserves, including liabilities in Property & Casualty Commercial and Commercial Markets, were $2,442 and $367, respectively, as of December 31, 2011; $2,308 and $378, respectively, as of December 31, 2010; and $2,484 and $367, respectively, as of December 31, 2009. [4] The one year and average three year net paid amounts for asbestos claims, including Ongoing Operations, were $198 and $230, respectively, resulting in a one year net survival ratio of 9.6 and a three year net survival ratio of 8.3. Net survival ratio is the quotient of the net carried reserves divided by the average annual payment amount and is an indication of the number of years that the net carried reserve would last (i.e. survive) if the future annual claim payments were consistent with the calculated historical average. For paid and incurred losses and loss adjustment expenses reporting, the Company classifies its asbestos and environmental reserves into three categories: Direct, Assumed Reinsurance and London Market. Direct insurance includes primary and excess coverage. Assumed reinsurance includes both treaty reinsurance (covering broad categories of claims or blocks of business) and facultative reinsurance (covering specific risks or individual policies of primary or excess insurance companies). London Market business includes the business written by one or more of the Company subsidiaries in the United Kingdom, which are no longer active in the insurance or reinsurance business. Such business includes both direct insurance and assumed reinsurance. Of the three categories of claims (Direct, Assumed Reinsurance and London Market), direct policies tend to have the greatest factual development from which to estimate the Company exposures. Assumed reinsurance exposures are inherently less predictable than direct insurance exposures because the Company may not receive notice of a reinsurance claim until the underlying direct insurance claim is mature. This causes a delay in the receipt of information at the reinsurer level and adds to the uncertainty of estimating related reserves. London Market exposures are the most uncertain of the three categories of claims. As a participant in the London Market (comprised of both Lloyd of London and London Market companies), certain subsidiaries of the Company wrote business on a subscription basis, with those subsidiaries involvement being limited to a relatively small percentage of a total contract placement. Claims are reported, via a broker, to the lead underwriter and, once agreed to, are presented to the following markets for concurrence. This reporting and claim agreement process makes estimating liabilities for this business the most uncertain of the three categories of claims. 51 Table of Contents The following table sets forth, for the years ended December 31, 2011, 2010 and 2009, paid and incurred loss activity by the three categories of claims for asbestos and environmental. Paid and Incurred Losses and Loss Adjustment Expenses ( LAE ) Development Asbestos and Environmental Asbestos [1] Environmental [1] Paid Incurred Paid Incurred Losses & LAE Losses & LAE Losses & LAE Losses & LAE 2011 Gross Direct $ 170 $ 350 $ 32 $ 25 Assumed Reinsurance 55 12 8 London Market 23 16 6 4 Total 248 378 46 29 Ceded (59 ) (84 ) (6 ) (3 ) Net $ 189 $ 294 $ 40 $ 26 2010 Gross Direct $ 201 $ 209 $ 35 $ 50 Assumed Reinsurance 128 12 5 London Market 42 (15 ) 7 10 Total 371 194 54 65 Ceded (77 ) (5 ) (14 ) 2 Net $ 294 $ 189 $ 40 $ 67 2009 Gross Direct $ 160 $ 117 $ 29 $ 92 Assumed Domestic 56 52 7 London Market 18 10 12 Total 234 169 46 104 Ceded (53 ) (31 ) (6 ) (29 ) Net prior to reclassification $ 181 $ 138 $ 40 $ 75 Reclassification of asbestos and environmental liabilities [2] 51 3 Net $ 181 $ 189 $ 40 $ 78 [1] Excludes asbestos and environmental paid and incurred loss and LAE reported in Ongoing Operations. Total gross losses and LAE incurred in Ongoing Operations for the years ended December 31, 2011, 2010 and 2009 includes $30, $15 and $17, respectively, related to asbestos and environmental claims. Total gross losses and LAE paid in Ongoing Operations for the years ended December 31, 2011, 2010 and 2009 includes $22, $14 and $20, respectively, related to asbestos and environmental claims. [2] During the three months ended June 30, 2009, the Company reclassified liabilities of $54 that were previously classified as All Other to Asbestos and Environmental . In the fourth quarters of 2011, 2010 and 2009, the Company completed evaluations of certain of its non-asbestos and environmental reserves, including its assumed reinsurance liabilities. In 2011, the Company recognized no prior year development. In 2010, the Company recognized unfavorable prior year development of $11. In 2009, the Company recognized unfavorable prior year development of $35, principally driven by higher projected unallocated loss adjustment expenses. During the third quarters of 2011, 2010 and 2009, the Company completed its annual ground up environmental reserve evaluations. In each of these evaluations, the Company reviewed all of its open direct domestic insurance accounts exposed to environmental liability as well as assumed reinsurance accounts and its London Market exposures for both direct and assumed reinsurance. During the third quarters of 2011 and 2010, the Company found estimates for some individual account exposures increased based upon unfavorable litigation results and increased clean-up or expense costs, with the vast majority of this deterioration emanating from a limited number of insureds. In 2009, the Company found estimates for some individual accounts increased based upon additional sites identified, litigation developments and new damage and defense cost information obtained on these accounts since the last review. The net effect of these account-specific changes as well as actuarial evaluations of new account emergence and historical loss and expense paid experience resulted in $19, $62 and $75 increases in net environmental liabilities in 2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively. The Company currently expects to continue to perform an evaluation of its environmental liabilities annually. 52 Table of Contents In reporting environmental results, the Company classifies its gross exposure into Direct, Assumed Reinsurance, and London Market. The following table displays gross environmental reserves and other statistics by category as of December 31, 2011. Summary of Environmental Reserves As of December 31, 2011 Total Reserves Gross [1] [2] Direct $ 271 Assumed Reinsurance 39 London Market 57 Total 367 Ceded (47 ) Net $ 320 [1] The one year gross paid amount for total environmental claims is $58, resulting in a one year gross survival ratio of 6.4. [2] The three year average gross paid amount for total environmental claims is $58, resulting in a three year gross survival ratio of 6.4. During the second quarters of 2011, 2010 and 2009, the Company completed its annual ground-up asbestos reserve evaluations. As part of these evaluations, the Company reviewed all of its open direct domestic insurance accounts exposed to asbestos liability, as well as assumed reinsurance accounts and its London Market exposures for both direct insurance and assumed reinsurance. Based on this evaluation, the Company strengthened its net asbestos reserves by $290 in second quarter 2011. During 2011, for certain direct policyholders, the Company experienced increases in claim frequency, severity and expense which were driven by mesothelioma claims, particularly against certain smaller, more peripheral insureds. The Company also experienced unfavorable development on its assumed reinsurance accounts driven largely by the same factors experienced by the direct policyholders. During 2010 and 2009, for certain direct policyholders, the Company experienced increases in claim severity and expense. Increases in severity and expense were driven by litigation in certain jurisdictions and, to a lesser extent, development on primarily peripheral accounts. The Company also experienced unfavorable development on its assumed reinsurance accounts driven largely by the same factors experienced by the direct policyholders. The net effect of these changes in 2010 and 2009 resulted in $169 and $138 increases in net asbestos reserves, respectively. The Company currently expects to continue to perform an evaluation of its asbestos liabilities annually. The Company divides its gross asbestos exposures into Direct, Assumed Reinsurance and London Market. The Company further divides its direct asbestos exposures into the following categories: Major Asbestos Defendants (the Top 70 accounts in Tillinghast published Tiers 1 and 2 and Wellington accounts), which are subdivided further as: Structured Settlements, Wellington, Other Major Asbestos Defendants, Accounts with Future Expected Exposures greater than $2.5, Accounts with Future Expected Exposures less than $2.5, and Unallocated. Structured Settlements are those accounts where the Company has reached an agreement with the insured as to the amount and timing of the claim payments to be made to the insured. The Wellington subcategory includes insureds that entered into the Wellington Agreement dated June 19, 1985. The Wellington Agreement provided terms and conditions for how the signatory asbestos producers would access their coverage from the signatory insurers. The Other Major Asbestos Defendants subcategory represents insureds included in Tiers 1 and 2, as defined by Tillinghast that are not Wellington signatories and have not entered into structured settlements with The Hartford. The Tier 1 and 2 classifications are meant to capture the insureds for which there is expected to be significant exposure to asbestos claims. Accounts with future expected exposures greater or less than $2.5 include accounts that are not major asbestos defendants. The Unallocated category includes an estimate of the reserves necessary for asbestos claims related to direct insureds that have not previously tendered asbestos claims to the Company and exposures related to liability claims that may not be subject to an aggregate limit under the applicable policies. An account may move between categories from one evaluation to the next. For example, an account with future expected exposure of greater than $2.5 in one evaluation may be reevaluated due to changing conditions and recategorized as less than $2.5 in a subsequent evaluation or vice versa. 53 Table of Contents The following table displays gross asbestos reserves and other statistics by policyholder category as of December 31, 2011. Summary of Gross Asbestos Reserves As of December 31, 2011 Number of All Time Total All Time Accounts [2] Paid [3] Reserves Ultimate [3] Gross Asbestos Reserves as of June 30, 2011 [1] Major asbestos defendants [5] Structured settlements (includes 4 Wellington accounts) [6] 8 $ 331 $ 438 $ 769 Wellington (direct only) 29 908 43 951 Other major asbestos defendants 28 527 28 555 No known policies (includes 3 Wellington accounts) 5 Accounts with future exposure > $2.5 85 929 702 1,631 Accounts with future exposure < $2.5 1,075 342 122 464 Unallocated [7] 1,895 563 2,458 Total Direct 4,932 1,896 6,828 Assumed Reinsurance 1,302 379 1,681 London Market 646 283 929 Total as of June 30, 2011 [1] 6,880 2,558 9,438 Gross paid loss activity for the third quarter and fourth quarter 2011 127 (127 ) Gross incurred loss activity for the third quarter and fourth quarter 2011 11 11 Total as of December 31, 2011 [4] $ 7,007 $ 2,442 $ 9,449 [1] Gross Asbestos Reserves based on the second quarter 2011 asbestos reserve study. [2] An account may move between categories from one evaluation to the next. Reclassifications were made as a result of the reserve evaluation completed in the second quarter of 2011. [3] All Time Paid represents the total payments with respect to the indicated claim type that have already been made by the Company as of the indicated balance sheet date. All Time Ultimate represents the Company estimate, as of the indicated balance sheet date, of the total payments that are ultimately expected to be made to fully settle the indicated payment type. The amount is the sum of the amounts already paid (e.g. All Time Paid ) and the estimated future payments (e.g. the amount shown in the column labeled Total Reserves ). [4] Survival ratio is a commonly used industry ratio for comparing reserve levels between companies. While the method is commonly used, it is not a predictive technique. Survival ratios may vary over time for numerous reasons such as large payments due to the final resolution of certain asbestos liabilities, or reserve re-estimates. The survival ratio is computed by dividing the recorded reserves by the average of the past three years of payments. The ratio is the calculated number of years the recorded reserves would survive if future annual payments were equal to the average annual payments for the past three years. The 3-year gross survival ratio of 8.3 as of December 31, 2011 is computed based on total paid losses of $881 for the period from January 1, 2009 to December 31, 2011. As of December 31, 2011, the one year gross paid amount for total asbestos claims is $258 resulting in a one year gross survival ratio of 9.5. [5] Includes 24 open accounts at June 30, 2011. Included 25 open accounts at June 30, 2010. [6] Structured settlements include the Company reserves related to PPG Industries, Inc. ( PPG ). In January 2009, the Company, along with approximately three dozen other insurers, entered into a modified agreement in principle with PPG to resolve the Company coverage obligations for all of its PPG asbestos liabilities, including principally those arising out of its 50% stock ownership of Pittsburgh Corning Corporation ( PCC ), a joint venture with Corning, Inc. The agreement is contingent on the fulfillment of certain conditions, including the confirmation of a PCC plan of reorganization under Section 524(g) of the Bankruptcy Code, which have not yet been met. [7] Includes closed accounts (exclusive of Major Asbestos Defendants) and unallocated IBNR. The Company provides an allowance for uncollectible reinsurance, reflecting management best estimate of reinsurance cessions that may be uncollectible in the future due to reinsurers unwillingness or inability to pay. During the second quarters of 2011, 2010 and 2009, the Company completed its annual evaluations of the collectability of the reinsurance recoverables and the adequacy of the allowance for uncollectible reinsurance associated with older, long-term casualty liabilities reported in the Property & Casualty Other Operations. In conducting this evaluation, the Company used its most recent detailed evaluations of ceded liabilities reported in the segment. The Company analyzed the overall credit quality of the Company reinsurers, recent trends in arbitration and litigation outcomes in disputes between cedants and reinsurers, and recent developments in commutation activity between reinsurers and cedants. The evaluation in the second quarters of 2010 and 2011 resulted in no adjustment to the allowance for uncollectible reinsurance. As of December 31, 2011 and 2010, the allowance for uncollectible reinsurance for Property & Casualty Other Operations totals $207. As a result of the second quarter of 2009 evaluation, the Company reduced its allowance for uncollectible reinsurance by $20 principally to reflect decreased reinsurance recoverable dispute exposure and favorable activity since the last evaluation. The Company currently expects to perform its regular comprehensive review of Property & Casualty Other Operations reinsurance recoverables annually. Due to the inherent uncertainties as to collection and the length of time before reinsurance recoverables become due, particularly for older, long-term casualty liabilities, it is possible that future adjustments to the Company reinsurance recoverables, net of the allowance, could be required. Consistent with the Company long-standing reserving practices, the Company will continue to review and monitor its reserves in the Property & Casualty Other Operations segment regularly and, where future developments indicate, make appropriate adjustments to the reserves. The company will complete both its annual ground-up asbestos and environmental reserve studies during the second quarter of 2012. 54 Table of Contents Impact of Re-estimates The establishment of property and casualty insurance product reserves is an estimation process, using a variety of methods, assumptions and data elements. Ultimate losses may vary significantly from the current estimates. Many factors can contribute to these variations and the need to change the previous estimate of required reserve levels. Subsequent changes can generally be thought of as being the result of the emergence of additional facts that were not known or anticipated at the time of the prior reserve estimate and/or changes in interpretations of information and trends. The table below shows the range of annual reserve re-estimates experienced by The Hartford over the past ten years. The amount of prior accident year development (as shown in the reserve rollforward) for a given calendar year is expressed as a percent of the beginning calendar year reserves, net of reinsurance. The percentage relationships presented are significantly influenced by the facts and circumstances of each particular year and by the fact that only the last ten years are included in the range. Accordingly, these percentages are not intended to be a prediction of the range of possible future variability. See Impact of key assumptions on reserve volatility within this section for further discussion of the potential for variability in recorded loss reserves. Property & Property & Casualty Consumer Casualty Other Total Property and Commercial Markets Operations Casualty Insurance Range of prior accident year unfavorable (favorable) development for the ten years ended December 31, 2011 [1] [2] (3.1) 1.5 (5.2) 5.1 3.0 67.5 (1.2) 21.5 [1] Excluding the reserve strengthening for asbestos and environmental reserves, over the past ten years reserve re-estimates for total property and casualty insurance ranged from (3.0)% to 1.6%. [2] Development for Corporate is included in Property & Casualty Commercial and Consumer Markets in 2007 and prior. The potential variability of the Company property and casualty insurance product reserves would normally be expected to vary by segment and the types of loss exposures insured by those segments. Illustrative factors influencing the potential reserve variability for each of the segments are discussed above. A table depicting the historical development of the liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses, net of reinsurance, follows. Loss Development Table Loss And Loss Adjustment Expense Liability Development Net of Reinsurance For the Years Ended December 31, [1] 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 Liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses, net of reinsurance $ 12,860 $ 13,141 $ 16,218 $ 16,191 $ 16,863 $ 17,604 $ 18,231 $ 18,347 $ 18,210 $ 17,948 $ 18,517 Cumulative paid losses and loss expenses One year later 3,339 3,480 4,415 3,594 3,702 3,727 3,703 3,771 3,882 4,037 Two years later 5,621 6,781 6,779 6,035 6,122 5,980 5,980 6,273 6,401 Three years later 8,324 8,591 8,686 7,825 7,755 7,544 7,752 8,074 Four years later 9,710 10,061 10,075 9,045 8,889 8,833 9,048 Five years later 10,871 11,181 11,063 9,928 9,903 9,778 Six years later 11,832 12,015 11,821 10,798 10,674 Seven years later 12,563 12,672 12,601 11,448 Eight years later 13,166 13,385 13,193 Nine years later 13,829 13,935 Ten years later 14,345 Liabilities re-estimated One year later 13,153 15,965 16,632 16,439 17,159 17,652 18,005 18,161 18,014 18,315 Two years later 16,176 16,501 17,232 16,838 17,347 17,475 17,858 18,004 18,136 Three years later 16,768 17,338 17,739 17,240 17,318 17,441 17,700 18,139 Four years later 17,425 17,876 18,367 17,344 17,497 17,439 17,866 Five years later 17,927 18,630 18,554 17,570 17,613 17,676 Six years later 18,686 18,838 18,836 17,777 17,895 Seven years later 18,892 19,126 19,063 18,064 Eight years later 19,192 19,373 19,351 Nine years later 19,452 19,671 Ten years later 19,751 Deficiency (redundancy), net of reinsurance $ 6,891 $ 6,530 $ 3,133 $ 1,873 $ 1,032 $ 72 $ (365 ) $ (208 ) $ (74 ) $ 367 55 Table of Contents The table above shows the cumulative deficiency (redundancy) of the Company reserves, net of reinsurance, as now estimated with the benefit of additional information. Those amounts are comprised of changes in estimates of gross losses and changes in estimates of related reinsurance recoveries. The table below, for the periods presented, reconciles the net reserves to the gross reserves, as initially estimated and recorded, and as currently estimated and recorded, and computes the cumulative deficiency (redundancy) of the Company reserves before reinsurance. Loss And Loss Adjustment Expense Liability Development Gross For the Years Ended December 31, 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 Net reserve, as initially estimated $ 13,141 $ 16,218 $ 16,191 $ 16,863 $ 17,604 $ 18,231 $ 18,347 $ 18,210 $ 17,948 $ 18,517 Reinsurance and other recoverables, as initially estimated 3,950 5,497 5,138 5,403 4,387 3,922 3,586 3,441 3,077 3,033 Gross reserve, as initially estimated $ 17,091 $ 21,715 $ 21,329 $ 22,266 $ 21,991 $ 22,153 $ 21,933 $ 21,651 $ 21,025 $ 21,550 Net re-estimated reserve $ 19,671 $ 19,351 $ 18,064 $ 17,895 $ 17,676 $ 17,866 $ 18,139 $ 18,136 $ 18,315 Re-estimated and other reinsurance recoverables 5,693 5,592 5,469 5,792 4,193 3,910 3,585 3,064 2,799 Gross re-estimated reserve $ 25,364 $ 24,943 $ 23,533 $ 23,687 $ 21,869 $ 21,776 $ 21,724 $ 21,200 $ 21,114 Gross deficiency (redundancy) $ 8,273 $ 3,228 $ 2,204 $ 1,421 $ (122 ) $ (377 ) $ (209 ) $ (451 ) $ 89 The following table is derived from the Loss Development table and summarizes the effect of reserve re-estimates, net of reinsurance, on calendar year operations for the ten-year period ended December 31, 2011. The total of each column details the amount of reserve re-estimates made in the indicated calendar year and shows the accident years to which the re-estimates are applicable. The amounts in the total accident year column on the far right represent the cumulative reserve re-estimates during the ten year period ended December 31, 2011 for the indicated accident year(s). Effect of Net Reserve Re-estimates on Calendar Year Operations Calendar Year 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 Total By Accident year 2001 & Prior $ 293 $ 3,023 $ 592 $ 657 $ 502 $ 759 $ 206 $ 300 $ 260 $ 299 $ 6,891 2002 (199 ) (56 ) 180 36 (5 ) 2 (12 ) (13 ) (1 ) (68 ) 2003 (122 ) (237 ) (31 ) (126 ) (21 ) (6 ) (20 ) (10 ) (573 ) 2004 (352 ) (108 ) (226 ) (83 ) (56 ) (20 ) (1 ) (846 ) 2005 (103 ) (214 ) (133 ) (47 ) (91 ) (5 ) (593 ) 2006 (140 ) (148 ) (213 ) (118 ) (45 ) (664 ) 2007 (49 ) (113 ) (156 ) (71 ) (389 ) 2008 (39 ) 1 (31 ) (69 ) 2009 (39 ) (13 ) (52 ) 2010 245 245 Total $ 293 $ 2,824 $ 414 $ 248 $ 296 $ 48 $ (226 ) $ (186 ) $ (196 ) $ 367 $ 3,882 During the 2007 calendar year, the Company refined its processes for allocating incurred but not reported ( IBNR ) reserves by accident year, resulting in a reclassification of $347 of IBNR reserves from the 2003 to 2006 accident years to the 2002 and prior accident years. This reclassification of reserves by accident year had no effect on total recorded reserves within any segment or on total recorded reserves for any line of business within a segment. Reserve changes for accident years 2001 & Prior The largest impacts of net reserve re-estimates are shown in the 2001 & Prior accident years. The reserve deterioration is driven, in part, by deterioration of reserves for asbestos, environmental, assumed casualty reinsurance, workers compensation, and general liability claims. Numerous actuarial assumptions on assumed casualty reinsurance turned out to be low, including loss cost trends, particularly on excess of loss business, and the impact of deteriorating terms and conditions. The reserve re-estimates in calendar year 2003 include an increase in reserves of $2.6 billion related to reserve strengthening based on the Company evaluation of its asbestos reserves. The reserve evaluation that led to the strengthening in calendar year 2003 confirmed the Company view of the existence of a substantial long-term deterioration in the asbestos litigation environment. The reserve re-estimates in calendar years 2004 through 2006 were largely attributable to reductions in the reinsurance recoverable asset associated with older, long-term casualty liabilities, and unexpected development on mature claims in both general liability and workers compensation. The reserve re-estimates during calendar year 2008 are largely driven by increases in asbestos, environmental and general liability reserves. The reserve re-estimates in calendar years 2009, 2010 and 2011 are largely due to increases in asbestos and environmental reserves, resulting from the Company annual evaluations of these liabilities. These reserve evaluations reflect deterioration in the litigation environment surrounding asbestos and environmental liabilities during this period. 56 Table of Contents Reserve changes for accident year 2002 Accident year 2002 is reasonably close to original estimates. However, it shows swings by calendar period, with some favorable development prior to calendar year 2005, largely offset by unfavorable development in calendar years 2005 through 2008. Reserve releases during calendar years 2003 and 2004 come largely from short-tail lines of business, where results emerge quickly and actual reported losses are predictive of ultimate losses. Reserve increases during calendar year 2005 were a result of unfavorable development on accident years prior to 2002 leading the Company to increase its estimate of unpaid losses for the 2002 accident year. Reserve changes for accident years 2003 through 2007 Even after considering the 2007 calendar year reclassification of $347 IBNR reserves from accident years 2003 to 2006 to accident years 2002 and prior, accident years 2003 through 2007 show favorable development in calendar years 2004 through 2011. A portion of the release comes from short-tail lines of business, where results emerge quickly. During calendar year 2005 and 2006, favorable re-estimates occurred for both loss and allocated loss adjustment expenses. In addition, catastrophe reserves related to the 2004 and 2005 hurricanes developed favorably in 2006. During calendar years 2005 through 2008, the Company recognized favorable re-estimates of both loss and allocated loss adjustment expenses on workers compensation claims, driven, in part, by state regulatory reforms in California and Florida, underwriting actions, and expense reduction initiatives that had a greater impact in controlling costs than originally estimated. In 2007, the Company released reserves for package business claims as reported losses emerged favorably to previous expectations. In 2007 through 2009, the Company released reserves for general liability claims due to the favorable emergence of losses for high hazard and umbrella general liability claims. Reserves for professional liability claims were released in 2008 and 2009 related to the 2003 through 2007 accident years due to a lower estimate of claim severity on both directors and officers insurance claims and errors and omissions insurance claims. Reserves of auto liability claims, within Consumer Markets, were released in 2008 due largely to an improvement in emerged claim severity for the 2005 to 2007 accident years. Reserve changes for accident years 2008 through 2009 Accident years 2008 through 2009 remain reasonably close to original estimates. Modest favorable reserve re-estimates during calendar periods 2009 through 2011 are primarily related to liability lines of business. Reserve changes for accident year 2010 Unfavorable reserve re-estimates in calendar year 2011 are largely driven by workers compensation. Loss cost trends were higher than initially expected as an increase in frequency outpaced a moderation of severity trends. 57 Table of Contents Estimated Gross Profits Used in the Valuation and Amortization of Assets and Liabilities Associated with Variable Annuity and Other Universal Life-Type Contracts Estimated gross profits ( EGPs ) are used in the amortization of: the DAC asset, which includes the present value of future profits; sales inducement assets ( SIA ); and unearned revenue reserves ( URR ). See Note 7 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information on DAC. See Note 10 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information on SIA. Portions of EGPs are also used in the valuation of reserves for death and other insurance benefit features on variable annuity and universal life-type contracts. See Note 9 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information on death and other insurance benefit reserves. The most significant EGP based balances as of December 31, 2011 and 2010 are as follows: Individual Annuity Individual Life Retirement Plans Life Other Operations 2011 2010 2011 2010 2011 2010 2011 2010 DAC $ 2,815 $ 3,251 $ 2,755 $ 2,633 $ 813 $ 820 $ 1,256 $ 1,652 SIA $ 291 $ 329 $ 47 $ 45 $ 22 $ 23 $ 54 $ 41 URR $ 90 $ 99 $ 1,570 $ 1,367 $ $ $ 39 $ 59 Death and Other Insurance Benefit Reserves $ 1,103 $ 1,052 $ 228 $ 113 $ 1 $ 1 $ 975 $ 696 For most contracts, the Company estimates gross profits over 20 years as EGPs emerging subsequent to that timeframe are immaterial. Products sold in a particular year are aggregated into cohorts. Future gross profits for each cohort are projected over the estimated lives of the underlying contracts, based on future account value projections for variable annuity and variable universal life products. The projection of future account values requires the use of certain assumptions including: separate account returns; separate account fund mix; fees assessed against the contract holder account balance; surrender and lapse rates; interest margin; mortality; and the extent and duration of hedging activities and hedging costs. Changes in these assumptions and, in addition, changes to other policyholder behavior assumptions such as resets, partial surrenders, reaction to price increases, and asset allocations causes EGPs to fluctuate which impacts earnings. The Company determines EGPs from a single deterministic reversion to mean ( RTM ) separate account return projection which is an estimation technique commonly used by insurance entities to project future separate account returns. Through this estimation technique, the Company DAC model is adjusted to reflect actual account values at the end of each quarter. Through consideration of recent market returns, the Company will unlock, or adjust, projected returns over a future period so that the account value returns to the long-term expected rate of return, providing that those projected returns do not exceed certain caps or floors. This Unlock for future separate account returns is determined each quarter. Under RTM, the expected long term weighted average rate of return is 8.3% and 5.9% for U.S. and Japan, respectively. In the third quarter of each year, the Company completes a comprehensive non-market related policyholder behavior assumption study and incorporates the results of those studies into its projection of future gross profits. Additionally, throughout the year, the Company evaluates various aspects of policyholder behavior and periodically revises its policyholder assumptions as credible emerging data indicates that changes are warranted. Upon completion of the assumption study or evaluation of credible new information, the Company will revise its assumptions to reflect its current best estimate. These assumption revisions will change the projected account values and the related EGPs in the DAC, SIA and URR amortization models, as well as the death and other insurance benefit reserving model. All assumption changes that affect the estimate of future EGPs including the update of current account values, the use of the RTM estimation technique and policyholder behavior assumptions are considered an Unlock in the period of revision. An Unlock adjusts DAC, SIA, URR and death and other insurance benefit reserve balances in the Consolidated Balance Sheets with an offsetting benefit or charge in the Consolidated Statements of Operations in the period of the revision. An Unlock that results in an after-tax benefit generally occurs as a result of actual experience or future expectations of product profitability being favorable compared to previous estimates. An Unlock that results in an after-tax charge generally occurs as a result of actual experience or future expectations of product profitability being unfavorable compared to previous estimates. EGPs are also used to determine the expected excess benefits and assessments included in the measurement of death and other insurance benefit reserves. These excess benefits and assessments are derived from a range of stochastic scenarios that have been calibrated to the Company RTM separate account returns. The determination of death and other insurance benefit reserves is also impacted by discount rates, lapses, volatilities, mortality assumptions and benefit utilization, including assumptions around annuitization rates. An Unlock revises EGPs, on a quarterly basis, to reflect market updates of policyholder account value and the Company current best estimate assumptions. Modifications to the Company hedging programs may impact EGPs, and correspondingly impact DAC recoverability. After each quarterly Unlock, the Company also tests the aggregate recoverability of DAC by comparing the DAC balance to the present value of future EGPs. The margin between the DAC balance and the present value of future EGPs for U.S. and Japan individual variable annuities was 23% and 40% as of December 31, 2011, respectively. If the margin between the DAC asset and the present value of future EGPs is exhausted, then further reductions in EGPs would cause portions of DAC to be unrecoverable and the DAC asset would be written down to equal future EGPs. 58 Table of Contents Unlocks The after-tax (charge) benefit to net income (loss) by asset and liability as a result of the Unlocks for 2011, 2010 and 2009, were: For the year ended December 31, 2011: Death and Other Segment Insurance After-tax (Charge) Benefit DAC URR Benefit Reserves SIA Total Individual Annuity $ (162 ) $ 6 $ $ (16 ) $ (172 ) Individual Life (50 ) 21 (40 ) (69 ) Retirement Plans (44 ) (1 ) (45 ) Life Other Operations (74 ) (173 ) 3 (244 ) Total $ (330 ) $ 27 $ (213 ) $ (14 ) $ (530 ) The Unlock charge for the year ended December 31, 2011 was driven primarily by assumption changes which reduced expected future gross profits including additional costs associated with implementing the Japan hedging strategy and the U.S. variable annuity macro hedge program, as well as actual separate account returns below our aggregated estimated return. For the year ended December 31, 2010: Death and Other Segment Insurance Benefit After-tax (charge) benefit DAC URR Reserves SIA Total Individual Annuity $ 104 $ 1 $ 39 $ (1 ) $ 143 Individual Life 23 5 1 (1 ) 28 Retirement Plans 18 18 Life Other Operations (62 ) 6 (23 ) 1 (78 ) Total $ 83 $ 12 $ 17 $ (1 ) $ 111 The Unlock benefit for the year ended December 31, 2010 was driven primarily by actual separate account returns above our aggregated estimated return. Also included in the benefit are assumption changes related to benefits from withdrawals and lapses, offset by hedging, annuitization estimates on Japan products, and long-term expected rate of return updates. For the year ended December 31, 2009: Death and Segment Other Insurance After-tax (charge) benefit DAC URR Benefit Reserves SIA Total [1] Individual Annuity $ (429 ) $ 17 $ (158 ) $ (36 ) $ (606 ) Individual Life (101 ) 54 (4 ) (51 ) Retirement Plans (55 ) (1 ) (56 ) Life Other Operations (104 ) 6 (210 ) (10 ) (318 ) Corporate (3 ) (3 ) Total $ (692 ) $ 77 $ (372 ) $ (47 ) $ (1,034 ) [1] Includes $(49) related to DAC recoverability impairment associated with the decision to suspend sales in the U.K variable annuity business. The Unlock charge for the year ended December 31, 2009 was driven primarily by actual separate account returns significantly below our aggregated estimated return for the first quarter of 2009, partially offset by actual returns being greater than our aggregated estimated return for the period from April 1, 2009 to December 31, 2009. Evaluation of Other-Than-Temporary Impairments on Available-for-Sale Securities and Valuation Allowances on Mortgage Loans The Company has a monitoring process overseen by a committee of investment and accounting professionals that identifies investments that are subject to an enhanced evaluation on a quarterly basis to determine if an other-than-temporary impairment ( impairment ) is present for AFS securities or a valuation allowance is required for mortgage loans. This evaluation is a quantitative and qualitative process, which is subject to risks and uncertainties. For further discussion of the accounting policies, see the Significant Investment Accounting Policies Section in Note 5 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. For a discussion of impairments recorded, see the Other-Than-Temporary Impairments within the Investment Portfolio Risks and Risk Management section of the MD&A. 59 Table of Contents Living Benefits Required to be Fair Valued (in Other Policyholder Funds and Benefits Payable ) Fair values for GMWB and GMAB contracts are calculated using the income approach based upon internally developed models because active, observable markets do not exist for those items. The fair value of the Company guaranteed benefit liabilities, classified as embedded derivatives, and the related reinsurance and customized freestanding derivatives is calculated as an aggregation of the following components: Best Estimate Claims Payments; Credit Standing Adjustment; and Margins. The resulting aggregation is reconciled or calibrated, if necessary, to market information that is, or may be, available to the Company, but may not be observable by other market participants, including reinsurance discussions and transactions. The Company believes the aggregation of these components, as necessary and as reconciled or calibrated to the market information available to the Company, results in an amount that the Company would be required to transfer, or receive, for an asset, to or from market participants in an active liquid market, if one existed, for those market participants to assume the risks associated with the guaranteed minimum benefits and the related reinsurance and customized derivatives. The fair value is likely to materially diverge from the ultimate settlement of the liability as the Company believes settlement will be based on our best estimate assumptions rather than those best estimate assumptions plus risk margins. In the absence of any transfer of the guaranteed benefit liability to a third party, the release of risk margins is likely to be reflected as realized gains in future periods net income. For further discussion on the impact of fair value changes from living benefits see Note 4 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements and for a discussion on the sensitivities of certain living benefits due to capital market factors see Variable Product Guarantee Risks and Risk Management. Goodwill Impairment Goodwill balances are reviewed for impairment at least annually or more frequently if events occur or circumstances change that would indicate that a triggering event for a potential impairment has occurred. During the fourth quarter of 2011, the Company changed the date of its annual impairment test for all reporting units to October 31 st from January 1 st for Wealth Management reporting units, June 30 th for Federal Trust Corporation within Corporate, and October 1 st for Property & Casualty Commercial and Consumer Markets. As a result, all reporting units performed an impairment test on October 31, 2011 in addition to the annual impairment tests performed on January 1 st or October 1 st as applicable. The change was made to be consistent across all reporting units and to more closely align the impairment testing date with the long-range planning and forecasting process. The Company has determined that this change in accounting principle is preferable under the circumstances and does not result in any delay, acceleration or avoidance of impairment. As it was impracticable to objectively determine projected cash flows and related valuation estimates as of each October 31 for periods prior to October 31, 2011, without applying information that has been learned since those periods, the Company has prospectively applied the change in the annual goodwill impairment testing date from October 31, 2011. The goodwill impairment test follows a two-step process. In the first step, the fair value of a reporting unit is compared to its carrying value. If the carrying value of a reporting unit exceeds its fair value, the second step of the impairment test is performed for purposes of measuring the impairment. In the second step, the fair value of the reporting unit is allocated to all of the assets and liabilities of the reporting unit to determine an implied goodwill value. If the carrying amount of the reporting unit goodwill exceeds the implied goodwill value, an impairment loss is recognized in an amount equal to that excess. Management determination of the fair value of each reporting unit incorporates multiple inputs into discounted cash flow calculations including assumptions that market participants would make in valuing the reporting unit. Assumptions include levels of economic capital, future business growth, earnings projections, and assets under management for certain Wealth Management reporting units and the weighted average cost of capital used for purposes of discounting. In the case of one business unit, a market comparison approach is used to determine fair value. Decreases in the amount of economic capital allocated to a reporting unit, decreases in business growth, decreases in earnings projections and increases in the weighted average cost of capital will all cause a reporting unit fair value to decrease. A reporting unit is defined as an operating segment or one level below an operating segment. Most of the Company reporting units, for which goodwill has been allocated, are equivalent to the Company operating segments as there is no discrete financial information available for the separate components of the segment or all of the components of the segment have similar economic characteristics. In 2011 and 2010, The Hartford changed its reporting segments with no change to reporting units. The group disability and group life components of Group Benefits have been aggregated into one reporting unit; the homeowners and automobile components of Consumer Markets have been aggregated into one reporting unit; the variable life, universal life and term life components of Individual Life have been aggregated into one reporting unit; the 401(k), 457 and 403(b) components of Retirement Plans have been aggregated into one reporting unit; the retail mutual funds component of Mutual Funds has been aggregated into one reporting unit. In circumstances where the components of an operating segment constitute a business for which discrete financial information is available and segment management regularly reviews the operating results of that component such as Hartford Financial Products, the Company has classified those components as reporting units. Goodwill associated with the June 30, 2000 buyback of Hartford Life, Inc. was allocated to each of Hartford Life reporting units based on the reporting units fair value of in-force business at the time of the buyback. Although this goodwill was allocated to each reporting unit, it is held in Corporate for segment reporting. 60 Table of Contents As of December 31, 2011, goodwill has been allocated to the following reporting units: Segment Goodwill in Goodwill Corporate Total Group Benefits $ $ 138 $ 138 Consumer Markets 119 119 Individual Life 224 118 342 Retirement Plans 87 69 156 Mutual Funds 159 92 251 Total $ 589 $ 417 $ 1,006 As of December 31, 2010, goodwill has been allocated to the following reporting units: Segment Goodwill in Goodwill Corporate Total Hartford Financial Products within Property & Casualty Commercial $ 30 $ $ 30 Group Benefits 138 138 Consumer Markets 119 119 Individual Life 224 118 342 Retirement Plans 87 69 156 Mutual Funds 159 92 251 Federal Trust Corporation within Corporate 15 15 Total $ 619 $ 432 $ 1,051 During the second quarter of 2011, the Company wrote off the remaining $15 of goodwill associated with the Federal Trust Corporation ( FTC ) reporting unit within Corporate due to the announced divestiture of FTC. The write-off of the FTC reporting unit goodwill was recorded as a loss on disposal within discontinued operations. The Company completed its annual goodwill assessment for the reporting units within the Property & Casualty Commercial and Consumer Markets operating segments on October 1, 2011. The Consumer Markets reporting unit completed its annual goodwill assessment on October 1, 2011 and again on October 31, 2011 which resulted in no impairment of goodwill. In both tests, the reporting unit passed the first step of their annual impairment tests with a significant margin. The annual goodwill assessment for the Property & Casualty Commercial reporting unit that was performed on October 1, 2011 resulted in a write-down of goodwill of $30, pre-tax leaving no remaining goodwill. The results of the discounted cash flow calculations indicated that the fair value of the reporting unit was less than the carrying value; this was due primarily to a decrease in future expected underwriting cash flows. The decrease in future expected underwriting cash flows is driven by an expected reduction in written premium in the short term as the Company maintains pricing discipline in a downward market cycle, while retaining long term capabilities for future opportunities. The Company completed its annual goodwill assessment for the individual reporting units within the Wealth Management operating segment and Corporate, except for the FTC reporting unit, as noted above, on January 1, 2011 and October 31, 2011, which resulted in no impairment of goodwill. In both tests, the reporting units passed the first step of their annual impairment tests with a significant margin with the exception of the Individual Life reporting unit at the January 1, 2011 test. The Individual Life reporting unit had a margin of less than 10% between fair value and book value on January 1, 2011. As of the October 31, 2011 impairment test, the Individual Life reporting unit had a fair value in excess of book value of approximately 15%, a modest improvement from the January 1, 2011 results due to improving cost of capital. The fair value of the Individual Life reporting unit is based on discounted cash flows using earnings projections on in force business and future business growth. There could be a positive or negative impact on the result of step one in future periods if assumptions change about the level of economic capital, future business growth, earnings projections or the weighted average cost of capital. See Note 8 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for information on the results of goodwill impairment tests performed in 2010 and 2009. Valuation of Investments and Derivative Instruments The fair value of AFS securities, fixed maturities, at fair value using the fair value option ( FVO ), equity securities, trading, and short-term investments in an active and orderly market (i.e., not distressed or forced liquidation) is determined by management after considering one of three primary sources of information: third-party pricing services, independent broker quotations or pricing matrices. Security pricing is applied using a waterfall approach whereby prices are first sought from third-party pricing services, the remaining unpriced securities are submitted to independent brokers for prices, or lastly, securities are priced using a pricing matrix. Typical inputs used by these pricing methods include, but are not limited to, reported trades, benchmark yields, issuer spreads, bids, offers, and/or estimated cash flows, prepayments speeds and default rates. Based on the typical trading volumes and the lack of quoted market prices for fixed maturities, third-party pricing services will normally derive the security prices through recent reported trades for identical or similar securities making adjustments through the reporting date based upon available market observable information as outlined above. If there are no recent reported trades, the third party pricing services and brokers may use matrix or model processes to develop a security price where future cash flow expectations are developed based upon collateral performance and discounted at an estimated market rate. For further discussion, see the Available-for-Sale, Fixed Maturities, FVO, Equity Securities, Trading, and Short-Term Investments Section in Note 4 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 61 Table of Contents The Company has analyzed the third-party pricing services valuation methodologies and related inputs, and has also evaluated the various types of securities in its investment portfolio to determine an appropriate fair value hierarchy level based upon trading activity and the observability of market inputs. For further discussion of fair value measurement, see Note 4 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Valuation of Derivative Instruments, excluding embedded derivatives within liability contracts and reinsurance related derivatives Derivative instruments are reported on the Consolidated Balance Sheets at fair value and are reported in Other Investments and Other Liabilities. The fair value of derivative instruments is determined using pricing valuation models, which utilize market data inputs or independent broker quotations. Excluding embedded and reinsurance related derivatives, as of December 31, 2011 and 2010, 98% and 97%, respectively, of derivatives based upon notional values, were priced by valuation models, which utilize independent market data. The remaining derivatives were priced by broker quotations. The derivatives are valued using mid-market level inputs that are predominantly observable in the market with the exception of the customized swap contracts that hedge guaranteed minimum withdrawal benefits ( GMWB ) liabilities. Inputs used to value derivatives include, but are not limited to, swap interest rates, foreign currency forward and spot rates, credit spreads and correlations, interest and equity volatility and equity index levels. For further discussion, see the Derivative Instruments, including embedded derivatives within the investments section in Note 4 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Pension and Other Postretirement Benefit Obligations The Company maintains a U.S. qualified defined benefit pension plan (the Plan ) that covers substantially all employees, as well as unfunded excess plans to provide benefits in excess of amounts permitted to be paid to participants of the Plan under the provisions of the Internal Revenue Code. The Company has also entered into individual retirement agreements with certain retired directors providing for unfunded supplemental pension benefits. In addition, the Company provides certain health care and life insurance benefits for eligible retired employees. The Company maintains international plans which represent an immaterial percentage of total pension assets, liabilities and expense and, for reporting purposes, are combined with domestic plans. Pursuant to accounting principles related to the Company pension and other postretirement obligations to employees under its various benefit plans, the Company is required to make a significant number of assumptions in order to calculate the related liabilities and expenses each period. The two economic assumptions that have the most impact on pension and other postretirement expense are the discount rate and the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets. In determining the discount rate assumption, the Company utilizes a discounted cash flow analysis of the Company pension and other postretirement obligations and currently available market and industry data. The yield curve utilized in the cash flow analysis is comprised of bonds rated Aa or higher with maturities primarily between zero and thirty years. Based on all available information, it was determined that 4.75% and 4.50% were the appropriate discount rates as of December 31, 2011 to calculate the Company pension and other postretirement obligations, respectively. Accordingly, the 4.75% and 4.50% discount rates will also be used to determine the Company 2012 pension and other postretirement expense, respectively. At December 31, 2010, the discount rate was 5.50% and 5.25% for pension and other postretirement expense, respectively. As of December 31, 2011, a 25 basis point increase/decrease in the discount rate would decrease/increase the pension and other postretirement obligations by $157 and $10, respectively. The Company determines the expected long-term rate of return assumption based on an analysis of the Plan portfolio historical compound rates of return since 1979 (the earliest date for which comparable portfolio data is available) and over 5 year and 10 year periods. The Company selected these periods, as well as shorter durations, to assess the portfolio volatility, duration and total returns as they relate to pension obligation characteristics, which are influenced by the Company workforce demographics. In addition, the Company also applies long-term market return assumptions to an investment mix that generally anticipates 60% fixed income securities, 20% equity securities and 20% alternative assets to derive an expected long-term rate of return. Based upon these analyses, management maintained the long-term rate of return assumption at 7.30% as of December 31, 2011. This assumption will be used to determine the Company 2012 expense. The long-term rate of return assumption at December 31, 2010, that was used to determine the Company 2010 expense, was 7.30%. Pension expense reflected in the Company results was $213, $186 and $137 in 2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively. The Company estimates its 2012 pension expense will be approximately $246, based on current assumptions. To illustrate the impact of these assumptions on annual pension expense for 2012 and going forward, a 25 basis point decrease in the discount rate will increase pension expense by approximately $18 and a 25 basis point change in the long-term asset return assumption will increase/decrease pension expense by approximately $11. The Company uses a five-year averaging method to determine the market-related value of Plan assets, which is used to determine the expected return component of pension expense. Under this methodology, asset gains/losses that result from returns that differ from the Company long-term rate of return assumption are recognized in the market-related value of assets on a level basis over a five year period. The difference between actual asset returns for the plans of $613 and $434 for the years ended December 31, 2011 and 2010, respectively, as compared to expected returns of $298 and $286 for the years ended December 31, 2011 and 2010, respectively, will be fully reflected in the market-related value of plan assets over the next five years using the methodology described above. The level of actuarial net loss continues to exceed the allowable amortization corridor. Based on the 4.75% discount rate selected as of December 31, 2011 and taking into account estimated future minimum funding, the difference between actual and expected performance in 2011 will decrease annual pension expense in future years. The decrease in pension expense will be approximately $13 in 2012 and will increase ratably to a decrease of approximately $95 in 2017. 62 Table of Contents Valuation Allowance on Deferred Tax Assets Deferred tax assets represent the tax benefit of future deductible temporary differences and operating loss and tax credit carryforwards. Deferred tax assets are measured using the enacted tax rates expected to be in effect when such benefits are realized if there is no change in tax law. Under U.S. GAAP, we test the value of deferred tax assets for impairment on a quarterly basis at the entity level within each tax jurisdiction, consistent with our filed tax returns. Deferred tax assets are reduced by a valuation allowance if, based on the weight of available evidence, it is more likely than not that some portion, or all, of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. The determination of the valuation allowance for our deferred tax assets requires management to make certain judgments and assumptions. In evaluating the ability to recover deferred tax assets, we have considered all available evidence as of December 31, 2011, including past operating results, the existence of cumulative losses in the most recent years, forecasted earnings, future taxable income, and prudent and feasible tax planning strategies. In the event we determine it is not more likely than not that we will be able to realize all or part of our deferred tax assets in the future, an increase to the valuation allowance would be charged to earnings in the period such determination is made. Likewise, if it is later determined that it is more likely than not that those deferred tax assets would be realized, the previously provided valuation allowance would be reversed. Our judgments and assumptions are subject to change given the inherent uncertainty in predicting future performance and specific industry and investment market conditions. The Company has recorded a deferred tax asset valuation allowance that is adequate to reduce the total deferred tax asset to an amount that will be more likely than not realized. The deferred tax asset valuation allowance was $95, relating mostly to foreign net operating losses, as of December 31, 2011 and was $173 as of December 31, 2010. In assessing the need for a valuation allowance, management considered future taxable temporary difference reversals, future taxable income exclusive of reversing temporary differences and carryforwards, taxable income in open carry back years, as well as other tax planning strategies. These tax planning strategies include holding a portion of debt securities with market value losses until recovery, altering the level of tax exempt securities held, selling appreciated securities to offset capital losses, business considerations such as asset-liability matching, and the sales of certain corporate assets. Management views such tax planning strategies as prudent and feasible, and would implement them, if necessary, to realize the deferred tax asset. Based on the availability of additional tax planning strategies identified in the second quarter of 2011, the Company released $86, or 100% of the valuation allowance associated with investment realized capital losses. Future economic conditions and debt market volatility, including increases in interest rates, can adversely impact the Company tax planning strategies and in particular the Company ability to utilize tax benefits on previously recognized realized capital losses. Contingencies Relating to Corporate Litigation and Regulatory Matters Management evaluates each contingent matter separately. A loss is recorded if probable and reasonably estimable. Management establishes reserves for these contingencies at its best estimate, or, if no one number within the range of possible losses is more probable than any other, the Company records an estimated reserve at the low end of the range of losses. The Company has a quarterly monitoring process involving legal and accounting professionals. Legal personnel first identify outstanding corporate litigation and regulatory matters posing a reasonable possibility of loss. These matters are then jointly reviewed by accounting and legal personnel to evaluate the facts and changes since the last review in order to determine if a provision for loss should be recorded or adjusted, the amount that should be recorded, and the appropriate disclosure. The outcomes of certain contingencies currently being evaluated by the Company, which relate to corporate litigation and regulatory matters, are inherently difficult to predict, and the reserves that have been established for the estimated settlement amounts are subject to significant changes. Management expects that the ultimate liability, if any, with respect to such lawsuits, after consideration of provisions made for estimated losses, will not be material to the consolidated financial condition of the Company. In view of the uncertainties regarding the outcome of these matters, as well as the tax-deductibility of payments, it is possible that the ultimate cost to the Company of these matters could exceed the reserve by an amount that would have a material adverse effect on the Company results of operations or liquidity in a particular quarterly or annual period. 63 Table of Contents THE HARTFORD S OPERATIONS OVERVIEW The Hartford is a financial holding company for a group of subsidiaries that provide property and casualty and life insurance and investment products to both individual and business customers in the United States and continues to administer business previously sold in Japan and the U.K. The Company conducts business in four divisions, Commercial Markets, Consumer Markets, Wealth Management and Runoff Operations, each containing reporting segments. The Commercial Markets division consists of the reporting segments of Property & Casualty Commercial and Group Benefits. The Consumer Markets division is also the reporting segment. The Wealth Management division consists of the following reporting segments: Individual Annuity, Individual Life, Retirement Plans and Mutual Funds. The Runoff division consists of Life Other Operations and Property & Casualty Other Operations. For additional discussion regarding The Hartford reporting segments, see Note 3 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. The Company derives its revenues principally from: (a) premiums earned for insurance coverages provided to insureds; (b) fee income, including asset management fees, on separate account and mutual fund assets and mortality and expense fees, as well as cost of insurance charges; (c) net investment income; (d) fees earned for services provided to third parties; and (e) net realized capital gains and losses. Premiums charged for insurance coverages are earned principally on a pro rata basis over the terms of the related policies in-force. Asset management fees and mortality and expense fees are primarily generated from separate account assets, which are deposited through the sale of variable annuity and variable universal life products and from mutual funds. Cost of insurance charges are assessed on the net amount at risk for investment-oriented life insurance products. Service fees principally include revenues from member contact center services provided through the AARP Health program. Profitability over time is greatly influenced by the Company underwriting discipline, which seeks to manage exposure to loss through favorable risk selection and diversification, its management of claims, its use of reinsurance, the size of its in force block, actual mortality and morbidity experience, and its ability to manage its expense ratio which it accomplishes through economies of scale and its management of acquisition costs and other underwriting expenses. Pricing adequacy depends on a number of factors, including the ability to obtain regulatory approval for rate changes, proper evaluation of underwriting risks, the ability to project future loss cost frequency and severity based on historical loss experience adjusted for known trends, the Company response to rate actions taken by competitors, and expectations about regulatory and legal developments and expense levels. The Company seeks to price its insurance policies such that insurance premiums and future net investment income earned on premiums received will cover underwriting expenses and the ultimate cost of paying claims reported on the policies and provide for a profit margin. For many of its insurance products, the Company is required to obtain approval for its premium rates from state insurance departments. The financial results in the Company variable annuity, mutual fund and, to a lesser extent, variable universal life businesses, depend largely on the amount of the contract holder account value or assets under management on which it earns fees and the level of fees charged. Changes in account value or assets under management are driven by two main factors: net flows, which measure the success of the Company asset gathering and retention efforts, and the market return of the funds, which is heavily influenced by the return realized in the equity markets. Net flows are comprised of new sales and other deposits less surrenders, death benefits, policy charges and annuitizations of investment type contracts, such as variable annuity contracts. In the mutual fund business, net flows are known as net sales. Net sales are comprised of new sales less redemptions by mutual fund customers. The Company uses the average daily value of the S&P 500 Index as an indicator for evaluating market returns of the underlying account portfolios in the United States. Relative financial results of variable products are highly correlated to the growth in account values or assets under management since these products generally earn fee income on a daily basis. Equity market movements could also result in benefits for or charges against deferred acquisition costs. The profitability of fixed annuities and other spread-based products depends largely on the Company ability to earn target spreads between earned investment rates on its general account assets and interest credited to policyholders. In addition, the size and persistency of gross profits from these businesses is an important driver of earnings as it affects the rate of amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs. The investment return, or yield, on invested assets is an important element of the Company earnings since insurance products are priced with the assumption that premiums received can be invested for a period of time before benefits, loss and loss adjustment expenses are paid. Due to the need to maintain sufficient liquidity to satisfy claim obligations, the majority of the Company invested assets have been held in available-for-sale securities, including, among other asset classes, corporate bonds, municipal bonds, government debt, short-term debt, mortgage-backed securities and asset-backed securities. The primary investment objective for the Company is to maximize economic value, consistent with acceptable risk parameters, including the management of credit risk and interest rate sensitivity of invested assets, while generating sufficient after-tax income to meet policyholder and corporate obligations. Investment strategies are developed based on a variety of factors including business needs, regulatory requirements and tax considerations. For a discussion on how The Hartford establishes property and casualty insurance product reserves, see Property and Casualty Insurance Product Reserves, Net of Reinsurance in the Critical Accounting Estimates section of MD&A and for further information on Unlocks, see Estimated Gross Profits Used in the Valuation and Amortization of Assets and Liabilities Associated with Variable Annuity and Other Universal Life-Type Contracts also in the Critical Accounting Estimates section of MD&A. 64 Table of Contents Definitions of Non-GAAP and other measures and ratios Account Value Account value includes policyholders balances for investment contracts and reserves for future policy benefits for insurance contracts. Account value is a measure used by the Company because a significant portion of the Company fee income is based upon the level of account value. These revenues increase or decrease with a rise or fall in the amount of account value whether caused by changes in the market or through net flows. After-tax Margin, Core Earnings excluding Unlock After-tax margin, core earnings excluding Unlock, is a non-GAAP financial measure that the Company uses to evaluate, and believes is an important measure of, certain of the segment operating performance. After-tax margin is the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP measure. The Hartford believes that the measure after-tax margin, core earnings excluding Unlock, provides investors with a valuable measure of the performance of certain of the Company on-going businesses because it reveals trends in those businesses that may be obscured by the effect of realized gains (losses) and quarterly Unlocks. Unlocks occur when the Company determines based on actual experience or other evidence, that estimates of future gross profits should be revised. As the Unlock is a reflection of the Company new best estimates of future gross profits, the result of the Unlock and its impact distort the trend of after-tax margin. After-tax margin, excluding realized gains (losses) and Unlock, should not be considered as a substitute for After-tax margin and does not reflect the overall profitability of our businesses. Therefore, the Company believes it is important for investors to evaluate both after-tax margin, core earnings excluding Unlock, and after-tax margin when reviewing the Company performance. After-tax margin, core earnings excluding Unlock is calculated by dividing core earnings excluding Unlocks by total core revenues excluding Unlocks. A reconciliation of After-tax margin to After-tax margin, core earnings excluding Unlock for the year ended December 31, 2011, 2010 and 2009 is set forth in the After-tax Margin section within Key Performance Measures and Ratios. For additional information regarding the Unlock, see Critical Accounting Estimates within the MD&A. Assets Under Management Assets under management ( AUM ) include account values and mutual fund assets. AUM is a measure used by the Company because a significant portion of the Company revenues are based upon asset values. These revenues increase or decrease with a rise or fall in the amount of account value whether caused by changes in the market or through net flows. Catastrophe ratio The catastrophe ratio (a component of the loss and loss adjustment expense ratio) represents the ratio of catastrophe losses incurred in the current calendar year (net of reinsurance) to earned premiums and includes catastrophe losses incurred for both the current and prior accident years. A catastrophe is an event that causes $25 or more in industry insured property losses and affects a significant number of property and casualty policyholders and insurers. The catastrophe ratio includes the effect of catastrophe losses, but does not include the effect of reinstatement premiums. Combined ratio The combined ratio is the sum of the loss and loss adjustment expense ratio, the expense ratio and the policyholder dividend ratio. This ratio is a relative measurement that describes the related cost of losses and expenses for every $100 of earned premiums. A combined ratio below 100.0 demonstrates underwriting profit; a combined ratio above 100.0 demonstrates underwriting losses. Combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development The combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development, a non-GAAP measure, represents the combined ratio for the current accident year, excluding the impact of catastrophes. Combined ratio is the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP measure. The Company believes this ratio is an important measure of the trend in profitability since it removes the impact of volatile and unpredictable catastrophe losses and prior accident year reserve development. A reconciliation of combined ratio to combined ratio before prior accident year reserve development for the years ended December 31, 2011, 2010 and 2009 is set forth in the Combined ratio before catastrophes and prior year development section within Key Performance Measures and Ratios. 65 Table of Contents Core Earnings Core earnings, a non-GAAP measure is an important measure of the Company operating performance. The Hartford believes that the measure core earnings provides investors with a valuable measure of the performance of the Company ongoing businesses because it reveals trends in our insurance and financial services businesses that may be obscured by including the net effect of certain realized capital gains and losses and discontinued operations. Some realized capital gains and losses are primarily driven by investment decisions and external economic developments, the nature and timing of which are unrelated to the insurance and underwriting aspects of our business. Accordingly, core earnings excludes the effect of all realized gains and losses (net of tax and the effects of deferred policy acquisition costs ( DAC ) that tend to be highly variable from period to period based on capital market conditions. The Hartford believes, however, that some realized capital gains and losses are integrally related to our insurance operations, so core earnings includes net realized gains and losses such as net periodic settlements on credit derivatives and net periodic settlements on the Japan fixed annuity cross-currency swap. These net realized gains and losses are directly related to an offsetting item included in the income statement such as net investment income. Core earnings is also used by management to assess our operating performance and is one of the measures considered in determining incentive compensation for the Company managers. Net income is the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP measure. Core earnings should not be considered as a substitute for net income and does not reflect the overall profitability of the Company business. Therefore, The Hartford believes that it is useful for investors to evaluate both net income and core earnings when reviewing the Company performance. A reconciliation of net income to core earnings for the years ended December 31, 2011, 2010 and 2009 is set forth below For the years ended December 31, 2011 2010 2009 Core earnings $ 970 $ 1,972 $ 797 Less: Realized gains (losses) excluded from core earnings (394 ) (228 ) (1,680 ) Less: Discontinued operations 86 (64 ) (4 ) Net income (loss) $ 662 $ 1,680 $ (887 ) Current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes The current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes is a measure of the cost of non-catastrophe claims incurred in the current accident year divided by earned premiums. Management believes that the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes is a performance measure that is useful to investors as it removes the impact of volatile and unpredictable catastrophe losses and prior accident year reserve development. DAC amortization ratio, Core Earnings excluding Unlock DAC amortization ratio, core earnings excluding Unlock, is a non-GAAP financial measure that the Company uses to evaluate, and believes is an important measure of, certain of the segment operating performance. DAC amortization ratio is the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP measure. The Hartford believes that the measure DAC amortization ratio, core earnings excluding Unlock, provides investors with a valuable measure of the performance of certain of the Company on-going businesses because it reveals trends in our businesses that may be obscured by the effect of realized gains (losses) or quarterly Unlocks. Unlocks occur when the Company determines, based on actual experience or other evidence, that estimates of future gross profits should be revised. The Unlock is a reflection of the Company new best estimates of future gross profits. The result of the Unlock and is impact distort the trend of DAC amortization ratio. DAC amortization ratio, core earnings excluding Unlock, should not be considered as a substitute for DAC amortization ratio and does not reflect the overall profitability of our businesses. Therefore, the Company believes it is important for investors to evaluate both DAC amortization ratio, core earnings excluding Unlock, and DAC amortization ratio when reviewing the Company performance. DAC amortization ratio, core earnings excluding Unlock is calculated by dividing Core DAC amortization costs by pre-tax core earnings before DAC amortization costs. A reconciliation of DAC amortization ratio to DAC amortization ratio, core earnings excluding Unlock for the years ended December 31, 2011, 2010 and 2009 is set forth in the Individual Annuity Operating Summary with MD&A. For additional information regarding the Unlock, see Critical Accounting Estimates within the MD&A. Expense ratio The expense ratio for the underwriting segments of Property & Casualty Commercial and Consumer Markets is the ratio of underwriting expenses, excluding bad debt expense, to earned premiums. Underwriting expenses include the amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs and insurance operating costs and expenses. Deferred policy acquisition costs include commissions, taxes, licenses and fees and other underwriting expenses and are amortized over the policy term. The expense ratio for the remaining segments is expressed as a ratio of insurance operating costs and expenses to a revenue measure, depending on the type of business. This calculation excludes the amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs, which is calculated as a separate ratio, and is discussed below. 66 Table of Contents Fee Income Fee income is largely driven from amounts collected as a result of contractually defined percentages of assets under management. These fees are generally collected on a daily basis. For individual life insurance products, fees are contractually defined as percentages based on levels of insurance, age, premiums and deposits collected and contract holder value. Life insurance fees are generally collected on a monthly basis. Therefore, the growth in assets under management either through positive net flows or net sales, or favorable equity market performance will have a favorable impact on fee income. Conversely, either negative net flows or net sales, or unfavorable equity market performance will reduce fee income. Loss and loss adjustment expense ratio The loss and loss adjustment expense ratio is a measure of the cost of claims incurred in the calendar year divided by earned premium and includes losses incurred for both the current and prior accident years, as well as the costs of mortality and morbidity and other contractholder benefits to policyholders. Since Group Benefits occasionally buys a block of claims for a stated premium amount, the Company excludes this buyout from the loss ratio used for evaluating the underwriting results of the business as buyouts may distort the loss ratio. Among other factors, the loss and loss adjustment expense ratio needed for the Company to achieve its targeted return on equity fluctuates from year to year based on changes in the expected investment yield over the claim settlement period, the timing of expected claim settlements and the targeted returns set by management based on the competitive environment. The loss and loss adjustment expense ratio is affected by claim frequency and claim severity, particularly for shorter-tail property lines of business, where the emergence of claim frequency and severity is credible and likely indicative of ultimate losses. Claim frequency represents the percentage change in the average number of reported claims per unit of exposure in the current accident year compared to that of the previous accident year. Claim severity represents the percentage change in the estimated average cost per claim in the current accident year compared to that of the previous accident year. As one of the factors used to determine pricing, the Company practice is to first make an overall assumption about claim frequency and severity for a given line of business and then, as part of the ratemaking process, adjust the assumption as appropriate for the particular state, product or coverage. Loss ratio, excluding buyouts The loss ratio is utilized for the Group Benefits segment and is expressed as a ratio of benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses to premiums and other considerations, excluding buyout premiums. Buyout premiums represent takeover of open claim liabilities and other non-recurring premium amounts. Mutual Fund Assets Mutual fund assets include retail, investment-only and college savings plan assets under Section 529 of the Code, collectively referred to as non-proprietary, and proprietary mutual funds. Non-proprietary mutual fund assets are owned by the shareholders of those funds and not by the Company. Proprietary mutual funds include mutual funds sponsored by the Company which are owned by the separate accounts of the Company to support insurance and investment products sold by the Company. The non-proprietary mutual fund assets are not reflected in the Company consolidated financial statements. Mutual fund assets are a measure used by the Company because a significant portion of the Company revenues are based upon asset values. These revenues increase or decrease with a rise or fall in the amount of account value whether caused by changes in the market or through net flows. Net Investment Spread Management evaluates performance of certain products based on net investment spread. These products include those that have insignificant mortality risk, such as fixed annuities, certain general account universal life contracts and certain institutional contracts. Net investment spread is determined by taking the difference between the earned rate (excluding the effects of realized capital gains and losses, including those related to the Company GMWB product and related reinsurance and hedging programs) and the related crediting rates on average general account assets under management. The net investment spreads are for the total portfolio of relevant contracts in each segment and reflect business written at different times. When pricing products, the Company considers current investment yields and not the portfolio average. The determination of credited rates is based upon consideration of current market rates for similar products, portfolio yields and contractually guaranteed minimum credited rates. Net investment spread can be volatile period over period, which can have a significant positive or negative effect on the operating results of each segment. The volatile nature of net investment spread is driven primarily by earnings on limited partnership and other alternative investments and prepayment premiums on securities. Investment earnings can also be influenced by factors such as changes in interest rates, credit spreads and decisions to hold higher levels of short-term investments. Net investment spread is calculated by dividing net investment earnings by average reserves using a 13-point average, less interest credited divided by average account value using a 13-point average. New business written premium New business written premium represents the amount of premiums charged for policies issues to customers who were not insured with the Company in the previous policy term. New business written premium plus renewal policy written premium equals total written premium. 67 Table of Contents Policies in force Policies in force represent the number of policies with coverage in effect as of the end of the period. The number of policies in force is a growth measure used for Consumer Markets and standard commercial lines within Property & Casualty Commercial and is affected by both new business growth and premium renewal retention. Policy count retention Policy count retention represents the ratio of the number of policies renewed during the period divided by the number of policies from the previous policy term period. The number of policies available to renew from the previous policy term represents the number of policies written in the previous policy term net of any cancellations of those policies. Policy count retention is affected by a number of factors, including the percentage of renewal policy quotes accepted and decisions by the Company to non-renew policies because of specific policy underwriting concerns or because of a decision to reduce premium writings in certain classes of business or states. Policy count retention is also affected by advertising and rate actions taken by competitors. Policyholder dividend ratio The policyholder dividend ratio is the ratio of policyholder dividends to earned premium. Prior accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio The prior year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio represents the increase (decrease) in the estimated cost of settling catastrophe and non-catastrophe claims incurred in prior accident years as recorded in the current calendar year divided by earned premiums. Reinstatement premiums Reinstatement premium represents additional ceded premium paid for the reinstatement of the amount of reinsurance coverage that was reduced as a result of a reinsurance loss payment. Renewal earned pricing increase (decrease) Written premiums are earned over the policy term, which is six months for certain personal lines auto business and 12 months for substantially all of the remainder of the Company property and casualty business. Because the Company earns premiums over the 6 to 12 month term of the policies, renewal earned pricing increases (decreases) lag renewal written pricing increases (decreases) by 6 to 12 months. Renewal written pricing increase (decrease) Renewal written pricing increase (decrease) represents the combined effect of rate changes, amount of insurance and individual risk pricing decisions per unit of exposure since the prior year. The rate component represents the average change in rate filings during the period and the amount of insurance represents the value of the rating base, such as model year/vehicle symbol for auto, building replacement costs for property and wage inflation for workers compensation. The renewal written price increase (decrease) does not include other factors that affect average premium per unit of exposure such as changes in the mix of business by state, territory, class plan and tier of risk. A number of factors affect renewal written pricing increases (decreases) including expected loss costs as projected by the Company pricing actuaries, rate filings approved by state regulators, risk selection decisions made by the Company underwriters and marketplace competition. Renewal written pricing changes reflect the property and casualty insurance market cycle. Prices tend to increase for a particular line of business when insurance carriers have incurred significant losses in that line of business in the recent past or the industry as a whole commits less of its capital to writing exposures in that line of business. Prices tend to decrease when recent loss experience has been favorable or when competition among insurance carriers increases. Return on Assets ( ROA ), Core Earnings excluding Unlock ROA, core earnings excluding Unlock, is a non-GAAP financial measure that the Company uses to evaluate, and believes is an important measure of, certain of the segment operating performance. ROA is the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP measure. The Hartford believes that the measure ROA, core earnings excluding Unlock, provides investors with a valuable measure of the performance of certain of the Company on-going businesses because it reveals trends in our businesses that may be obscured by the effect of realized gains (losses) or quarterly Unlocks. Unlocks occur when the Company determines, based on actual experience or other evidence, that estimates of future gross profits should be revised. As the Unlock is a reflection of the Company new best estimates of future gross profits. The result and its impact distort the trend of ROA. ROA, core earnings excluding Unlock, should not be considered as a substitute for ROA and does not reflect the overall profitability of our businesses. Therefore, the Company believes it is important for investors to evaluate both ROA, core earnings excluding Unlock, and ROA when reviewing the Company performance. ROA is calculated by dividing core earnings excluding Unlocks by a two-point average AUM. A reconciliation of ROA to ROA, core earnings excluding Unlock for the years ended December 31, 2011, 2010 and 2009 is set forth in the ROA section within Key Performance Measures and Ratios. 68 Table of Contents Underwriting results Underwriting results is a before-tax measure that represents earned premiums less incurred losses, loss adjustment expenses, underwriting expenses and policyholder dividends. The Hartford believes that underwriting results provides investors with a valuable measure of before-tax profitability derived from underwriting activities, which are managed separately from the Company investing activities. The underwriting segments of Property & Casualty Commercial and Consumer Markets are evaluated by management primarily based upon underwriting results. A reconciliation of underwriting results to net income for Property & Casualty Commercial and Consumer Markets is set forth in their respective discussions herein. Written and earned premiums Written premium is a statutory accounting financial measure which represents the amount of premiums charged for policies issued, net of reinsurance, during a fiscal period. Earned premium is a U.S. GAAP and statutory measure. Premiums are considered earned and are included in the financial results on a pro rata basis over the policy period. Management believes that written premium is a performance measure that is useful to investors as it reflects current trends in the Company sale of property and casualty insurance products. Written and earned premium are recorded net of ceded reinsurance premium. Traditional life insurance type products, such as those sold by Group Benefits, collect premiums from policyholders in exchange for financial protection for the policyholder from a specified insurable loss, such as death or disability. These premiums together with net investment income earned from the overall investment strategy are used to pay the contractual obligations under these insurance contracts. Two major factors, new sales and persistency, impact premium growth. Sales can increase or decrease in a given year based on a number of factors, including but not limited to, customer demand for the Company product offerings, pricing competition, distribution channels and the Company reputation and ratings. Persistency refers to the percentage of policies remaining in-force from year-to-year. 69 Table of Contents KEY PERFORMANCE MEASURES AND RATIOS The Hartford considers several measures and ratios to be the key performance indicators for its businesses. The following discussions include the more significant ratios and measures of profitability for the years ended December 31, 2011, 2010 and 2009. Management believes that these ratios and measures are useful in understanding the underlying trends in The Hartford businesses. However, these key performance indicators should only be used in conjunction with, and not in lieu of, the results presented in the segment discussions that follow in this MD&A. These ratios and measures may not be comparable to other performance measures used by the Company competitors. Combined ratio before catastrophes and prior year development Combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development is a key indicator of overall profitability for the property and casualty underwriting segments of Property & Casualty Commercial and Consumer Markets since it removes the impact of volatile and unpredictable catastrophe losses and prior accident year reserve development. 2011 2010 2009 Property & Casualty Commercial Combined ratio 104.5 89.7 85.9 Catastrophe ratio 5.4 2.7 0.9 Non-catastrophe prior year development 1.8 (6.3 ) (6.3 ) Combined ratio before catastrophes and prior year development 97.2 93.4 91.2 Consumer Markets Combined ratio 101.5 99.0 97.2 Catastrophe ratio 12.0 7.8 5.9 Non-catastrophe prior year development (2.7 ) (2.4 ) (1.0 ) Combined ratio before catastrophes and prior year development 92.2 93.6 92.3 Year ended December 31, 2011 compared to the year ended December 31, 2010 Property & Casualty Commercial combined ratio before catastrophes and prior year development deteriorated primarily due to an increase in current accident year losses and loss adjustment expenses ratio before catastrophes, largely due to loss costs outpacing earned pricing increases predominantly related to workers compensation business. Consumer Markets combined ratio before catastrophes and prior year development decreased primarily due to changes in the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expenses ratio before catastrophes, as a decrease for auto was partially offset by an increase for home. The decrease for auto was driven by the effect of earned pricing increases and lower estimated frequency on auto liability claims, which was partially offset by higher auto physical damage loss costs. The increase for home was primarily due to an increase in the frequency of non-catastrophe weather claims, partially offset by the effect of earned pricing increases. Year ended December 31, 2010 compared to the year ended December 31, 2009 Property & Casualty Commercial combined ratio before catastrophes and prior year development increased primarily due to higher severity on package business and workers compensation, as well as an increased ratio for specialty casualty, and to a lesser extent an increase in the expense ratio due to increased expenses for taxes, licenses and fees. Consumer Markets combined ratio before catastrophes and prior year development increased primarily due to an increase in the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes for auto of 1.3 points due to higher auto physical damage emerged frequency and higher expected auto liability loss costs relative to average premium. The current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes for home increased 0.7 points primarily due to an increase in loss adjustment expenses, partially offset by the effect of earned pricing increases. 70 Table of Contents Return on Assets Return on assets is a key indicator of overall profitability for the Individual Annuity, Retirement Plans, Mutual Funds and Life Other Operations reporting segments as a significant portion of their earnings is based on average assets under management. Ratios 2011 2010 2009 Individual Annuity [1] ROA (1.6 ) bps 54.7 bps (48.6 ) bps Effect of net realized losses, net of tax and DAC on ROA (41.3 ) bps 0.2 bps (38.5 ) bps Effect of Unlock on ROA (7.2 ) bps 15.8 bps (47.0 ) bps ROA, core earnings excluding Unlock 46.9 bps 38.7 bps 36.9 bps Retirement Plans [1] ROA 2.9 bps 9.7 bps (54.8 ) bps Effect of net realized losses, net of tax and DAC on ROA (0.7 ) bps (4.8 ) bps (46.4 ) bps Effect of Unlock on ROA (7.5 ) bps 5.4 bps (11.4 ) bps ROA, core earnings excluding Unlock 11.1 bps 9.1 bps 3.0 bps Mutual Funds [1] ROA 10.5 bps 13.7 bps 8.8 bps Effect of net realized gains/(losses), net of tax and DAC on ROA bps 3.9 bps bps ROA, core earnings excluding Unlock 10.5 bps 9.8 bps 8.8 bps Life Other Operations [1] ROA 39.2 bps (9.6 ) bps (74.5 ) bps Effect of net realized gains/(losses), net of tax and DAC on ROA 1.7 bps (32.0 ) bps (51.7 ) bps Effect of Unlock on ROA 3.5 bps (7.7 ) bps (32.4 ) bps ROA, core earnings excluding Unlock 34.0 bps 30.1 bps 9.6 bps [1] Proprietary mutual funds, Investment-Only mutual funds, Canadian mutual funds, and 529 college savings plans are reported in Mutual Funds in 2011 and 2010. Prior to 2010, proprietary mutual fund assets were included in Individual Annuity, Retirement Plans, and Mutual Funds, as those same assets generate earnings for each of these segments. Year ended December 31, 2011 compared to year ended December 31, 2010 Individual Annuity ROA, core earnings excluding Unlock, increased in 2011 primarily due to the favorable impact of a flat DAC amortization rate on 2011 earnings and a DRD tax settlement benefit in 2011. Retirement Plans ROA, core earnings excluding Unlock, increased in 2011 primarily due to increased fee and investment income resulting from higher average general account invested assets and favorable partnership income as well as a DRD tax settlement benefit. Mutual Funds ROA, core earnings excluding Unlock, increased in 2011 primarily due to higher earnings from continuing operations resulting primarily from lower operating expenses in 2011. Assets under management and asset-based fee income were unfavorably impacted by declining equity market performance and increasing outflows over the course of 2011. Life Other Operations ROA, core earnings excluding Unlock, increased in 2011 primarily due to a lower DAC amortization rate, as earnings increased in 2011 compared to 2010, and a DRD tax settlement benefit, offset in part by decreased investment income due to lower average account values in 2011 as compared to 2010. Year ended December 31, 2010 compared to year ended December 31, 2009 Individual Annuity ROA, core earnings excluding Unlock, increased in 2010 primarily due to improved net investment income on limited partnerships and other alternative investments, a lower DAC amortization rate, lower operating expenses associated with the restructuring of operations. Retirement Plans ROA, core earnings excluding Unlock, increased in 2010 primarily due to improved performance on limited partnerships and other alternative investments in 2010, and was driven by improvement in the equity markets, which led to increased account values and increased deposit activity. Mutual Funds ROA, core earnings excluding Unlock, increased in 2010 primarily due to improvement in the equity markets, which enabled this line of business to partially return to scale, and the impact of lower operating expenses, partially offset by the addition of proprietary mutual fund assets to this line of business, which has a lower ROA level than the non-proprietary mutual fund business. Life Other Operations ROA, core earnings excluding Unlock, increased in 2010 primarily due to lower operating expenses in 2010 and the absence of 3 Win charges recognized in the first quarter of 2009. 71 Table of Contents After-tax margin After-tax margin is a key indicator of overall profitability for the Individual Life and Group Benefits reporting segments as a significant portion of their earnings are a result of the net margin from losses incurred on earned premiums, fees and other considerations. 2011 2010 2009 Individual Life After-tax margin 9.6 % 17.9 % 1.3 % Effect of net realized gains (losses), net of tax and DAC on after-tax margin 1.3 % 1.3 % (6.6 %) Effect of Unlock on after-tax margin (5.5 %) 1.7 % (4.7 %) After-tax margin, core earnings excluding Unlock 13.8 % 14.9 % 12.6 % Group Benefits After-tax margin (excluding buyouts) 2.0 % 3.9 % 4.2 % Effect of net realized gains (losses), net of tax on after-tax margin 0.1 % 0.5 % (1.5 %) After-tax margin (excluding buyouts), excluding realized gains (losses) 1.9 % 3.4 % 5.7 % Year ended December 31, 2011 compared to year ended December 31, 2010 Individual Life after-tax margin, core earnings excluding Unlock, decrease was primarily due to increased benefits, losses and expenses and increased mortality costs, partially offset by increased net investment income. The decrease in Group Benefits after-tax margin (excluding buyouts), excluding realized gains (losses), was primarily due to higher mortality and morbidity driven by elevated incidence and lower claim terminations, and to a lesser extent, a decrease in fully insured ongoing premiums, driven by lower sales over the past year, as well as from a challenging economic environment. Year ended December 31, 2010 compared to year ended December 31, 2009 Individual Life after-tax margin, core earnings excluding Unlock, increase was primarily due to lower DAC amortization and net realized capital gains in 2010 compared to net realized capital losses in 2009. Group Benefits after-tax margin (excluding buyouts), excluding realized gains (losses), decrease was primarily due to a higher loss ratio from unfavorable morbidity driven by lower claim terminations on disability business. 72 Table of Contents Investment Results Composition of Invested Assets December 31, 2011 December 31, 2010 Amount Percent Amount Percent Fixed maturities, AFS, at fair value $ 81,809 78.3 % $ 77,820 79.2 % Fixed maturities, at fair value using the fair value option 1,328 1.3 % 649 0.7 % Equity securities, AFS, at fair value 921 0.9 % 973 1.0 % Mortgage loans 5,728 5.5 % 4,489 4.6 % Policy loans, at outstanding balance 2,001 1.9 % 2,181 2.2 % Limited partnerships and other alternative investments 2,532 2.4 % 1,918 2.0 % Other investments [1] 2,394 2.3 % 1,617 1.6 % Short-term investments 7,736 7.4 % 8,528 8.7 % Total investments excluding equity securities, trading 104,449 100.0 % 98,175 100.0 % Equity securities, trading, at fair value [2] 30,499 32,820 Total investments $ 134,948 $ 130,995 [1] Primarily relates to derivative instruments. [2] As of December 31, 2011 and 2010, approximately $28.5 billion and $30.5 billion, respectively, of equity securities, trading, support Japan variable annuities. Those equity securities, trading, were invested in mutual funds, which, in turn, invested in the following asset classes, Japan equity 21%, Japan fixed income (primarily government securities) 15%, global equity 21%, global government bonds 42%, and cash and other 1% for both periods presented. Total investments increased since December 31, 2010 primarily due to increases in fixed maturities, AFS, mortgage loans and other investments, partially offset by a decline in equity securities, trading and short-term investments. The increase in fixed maturities, AFS, was largely the result of improved valuations as a result of declining interest rates, partially offset by credit spread widening. The increase in mortgage loans related to the funding of commercial whole loans, and the increase in other investments primarily related to increases in value of derivatives largely due to a decline in the equity market, strengthening of the Japanese yen in comparison to the U.S. dollar and a decline in interest rates. These increases were partially offset by a decline in equity securities, trading, primarily due to deteriorations in market performance of the underlying investments and net outflows, partially offset by the Japanese yen strengthening in comparison to the euro. The decline in short-term investments primarily relates to increased allocations to mortgage loans and limited partnerships and other alternative investments. Net Investment Income (Loss) For the years ended December 31, 2011 2010 2009 Amount Yield [1] Amount Yield [1] Amount Yield [1] Fixed maturities [2] $ 3,396 4.2 % $ 3,489 4.3 % $ 3,617 4.5 % Equity securities, AFS 36 3.8 % 53 4.8 % 93 6.5 % Mortgage loans 281 5.4 % 260 5.2 % 307 4.8 % Policy loans 131 6.1 % 132 6.1 % 139 6.3 % Limited partnerships and other alternative investments 243 12.0 % 216 12.6 % (341 ) (15.6 %) Other [3] 301 329 314 Investment expense (116 ) (115 ) (112 ) Total securities AFS and other $ 4,272 4.4 % $ 4,364 4.5 % $ 4,017 4.1 % Equity securities, trading (1,359 ) (774 ) 3,188 Total net investment income (loss), before-tax $ 2,913 $ 3,590 $ 7,205 Total securities, AFS and other excluding limited partnerships and other alternative investments 4,029 4.2 % 4,148 4.3 % 4,358 4.5 % [1] Yields calculated using annualized investment income before investment expenses divided by the monthly average invested assets at cost, amortized cost, or adjusted carrying value, as applicable, excluding consolidated variable interest entity noncontrolling interests. Included in the fixed maturity yield is Other, which primarily relates to derivatives (see footnote [3] below). Included in the total net investment income yield is investment expense. [2] Includes net investment income on short-term investments. [3] Includes income from derivatives that qualify for hedge accounting and hedge fixed maturities. 73 Table of Contents Year ended December 31, 2011 compared to the year ended December 31, 2010 Total net investment income declined largely due to equity securities, trading, resulting from a market decline of the underlying investment funds supporting the Japanese variable annuity product and net outflows, partially offset by the Japanese yen strengthening in comparison to the euro. Also contributing to the decline was lower income on fixed maturities resulting from the proceeds from sales being reinvested at lower rates. These declines were partially offset by an increase in limited partnership and other alternative investment income due to additional allocations to this asset class and strong private equity and real estate returns, as well as an increase in mortgage loan income due to additional investments in commercial whole loans. The Company expectation for 2012, based on the current interest rate and credit environment, is that reinvestment rates will be slightly lower than maturing securities; however, the Company has increased its investment in certain higher yielding asset classes, such as commercial mortgage loans and a modest amount of high-yield securities. Therefore, the Company expects the 2012 portfolio yield, excluding limited partnerships, to be relatively consistent with 2011. Year ended December 31, 2010 compared to the year ended December 31, 2009 Total net investment income decreased largely due to equity securities, trading, resulting primarily from declines in market performance of the underlying investment funds supporting the Japanese variable annuity product. Total net investment income, excluding equity securities, trading, increased primarily due to improved performance of limited partnerships and other alternative investments primarily within real estate and private equity funds, partially offset by lower income on fixed maturities resulting from a decline in average short-term interest rates and lower reinvestment rates. Net Realized Capital Gains (Losses) For the years ended December 31, 2011 2010 2009 Gross gains on sales $ 693 $ 836 $ 1,056 Gross losses on sales (384 ) (522 ) (1,397 ) Net OTTI losses recognized in earnings (174 ) (434 ) (1,508 ) Valuation allowances on mortgage loans 24 (154 ) (403 ) Japanese fixed annuity contract hedges, net [1] 3 27 47 Periodic net coupon settlements on credit derivatives/Japan (10 ) (17 ) (49 ) Results of variable annuity hedge program U.S. GMWB derivatives, net (397 ) 89 1,464 U.S. macro hedge program (216 ) (445 ) (733 ) Total U.S. program (613 ) (356 ) 731 International program 775 11 (112 ) Total results of variable annuity hedge program 162 (345 ) 619 Other, net [2] (459 ) (2 ) (369 ) Net realized capital gains (losses), before-tax $ (145 ) $ (611 ) $ (2,004 ) [1] Relates to the Japanese fixed annuity product (adjustment of product liability for changes in spot currency exchange rates, related derivative hedging instruments, excluding net period coupon settlements, and Japan FVO securities). [2] Primarily consists of gains and losses on non-qualifying derivatives and fixed maturities, FVO, Japan 3Win related foreign currency swaps, and other investment gains and losses. Details on the Company net realized capital gains and losses are as follows: Gross gains and losses on sales Gross gains and losses on sales for the year ended December 31, 2011 were predominately from investment grade corporate securities, U.S. Treasuries, municipal bonds and commercial real estate related securities. These sales were the result of reinvestment into spread product well-positioned for modest economic growth, as well as the purposeful reduction of certain exposures. Gross gains and losses on sales for the year ended December 31, 2010 were predominantly from sales of investment grade corporate securities in order to take advantage of attractive market opportunities, as well as sales of U.S. Treasuries related to tactical repositioning of the portfolio. Gross gains and losses on sales for the year ended December 31, 2009 were predominantly within corporate, government and structured securities. Also included were gains of $360 related to the sale of Verisk/ISO securities. Gross gains and losses on sales primarily resulted from efforts to reduce portfolio risk through sales of subordinated financials and real estate related securities and from sales of U.S. Treasuries to manage liquidity. Net OTTI losses For further information, see Other-Than-Temporary Impairments within the Investment Portfolio Risks and Risk Management section of the MD&A. Valuation allowances on mortgage loans For further information, see Valuation Allowances on Mortgage Loans within the Investment Portfolio Risks and Risk Management section of the MD&A. 74 Table of Contents Variable annuity hedge program For the year ended December 31, 2011, the loss on U.S. GMWB related derivatives, net, was primarily due to a decrease in long-term interest rates that resulted in a charge of ($283) and a higher interest rate volatility that resulted in a charge of ($84). The loss on U.S. macro hedge program for the year ended December 31, 2011 was primarily driven by time decay and a decrease in equity market volatility since the purchase date of certain options during the fourth quarter. The gain associated with the international program for the year ended December 31, 2011 was primarily driven by the Japanese yen strengthening, lower global equity markets, and a decrease in interest rates. For the year ended December 31, 2010, the gain on U.S. GMWB derivatives, net, was primarily due to liability model assumption updates of $159 and lower implied market volatility of $118, and outperformance of the underlying actively managed funds as compared to their respective indices of $104, partially offset by losses due to a general decrease in long-term rates of ($158) and rising equity markets of ($90). The net loss on the U.S. macro hedge program was primarily the result of a higher equity market valuation and the impact of trading activity. For the year ended December 31, 2009, the gain on GMWB derivatives, net, was primarily due to liability model assumption updates related to favorable policyholder experience of $566, the relative outperformance of the underlying actively managed funds as compared to their respective indices of $550, and the impact of the Company own credit standing of $154. Additional net gains of $56 resulted from lower implied market volatility and a general increase in long-term interest rates, partially offset by rising equity markets. The net loss on the U.S. macro hedge program was primarily the result of a higher equity market valuation. Other, net Other, net loss for the year ended December 31, 2011, was primarily due to losses of ($148) on credit derivatives and fair value option securities driven by credit spread widening and losses of ($141) on transactional foreign currency re-valuation associated with the internal reinsurance of the Japan variable annuity business, which is offset in AOCI, due to appreciation of the Japanese yen versus the U.S. dollar. Additionally, losses of ($94) for the year ended December 31, 2011 resulted from equity futures and options used to hedge equity market risk in the investment portfolio due to an increase in the equity market during the hedged period. Also included were losses of ($69) on Japan 3Win foreign currency swaps primarily driven by a decrease in long-term U.S. interest rates. Other, net loss for the year ended December 31, 2010 was primarily due to a loss of ($326) on transactional foreign currency re-valuation due to an increase in value of the Japanese yen versus the U.S. dollar associated with the internal reinsurance of the Japan variable annuity business, which is offset in AOCI. This loss was partially offset by gains of $217 on credit derivatives driven by credit spread tightening, and gains of $59 on interest rate derivatives used to manage portfolio duration driven by a decline in long-term interest rates. Other, net loss for the year ended December 31, 2009 primarily resulted in net losses of ($463) on credit derivatives where the Company purchased credit protection due to credit spread tightening and approximately ($300) from contingent obligations associated with the Allianz transaction. These losses were partially offset by gains of $155 on credit derivatives that assume credit risk due to credit spread tightening, as well as $140 from a change in spot rates related to transactional foreign currency predominately on the internal reinsurance of the Japan variable annuity business, which is offset in AOCI. 75 Table of Contents PROPERTY & CASUALTY COMMERCIAL Underwriting Summary 2011 2010 2009 Written premiums $ 6,176 $ 5,796 $ 5,715 Change in unearned premium reserve 49 52 (188 ) Earned premiums 6,127 5,744 5,903 Losses and loss adjustment expenses Current accident year before catastrophes 4,139 3,579 3,582 Current accident year catastrophes 320 152 78 Prior accident years 125 (361 ) (394 ) Total losses and loss adjustment expenses 4,584 3,370 3,266 Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs 1,356 1,353 1,393 Underwriting expenses 443 426 399 Dividends to policyholders 18 5 10 Underwriting results (274 ) 590 835 Net servicing income 13 9 6 Net investment income 910 935 755 Net realized capital gains (losses) (50 ) 3 (209 ) Goodwill impairment (30 ) Other expenses (151 ) (147 ) (139 ) Income from continuing operations before income taxes 418 1,390 1,248 Income tax expense 40 407 356 Income from continuing operations, net of tax 378 983 892 Income from discontinued operations, net of tax [1] 150 12 7 Net income $ 528 $ 995 $ 899 [1] Represents the income from operations and sale of Specialty Risk Services ( SRS ). For additional information, see Note 20 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Premium Measures [1] 2011 2010 2009 New business premium $ 1,097 $ 1,122 $ 1,101 Standard commercial lines policy count retention 82 % 84 % 81 % Standard commercial lines renewal written pricing increase (decrease) 4 % 1 % (1 %) Standard commercial lines renewal earned pricing increase (decrease) 2 % (2 %) Standard commercial lines policies in-force as of end of period 1,252,820 1,211,047 1,159,759 [1] Standard commercial lines represents the Company small commercial and middle market property and casualty lines. Ratios 2011 2010 2009 Loss and loss adjustment expense ratio Current accident year before catastrophes 67.6 62.3 60.7 Current accident year catastrophes 5.2 2.7 1.3 Prior accident years 2.0 (6.3 ) (6.7 ) Total loss and loss adjustment expense ratio 74.8 58.7 55.3 Expense ratio 29.4 31.0 30.4 Policyholder dividend ratio 0.3 0.1 0.2 Combined ratio 104.5 89.7 85.9 Catastrophe ratio Current accident year 5.2 2.7 1.3 Prior accident years 0.2 (0.4 ) Total catastrophe ratio 5.4 2.7 0.9 Combined ratio before catastrophes 99.1 87.1 84.9 Combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development 97.2 93.4 91.2 Other revenues [1] $ 97 $ 96 $ 103 [1] Represents servicing revenues. 76 Table of Contents Year ended December 31, 2011 compared to the year ended December 31, 2010 Net income decreased in 2011, as compared to the prior year, primarily due to a decrease in underwriting results due to higher current accident year losses, including catastrophes, and unfavorable prior accident years development in 2011 compared to favorable prior accident years development in 2010. The decrease in underwriting results was partially offset by the net realized capital gain on the sale of SRS. The annual goodwill assessment for the Property & Casualty Commercial reporting unit resulted in a write-down of goodwill of $30, pre-tax for the year ended December 31, 2011. For further discussion, see Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets within Note 8 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Current accident year catastrophe losses increased $168, pre-tax, from 2010 to 2011. In 2011, catastrophes primarily included severe thunderstorms and tornadoes in the Midwest and Southeast, Hurricane Irene in the Northeast, Tropical Storm Lee, and winter storms, earlier in the year, in the Northeast and Midwest. In 2010, catastrophes primarily included tornadoes, thunderstorms and hail events in the Midwest, Plains States and the Southeast and winter storms in the Mid-Atlantic and Northeast. For information regarding prior accident years reserve development, including reserve (releases) strengthenings by reserve line, see the Property and Casualty Insurance Product Reserves, Net of Reinsurance section within Critical Accounting Estimates. The increase in earned premiums in 2011, is primarily due to improvements in workers compensation, driven by higher new business premium, renewal earned pricing increases and an increase in policies-in-force. The earned pricing changes were primarily a reflection of written pricing changes over the last year. Renewal written pricing increased for all standard commercial lines driven by improving market conditions. Current accident year losses and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes increased, due primarily to the increase in earned premiums for workers compensation, as well as an increase in the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes. The ratio increased primarily due to loss costs outpacing earned pricing increases driven by an increase in workers compensation claim frequency, partially offset by moderating severity, resulting in an increase in current accident year reserve strengthening. Underwriting expenses increased in 2011, driven by an increase in technology costs, partially offset by a decrease in compensation related costs. The year ended December 31, 2011 included a $12 release of reserves for other state funds and taxes, while the year ended December 31, 2010 included strengthening of $20, which was due to an increase in the assessment for New York state funds and taxes. The change in dividends to policyholders is due to a decrease in 2010 of dividends payable primarily for workers compensation policyholders. Net realized capital losses increased primarily due to losses on derivatives, partially offset by lower impairments. For additional information, see the Investment Results section within Key Performance Measures and Ratios. The effective tax rate, in both periods, differs from the U.S. Federal statutory rate primarily due to permanent differences related to investments in tax exempt securities. In addition, due to the availability of additional tax planning strategies, the Company released $22, or 100%, of the valuation allowance associated with investment realized capital losses in 2011. For further discussion, see Income Taxes within Note 13 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 77 Table of Contents Year ended December 31, 2010 compared to the year ended December 31, 2009 Net income increased in 2010, as compared to the prior year, driven by improvements in net realized capital gains (losses) and higher net investment income, despite a decrease in underwriting results. The primary causes of the decrease in underwriting results were lower earned premiums and higher current accident year catastrophe losses. Earned premiums decreased across most product lines, with the exception of workers compensation and specialty casualty. The effects of the economic downturn contributed to the decrease in earned premiums during 2010. Although earned premiums declined, several key measures showed improvement. New business written premium increased, driven by increases in specialty casualty and package business, partially offset by decreases in general liability, professional liability and marine. In addition, for standard commercial lines, policy count retention increased in all lines of business, due in part by an improvement in mid-term cancellations in 2010. Renewal earned pricing was flat for standard commercial lines, as an increase in package business and property was offset by a decrease in all other lines. The earned pricing changes were primarily a reflection of written pricing changes over the last year. Renewal written pricing increased for standard commercial lines driven by increases in property and workers compensation, partially offset by decreases in all other lines. Lastly, the number of policies-in-force increased, primarily due to the increase in policy count retention. The growth in policies in-force does not correspond directly with the change in earned premiums due to the effect of changes in earned pricing and changes in the average premium per policy. Current accident year losses and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes decreased slightly, due to the decrease in earned premiums, which was mostly offset by an increase in the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes. The ratio increased, primarily due to higher severity on package business and workers compensation, as well as an increased ratio for specialty casualty. Current accident year catastrophe losses in 2010 were higher than in 2009 primarily due to more severe windstorm events, particularly from hail in the West, Midwest, plains states and the Southeast, and from winter storms in the Mid-Atlantic and Northeast. Losses in 2009 were primarily incurred from ice storms, windstorms and tornadoes across many states. For information regarding prior accident years reserve development, including reserve (releases) strengthenings by reserve line, see the Property and Casualty Insurance Product Reserves, Net of Reinsurance section within Critical Accounting Estimates. Underwriting expenses increased in 2010, driven by an increase in taxes, licenses and fees of $19, which included a $5 increase in reserve strengthening for other state funds and taxes and a $7 reduction in TWIA assessments recognized in 2009 related to hurricane Ike. Also contributing to the increase were higher technology costs, partially offset by lower compensation-related costs. Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs decreased, largely due to the decrease in earned premiums. The change in dividends to policyholders is due to a decrease in 2010 of dividends payable primarily for workers compensation policyholders. Net realized capital gains (losses) improved as compared to the prior year, as did net investment income. The improvements in net realized capital gains (loss) were primarily driven by lower impairments in 2010 compared to 2009 and realized gains on derivatives in 2010 compared to losses in 2009. Net investment income increased in 2010, primarily as a result of improvements in limited partnerships and other alternative investments, partially offset by lower returns on taxable fixed maturities due to declining interest rates. For additional information, see the Investment Results section within Key Performance Measures and Ratios. The effective tax rate, in both periods, differs from the U.S. Federal statutory rate primarily due to permanent differences related to investments in tax exempt securities. For further discussion, see Income Taxes within Note 13 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 78 Table of Contents GROUP BENEFITS Operating Summary 2011 2010 2009 Premiums and other considerations $ 4,147 $ 4,278 $ 4,350 Net investment income 411 429 403 Net realized capital gains (losses) (3 ) 46 (124 ) Total revenues 4,555 4,753 4,629 Benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses 3,306 3,331 3,196 Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs 55 61 61 Insurance operating costs and other expenses 1,104 1,111 1,120 Total benefits, losses and expenses 4,465 4,503 4,377 Income before income taxes 90 250 252 Income tax expense 65 59 Net income $ 90 $ 185 $ 193 Premiums and other considerations 2011 2010 2009 Fully insured ongoing premiums $ 4,036 $ 4,166 $ 4,309 Buyout premiums 49 58 Other 62 54 41 Total premiums and other considerations $ 4,147 $ 4,278 $ 4,350 Fully insured ongoing sales, excluding buyouts $ 505 $ 583 $ 741 Ratios, excluding buyouts 2011 2010 2009 Loss ratio 79.5 % 77.6 % 73.5 % Loss ratio, excluding financial institutions 84.5 % 82.8 % 77.8 % Expense ratio 28.3 % 27.8 % 27.1 % Expense ratio, excluding financial institutions 23.7 % 23.3 % 22.6 % Group Benefits has a block of financial institution business that is experience rated. This business comprised approximately 9% to 10% of the segment 2011, 2010 and 2009 premiums and other considerations (excluding buyouts). With respect to the segment core earnings, the financial institution business comprised 2% for 2011, 6% for 2010, 2% for 2009, excluding a one-time payment to a third party administrator in 2011 and a commission accrual adjustment in 2009. Year ended December 31, 2011 compared to the year ended December 31, 2010 Net income decreased, relative to prior year, primarily due to higher mortality and morbidity driven by elevated incidence and lower claim terminations, and to a lesser extent, a decrease in fully insured ongoing premiums, driven by lower sales over the past year, as well as, from a challenging economic environment. The effective tax rate, in both periods, differs from the U.S. Federal statutory rate primarily due to permanent differences related to investments in tax exempt securities. In addition, due to the availability of additional tax planning strategies, the Company released $5 or 100% of the valuation allowance associated with investment realized capital losses in 2011. For further discussion, see Income Taxes within Note 13 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Year ended December 31, 2010 compared to the year ended December 31, 2009 Net income decreased as compared to prior year, as a decrease in premiums and other considerations and higher claim costs offset the improvements in net realized capital gains (losses) and net investment income. Premiums and other considerations decreased due to a 3% decline in fully insured ongoing premiums which was driven by lower sales due to the competitive marketplace, and the pace of the economic recovery. The loss ratio, excluding buyouts, increased compared to the prior year, particularly in group disability, primarily due to unfavorable morbidity experience from higher incidence and lower claim terminations. The favorable change to net realized capital gains in 2010, from net realized capital losses in 2009, was due to impairments on investment securities recorded in 2009. For further discussion on impairments, see Other-Than-Temporary Impairments within the Investment Credit Risk section of the MD&A. Net investment income increased as a result of higher weighted average portfolio yields primarily due to improved performance on limited partnerships and other alternative investments. The effective tax rate, in both periods, differs from the U.S. Federal statutory rate primarily due to permanent differences related to investments in tax exempt securities. For further discussion, see Income Taxes within Note 13 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 79 Table of Contents CONSUMER MARKETS Operating Summary 2011 2010 2009 Written premiums $ 3,675 $ 3,886 $ 3,995 Change in unearned premium reserve (72 ) (61 ) 36 Earned premiums 3,747 3,947 3,959 Losses and loss adjustment expenses Current accident year before catastrophes 2,536 2,737 2,707 Current accident year catastrophes 425 300 228 Prior accident years (75 ) (86 ) (33 ) Total losses and loss adjustment expenses 2,886 2,951 2,902 Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs 639 667 674 Underwriting expenses 279 290 273 Underwriting results (57 ) 39 110 Net servicing income 19 35 29 Net investment income 187 187 178 Net realized capital gains (losses) (11 ) (52 ) Other expenses (162 ) (66 ) (77 ) Income (loss) before income taxes (24 ) 195 188 Income tax expense (benefit) (29 ) 52 48 Net income $ 5 $ 143 $ 140 Written Premiums 2011 2010 2009 Product Line Automobile $ 2,562 $ 2,745 $ 2,877 Homeowners 1,113 1,141 1,118 Total $ 3,675 $ 3,886 $ 3,995 Earned Premiums Product Line Automobile $ 2,619 $ 2,806 $ 2,857 Homeowners 1,128 1,141 1,102 Total $ 3,747 $ 3,947 $ 3,959 Premium Measures 2011 2010 2009 Policies in force at year end Automobile 2,080,535 2,226,351 2,395,421 Homeowners 1,338,676 1,426,107 1,488,408 Total policies in force at year end 3,419,211 3,652,458 3,883,829 New business premium Automobile $ 298 $ 311 $ 455 Homeowners $ 91 $ 106 $ 149 Policy count retention Automobile 83 % 83 % 86 % Homeowners 84 % 85 % 86 % Renewal written pricing increase Automobile 5 % 6 % 3 % Homeowners 8 % 10 % 5 % Renewal earned pricing increase Automobile 6 % 5 % 4 % Homeowners 9 % 7 % 6 % 80 Table of Contents Ratios and Supplemental Data 2011 2010 2009 Loss and loss adjustment expense ratio Current accident year before catastrophes 67.7 69.4 68.4 Current accident year catastrophes 11.3 7.6 5.8 Prior accident years (2.0 ) (2.2 ) (0.8 ) Total loss and loss adjustment expense ratio 77.0 74.8 73.3 Expense ratio 24.5 24.2 23.9 Combined ratio 101.5 99.0 97.2 Catastrophe ratio Current accident year 11.3 7.6 5.8 Prior accident years 0.7 0.3 0.1 Total catastrophe ratio 12.0 7.8 5.9 Combined ratio before catastrophes 89.5 91.2 91.3 Combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident years development 92.2 93.6 92.3 Other revenues [1] $ 156 $ 172 $ 154 [1] Represents servicing revenues. Product Combined Ratios 2011 2010 2009 Automobile 96.4 97.1 96.9 Homeowners 113.7 104.0 98.2 Total 101.5 99.0 97.2 Year ended December 31, 2011 compared to the year ended December 31, 2010 Net income decreased in 2011, as compared to the prior year, due to higher current accident year catastrophes and a $113, pre-tax, charge, recorded in other expenses, related to the write off of capitalized costs associated with a discontinued policy administration software project. Current accident year catastrophe losses increased from 2010 to 2011, driven by an increase in tornado and thunderstorm losses in the Midwest and Southeast of approximately $140, pre-tax. In 2011, catastrophes primarily included severe tornadoes, hail and thunderstorm events in the Midwest and Southeast and Hurricane Irene. In 2010, catastrophes primarily included tornadoes, hail and thunderstorm events in the Midwest, Plains States and the Southeast, as well as, a severe wind and hail storm event in Arizona. Earned premiums decreased in auto and were down modestly for homeowners. For both auto and homeowners, non-renewal of existing policies more than offset the impacts of new business written premium and renewal earned pricing increases. Compared to 2010, the number of policies in-force as of December 31, 2011 decreased for both auto and home, driven by non-renewals. Auto new business written premium decreased, primarily due to the effect of written pricing increases and underwriting actions that lowered the policy issue rate in Agency. Home new business written premium decreased in both AARP and Agency driven largely by the effect of written pricing increases. While auto and home new business written premium declined for the full year, new business increased in the latter part of the year with new business growth in both channels in the fourth quarter of 2011. The higher auto renewal earned pricing in 2011 was due to rate increases and the effect of policyholders purchasing newer vehicle models in place of older models. Average renewal earned premium per policy for auto increased modestly as renewal earned pricing increases were partially offset by the effect of a continued shift to more preferred market business which has lower average earned premium. Homeowners renewal earned pricing increases were due to rate increases and increased coverage amounts. For both auto and home, the Company has increased rates in certain states for certain classes of business to maintain profitability in the face of rising loss costs. Current accident year losses and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes decreased primarily due to lower earned premiums. The overall current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes decreased during 2011 as a 2.6 point decrease for auto was partially offset by a 1.2 point increase for home. For auto, the effect of earned pricing increases and lower estimated frequency on auto liability claims was partially offset by higher auto physical damage loss costs. For home, an increase in the frequency of non-catastrophe weather claims was partially offset by the effect of earned pricing increases. Amortization of deferred acquisition costs decreased largely due to a decline in commissions paid to agents due to lower Agency earned premium. The decrease in underwriting expenses was primarily driven by a decrease in reserves for other state funds and taxes. The decline in net servicing income in 2011 was largely due to lower contact center transaction volumes handled as a third party administrator under the AARP Health program. For information regarding prior accident years reserve development, including reserve (releases) strengthenings by reserve line, see the Property and Casualty Insurance Product Reserves, Net of Reinsurance section within Critical Accounting Estimates. The effective tax rate, in both periods, differs from the U.S. Federal statutory rate primarily due to permanent differences related to investments in tax exempt securities. For further discussion, see Income Taxes within Note 13 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 81 Table of Contents Year ended December 31, 2010 compared to the year ended December 31, 2009 Net income increased slightly in 2010, as compared to the prior year, despite a decrease in underwriting results. The primary causes of the decrease in underwriting results were higher current accident year losses and loss adjustment expenses, including catastrophes, partially offset by more favorable prior accident year reserve development. The lower underwriting results were offset by improvements in net realized capital gains (losses) and higher net investment income. Current accident year losses and loss adjustment expenses before catastrophes increased primarily due to an increase in the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes for auto due to higher auto physical damage emerged frequency and higher expected auto liability loss costs relative to average premium. The current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes for home increased primarily due to an increase in loss adjustment expenses, partially offset by the effect of earned pricing increases. Current accident year catastrophes were higher in 2010 than in 2009 primarily due to a severe wind and hail storm event in Arizona during the fourth quarter of 2010. Losses in 2010 were also incurred from tornadoes, thunderstorms and hail events in the Midwest, plains states and the Southeast, as well as from winter storms in the Mid-Atlantic and Northeast. Catastrophe losses in 2009 were primarily incurred from windstorms in Texas and the Midwest as well as the two large Colorado hail and windstorm events. For information regarding prior accident years reserve development, including reserve (releases) strengthenings by reserve line, see the Property and Casualty Insurance Product Reserves, Net of Reinsurance section within Critical Accounting Estimates. Earned premiums decreased in 2010, as lower earned premiums in auto were partially offset by an increase in homeowners. Auto earned premiums were down reflecting a decrease in new business written premium and policy count retention since the fourth quarter of 2009 and a decrease in average renewal earned premium per policy. Homeowners earned premiums grew primarily due to the effect of increases in earned pricing, partially offset by a decrease in new business written premium and policy count retention. Auto and home new business written premium decreased primarily due to the effect of written pricing increases and underwriting actions that lowered the policy issue rate. Also contributing to the decrease in new business were fewer responses from direct marketing on AARP business and fewer quotes from independent agents driven by increased competition. Partially offsetting the decrease in auto new business was the effect of an increase in policies sold to AARP members through agents. Partially offsetting the decrease in home new business was an increase in the cross-sale of homeowners insurance to insureds that have auto policies. The change in auto renewal earned pricing was flat due to rate increases and the effect of policyholders purchasing newer vehicle models in place of older models. Despite auto renewal earned pricing increasing, average renewal earned premium per policy for auto declined due to a shift to more preferred market segments and a greater concentration of business in states and territories with lower average premium. Homeowners renewal earned pricing increased due to rate increases and increased coverage amounts reflecting higher rebuilding costs. For both auto and home, the Company has increased rates in certain states for certain classes of business to maintain profitability in the face of rising loss costs. Policy count retention for auto and home decreased primarily driven by the effect of renewal written pricing increases and underwriting actions to improve profitability. The decrease in the policy count retention for homeowners was partially offset by the effect of the Company non-renewal of Florida homeowners agency business in 2009. Compared to 2009, the number of policies in-force as of 2010 decreased for both auto and home, driven by the decreases in policy retention and new business. The expense ratio increased due largely to an increase in legal settlement costs in 2010 and higher amortization of acquisition costs on AARP business, partially offset by lower direct marketing spend for consumer direct business. Also contributing to the increase in the expense ratio was a reduction of TWIA hurricane assessments in 2009 largely offset by an increase in reserves for other state funds and taxes in 2009. Net realized capital gains (losses) improved, as compared to prior year. The improvements were primarily driven by lower impairments in 2010 compared to 2009 and realized gains on derivatives in 2010 compared to losses in 2009. Net investment income increased, primarily as a result of increased income from limited partnerships and other alternative investments, partially offset by lower returns on taxable fixed maturities due to declining interest rates. For additional information, see the Investment Results section within Key Performance Measures and Ratios. The effective tax rate, in both periods, differs from the U.S. Federal statutory rate primarily due to permanent differences related to investments in tax exempt securities. For further discussion, see Income Taxes within Note 13 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 82 Table of Contents INDIVIDUAL ANNUITY Operating Summary 2011 2010 2009 Fee income and other $ 1,411 $ 1,493 $ 1,472 Earned premiums 249 223 (7 ) Net investment income 768 814 771 Net realized capital losses (591 ) (339 ) (7 ) Total revenues 1,837 2,191 2,229 Benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses 1,106 1,054 1,310 Amortization of DAC 483 (56 ) 1,339 Insurance operating costs and other expenses 536 542 505 Total benefits, losses and expenses 2,125 1,540 3,154 Income (loss) before income taxes (288 ) 651 (925 ) Income tax expense (benefit) (274 ) 124 (481 ) Net income (loss) $ (14 ) $ 527 $ (444 ) Assets Under Management [1] 2011 2010 2009 Fixed MVA annuity and other account values $ 11,631 12,223 12,110 Variable annuity account values 68,760 83,013 84,679 Total assets under management $ 80,391 $ 95,236 $ 96,789 Account Value Roll Forward 2011 2010 2009 Variable Annuities Account value, beginning of period $ 83,013 $ 119,387 $ 105,921 Transfers affecting beginning of period [1] (34,708 ) (31,343 ) Account value, beginning of period, as adjusted $ 83,013 $ 84,679 $ 74,578 Net flows (11,552 ) (9,966 ) (7,122 ) Change in market value and other (2,701 ) 8,300 17,223 Account value, end of period $ 68,760 $ 83,013 $ 84,679 Net Investment Spread 17 bps 27 bps 1 bps Expense Ratios General insurance expense ratio 23.5 bps 22.4 bps 24.1 bps DAC amortization ratio 247.7 % (9.4 %) 323.4 % Effect of realized gains (losses) on DAC amortization (183.3 %) 39.3 % (141.4 %) Effect of Unlocks on DAC amortization (12.0 %) 22.4 % (120.1 %) DAC amortization ratio, core earnings, excluding Unlock 52.4 % 52.3 % 62.0 % [1] International and institutional annuities were transferred retrospectively to Life Other Operations. 83 Table of Contents Year ended December 31, 2011 compared to the year ended December 31, 2010 Net income decreased in 2011 compared to 2010 primarily due to an Unlock charge taken in 2011 compared to an Unlock benefit in 2010 and increased net realized capital losses in 2011. Additionally, lower account values driven by equity performance and net outflows resulted in lower fee income. The Unlock charge was $172, after-tax, in 2011 as compared to an Unlock benefit of $143, after-tax, in 2010. The Unlock charge in 2011 was due to the annual assumption update which reflected additional hedging costs incurred in 2011 resulting in increased benefits losses and loss adjustment expenses and DAC amortization. For further discussion of the Unlock see the Critical Accounting Estimates within the MD&A. The higher net realized capital losses in 2011 were primarily due to increased losses on the variable annuity hedging program. The variable annuity hedging program losses were $613 in 2011 compared with losses of $356 in 2010. For further discussion on the results of the variable annuity hedging program see Investment Results, Net Realized Capital Gains (Losses) within Key Performance Measures and Ratios of the MD&A. Net investment spread decreased by 10 bps in 2011 compared to 2010 primarily due to lower returns on partnership, derivative and other alternative investments. Yields decreased by 28 bps due to a lower interest rate environment, however, this decrease was offset by a benefit of 18 bps from lower crediting rates related to maturities of older contracts with higher crediting rates or contract renewals with current lower crediting rates. Individual Annuity effective tax rate differs from the statutory rate of 35% primarily due to permanent differences for the separate account DRD on annuity products. Income taxes include separate account DRD benefits of $155 in 2011 compared to $108 in 2010. Included in the 2011 separate account benefit is a tax benefit of $51 including $6 interest related to a DRD settlement. For further discussion, see Note 13 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Year ended December 31, 2010 compared to the year ended December 31, 2009 Net income increased in 2010 compared to 2009 primarily due to significant improvements in the equity markets, which resulted in an Unlock benefit in 2010 as compared to an Unlock charge in 2009, as well as continued market value appreciation in account value resulting in increased fee income, and due to continued expense reduction efforts in 2010. The Unlock benefit was $143, after-tax, in 2010 as compared to an Unlock charge of $606, after-tax, in 2009. The benefit in 2010 was primarily due to equity market improvements that were greater than expectations for the year ended December 31, 2010, while 2009 charge was primarily the result of equity market performance significantly below expectations for the first quarter of 2009. The Unlock resulted in decreases to both benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses and amortization of DAC. For further discussion of the Unlock see the Critical Accounting Estimates within the MD&A. The higher net realized capital losses in 2010 were primarily due to losses on the variable annuity hedging program compared to gains in 2009, partially offset by lower impairment losses in 2010 and net realized gains on sales of securities in 2010 compared to net realized losses in 2009. The variable annuity hedging program losses were $356 in 2010 compared with gains of $731 in 2009. For further discussion on the results of the variable annuity hedging program see Investment Results, Net Realized Capital Gains (Losses) within Key Performance Measures and Ratios of the MD&A. Net investment income on securities available-for-sale and other increased slightly due to improving investments results on limited partnership and other alternative investments. Net investment spread increased by 26 bps in 2010 compared to 2009 primarily due to an increase in partnership returns, partially offset by declines in fixed maturities. Yields decreased by 7 bps due to a lower interest rate environment, however, this decrease was offset by a benefit of 33 bps from lower crediting rates related to maturities of older contracts with higher crediting rates or contract renewals with current lower crediting rates. Individual Annuity effective tax rate differs from the statutory rate of 35% primarily due to permanent differences for the separate account DRD on U.S. annuity products. For further discussion, see Note 13 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 84 Table of Contents INDIVIDUAL LIFE Operating Summary 2011 2010 2009 Fee income and other $ 1,001 $ 952 $ 1,027 Earned premiums (102 ) (96 ) (87 ) Net investment income 456 400 335 Net realized capital gains (losses) 30 24 (145 ) Total revenues 1,385 1,280 1,130 Benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses 816 644 640 Insurance operating costs and other expenses 182 181 188 Amortization of DAC 221 119 314 Total benefits, losses and expenses 1,219 944 1,142 Income (loss) before income taxes 166 336 (12 ) Income tax expense (benefit) 33 107 (27 ) Net income $ 133 $ 229 $ 15 Account Values Individual variable universal life insurance $ 5,535 $ 6,115 $ 5,766 Universal life, interest sensitive whole life, modified guaranteed life insurance and other 6,765 6,128 5,693 Total account values $ 12,300 $ 12,243 $ 11,459 Individual Life Insurance In-force Variable universal life insurance $ 69,716 $ 74,044 $ 78,671 Universal life, interest sensitive whole life, modified guaranteed life insurance 64,006 58,789 56,030 Term life 81,494 75,797 69,968 Total life insurance in-force $ 215,216 $ 208,630 $ 204,669 Net Investment Spread 153 bps 145 bps 81 bps Death Benefits $ 423 $ 362 $ 346 Year ended December 31, 2011 compared to the year ended December 31, 2010 Net income decreased in 2011 compared to 2010 largely due to an Unlock charge taken in 2011 compared to an Unlock benefit in 2010 and unfavorable mortality in 2011, partially offset by an increase in net investment income driven by higher invested assets and favorable partnership income. The Unlock charge was $69, after-tax, for 2011 compared to an Unlock benefit of $28, after-tax, for 2010. The Unlock charge in 2011 was due to the annual assumption update completed in the third quarter and resulted in an increase in fee income, benefit and claim expense and DAC amortization. For further discussion of Unlocks see the Critical Accounting Estimates within the MD&A. Net investment spread increased by 8 bps in 2011 compared to 2010. While yields were down slightly compared to 2010, the increase in spread was driven by lower crediting rates on new business written relative to in-force business with higher crediting rates. The increase in death benefits for 2011 compared to 2010 was due to unfavorable mortality experience due to higher reinsurance retention relative to 2010 but within expected levels of volatility for 2011. Individual Life effective tax rate differs from the statutory rate of 35% primarily due to permanent differences for the separate account DRD. Income taxes include separate account DRD benefits of $17 and $13 for the years ended December 31, 2011 and 2010, respectively. The separate account DRD benefit for the year ended December 31, 2011 includes $5 related to a DRD settlement. 85 Table of Contents Year ended December 31, 2010 compared to the year ended December 31, 2009 Net income increased in 2010 compared to 2009 primarily due to net realized capital gains and Unlock benefit in 2010. In addition, Individual Life net income increased, excluding the improvements to net realized gains and an Unlock benefit, due to improvements in the segment individual life business. Individual Life net realized gains in 2010 compared to net realized capital losses in 2009 were primarily due to lower losses from impairments. For further discussion on impairments, see Other-Than-Temporary Impairments within the Investment Credit Risk section of the MD&A. The Unlock benefit was $28, after-tax, in 2010 as compared to an Unlock charge of $51, after-tax, in 2009. The benefit in 2010 was primarily due to assumption updates related to lapse rates, investment margin and mortality, partially offset by persistency, while 2009 charge was primarily the result of assumption updates related to investment margin and expenses, as well as equity market performance significantly below expectations in 2009, partially offset by assumption updates on lapse rates. The Unlock primarily resulted in decreases to amortization of DAC and fee income and other. For further discussion of the Unlock see the Critical Accounting Estimates within the MD&A. Net investment income increased primarily due to improved performance of limited partnerships and other alternative investments and earnings on a higher average invested asset base in 2010 compared to 2009, partially offset by lower yields on fixed maturity investments. Net investment spread increased by 64 bps in 2010 compared to 2009 driven by improved investment yields of 33 bps and decreased crediting rates of 31 bps. The lower crediting rates related to maturities of older contracts with higher crediting rates or contract renewals with current lower crediting rates. Individual Life effective tax rate differs from the statutory rate of 35% primarily due to permanent differences for the separate account DRD, partially offset by a valuation allowance on deferred tax benefits related to certain realized losses in 2010. For further discussion, see Note 13 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 86 Table of Contents RETIREMENT PLANS Operating Summary 2011 2010 2009 Fee income and other $ 373 $ 352 $ 321 Earned premiums 7 7 3 Net investment income 396 364 315 Net realized capital losses (10 ) (18 ) (333 ) Total revenues 766 705 306 Benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses 308 278 269 Insurance operating costs and other expenses 354 340 346 Amortization of DAC 134 27 56 Total benefits, losses and expenses 796 645 671 Income (loss) before income taxes (30 ) 60 (365 ) Income tax expense (benefit) (45 ) 13 (143 ) Net income (loss) $ 15 $ 47 $ (222 ) Assets Under Management 2011 2010 2009 401(k) account values $ 21,124 $ 20,291 $ 16,142 403(b)/457 account values 12,775 12,649 11,116 401(k)/403(b) mutual funds 18,403 19,578 16,704 Total assets under management $ 52,302 $ 52,518 $ 43,962 Assets Under Management Roll Forward 2011 2010 2009 Assets under management, beginning of period $ 52,518 $ 43,962 $ 37,036 Net flows 761 1,545 (1,142 ) Transfers in and reclassifications [1] 267 1,488 Change in market value and other (1,244 ) 5,523 8,068 Assets under management, end of period $ 52,302 $ 52,518 $ 43,962 Net Investment Spread 98 bps 99 bps 66 bps [1] Lifetime Income and Maturity Funding business of $194 was transferred from Individual Annuity to Retirement Plans effective January 1, 2010. Also in 2010, the Company identified specific plans that required reclassification of $1.3 billion from AUA to AUM. Year ended December 31, 2011 compared to the year ended December 31, 2010 Net income decreased in 2011 compared to 2010 due largely to the Unlock charge taken in the third quarter compared to an Unlock benefit in 2010, partially offset by a favorable one-time true up in tax expense. The Unlock charge was $45, after-tax, in 2011 as compared to an Unlock benefit of $18, after-tax, in 2010. The Unlock charge in 2011 was primarily due to the annual assumption update completed in the third quarter. The most significant assumption changes related to reduced investment spread in the general account delayed projected expense benefits and increased trail commissions due to the mix of business. Each of these items reduces expected future gross profits. The benefit in 2010 was primarily due to assumption changes based on actual experience and to a lesser extent from the market performance variance to expectations. For further discussion of Unlocks see the Critical Accounting Estimates within the MD&A. Net investment income increased in 2011 compared to 2010 although portfolio yields were lower in 2011. Net investment spread decreased by 1 bps driven by lower yields of 12 bps on higher average general account invested assets and favorable partnership income, offset by lower crediting rates of 11 bps. Retirement Plans effective tax rate differs from the statutory rate of 35% primarily due to permanent differences for the separate account DRD. For 2011 and 2010 income taxes include separate account DRD benefits of $25 and $18, respectively. Included in the separate account benefit for 2011 is a $4 benefit related to a DRD settlement and a $2 benefit related to a true up the 2010 tax year provision. In addition, due to the availability of additional tax planning strategies, the Company released $10 or 100% of the valuation allowance associated with realized capital losses during 2011. For further discussion, see Note 13 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 87 Table of Contents Year ended December 31, 2010 compared to the year ended December 31, 2009 Retirement Plans net income in 2010 compared to a net loss in 2009 was primarily due to significant improvements in net realized capital losses, as well as higher net investment income and improvements in the equity markets which resulted in an Unlock benefit in 2010 as compared to an Unlock charge in 2009 and continued market value appreciation in AUM which resulted in increased fee income and other. Net realized capital losses were lower in 2010 compared to 2009 due to lower losses from impairments, derivatives, and trading losses compared to 2009. Net investment income increased in 2010 compared to 2009 primarily due to the improved performance from limited partnerships and other alternative investments and higher average general account invested assets compared to 2009. Correspondingly, the improvements in performance on limited partnerships and other alternative investments drove an increase in the net investment spread of 33 bps, partially offset by lower returns on fixed maturity securities. Net investment spread also improved due to lower crediting rates of 8 bps. The Unlock benefit was $18, after-tax, in 2010 as compared to an Unlock charge of $56, after-tax, in 2009. The benefit in 2010 was primarily due to assumption changes based on actual experience and to a lesser extent from the market performance variance to expectations for the year ended December 31, 2010, while 2009 charge was primarily the result assumption changes based on actual experience and equity market performance significantly below expectations. The Unlock primarily resulted in a decrease to amortization of DAC. For further discussion of the Unlock see the Critical Accounting Estimates within the MD&A. Fee income and other increased primarily due to increases in asset based fees on higher average account values resulting from improvements in equity markets and increased net flows. Retirement Plans effective tax rate differs from the statutory rate of 35% primarily due to permanent differences for the separate account DRD. For further discussion, see Note 13 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 88 Table of Contents MUTUAL FUNDS Operating Summary 2011 2010 2009 Fee income and other $ 649 $ 664 $ 518 Net investment loss (3 ) (8 ) (21 ) Net realized capital gains (loss) 1 Total revenues 647 656 497 Insurance operating costs and other expenses 448 458 395 Amortization of DAC 47 51 50 Total benefits, losses and expenses 495 509 445 Income from continuing operations, before income taxes 152 147 52 Income tax expense 54 52 18 Income from continuing operations 98 95 34 Income from discontinued operations, net of tax [1] 37 Net income $ 98 $ 132 $ 34 Assets Under Management 2011 2010 2009 Retail mutual fund assets $ 40,228 $ 48,753 $ 42,829 Investment Only mutual fund assets 6,983 6,659 529 College Savings Plan and Canadian mutual fund assets 1,557 1,472 1,202 Total non-proprietary and Canadian mutual fund assets 48,768 56,884 44,031 Proprietary mutual fund assets 36,770 43,602 Total mutual fund assets under management $ 85,538 $ 100,486 $ 44,031 Non-Proprietary and Canadian Mutual Fund AUM Roll Forward 2011 2010 2009 Non-Proprietary and Canadian Mutual Fund AUM, beginning of period $ 56,884 $ 44,031 $ 32,710 Transfers in (out) [2] 5,617 (826 ) Net flows (4,378 ) 2,750 2,115 Change in market value and other (3,738 ) 4,486 10,032 Non-Proprietary and Canadian Mutual Fund AUM, end of period $ 48,768 $ 56,884 $ 44,031 Proprietary Mutual Fund AUM Roll Forward 2011 2010 2009 Proprietary Mutual Fund AUM, beginning of period $ 43,602 $ $ Transfers in [3] 43,890 Net flows (5,797 ) (5,334 ) Change in market value (1,035 ) 5,046 Proprietary Mutual Fund AUM, end of period $ 36,770 $ 43,602 $ [1] Represents income from discontinued operations, net of tax of Hartford Investments Canada Corporation ( HICC ). For additional information, see Note 20 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. [2] Canadian and Offshore businesses were transferred to International Annuity within Life Other Operations effective January 1, 2009. Investment-only and Canadian mutual fund assets were transferred from Life Other Operations effective January 1, 2010. [3] Proprietary mutual fund assets under management are included in the Mutual Fund reporting segment effective January 1, 2010. Year ended December 31, 2011 compared to the year ended December 31, 2010 Net income decreased in 2011 primarily due to discontinued operations. The decline in income from discontinued operations in 2011 compared to 2010 is due to the sale of the Canadian mutual fund operations, which closed in December 2010. Net income from continuing operations increased compared to 2010 due to a decline in expenses largely due to a capital infusion to the Money Market Funds in the third quarter of 2010. Year ended December 31, 2010 compared to the year ended December 31, 2009 Net income increased in 2010 compared to 2009 due to the inclusion of a net realized gain on the sale of Canadian mutual fund operations of $41 after-tax, within income from discontinued operations. In addition higher overall account balances attributed to the improved equity markets, and positive net flows on non-proprietary and Canadian mutual fund assets, resulted in higher fee income, partially offset by higher trail commissions, as well as capital infusions to the money market funds. Also contributing to the net income in 2010 is the increase in scale of the reporting segment businesses. 89 Table of Contents LIFE OTHER OPERATIONS Operating Summary 2011 2010 2009 Fee income and other $ 1,045 $ 1,046 $ 948 Earned premiums (25 ) 3 345 Net investment income (loss) Securities available-for-sale and other 973 999 947 Equity securities trading [1] (1,359 ) (774 ) 3,188 Total net investment income (loss) (386 ) 225 4,135 Net realized capital gains (losses) 586 (417 ) (702 ) Total revenues 1,220 857 4,726 Benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses 1,305 1,148 1,854 Benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses returns credited on international variable annuities [1] (1,359 ) (774 ) 3,188 Amortization of DAC 492 305 370 Insurance operating costs and other expenses 274 262 350 Total benefits, losses and expenses 712 941 5,762 Income (loss) from continuing operations, before income taxes 508 (84 ) (1,036 ) Income tax expense (benefit) 150 (343 ) Income (loss) from continuing operations 358 (84 ) (693 ) Loss from discontinued operations, net of tax [2] (6 ) (5 ) Net income (loss) $ 358 $ (90 ) $ (698 ) Assets Under Management [3] Variable annuity account values [4] $ 31,162 $ 33,507 $ 32,948 Fixed MVA annuity and other account values [5] 4,786 4,596 4,365 Institutional annuity account values [6] 19,330 19,674 22,373 Private Placement Life Insurance ( PPLI ) 36,335 36,042 35,146 Account Value Roll Forward Variable Annuities Account value, beginning of period $ 33,507 $ 32,948 $ 31,335 Net flows (1,848 ) (1,946 ) (606 ) Change in market value and other (2,130 ) (1,531 ) 2,545 Effect of currency translation 1,633 4,036 (326 ) Account value, end of period $ 31,162 $ 33,507 $ 32,948 [1] Includes investment income and mark-to-market effects of equity securities, trading, supporting the international variable annuity business, which are classified in net investment income with corresponding amounts credited to policyholders within benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses. [2] Represents loss from discontinued operations, net of tax of Hartford Advantage investment, Ltd. ( HAIL ). For additional information, see Note 20 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. [3] International and institutional annuities were transferred retrospectively from Individual Annuity; PPLI was transferred retrospectively from Individual Life. [4] Canadian and Offshore businesses were transferred from Mutual Funds effective January 1, 2009. Investment-only and Canadian mutual fund assets were transferred to Mutual Funds effective January 1, 2010. [5] Includes approximately $1.9 billion, $1.9 billion and $1.8 billion related to the triggering of the guaranteed minimum income benefit for the 3 Win product as of December 31, 2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively. This account value is not expected to generate material future profit or loss to the Company. [6] Included in the balance is approximately $1.3 billion for the year ended December 31, 2011 and approximately $1.4 billion for the year ended December 31, 2010 related to an intrasegment funding agreement which is eliminated in consolidation. 90 Table of Contents Year ended December 31, 2011 compared to the year ended December 31, 2010 Net income increased in 2011 compared to 2010 primarily due to the change in net realized capital gains (losses), offset in part by increases in 2011 in the Unlock charge and DAC amortization resulting from assumption changes reflecting the declining performance of the equity markets in 2011. Benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses increased in 2011 reflecting the decline in equity market performance however, these expenses were partially offset by the release of a reserve related to a Japan product. In addition, insurance operating costs and other expenses increased in 2011 due to costs associated with expected assessments related to the Executive Life Insurance Company of New York ( ELNY ) insolvency. The net realized capital gains in 2011 compared to net realized capital losses in 2010 were primarily due to gains in the variable annuity hedging program and lower net impairment losses. Variable annuity hedging program gains were $775 in 2011 compared to $11 in 2010; net impairment losses were $54 and $172, respectively, in 2011 and 2010. For further discussion on the results of the variable annuity hedging program see Investment Results, Net Realized Capital Gains (Losses) within Key Performance Measures and Ratios of the MD&A. The Unlock charge was $244, after-tax, in 2011 compared to an Unlock charge of $78, after-tax, in 2010. The Unlock charge in 2011 was primarily a result of the impact of the annual assumption update. Including expected Japan hedging costs, and actual separate account returns below our aggregated estimated returns. Benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses as well as DAC amortization increased accordingly. For further discussion of the Unlock see the Critical Accounting Estimates within the MD&A. Life Other Operations effective tax rate differs from the statutory rate of 35% primarily due to varying tax rates by country and the valuation allowance on deferred tax benefits related to certain realized losses on securities that back certain institutional annuities. For further discussion, see Note 13 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Year ended December 31, 2010 compared to the year ended December 31, 2009 Net income increased in 2010 compared to 2009 primarily due to the change in net realized capital gains (losses), a lower Unlock charge and lower DAC amortization, as well as continued expense reduction efforts. The Unlock charge was $78, after-tax, in 2010 compared to an Unlock charge of $318, after-tax, in 2009. The Unlock charge in 2010 was primarily due to equity market improvements that were less than expected for 2010, while the Unlock charge in 2009 was primarily due to equity market performance significantly below expectations for the first quarter of 2009. Benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses, as well as DAC amortization decreased in 2010 due to the lower Unlock charge. For further discussion of the Unlock see the Critical Accounting Estimates within the MD&A. The lower net realized capital losses in 2010 compared to 2009 were primarily due to lower impairment losses and net realized gains on sales of securities as compared with net realized losses in 2009. Variable annuity hedging program gains were were $11 in 2010 compared to losses of $112 in 2009; net impairment losses were $172 and $619, respectively, in 2010 and 2009. For further discussion on the results of the variable annuity hedging program see Investment Results, Net Realized Capital Gains (Losses) within Key Performance Measures and Ratios of the MD&A. Management decision to suspend sales of structured settlements and terminal funding products resulted in decreased earned premiums in 2010 as compared to 2009 with a corresponding decrease in benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses. In addition, benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses were lower for institutional annuities driven by the Company execution on its call and buyback strategy associated with stable value products, which reduced the related liabilities. Life Other Operations effective tax rate differs from the statutory rate of 35% primarily due to varying tax rates by country and the valuation allowance on deferred tax benefits related to certain realized losses on securities that back certain institutional annuities. For further discussion, see Note 13 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 91 Table of Contents PROPERTY & CASUALTY OTHER OPERATIONS Operating Summary 2011 2010 2009 Earned premiums $ $ 1 $ Net investment income 151 163 161 Net realized capital gains (losses) (1 ) 24 (26 ) Total revenues 150 188 135 Benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses 317 251 241 Insurance operating costs and other expenses 24 30 23 Total benefits, losses and expenses 341 281 264 Loss before income taxes (191 ) (93 ) (129 ) Income tax benefit (74 ) (40 ) (51 ) Net loss $ (117 ) $ (53 ) $ (78 ) Year ended December 31, 2011 compared to the year ended December 31, 2010 The net loss in Property & Casualty Other Operations increased in 2011, as compared to 2010, primarily due to reserve strengthening of $290, pre-tax, in 2011, resulting from the company annual review of its asbestos liabilities. In the comparable prior year period, the reserve strengthening was $169, pre-tax. Partially offsetting the increase in asbestos reserve strengthening was lower reserve strengthening of net environmental reserves of $19, pre-tax, in 2011 compared to $62, pre-tax, in 2010, resulting from the company annual review of its environmental liabilities. For further information, see Property & Casualty Other Operations Claims within the Property and Casualty Insurance Product Reserves, Net of Reinsurance section in Critical Accounting Estimates. Year ended December 31, 2010 compared to the year ended December 31, 2009 The net loss in Property & Casualty Other Operations improved in 2010, as compared to 2009, primarily due to a change from net realized capital losses in 2009 to net realized capital gains in 2010. The change in net realized capital gains (losses) is a result of impairments in 2009. In addition, the net loss improved due to lower reserve strengthening of $62, pre-tax, in 2010, compared to $75, pre-tax, in 2009, resulting from the company annual review of its environmental liabilities. Partially offsetting the improvements in net realized capital gains (losses) and environmental reserve actions was increased reserve strengthening of $169, pre-tax, in 2010, compared to $138, pre-tax, in 2009, resulting from the company annual review of its asbestos liabilities. For further information, see Property & Casualty Other Operations Claims within the Property and Casualty Insurance Product Reserves, Net of Reinsurance section in Critical Accounting Estimates. 92 Table of Contents CORPORATE Operating Summary [1] 2011 2010 2009 Earned premiums $ $ 2 $ (1 ) Fee income [2] 209 187 220 Net investment income 23 81 173 Net realized capital gains (losses) (96 ) 66 (406 ) Other revenue (1 ) 4 Total revenues 136 335 (10 ) Benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses (3 ) (2 ) 153 Insurance operating costs and other expenses 202 325 323 Interest expense 508 508 476 Goodwill impairment 32 Total benefits, losses and expenses 707 831 984 Loss from continuing operations before income taxes (571 ) (496 ) (994 ) Income tax benefit (201 ) (168 ) (274 ) Loss from continuing operations, net of tax (370 ) (328 ) (720 ) Loss from discontinued operations, net of tax [3] (64 ) (107 ) (6 ) Net loss $ (434 ) $ (435 ) $ (726 ) [1] Leveraged corporate owned life insurance was transferred from Corporate to Life Other Operations, effective January 1, 2010. [2] Fee income includes the income associated with the sales of non-proprietary insurance products in the Company broker-dealer subsidiaries that has an offsetting commission expense in insurance operating costs and other expenses. [3] Represents the loss from operations and sale of Federal Trust Corporation. For additional information, see Note 20 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Year ended December 31, 2011 compared to the year ended December 31, 2010 The net loss in Corporate remained flat due to net realized capital losses in 2011, compared to gains in 2010, partially offset by a decrease in insurance operating costs and other expenses. The net realized capital losses in 2011 primarily relate to losses on derivatives. Insurance operating costs and other expenses decreased primarily as a result of an accrual for a litigation settlement of $73, before-tax, in 2010, for a class action lawsuit related to structured settlements. The loss from discontinued operations, net of tax, in 2011, is due to a net realized capital loss of $74, after-tax, from the disposition of Federal Trust Corporation. Loss from discontinued operations, net of tax, in 2010, primarily relates to goodwill impairment on Federal Trust Corporation of approximately $100, after-tax. See Note 13 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for a reconciliation of the tax provision at the U.S. Federal statutory rate to the provision (benefit) for income taxes. Year ended December 31, 2010 compared to the year ended December 31, 2009 The net loss in Corporate decreased primarily due to improvements in net realized capital gains (losses), partially offset by an increase in interest expense. The change to net realized capital gains, from net realized capital losses was due to impairments on investment securities recorded in 2009. In addition, 2009 included a net realized capital loss of approximately $300 as a result of a contingency payment made to Allianz due to the Company participation in the Capital Purchase Program. See Note 15 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for a further discussion on Allianz. Interest expense increased primarily due to the issuance of $1.1 billion of senior notes in the first quarter of 2010. For further information, see Senior Notes within Note 14 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. The effective tax rate in 2009 differed from the U.S. Federal statutory rate due to nondeductible costs associated with the contingency payment to Allianz. 93 Table of Contents ENTERPRISE RISK MANAGEMENT The Company has an enterprise risk management function ( ERM ) that is charged with providing analysis of the Company risks on an individual and aggregated basis and with ensuring that the Company risks remain within its risk appetite and tolerances. The Company has established the Enterprise Risk and Capital Committee ( ERCC ) that includes the Company CEO, Chief Financial Officer ( CFO ), Chief Investment Officer ( CIO ), Chief Risk Officer, the divisional Presidents and the General Counsel. The ERCC is responsible for managing the Company risks and overseeing the enterprise risk management program. The Company categorizes its main risks as follows: Insurance Risk Operational Risk Financial Risk Business Risk Insurance Risk Management The Company categorizes its insurance risks across both property-casualty and life products. The Company insurance operations are vested in the ability to add value through the effective underwriting, pooling, and pricing of insurance risks. As such, working under the direction of the Company Chief Insurance Risk Officer ( CIRO ), the Company has developed a disciplined approach to insurance risk management that is well integrated into the organization underwriting, pricing, reinsurance, claims, and capital management processes. At the same time, the Company has policies and procedures to manage concentrations or correlations of insurance risk, including ERM policies governing the risks related to natural and man-made property catastrophes such as hurricanes, earthquakes, tornado/hailstorms, winter storms, pandemics, terrorism, and casualty catastrophes. The Company establishes risk limits to control potential loss and actively monitors the risk exposures as a percent of statutory surplus. The Company also uses reinsurance to transfer insurance risk to well-established and financially secure reinsurers (see Reinsurance Section). The Company CIRO has enterprise responsibility for establishing and maintaining the framework, principles and guidelines of The Hartford insurance risk management program. Non-Catastrophic Insurance Risks Non-catastrophic insurance risks exist within each of the Company divisions and include, but are not limited to, the following: Property: Risk of loss to personal or commercial property from automobile related accidents, weather, explosions, smoke, shaking, fire, theft, vandalism, inadequate installation, faulty equipment, collisions and falling objects, and/or machinery mechanical breakdown resulting in physical damage and other covered perils. Liability: Risk of loss from automobile related accidents, uninsured and underinsured drivers, lawsuits from accidents, defective products, breach of warranty, negligent acts by professional practitioners, environmental claims, latent exposures, fraud, coercion, forgery, failure to fulfill obligations per contract surety, liability from errors and omissions, derivative lawsuits, and other securities actions and covered perils. Mortality: Risk of loss from unexpected trends in insured deaths impacting timing of payouts from life insurance or annuity products, personal or commercial automobile related accidents, and death of employees or executives during the course of employment, while on disability, or while collecting worker compensation benefits. Morbidity : Risk of loss to an insured from illness incurred during the course of employment or illness from other covered perils. Disability: Risk of loss incurred from personal or commercial automobile related losses, accidents arising outside of the workplace, injuries or accidents incurred during the course of employment, or from equipment each loss resulting short term or long term disability payments. Longevity: Risk of loss from increase life expectancy trends among policyholders receiving long term benefit payments or annuity payouts. The Company processes for managing these risks include disciplined underwriting protocols, exposure controls, sophisticated risk based pricing, risk modeling, risk transfer, and capital management strategies. The Company has established underwriting guidelines for both individual risks, including individual policy limits, and risks in the aggregate, including aggregate exposure limits by geographic zone and peril. Pricing indications for each line of business are set independent of the business by corporate actuarial and are integrated into the reserve review process to ensure consistency between pricing and reserving. Monthly reports track loss cost trends relative to pricing objectives within each state and product, and corporate actuarial provides an independent report to the Board on the Company reserve position and loss cost trends. 94 Table of Contents Natural Catastrophe Risk Natural catastrophe risk is defined as the exposure arising from natural phenomena (e.g., weather, earthquakes, wildfires, etc.) that create a concentration or aggregation of loss across the Company insurance or asset portfolios. The Company uses both internal and third-party models to estimate the potential loss resulting from various catastrophe events and the potential financial impact those events would have on the Company financial position and results of operations across the property-casualty, life, and asset management businesses. For natural catastrophe perils, the Company generally limits its estimated pre-tax loss as a result of natural catastrophes for property & casualty exposures from a single 250-year event to less than 30% of statutory surplus prior to reinsurance and to less than 15% of statutory surplus after reinsurance. The Company modeled loss estimates are derived by averaging 21 modeled loss events representing a 250-year return period loss. For the peril of earthquake, the 21 events averaged to determine the modeled loss estimate include events occurring in California as well as the Northeastern, Southeastern and Midwestern regions of the United States with associated magnitudes ranging from 5.9 to 7.7 on the Moment Magnitude scale. For the peril of hurricane, the 21 events averaged to determine the modeled loss estimate include category 3, 4 and 5 events in Florida, as well as other Gulf and Northeastern region landfalls. While Enterprise Risk Management has a process to track and manage these limits, from time to time, the estimated loss to natural catastrophes from a single 250-year event prior to reinsurance may fluctuate above or below these limits due to changes in modeled loss estimates, exposures, or statutory surplus. Currently, the Company estimated pre-tax loss to a single 250-year natural catastrophe event prior to reinsurance is less than 30% of the statutory surplus of the property and casualty insurance subsidiaries and the Company estimated pre-tax loss net of reinsurance is less than 15% of statutory surplus of the property and casualty operations. The estimated 250 year pre-tax probable maximum losses from hurricane events are estimated to be $1.7 billion and $632, before and after reinsurance, respectively. The estimated 250 year pre-tax probable maximum loss from earthquake events is estimated to be $793 before reinsurance and $482 net of reinsurance. The loss estimates represent total property losses for hurricane events and property and workers compensation losses for earthquake events resulting from a single event. The estimates provided are based on 250-year return period loss estimates that have a 0.4% likelihood of being exceeded in any single year. The net loss estimates provided above assume that the Company is able to recover all losses ceded to reinsurers under its reinsurance programs. There are various methodologies used in the industry to estimate the potential property and workers compensation losses that would arise from various catastrophe events and companies may use different models and assumptions in their estimates. Therefore, the Company estimates of gross and net losses arising from a 250-year hurricane or earthquake event may not be comparable to estimates provided by other companies. Furthermore, the Company estimates are subject to significant uncertainty and could vary materially from the actual losses that would arise from these events and the loss estimates provided by other companies. The Company also manages natural catastrophe risk for group life, group disability, and individual life insurance, which in combination with property and workers compensation loss estimates, are subject to separate enterprise risk management net aggregate loss limits as a percent of enterprise surplus. Terrorism Risk The Company defines terrorism risk as the risk of losses from terrorist attacks, including losses caused by single-site and multi-site conventional attacks, as well as the potential for attacks using nuclear, biological, chemical or radiological weapons ( NBCR ). The Company monitors aggregations of terrorism risk exposure around key landmarks primarily in major metropolitan areas that span the Company insurance portfolio. Enterprise limits for terrorism apply to aggregations of risk across property-casualty, group benefits, life insurance and specific asset portfolios and are defined based on a deterministic, single-site conventional terrorism attack scenario. The Company manages its potential estimated loss from a terrorism loss scenario to less than $1.3 billion. In addition, the Company monitors exposures monthly and employs both internally developed and vendor-licensed loss modeling tools as part of its risk management discipline. Pandemic Risk Pandemic risk is the exposure to loss arising from widespread influenza or other pathogens or bacterial infections that create an aggregation of loss across the Company insurance or asset portfolios. Consistent with industry practice, the Company assesses exposure to pandemics by analyzing the potential impact from a variety of pandemic scenarios based on conditions consistent with historical outbreaks of flu-like viruses such as the Severe 1918 Spanish Flu, the Asian flu of 1957, the Hong Kong flu of 1968, and the 2009 outbreak of the swine flu. For pandemic risk, the Company generally limits its estimated pre-tax loss from a single 250 year event to less than 12.5% of the statutory surplus for the enterprise. In evaluating these scenarios, the Company assesses the impact on group and individual life policies, short-term and long term disability, annuities, COLI, property & casualty claims, and losses in the investment portfolio associated with market declines in the event of a widespread pandemic. 95 Table of Contents Reinsurance as a Risk Management Strategy The Hartford utilizes reinsurance to transfer risk to affiliated and unaffiliated insurers. Reinsurance is used to manage aggregation of risk as well as to transfer certain risk to reinsurance companies based on specific geographic or risk concentrations. All reinsurance processes are aligned under a single enterprise reinsurance risk management policy. Reinsurance purchasing is a centralized function within Commercial, Consumer Markets and Wealth Management to support a consistent strategy and to ensure that the reinsurance activities are fully integrated into the organization risk management processes. A variety of traditional reinsurance products are used as part of the Company risk management strategy, including excess of loss occurrence-based products that protect property and worker compensation exposures, and individual risk or quota share arrangements, that protect specific classes or lines of business. The Company has no significant finite risk contracts in place and the statutory surplus benefit from all such prior year contracts is immaterial. Facultative reinsurance is used by the Company to manage policy-specific risk exposures based on established underwriting guidelines. The Hartford also participates in governmentally administered reinsurance facilities such as the Florida Hurricane Catastrophe Fund ( FHCF ), the Terrorism Risk Insurance Program established under The Terrorism Risk Insurance Program Reauthorization Act of 2007 ( TRIPRA ) and other reinsurance programs relating to particular risks or specific lines of business. Reinsurance for Catastrophes The Company has several catastrophe reinsurance programs, including reinsurance treaties that cover property and workers compensation losses aggregating from single catastrophe events. The following table summarizes the primary catastrophe treaty reinsurance coverage that the Company has in place as of February 1, 2012: % of layer(s) Coverage Treaty term reinsured Per occurrence limit Retention Principal property catastrophe program covering property catastrophe losses from a single event 1/1/2012 to 1/1/2013 90 % $ 750 $ 350 Reinsurance with the FHCF covering Florida Personal Lines property catastrophe losses from a single event 6/1/2011 to 6/1/2012 90 % 145 [1] 55 Workers compensation losses arising from a single catastrophe event [2] 7/1/2011 to 7/1/2012 95 % 350 100 [1] The per occurrence limit on the FHCF treaty is $145 for the 6/1/2011 to 6/1/2012 treaty year based on the Company election to purchase the required coverage from FHCF. For 6/1/2010 to 6/1/2011, the Company elected not to purchase additional limits under the Temporary Increase in Coverage Limit (TICL) statutory provision. [2] In addition, to the limit shown above, the workers compensation reinsurance includes a non-catastrophe, industrial accident layer, 80% of $30 excess a $20 retention. In addition to the property catastrophe reinsurance coverage described in the above table, the Company has other catastrophe and working layer treaties and facultative reinsurance agreements that cover property catastrophe losses on an aggregate excess of loss and on a per risk basis. The principal property catastrophe reinsurance program and other reinsurance programs include a provision to reinstate limits in the event that a catastrophe loss exhausts limits on one or more layers under the treaties. In addition to the reinsurance protection provided by The Hartford traditional property catastrophe reinsurance program described above, the Hartford has fully collateralized reinsurance coverage from Foundation Re III for losses sustained from qualifying hurricane loss events. Under the terms of the treaties, the Company is reimbursed for losses from hurricanes using customized industry index contracts designed to replicate The Hartford own catastrophe losses, with a provision that the actual losses incurred by the Company for covered events, net of reinsurance recoveries, cannot be less than zero. The following table summarizes the terms of the reinsurance treaties with Foundation Re III that were in place as of December 31, 2011: Bond amount issued Covered perils Treaty term Covered losses by Foundation Re III Hurricane loss events affecting the Gulf and Eastern Coast of the United States 1/27/2010 to 1/27/2014 90% of $200 in losses in excess of an index loss trigger equating to approximately $1.2 billion in losses to The Hartford $ 180 Hurricane loss events affecting the Gulf and Eastern Coast of the United States 2/18/2011 to 2/18/2015 67.5% of $200 in losses in excess of an index loss trigger equating to approximately $1.4 billion in losses to The Hartford 135 As of December 31, 2011, there have been no events that are expected to trigger a recovery under the Foundation Re III reinsurance program and, accordingly, the Company has not recorded any recoveries from the associated reinsurance treaties. 96 Table of Contents Reinsurance for Terrorism For the risk of terrorism, private sector catastrophe reinsurance capacity is generally limited and largely unavailable for terrorism losses caused by nuclear, biological, chemical or radiological weapons attacks. As such, the Company principal reinsurance protection against large-scale terrorist attacks is the coverage currently provided through the TRIPRA. On December 26, 2007, the President signed TRIPRA extending the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act of 2002 ( TRIA ) through the end of 2014. TRIPRA provides a backstop for insurance-related losses resulting from any act of terrorism certified by the Secretary of the Treasury, in concurrence with the Secretary of State and Attorney General, that result in industry losses in excess of $100. In addition, TRIPRA revised the TRIA definition of a certified act of terrorism by removing the requirement that an act be committed on behalf of any foreign person or foreign interest . As a result, domestic acts of terrorism can now be certified as acts of terrorism under the program, subject to the other requirements of TRIPRA. Under the program, in any one calendar year, the federal government would pay 85% of covered losses from a certified act of terrorism after an insurer losses exceed 20% of the Company eligible direct commercial earned premiums of the prior calendar year, up to a combined annual aggregate limit for the federal government and all insurers of $100 billion. If an act of terrorism or acts of terrorism result in covered losses exceeding the $100 billion annual industry aggregate limit, a future Congress would be responsible for determining how additional losses in excess of $100 billion will be paid. Among other items, TRIPRA required that the President Working Group on Financial Markets ( PWG ) continue to perform an analysis regarding the long-term availability and affordability of insurance for terrorism risk. Among the findings detailed in the PWG initial report, released October 2, 2006, were that the high level of uncertainty associated with predicting the frequency of terrorist attacks, coupled with the unwillingness of some insurance policyholders to purchase insurance coverage, makes predicting long-term development of the terrorism risk market difficult, and that there is likely little potential for future market development for NBCR coverage. The January 2011 PWG report notes some improvements in capacity and modeling, but also noted that take-up rates for terrorism coverage remained relatively flat over the past three years and that insurers remain uncertain about the ability of models to predict the frequency and severity of terrorist attacks. With respect to NBCR coverage, a December 2008 study by the U.S. Government Accountability Office ( GAO ) found that property and casualty insurers still generally seek to exclude NBCR coverage from their commercial policies when permitted. However, while nuclear, pollution and contamination exclusions are contained in many property and liability insurance policies, the GAO report concluded that such exclusions may be subject to challenges in court because they were not specifically drafted to address terrorist attacks. Furthermore, workers compensation policies generally have no exclusion or limitations. The GAO found that commercial property and casualty policyholders, including companies that own high-value properties in large cities, generally reported that they could not obtain NBCR coverage. Commercial property and casualty insurers generally remain unwilling to offer NBCR coverage because of uncertainties about the risk and the potential for catastrophic losses. Reinsurance Recoverables Reinsurance Security To manage reinsurer credit risk, a security review committee evaluates the credit standing, financial performance, management and operational quality of each potential reinsurer. Through this process, the Company maintains a centralized list of reinsurers approved for participation in reinsurance transactions. Only reinsurers approved through this process are eligible to participate in new reinsurance transactions. The Company approval designations reflect the differing credit exposure associated with various classes of business. Participation eligibility is categorized based upon the nature of the risk reinsured, including the expected liability payout duration. In addition to defining participation eligibility, the Company regularly monitors credit risk exposure to each reinsurance counterparty and has established limits tiered by counterparty credit rating. For further discussions on how the Company manages and mitigates third party credit risk, refer to the Credit Risk section. Property and Casualty Insurance Product Reinsurance Recoverable Property and casualty insurance product reinsurance recoverables represent loss and loss adjustment expense recoverable from a number of entities, including reinsurers and pools. The following table shows the components of the gross and net reinsurance recoverable as of December 31, 2011 and 2010: Reinsurance Recoverable December 31, 2011 December 31, 2010 Paid loss and loss adjustment expenses $ 153 $ 198 Unpaid loss and loss adjustment expenses 2,884 2,963 Gross reinsurance recoverable 3,037 3,161 Less: allowance for uncollectible reinsurance (290 ) (290 ) Net reinsurance recoverable $ 2,747 $ 2,871 97 Table of Contents As shown in the following table, a portion of the total gross reinsurance recoverable relates to the Company mandatory participation in various involuntary assigned risk pools and the value of annuity contracts held under structured settlement agreements. Reinsurance recoverables due from mandatory pools are backed by the financial strength of the property and casualty insurance industry. Annuities purchased from third-party life insurers under structured settlements are recognized as reinsurance recoverables in cases where the Company has not obtained a release from the claimant. Of the remaining gross reinsurance recoverable as of December 31, 2011 and 2010, the following table shows the portion of recoverables due from companies rated by A.M. Best. Distribution of gross reinsurance recoverable December 31, 2011 December 31, 2010 Gross reinsurance recoverable $ 3,037 $ 3,161 Less: mandatory (assigned risk) pools and structured settlements (617 ) (614 ) Gross reinsurance recoverable excluding mandatory pools and structured settlements $ 2,420 $ 2,547 % of Total % of Total Rated A- (Excellent) or better by A.M. Best [1] $ 1,774 73.3 % $ 1,869 73.3 % Other rated by A.M. Best 52 2.2 % 43 1.7 % Total rated companies 1,826 75.5 % 1,912 75.0 % Voluntary pools 100 4.1 % 107 4.2 % Captives 242 10.0 % 226 8.9 % Other not rated companies 252 10.4 % 302 11.9 % Total $ 2,420 100.0 % $ 2,547 100.0 % [1] Based on A.M. Best ratings as of December 31, 2011 and 2010, respectively. Where its contracts permit, the Company secures future claim obligations with various forms of collateral, including irrevocable letters of credit, secured trusts, funds held accounts and group wide offsets. As part of its reinsurance recoverable review, the Company analyzes recent developments in commutation activity between reinsurers and cedants, recent trends in arbitration and litigation outcomes in disputes between cedants and reinsurers and the overall credit quality of the Company reinsurers. Due largely to investment losses sustained by reinsurers in 2008 along with significant catastrophe losses and European sovereign debt concerns in 2011, the financial strength ratings of some reinsurers have been downgraded and the financial strength ratings of other reinsurers have been put on negative watch. Nevertheless, as indicated in the above table, approximately 73% of the gross reinsurance recoverables due from reinsurers rated by A.M. Best were rated A- (excellent) or better as of December 31, 2011. Due to the inherent uncertainties as to collection and the length of time before such amounts will be due, it is possible that future adjustments to the Company reinsurance recoverables, net of the allowance, could be required, which could have a material adverse effect on the Company consolidated results of operations or cash flows in a particular quarterly or annual period. Annually, the Company completes evaluations of the reinsurance recoverable asset associated with older, long-term casualty liabilities reported in the Property & Casualty Other Operations reporting segment, and the allowance for uncollectible reinsurance reported in the Property & Casualty Commercial reporting segment. For a discussion regarding the results of these evaluations, see Property and Casualty Insurance Product Reserves, Net of Reinsurance within the Critical Accounting Estimates section of the MD&A. Guaranty Funds and Other Insurance Assessments As part of its risk management strategy, the Company regularly monitors the financial wherewithal of other insurers and, in particular, activity by insurance regulators and various state guaranty associations relations to troubled insurers. In all states, insurers licensed to transact certain classes of insurance are required to become members of a guaranty fund. In most states, in the event of the insolvency of an insurer writing any such class of insurance in the state, members of the funds are assessed to pay certain claims of the insolvent insurer. A particular state fund assesses its members based on their respective written premiums in the state for the classes of insurance in which the insolvent insurer was engaged. Assessments are generally limited for any year to one or two percent of the premiums written per year depending on the state. The amount and timing of assessments related to past insolvencies is unpredictable. Citizens Property Insurance Corporation in Florida ( Citizens ), a non-affiliate insurer, provides property insurance to Florida homeowners and businesses that are unable to obtain insurance from other carriers, including for properties deemed to be high risk . Citizens maintains a Personal Lines account, a Commercial Lines account and a High Risk account. If Citizens incurs a deficit in any of these accounts, Citizens may impose a regular assessment on other insurance carriers in the state, such as the Company, to fund the deficits, subject to certain restrictions and subject to approval by the Florida Office of Insurance Regulation. Carriers are then permitted to surcharge policyholders to recover the assessments over the next few years. Citizens may also opt to finance a portion of the deficits through issuing bonds and may impose emergency assessments on other insurance carriers to fund the bond repayments. Unlike with regular assessments, however, insurance carriers only serve as a collection agent for emergency assessments and are not required to remit surcharges for emergency assessments to Citizens until they collect surcharges from policyholders. Under U.S. GAAP, the Company is required to accrue for regular assessments in the period the assessments become probable and estimable and the obligating event has occurred. Surcharges to recover the amount of regular assessments may not be recorded as an asset until the related premium is written. Emergency assessments that may be levied by Citizens are not recorded in the income statement. 98 Table of Contents Operational Risk Management The Hartford has an Operational Risk Management ( ORM ) function whose responsibility is to provide a comprehensive and enterprise-wide view of the Company operational risk on an aggregate basis. The Company defines operational risk as the risk of loss resulting from inadequate or failed internal processes, people and systems, or from external events. This inadequacy or failure may come from internal or external events. It includes legal risk and considers reputational risk as an impact. The Company has developed a library of operational risks which have been classified into the following seven risk categories: Internal Fraud External Fraud Employment Practices & Workplace Safety Business Disruption & Systems Failures Clients, Products & Business Practice Damage to Physical Assets Execution, Delivery & Process Management ORM is led by the Chief Operational Risk Officer ( CORO ) who is responsible for establishing, maintaining and communicating the framework, principles and guidelines of The Hartford operational risk management program. Responsibility for day-to-day management of operational risk lies within each business unit and functional area.. ORM works closely with the Operational Risk Committee ( ORC ), an enterprise wide governance body comprised of senior leaders from functional areas such as ORM, Enterprise Services, Enterprise Operations, Claims, Information Technology, Compliance and Internal Audit. The ORC meets regularly and provides a forum for ensuring the effective management of operational risks across the enterprise. The ORC responsibilities include reviewing and approving: policies governing operational risk, functional risk tolerances, and risk mitigation strategies. This group also identifies emerging operational risks, prioritizes them, and determines action plans. Individual committees, such as the Enterprise Sourcing Board, Enterprise Privacy and Security Committee and the Enterprise Health, Environment and Safety Committee, focus on specific operational risk issues and report to the ORC. ORM is responsible for ensuring controls and providing a framework for managing operational risks. ORM has various tools and processes for identifying, monitoring, measuring, prioritizing, and reporting operational risks. ORM uses a centralized Governance, Risk, and Compliance (GRC) system to help manage operational risk across the Company finance, legal, data security, and information technology functions. The Company business risk assessment process is used to identify operational risks and evaluate controls to mitigate those risks. Financial Risk Management The Company identifies the following categories of financial risk: Liquidity Risk Interest Rate Risk Equity Risk Foreign Currency Exchange Risk Credit Risk Financial risks include direct, and indirect risks to the Company financial objectives coming from events that impact market conditions or prices. Financial risk also includes exposure to events that may cause correlated movement in multiple risk factors. The primary source of financial risks are the Company general account assets and the liabilities which those assets back, together with the guarantees which the company has written over various liability products, particularly its portfolio of variable annuities. The Company assesses its financial risk on a U.S. GAAP, statutory and economic basis. The Hartford has developed a disciplined approach to financial risk management that is well integrated into the Company underwriting, pricing, hedging, claims, asset and liability management, new product, and capital management processes. Consistent with its risk appetite, the Company establishes financial risk limits to control potential loss. Exposures are actively monitored, and mitigated where appropriate. The Company uses various risk management strategies, including reinsurance and over-the-counter and exchange traded derivatives to transfer risk to well-established and financially secure counterparties. The Company Chief Market Risk Officer has enterprise responsibility for establishing and maintaining the framework, principles, and guidelines of The Hartford financial risk management program. 99 Table of Contents Liquidity Risk Liquidity risk is the risk to current or prospective earnings or capital arising from the company inability or perceived inability to meet its contractual cash obligations at the legal entity level when they come due over given horizons without incurring unacceptable costs and without relying on uncommitted funding sources. Liquidity risk includes the inability to manage unplanned increases or accelerations in cash outflows, decreases or changes in funding sources, and changes in market conditions that affect the ability to liquidate assets quickly to meet obligations with minimal loss in value. Components of liquidity risk include funding risk, transaction risk and market liquidity risk. Funding risk is the gap between sources and uses of cash under normal and stressed conditions taking into consideration structural, regulatory and legal entity constraints. Changes in institution-specific conditions that affect the Company ability to sell assets or otherwise transact business without incurring a significant loss in value is transaction risk. Changes in general market conditions that affect the institution ability to sell assets or otherwise transact business without incurring a significant loss in value is market liquidity risk. The Company has defined ongoing monitoring and reporting requirements to assess liquidity across the enterprise. The Company measures and manages liquidity risk exposures and funding needs within prescribed limits and across legal entities, business lines and currencies, taking into account legal, regulatory and operational limitations to the transferability of liquidity. The Company also monitors internal and external conditions, identifies material risk changes and emerging risks that may impact liquidity. The Company CFO has primary responsibility for liquidity risk. For further discussion on liquidity see the section on Capital Resources and Liquidity. Interest Rate Risk Interest rate risk is the risk of financial loss due to adverse changes in the value of assets and liabilities arising from movements in interest rates. Interest rate risk encompasses exposures with respect to changes in the level of interest rates, the shape of the term structure of rates and the volatility of interest rates. Interest rate risk does not include exposure to changes in credit spreads. The Company has exposure to interest rates arising from its fixed securities, interest sensitive liabilities and discount rate assumptions associated with the Company pension and other post retirement benefit obligations. An increase in interest rates from current levels is generally a favorable development for the Company. Rate increases are expected to provide additional net investment income, increase sales of fixed rate Wealth Management and Life Other Operations investment products, reduce the cost of the variable annuity hedging program, limit the potential risk of margin erosion due to minimum guaranteed crediting rates in certain Wealth Management and Life Other Operations products and, if sustained, could reduce the Company prospective pension expense. Conversely, a rise in interest rates will reduce the fair value of the investment portfolio, increase interest expense on the Company variable rate debt obligations and, if long-term interest rates rise dramatically within a six to twelve month time period, certain Wealth Management and Life Other Operations businesses may be exposed to disintermediation risk. Disintermediation risk refers to the risk that policyholders will surrender their contracts in a rising interest rate environment requiring the Company to liquidate assets in an unrealized loss position. In conjunction with the interest rate risk measurement and management techniques, certain of Wealth Management and Life Other Operation fixed income product offerings have market value adjustment provisions at contract surrender. An increase in interest rates may also impact the Company tax planning strategies and in particular its ability to utilize tax benefits to offset certain previously recognized realized capital losses. A decline in interest rates results in certain mortgage-backed securities being more susceptible to paydowns and prepayments. During such periods, the Company generally will not be able to reinvest the proceeds at comparable yields. Lower interest rates will also likely result in lower net investment income, increased hedging cost associated with variable annuities and, if declines are sustained for a long period of time, it may subject the Company to reinvestment risks, higher pension costs expense and possibly reduced profit margins associated with guaranteed crediting rates on certain Wealth Management and Life Other Operations products. Conversely, the fair value of the investment portfolio will increase when interest rates decline and the Company interest expense will be lower on its variable rate debt obligations. The Company manages its exposure to interest rate risk by constructing investment portfolios that maintain asset allocation limits and asset/liability duration matching targets which may include the use of derivatives. The Company analyzes interest rate risk using various models including parametric models and cash flow simulation under various market scenarios of the liabilities and their supporting investment portfolios, which may include derivative instruments. Measures the Company uses to quantify its exposure to interest rate risk inherent in its invested assets and interest rate sensitive liabilities include duration, convexity and key rate duration. Duration is the price sensitivity of a financial instrument or series of cash flows to a parallel change in the underlying yield curve used to value the financial instrument or series of cash flows. For example, a duration of 5 means the price of the security will change by approximately 5% for a 100 basis point change in interest rates. Convexity is used to approximate how the duration of a security changes as interest rates change in a parallel manner. Key rate duration analysis measures the price sensitivity of a security or series of cash flows to each point along the yield curve and enables the Company to estimate the price change of a security assuming non-parallel interest rate movements. 100 Table of Contents To calculate duration, convexity, and key rate durations, projections of asset and liability cash flows are discounted to a present value using interest rate assumptions. These cash flows are then revalued at alternative interest rate levels to determine the percentage change in fair value due to an incremental change in the entire yield curve for duration and convexity, or a particular point on the yield curve for key rate duration. Cash flows from corporate obligations are assumed to be consistent with the contractual payment streams on a yield to worst basis. Yield to worst is a basis that represents the lowest potential yield that can be received without the issuer actually defaulting. The primary assumptions used in calculating cash flow projections include expected asset payment streams taking into account prepayment speeds, issuer call options and contract holder behavior. Mortgage-backed and asset-backed securities are modeled based on estimates of the rate of future prepayments of principal over the remaining life of the securities. These estimates are developed by incorporating collateral surveillance and anticipated future market dynamics. Actual prepayment experience may vary from these estimates. The Company is also exposed to interest rate risk based upon the discount rate assumption associated with the Company pension and other postretirement benefit obligations. The discount rate assumption is based upon an interest rate yield curve comprised of bonds rated Aa with maturities primarily between zero and thirty years. For further discussion of interest rate risk associated with the benefit obligations, see the Critical Accounting Estimates Section of the MD&A under Pension and Other Postretirement Benefit Obligations and Note 17 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. In addition, management evaluates performance of certain Wealth Management and Life Other Operations products based on net investment spread which is, in part, influenced by changes in interest rates. For further discussion, see the Individual Annuity, Individual Life, and Retirement Plans sections of the MD&A. The investments and liabilities primarily associated with interest rate risk are included in the following discussion. Certain product liabilities, including those containing GMWB, GMIB, GMAB, or GMDB, expose the Company to interest rate risk but also have significant equity risk. These liabilities are discussed as part of the Equity Risk section below. Fixed Maturity Investments The Company investment portfolios primarily consist of investment grade fixed maturity securities. The fair value of these investments was $83.1 billion and $78.4 billion at December 31, 2011 and 2010, respectively. The fair value of these and other invested assets fluctuates depending on the interest rate environment and other general economic conditions. The weighted average duration of the fixed maturity portfolio was approximately 5.3 years and 5.1 years as of December 31, 2011 and 2010, respectively. Liabilities The Company investment contracts and certain insurance product liabilities, other than non-guaranteed separate accounts, include asset accumulation vehicles such as fixed annuities, guaranteed investment contracts, other investment and universal life-type contracts and certain insurance products such as long-term disability. Asset accumulation vehicles primarily require a fixed rate payment, often for a specified period of time, such as fixed rate annuities with a market value adjustment feature. Product examples include fixed rate annuities with a market value adjustment feature and fixed rate guaranteed investment contracts. The term to maturity of these contracts generally range from less than one year to ten years. In addition, certain products such as universal life contracts and the general account portion of Wealth Management and Life Other Operation variable annuity products, credit interest to policyholders subject to market conditions and minimum interest rate guarantees. The term to maturity of the asset portfolio supporting these products may range from short to intermediate. While interest rate risk associated with many of these products has been reduced through the use of market value adjustment features and surrender charges, the primary risk associated with these products is that the spread between investment return and credited rate may not be sufficient to earn targeted returns. The Company also manages the risk of certain insurance liabilities similarly to investment type products due to the relative predictability of the aggregate cash flow payment streams. Products in this category may contain significant reliance upon actuarial (including mortality and morbidity) pricing assumptions and do have some element of cash flow uncertainty. Product examples include structured settlement contracts, on-benefit annuities (i.e., the annuitant is currently receiving benefits thereon) and short-term and long-term disability contracts. The cash outflows associated with these policy liabilities are not interest rate sensitive but do vary based on the timing and amount of benefit payments. The primary risks associated with these products are that the benefits will exceed expected actuarial pricing and/or that the actual timing of the cash flows will differ from those anticipated, or interest rate levels may deviate from those assumed in product pricing, ultimately resulting in an investment return lower than that assumed in pricing. The average duration of the liability cash flow payments can range from less than one year to in excess of fifteen years. Derivatives The Company utilizes a variety of derivative instruments to mitigate interest rate risk associated with its investment portfolio. Interest rate swaps are primarily used to convert interest receipts or payments to a fixed or variable rate. The use of such swaps enables the Company to customize contract terms and conditions to customer objectives and manage the interest rate risk profile within established tolerances. Interest rate swaps are also used to hedge the variability in the cash flow of a forecasted purchase or sale of fixed rate securities due to changes in interest rates. Forward rate agreements are used to convert interest receipts on floating-rate securities to fixed rates. These derivatives are used to lock in the forward interest rate curve and reduce income volatility that results from changes in interest rates. Interest rate caps, floors, swaptions, and futures may be used to manage portfolio duration. 101 Table of Contents At December 31, 2011 and 2010, notional amounts pertaining to derivatives utilized to manage interest rate risk totaled $19.8 billion and $19.3 billion, respectively ($19.5 billion and $18.9 billion, respectively, related to investments and $0.3 billion and $0.4 billion, respectively, related to Wealth Management and Life Other Operations liabilities). The fair value of these derivatives was ($332) and ($372) as of December 31, 2011 and 2010, respectively Interest Rate Sensitivity The before-tax change in the net economic value of investment contracts (e.g., fixed annuity contracts) issued by the Company Wealth Management and Life Other Operations, as well as certain insurance product liabilities (e.g., short-term and long-term disability contracts) issued by the Company Commercial Markets operations, for which the payment rates are fixed at contract issuance and the investment experience is substantially absorbed by the Company operations, along with the corresponding invested assets are included in the following table. Also included in this analysis are the interest rate sensitive derivatives used by the Company to hedge its exposure to interest rate risk in the investment portfolios supporting these contracts. This analysis does not include the assets and corresponding liabilities of certain insurance products such as auto, property, whole and term life insurance, and certain life contingent annuities. Certain financial instruments, such as limited partnerships and other alternative investments, have been omitted from the analysis due to the fact that the investments are accounted for under the equity method and generally lack sensitivity to interest rate changes. Separate account assets and liabilities, equity securities, trading and the corresponding liabilities associated with the variable annuity products sold in Japan are excluded from the analysis because gains and losses in separate accounts accrue to policyholders. The calculation of the estimated hypothetical change in net economic value below assumes a 100 basis point upward and downward parallel shift in the yield curve. Change in Net Economic Value as of December 31, 2011 2010 Basis point shift - 100 + 100 - 100 + 100 Amount $ (494 ) $ 287 $ (190 ) $ 96 The fixed liabilities included above represented approximately 43% and 47% of the Company general account liabilities as of December 31, 2011 and 2010, respectively. The assets supporting the fixed liabilities are monitored and managed within set duration guidelines, and are evaluated on a daily basis, as well as annually using scenario simulation techniques in compliance with regulatory requirements. The following table provides an analysis showing the estimated before-tax change in the fair value of the Company fixed maturity investments and related derivatives, not included in the table above, assuming 100 basis point upward and downward parallel shifts in the yield curve as of December 31, 2011 and 2010. Certain financial instruments, such as limited partnerships and other alternative investments, have been omitted from the analysis due to the fact that the investments are accounted for under the equity method and generally lack sensitivity to interest rate changes. Change in Fair Value as of December 31, 2011 2010 Basis point shift - 100 + 100 - 100 + 100 Amount $ 3,248 $ (2,985 ) $ 2,988 $ (2,774 ) The selection of the 100 basis point parallel shift in the yield curve was made only as an illustration of the potential hypothetical impact of such an event and should not be construed as a prediction of future market events. Actual results could differ materially from those illustrated above due to the nature of the estimates and assumptions used in the above analysis. The Company sensitivity analysis calculation assumes that the composition of invested assets and liabilities remain materially consistent throughout the year and that the current relationship between short-term and long-term interest rates will remain constant over time. As a result, these calculations may not fully capture the impact of portfolio re-allocations, significant product sales or non-parallel changes in interest rates. 102 Table of Contents Equity Risk Equity risk is defined as the risk of financial loss due to changes in the value of global equities or equity indices. The Company has exposure to equity risk from assets under management, embedded derivatives within the Company variable annuities and assets that support the Company pension plans. Equity Risk on the Company Variable Annuity products is mitigated through various hedging programs. (See the Variable Annuity Hedge Program Section) The Company exposure to equity risk includes the potential for lower earnings associated with certain of the Wealth Management businesses such as variable annuities where fee income is earned based upon the fair value of the assets under management. For further discussion of equity risk, see the Variable Product Guarantee Risks and Risk Management section below. In addition, Wealth Management offers certain guaranteed benefits, primarily associated with variable annuity products, which increases the Company potential benefit exposure as the equity markets decline. The Company is also subject to equity risk based upon the assets that support its pension plans. The asset allocation mix is reviewed on a periodic basis. In order to minimize risk, the pension plans maintain a listing of permissible and prohibited investments. In addition, the pension plans have certain concentration limits and investment quality requirements imposed on permissible investment options. For further discussion of equity risk associated with the pension plans, see the Critical Accounting Estimates section of the MD&A under Pension and Other Postretirement Benefit Obligations and Note 17 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Variable Product Guarantee Risks and Risk Management The Company variable products are significantly influenced by the U.S., Japanese, and other equity markets. Increases or declines in equity markets impact certain assets and liabilities related to the Company variable products and the Company earnings derived from those products. The Company variable products include variable annuity contracts, mutual funds, and variable life insurance. Generally, declines in equity markets will: reduce the value of assets under management and the amount of fee income generated from those assets; reduce the value of equity securities trading supporting the international variable annuities, the related policyholder funds and benefits payable, and the amount of fee income generated from those variable annuities; increase the liability for GMWB benefits resulting in realized capital losses; increase the value of derivative assets used to hedge product guarantees resulting in realized capital gains; increase the costs of the hedging instruments we use in our hedging program; increase the Company net amount at risk for GMDB and GMIB benefits; decrease the Company actual gross profits, resulting in increased DAC amortization; increase the amount of required assets to be held backing variable annuity guarantees to maintain required regulatory reserve levels and targeted risk based capital ratios; adversely affect customer sentiment toward equity-linked products, causing a decline in sales; and decrease the Company estimated future gross profits. See Estimated Gross Profits Used in the Valuation and Amortization of Assets and Liabilities Associated with Variable Annuity and Other Universal Life-Type Contracts within the Critical Accounting Estimates section of the MD&A for further information. Generally, increases in equity markets will reduce the value of the dynamic hedge program and macro hedge derivative assets, resulting in realized capital losses, and will generally have the inverse impact of those listed above. See section on Variable Annuity Hedging Program for more information. 103 Table of Contents Variable Annuity Guaranteed Benefits The majority of the Company U.S., Japan, and U.K. variable annuities include optional living benefit and guaranteed minimum death benefit features. The net amount at risk ( NAR ) is generally defined as the guaranteed minimum benefit amount in excess of the contractholder current account value. Global variable annuity account values with guarantee features were $99.8 billion and $116.7 billion as of December 31, 2011 and December 31, 2010, respectively. The following table summarizes the account values of the Company U.S. and Japan variable annuities with guarantee features and the NAR split between various guarantee features: Total Variable Annuity Guarantees As of December 31, 2011 % of Account Gross Net Retained Net Contracts In % In the ($ in billions) Value Amount at Risk Amount at Risk the Money Money[4] U. S Variable Annuity [1] GMDB [2] $ 68.7 $ 12.0 $ 5.1 77 % 15 % GMWB 36.6 1.9 1.6 45 % 12 % Japan Variable Annuity [1] GMDB 29.2 10.9 9.4 99 % 27 % GMIB [3] 27.3 7.5 7.5 99 % 22 % UK Variable Annuity [1] GMDB 1.9 0.08 0.08 100 % 4 % GMWB 1.8 0.07 0.07 57 % 3 % Total Variable Annuity Guarantees As of December 31, 2010 % of Account Gross Net Retained Net Contracts In % In the ($ in billions) Value Amount at Risk Amount at Risk the Money Money[4] U. S Variable Annuity [1] GMDB [2] $ 83.0 $ 10.7 $ 4.3 70 % 12 % GMWB 44.8 1.3 1.1 35 % 9 % Japan Variable Annuity [1] GMDB 31.2 8.8 7.6 98 % 22 % GMIB [3] 29.7 6.1 6.1 99 % 17 % UK Variable Annuity [1] GMDB 2.2 0.04 0.04 100 % 1 % GMWB 2.5 0.03 0.03 25 % 1 % [1] Policies with a guaranteed living benefits (a GMWB in the US or UK, or a GMIB in Japan) also have a guaranteed death benefit. The net amount at risk ( NAR ) for each benefit is shown; however these benefits are not additive. When a policy terminates due to death, any NAR related to GMWB or GMIB is released. Similarly, when a policy goes into benefit status on a GMWB or, by contract, the GMDB NAR is reduced to $0. When a policy goes into benefit status on a GMIB, its GMDB NAR is released [2] Excludes group annuity contracts with GMDB benefits. [3] Includes small amount of GMWB [4 For all contracts that are in the money , this represents the percentage by which the average contract was in the money. The Company expects to incur these payments in the future only if the policyholder has an in the money GMWB at their death or their account value is reduced to a specified level, through contractually permitted withdrawals and/or market declines. If the account value is reduced to the specified level, the contract holder will receive an annuity equal to the guaranteed remaining benefit ( GRB ) . For the Company life-time GMWB products, this annuity can continue beyond the GRB. As the account value fluctuates with equity market returns on a daily basis and the life-time GMWB payments can exceed the GRB, the ultimate amount to be paid by the Company, if any, is uncertain and could be significantly more or less than the Company current carried liability. For additional information on the Company GMWB liability, see Note 4 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Many policyholders with a GMDB also have a GMWB in the U.S. or GMIB in Japan. Policyholders that have a product that offer both guarantees can only receive the GMDB or the GMIB benefit in Japan or the GMDB or GMWB in the U.S. For additional information on the Company GMDB liability, see Note 9 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 104 Table of Contents For GMIB contracts, in general, the policyholder has the right to elect to annuitize benefits, beginning (for certain products) on the tenth or fifteenth anniversary year of contract commencement, receive lump sum payment of the then current account value, or remain in the variable sub-account. For GMIB contracts, if the policyholder makes the election, the policyholder is entitled to receive the original investment value over a 10- to 15- year annuitization period. A small percentage of the contracts will first become eligible to elect annuitization beginning in 2013. The remainder of the contracts will first become eligible to elect annuitization from 2014 to 2022. Because policyholders have various contractual rights to defer their annuitization election, the period over which annuitization election can take place is subject to policyholder behavior and therefore indeterminate. In addition, upon annuitization the contractholder surrenders access to the account value and the account value is transferred to the Company general account where it is invested and the additional investment proceeds are used towards payment of the original investment value. If the original investment value exceeds the account value upon annuitization then the contract is in the money . As of December 31, 2011, 65% of retained NAR is reinsured to an affiliate of The Hartford. For additional information on the Company GMIB liability, see Note 9 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. The following table represents the timing of account values eligible for annuitization under the Japan GMIB as of December 31, 2011, as well as the NAR. The account values reflect 100% annuitization at the earliest point allowed by the contract and no adjustments for future market returns and policyholder behaviors. Future market returns, changes in the value of the Japanese yen and policyholder behaviors will impact account values eligible for annuitization in the years presented. GMIB [1] ($ in billions) Account Value Net Amount at Risk 2013 $ 0.3 $ 2014 4.5 0.9 2015 7.3 2.0 2016 2.5 0.8 2017 2.8 0.9 2018 & beyond [2] 6.9 2.0 Total $ 24.3 $ 6.6 [1] Excludes certain non-GMIB living benefits of $2.9 billion of account value and $0.9 billion of NAR. [2] In 2018 & beyond, $2.6 billion of the $6.9 billion is primarily associated with account value that is eligible in 2021. Variable Annuity Market Risk Exposures The following table summarizes the broad Variable Annuity Guarantees offered by the Company and the market risks to which the guarantee is most exposed from a U.S. GAAP accounting perspective. Variable Annuity Guarantees [1] U.S. GAAP Treatment [1] Primary Market Risk Exposures [1] U.S. Variable Guarantees GMDB Accumulation of the portion of fees required to cover expected claims, less accumulation of actual claims paid Equity Market Levels GMWB Fair Value Equity Market Levels / Implied Volatility / Interest Rates For Life Component of GMWB Accumulation of the portion of fees required to cover expected claims, less accumulation of actual claims paid Equity Market Levels International Variable Guarantees GMDB & GMIB Accumulation of the portion of fees required to cover expected claims, less accumulation of actual claims paid Equity Market Levels / Interest Rates / Foreign Currency GMWB Fair Value Equity Market Levels / Implied Volatility / Interest Rates / Foreign Currency GMAB Fair Value Equity Market Levels / Implied Volatility / Interest Rates / Foreign Currency [1] Each of these guarantees and the related U.S. GAAP accounting volatility will also be influenced by actual and estimated policyholder behavior. 105 Table of Contents Risk Hedging Variable Annuity Hedging Program The Company variable annuity hedging is primarily focused on reducing the economic exposure to market risks associated with guaranteed benefits that are embedded in our global VA contracts through the use of reinsurance and capital market derivative instruments. The variable annuity hedging also considers the potential impacts on Statutory accounting results. Reinsurance The Company uses reinsurance for a portion of contracts with GMWB riders issued prior to the third quarter of 2003 and GMWB risks associated with a block of business sold between the third quarter of 2003 and the second quarter of 2006. The Company also uses reinsurance for a majority of the GMDB issued in the U.S. and a portion of the GMDB issued in Japan. Capital Market Derivatives GMWB Hedge Program The Company enters into derivative contracts to hedge market risk exposures associated with the GMWB liabilities that are not reinsured. These derivative contracts include customized swaps, interest rate swaps and futures, and equity swaps, options, and futures, on certain indices including the S&P 500 index, EAFE index, and NASDAQ index. Additionally, the Company holds customized derivative contracts to provide protection from certain capital market risks for the remaining term of specified blocks of non-reinsured GMWB riders. These customized derivative contracts are based on policyholder behavior assumptions specified at the inception of the derivative contracts. The Company retains the risk for differences between assumed and actual policyholder behavior and between the performance of the actively managed funds underlying the separate accounts and their respective indices. While the Company actively manages this dynamic hedging program, increased U.S. GAAP earnings volatility may result from factors including, but not limited to: policyholder behavior, capital markets, divergence between the performance of the underlying funds and the hedging indices, changes in hedging positions and the relative emphasis placed on various risk management objectives. Macro Hedge Program The Company macro hedging program uses derivative instruments such as options, futures, swaps, and forwards on equities and interest rates to provide protection against the statutory tail scenario risk arising from U.S., GMWB and GMDB liabilities, on the Company statutory surplus. These macro hedges cover some of the residual risks not otherwise covered by specific dynamic hedging programs. Management assesses this residual risk under various scenarios in designing and executing the macro hedge program. The macro hedge program will result in additional U.S. GAAP earnings volatility as changes in the value of the macro hedge derivatives, which are designed to reduce statutory reserve and capital volatility, may not be closely aligned to changes in U.S. GAAP liabilities. International Hedge Programs The Company enters into derivative contracts to hedge market risk exposures associated with the guaranteed benefits which are embedded in the international variable annuity contracts. These derivative contracts include foreign currency forwards and options, interest rate swaps and futures, and equity swaps, options, and futures on certain broadly traded global equity indices including the S&P500 index, Nikkei 225 index, FTSE 100 index, and Euro Stoxx 50. During 2011, the Company increased its equity, currency, and interest rate hedge cover. While the Company actively manages these dynamic hedging programs, increased U.S. GAAP earnings volatility may result from factors including, but not limited to: focus on reducing the economic exposure to market risks associated with guaranteed benefits, capital markets, changes in hedging positions and the relative emphasis placed on various risk management objectives. 106 Table of Contents Variable Annuity Hedging Program Sensitivities The following table presents the accounting treatment of the underlying guaranteed living benefits and the related hedge assets by hedge program. U.S. Programs International Programs GMWB Macro Japan/UK Hedge Assets Liabilities Hedge Assets Liabilities Hedge Assets Liabilities [1] Fair Value Fair Value Fair Value Not Fair Value Fair Value Not Fair Value [1] The liabilities for international variable annuity are primarily not measured on a fair value basis. However there is an immaterial portion of the international variable annuity with a GMWB or GMAB which is measured on a fair value basis. The following table presents our estimates of the potential instantaneous impacts from sudden market stresses related to equity market prices, interest rates, implied market volatilities, and foreign currency exchange rates. The sensitivities below represent: (1) the net estimated difference between the change in the fair value of GMWB liabilities and the underlying hedge instruments and (2) the estimated change in fair value of the hedge instruments for the macro and international hedge programs, before the impacts of amortization of DAC, and taxes. As noted in the table above, certain hedge assets are used to hedge liabilities that are not carried at fair value and will not have a liability offset in the U.S. GAAP sensitivity analysis. All sensitivities are measured as of December 30, 2011, and are related to the fair value of liabilities and hedge instruments in place as of that date for the Company variable annuity hedge programs. The impacts presented in the table below are estimated individually as of December 30, 2011, and performed without consideration of any correlation among market risk factors. U.S. GAAP Sensitivity Analysis U.S. Programs International Programs (pre Tax/DAC) [1] GMWB Macro Japan/UK Equity Market Return -20 % -10 % +10 % -20 % -10 % +10 % -20 % -10 % +10 % Potential Net Fair Value Impact $ (35 ) $ (4 ) $ (20 ) $ 380 $ 141 $ (89 ) $ 908 $ 456 $ (451 ) Interest Rates -50 bps -25 bps +25 bps -50 bps -25 bps +25 bps -50 bps -25 bps +25 bps Potential Net Fair Value Impact $ (221 ) $ (106 ) $ 99 $ 12 $ 6 $ (6 ) $ 477 $ 235 $ (240 ) Implied Volatilities +10 % +2 % -10 % +10 % +2 % -10 % +10 % +2 % -10 % Potential Net Fair Value Impact $ (565 ) $ (110 ) $ 509 $ 90 $ 19 $ (111 ) $ 30 $ 6 $ (26 ) Yen Strengthens +/ Weakens - +20 % +10 % -10 % +20 % +10 % -10 % +20 % +10 % -10 % Potential Net Fair Value Impact N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A $ 2,875 $ 1,197 $ (749 ) [1] These sensitivities are based on the following key market levels as of December 30, 2011: 1) S&P of 1,257.60; 2) 10yr US swap rate of 2.03%; 3) S&P 10yr volatility of 30.15% and 4) FX rates of USDJPY @ 76.91 and EURJPY @99.66. The above sensitivity analysis is an estimate and should not be used to predict the Company future financial performance of its variable annuity hedge programs. The actual net changes in the fair value liability and the hedging assets illustrated in the above table may vary materially depending on a variety of factors which include but are not limited to: The sensitivity analysis is only valid as of the measurement date and assumes instantaneous changes in the capital market factors and no ability to rebalance hedge positions prior to the market changes; Changes to the underlying hedging program, policyholder behavior, and variation in underlying fund performance relative to the hedged index, which could materially impact the liability; and The impact of elapsed time on liabilities or hedge assets, any non-parallel shifts in capital market factors, or correlated moves across the sensitivities. 107 Table of Contents Foreign Currency Exchange Risk Foreign currency exchange risk is defined as the risk of financial loss due to changes in the relative value between currencies. The Company foreign currency exchange risk is related to non-U.S. dollar denominated liability contracts, including its GMDB, GMAB, GMWB and GMIB benefits associated with its Japanese and U.K. variable annuities, the investment in and net income of the Japanese and U.K. operations, non-U.S. dollar denominated investments, which primarily consist of fixed maturity investments, and a yen denominated individual fixed annuity product. In addition, the Company Life Other Operations issued non-U.S. dollar denominated funding agreement liability contracts. A portion of the Company foreign currency exposure is mitigated through the use of derivatives. The company manages the market risk, including foreign currency exchange risk, associated with the guaranteed benefits related to the Japanese and U.K. variable annuities through its comprehensive International Hedge Program. For more information on the International Hedge Program, including the foreign currency exchange risk sensitivity analysis, see the Variable Product Guarantee Risks and Risk Management section. In order to manage the currency exposure related to non-U.S. dollar denominated investments and the non-U.S. dollar denominated funding agreement liability contracts, the Company enters into foreign currency swaps and forwards to hedge the variability in cash flows or fair value. These foreign currency swap and forward agreements are structured to match the foreign currency cash flows of the hedged foreign denominated securities and liabilities. The yen denominated individual fixed annuity product was written by Hartford Life Insurance K.K. ( HLIKK ), a wholly-owned Japanese subsidiary of Hartford Life, Inc. ( HLI ), and subsequently reinsured to Hartford Life Insurance Company, a U.S. dollar based wholly-owned indirect subsidiary of HLI. During 2009, the Company suspended new sales of the Japan business. The underlying investment involves investing in U.S. securities markets, which offer favorable credit spreads. The yen denominated fixed annuity product ( yen fixed annuities ) is recorded in the consolidated balance sheets with invested assets denominated in dollars while policyholder liabilities are denominated in yen and converted to U.S. dollars based upon the December 31 yen to U.S. dollar spot rate. The difference between U.S. dollar denominated investments and yen denominated liabilities exposes the Company to currency risk. The Company manages this currency risk associated with the yen fixed annuities primarily with pay variable U.S. dollar and receive fixed yen currency swaps. Although economically an effective hedge, a divergence between the yen denominated fixed annuity product liability and the currency swaps exists primarily due to the difference in the basis of accounting between the liability and the derivative instruments (i.e. historical cost versus fair value). The yen denominated fixed annuity product liabilities are recorded on a historical cost basis and are only adjusted for changes in foreign spot rates and accrued income. The currency swaps are recorded at fair value, incorporating changes in value due to changes in forward foreign exchange rates, interest rates and accrued income. A portion of the Company foreign currency exposure is mitigated through the use of derivatives. Fixed Maturity Investments The risk associated with the non-U.S. dollar denominated fixed maturities relates to potential decreases in value and income resulting from unfavorable changes in foreign exchange rates. The fair value of the non-U.S. dollar denominated fixed maturities, which are primarily denominated in euro, sterling, yen and Canadian dollars, at December 31, 2011 and 2010, were approximately $2.3 billion and $1.4 billion, respectively. Included in these amounts are $1.9 billion and $1.0 billion at December 31, 2011 and 2010, respectively, related to non-U.S. dollar denominated fixed maturity securities that directly support liabilities denominated in the same currencies. At December 31, 2011 and 2010, the derivatives used to hedge currency exchange risk related to the remaining non-U.S. dollar denominated fixed maturities had a total notional amount of $399 and $431, respectively, and total fair value of $12 and ($6), respectively. Based on the fair values of the Company non-U.S. dollar denominated securities, including the associated yen denominated fixed annuity product liabilities, and derivative instruments as of December 31, 2011 and 2010, management estimates that a 10% unfavorable change in exchange rates would decrease the fair values by a before-tax total of approximately $113 and $87, respectively. The estimated impact was based upon a 10% change in December 31 spot rates. The selection of the 10% unfavorable change was made only for illustration of the potential hypothetical impact of such an event and should not be construed as a prediction of future market events. Actual results could differ materially from those illustrated above due to the nature of the estimates and assumptions used in the above analysis. Liabilities The Company Wealth Management operations issued non-U.S. dollar denominated funding agreement liability contracts. The Company hedges the foreign currency risk associated with these liability contracts with currency rate swaps. At December 31, 2011 and 2010, the derivatives used to hedge foreign currency exchange risk related to foreign denominated liability contracts had a total notional amount of $771 and a total fair value of ($57) and ($17), respectively. The Company uses currency swaps to manage the foreign currency risk associated with the yen denominated individual fixed annuity product. As of December 31, 2011 and 2010, the notional value of the currency swaps was $1.9 billion and $2.1 billion and the fair value was $514 and $608, respectively. The currency swaps are recorded at fair value, incorporating changes in value due to changes in forward foreign exchange rates, interest rates and accrued income. A before-tax net gain of $3 and $27 for the years ended December 31, 2011 and 2010, respectively, which includes the changes in value of the currency swaps, excluding net periodic coupon settlements, and the yen fixed annuity contract remeasurement, was recorded in net realized capital gains and losses. 108 Table of Contents Financial Risk on Statutory Capital Statutory surplus amounts and risk-based capital ( RBC ) ratios may increase or decrease in any period depending upon a variety of factors and may be compounded in extreme scenarios or if multiple factors occur at the same time. At times the impact of changes in certain market factors or a combination of multiple factors on RBC ratios can be counterintuitive. Factors include: In general, as equity market levels and interest rates decline, the amount and volatility of both our actual potential obligation, as well as the related statutory surplus and capital margin for death and living benefit guarantees associated with U.S. variable annuity contracts can be materially negatively affected, sometimes at a greater than linear rate. Other market factors that can impact statutory surplus, reserve levels and capital margin include differences in performance of variable subaccounts relative to indices and/or realized equity and interest rate volatilities. In addition, as equity market levels increase, generally surplus levels will increase. RBC ratios will also tend to increase when equity markets increase. However, as a result of a number of factors and market conditions, including the level of hedging costs and other risk transfer activities, reserve requirements for death and living benefit guarantees and RBC requirements could increase with rising equity markets, resulting in lower RBC ratios. Non-market factors, which can also impact the amount and volatility of both our actual potential obligation, as well as the related statutory surplus and capital margin, include actual and estimated policyholder behavior experience as it pertains to lapsation, partial withdrawals, and mortality. Similarly, for guaranteed benefits (GMDB, GMIB, and GMWB) reinsured from our international operations to our U.S. insurance subsidiaries, the amount and volatility of both our actual potential obligation, as well as the related statutory surplus and capital margin can be materially affected by a variety of factors, both market and non-market. Market factors include declines in various equity market indices and interest rates, changes in value of the yen versus other global currencies, difference in the performance of variable subaccounts relative to indices, and increases in realized equity, interest rate, and currency volatilities. Non-market factors include actual and estimated policyholder behavior experience as it pertains to lapsation, withdrawals, mortality, and annuitization. Risk mitigation activities, such as hedging, may also result in material and sometimes counterintuitive impacts on statutory surplus and capital margin. Notably, as changes in these market and non-market factors occur, both our potential obligation and the related statutory reserves and/or required capital can increase or decrease at a greater than linear rate. As the value of certain fixed-income and equity securities in our investment portfolio decreases, due in part to credit spread widening, statutory surplus and RBC ratios may decrease. As the value of certain derivative instruments that do not get hedge accounting decreases, statutory surplus and RBC ratios may decrease. The life insurance subsidiaries exposure to foreign currency exchange risk exists with respect to non-U.S. dollar denominated assets and liabilities. Assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies are accounted for at their U.S. dollar equivalent values using exchange rates at the balance sheet date. As foreign currency exchange rates vary in comparison to the U.S. dollar, the remeasured value of those non-dollar denominated assets or liabilities will also vary, causing an increase or decrease to statutory surplus. Our statutory surplus is also impacted by widening credit spreads as a result of the accounting for the assets and liabilities in our fixed market value adjusted ( MVA ) annuities. Statutory separate account assets supporting the fixed MVA annuities are recorded at fair value. In determining the statutory reserve for the fixed MVA annuities, we are required to use current crediting rates in the U.S. and Japanese LIBOR in Japan. In many capital market scenarios, current crediting rates in the U.S. are highly correlated with market rates implicit in the fair value of statutory separate account assets. As a result, the change in statutory reserve from period to period will likely substantially offset the change in the fair value of the statutory separate account assets. However, in periods of volatile credit markets, such as we have experienced, actual credit spreads on investment assets may increase sharply for certain sub-sectors of the overall credit market, resulting in statutory separate account asset market value losses. As actual credit spreads are not fully reflected in the current crediting rates in the U.S. or Japanese LIBOR in Japan, the calculation of statutory reserves will not substantially offset the change in fair value of the statutory separate account assets resulting in reductions in statutory surplus. This has resulted and may continue to result in the need to devote significant additional capital to support the product. With respect to our fixed annuity business, sustained low interest rates may result in a reduction in statutory surplus and an increase in National Association of Insurance Commissioners ( NAIC ) required capital. Most of these factors are outside of the Company control. The Company financial strength and credit ratings are significantly influenced by the statutory surplus amounts and RBC ratios of our insurance company subsidiaries. In addition, rating agencies may implement changes to their internal models that have the effect of increasing or decreasing the amount of statutory capital we must hold in order to maintain our current ratings. The Company has reinsured approximately 18% of its risk associated with U.S. GMWB and 58% of its risk associated with the aggregate U.S. GMDB exposure. These reinsurance agreements serve to reduce the Company exposure to changes in the statutory reserves and the related capital and RBC ratios associated with changes in the capital markets. The Company also continues to explore other solutions for mitigating the capital market risk effect on surplus, such as internal and external reinsurance solutions, modifications to our hedging program, changes in product design, increasing pricing and expense management 109 Table of Contents Credit Risk Credit risk is defined as the risk of financial loss due to uncertainty of obligor or counterparty ability or willingness to meet its obligations in accordance with agreed upon terms. The majority of the Company credit risk is concentrated in its investment holdings but is also present in reinsurance and insurance portfolios. Credit risk is comprised of three major factors: the risk of change in credit quality, or credit migration risk; the risk of default; and the risk of a change in value of a financial instrument due to changes in credit spread that are unrelated to changes in obligor credit quality. A decline in creditworthiness is typically associated with an increase in an investment credit spread, potentially resulting in an increase in other-than-temporary impairments and an increased probability of a realized loss upon sale. The objective of the Company enterprise credit risk management strategy is to identify, quantify, and manage credit risk on an aggregate portfolio basis and to limit potential losses in accordance with an established credit risk appetite. The Company manages to its risk appetite by primarily holding a diversified mix of investment grade issuers and counterparties across its investment, reinsurance, and insurance portfolios. Potential losses are also limited within portfolios by diversifying across geographic regions, asset types, and sectors. The Company manages a credit exposure from its inception to its maturity or sale. Both the investment and reinsurance areas have formulated procedures for counterparty approvals and authorizations. Although approval processes may vary by area and type of credit risk, approval processes establish minimum levels of creditworthiness and financial stability. Eligible credits are subjected to prudent and conservative underwriting reviews. Within the investment portfolio, private securities, such as commercial mortgages, and private placements, must be presented to their respective review committees for approval. Credit risks are managed on an on-going basis through the use of various processes and analyses. At the investment, reinsurance, and insurance product levels, fundamental credit analyses are performed at the issuer/counterparty level on a regular basis. To provide a holistic review within the investment portfolio, fundamental analyses are supported by credit ratings, assigned by nationally recognized rating agencies or internally assigned, and by quantitative credit analyses. The Company utilizes a credit VaR to measure default and migration risk on a monthly basis. Issuer and security level risk measures are also utilized. In the event of deterioration in credit quality, the Company maintains watch lists of problem counterparties within the investment and reinsurance portfolios. The watch lists are updated based on regular credit examinations and management reviews. The Company also performs quarterly assessments of probable expected losses in the investment portfolio. The process is conducted on a sector basis and is intended to promptly assess and identify potential problems in the portfolio and to recognize necessary impairments. Credit risk policies at the enterprise and operation level ensure comprehensive and consistent approaches to quantifying, evaluating, and managing credit risk under expected and stressed conditions. These policies define the scope of the risk, authorities, accountabilities, terms, and limits, and are regularly reviewed and approved by senior management and ERM. Aggregate counterparty credit quality and exposure is monitored on a daily basis utilizing an enterprise-wide credit exposure information system that contains data on issuers, ratings, exposures, and credit limits. Exposures are tracked on a current and potential basis. Credit exposures are reported regularly to the ERCC and to the Finance, Investment and Risk Management Committee ( FIRMCo ). Exposures are aggregated by ultimate parent across investments, reinsurance receivables, insurance products with credit risk, and derivative counterparties. The credit database and reporting system are available to all key credit practitioners in the enterprise. The Company exercises various and differing methods to mitigate its credit risk exposure within its investment and reinsurance portfolios. Some of the reasons for mitigating credit risk include financial instability or poor credit, avoidance of arbitration or litigation, future uncertainty, and exposure in excess of risk tolerances. Credit risk within the investment portfolio is most commonly mitigated through the use of derivative instruments or asset sales. Counterparty credit risk is mitigated through the practice of entering into contracts only with highly creditworthy institutions and through the practice of holding and posting of collateral. Systemic credit risk is mitigated through the construction of high-quality, diverse portfolios that are subject to regular underwriting of credit risks. For further discussion of the Company investment and derivative instruments, see the Investment Management section and Note 5 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Further discussion on managing and mitigating credit risk from the use of reinsurance via an enterprise security review process, see the Reinsurance section. The Company is not exposed to any credit concentration risk of a single issuer greater than 10% of the Company stockholders equity other than U.S. government and government agencies backed by the full faith and credit of the U.S. government. For further discussion of concentration of credit risk, see the Concentration of Credit Risk section in Note 5 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 110 Table of Contents Derivative Instruments The Company utilizes a variety of over-the-counter and exchange traded derivative instruments as a part of its overall risk management strategy, as well as to enter into replication transactions. Derivative instruments are used to manage risk associated with interest rate, equity market, credit spread, issuer default, price, and currency exchange rate risk or volatility. Replication transactions are used as an economical means to synthetically replicate the characteristics and performance of assets that would otherwise be permissible investments under the Company investment policies. For further information on the Company use of derivatives, see Note 5 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Derivative activities are monitored and evaluated by the Company compliance and risk management teams and reviewed by senior management. In addition, the Company monitors counterparty credit exposure on a monthly basis to ensure compliance with Company policies and statutory limitations. The notional amounts of derivative contracts represent the basis upon which pay or receive amounts are calculated and are not reflective of credit risk. Downgrades to the credit ratings of The Hartford insurance operating companies may have adverse implications for its use of derivatives including those used to hedge benefit guarantees of variable annuities. In some cases, downgrades may give derivative counterparties the unilateral contractual right to cancel and settle outstanding derivative trades or require additional collateral to be posted. In addition, downgrades may result in counterparties becoming unwilling to engage in additional over-the-counter ( OTC ) derivatives or may require collateralization before entering into any new trades. This will restrict the supply of derivative instruments commonly used to hedge variable annuity guarantees, particularly long-dated equity derivatives and interest rate swaps. Under these circumstances, the Company operating subsidiaries could conduct hedging activity using a combination of cash and exchange-traded instruments, in addition to using the available OTC derivatives. The Company uses various derivative counterparties in executing its derivative transactions. The use of counterparties creates credit risk that the counterparty may not perform in accordance with the terms of the derivative transaction. The Company has developed a derivative counterparty exposure policy which limits the Company exposure to credit risk. The derivative counterparty exposure policy establishes market-based credit limits, favors long-term financial stability and creditworthiness of the counterparty and typically requires credit enhancement/credit risk reducing agreements. The Company minimizes the credit risk of derivative instruments by entering into transactions with high quality counterparties primarily rated A or better, which are monitored and evaluated by the Company risk management team and reviewed by senior management. In addition, the Company monitors counterparty credit exposure on a monthly basis to ensure compliance with Company policies and statutory limitations. The Company also generally requires that derivative contracts, other than exchange traded contracts, certain forward contracts, and certain embedded and reinsurance derivatives, be governed by an International Swaps and Derivatives Association Master Agreement, which is structured by legal entity and by counterparty and permits right of offset. The Company has developed credit exposure thresholds which are based upon counterparty ratings. Credit exposures are measured using the market value of the derivatives, resulting in amounts owed to the Company by its counterparties or potential payment obligations from the Company to its counterparties. Credit exposures are generally quantified daily based on the prior business day market value and collateral is pledged to and held by, or on behalf of, the Company to the extent the current value of the derivatives exceed the contractual thresholds. In accordance with industry standard and the contractual agreements, collateral is typically settled on the next business day. The Company has exposure to credit risk for amounts below the exposure thresholds which are uncollateralized, as well as for market fluctuations that may occur between contractual settlement periods of collateral movements. For the company domestic derivative programs, the maximum uncollateralized threshold for a derivative counterparty for a single legal entity is $10. The Company currently transacts OTC derivatives in five legal entities that have a threshold greater than zero and therefore the maximum combined threshold for a single counterparty across all legal entities that use derivatives is $50. In addition, the Company may have exposure to multiple counterparties in a single corporate family due to a common credit support provider. As of December 31, 2011, for the company domestic derivative programs, the maximum combined threshold for all counterparties under a single credit support provider across all legal entities that use derivatives is $100. Based on the contractual terms of the collateral agreements, these thresholds may be immediately reduced due to a downgrade in either party credit rating. Beginning in the fourth quarter of 2011, the Company began hedging its Japan exposures within the legal entity HLIKK. The counterparty credit exposures at HLIKK generally follow the maximum uncollateralized threshold of the domestic program however, for two counterparties, collateralization requirements are currently not in place. These two counterparties maintain credit ratings of A or better and the Company actively monitors their credit standing. For further discussion, see the Derivative Commitments section of Note 12 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. For the year ended December 31, 2011, the Company has incurred no losses on derivative instruments due to counterparty default. In addition to counterparty credit risk, the Company may also introduce credit risk through the use of credit default swaps that are entered into to manage credit exposure. Credit default swaps involve a transfer of credit risk of one or many referenced entities from one party to another in exchange for periodic payments. The party that purchases credit protection will make periodic payments based on an agreed upon rate and notional amount, and for certain transactions there will also be an upfront premium payment. The second party, who assumes credit risk, will typically only make a payment if there is a credit event as defined in the contract and such payment will be typically equal to the notional value of the swap contract less the value of the referenced security issuer debt obligation. A credit event is generally defined as default on contractually obligated interest or principal payments or bankruptcy of the referenced entity. 111 Table of Contents The Company uses credit derivatives to purchase credit protection and to assume credit risk with respect to a single entity, referenced index, or asset pool. The Company purchases credit protection through credit default swaps to economically hedge and manage credit risk of certain fixed maturity investments across multiple sectors of the investment portfolio. The Company also enters into credit default swaps that assume credit risk as part of replication transactions. Replication transactions are used as an economical means to synthetically replicate the characteristics and performance of assets that would otherwise be permissible investments under the Company investment policies. These swaps reference investment grade single corporate issuers and baskets, which include customized diversified portfolios of corporate issuers, which are established within sector concentration limits and may be divided into tranches which possess different credit ratings. As of December 31, 2011 and 2010, the notional amount related to credit derivatives that purchase credit protection was $1.7 billion and $2.6 billion, respectively, while the fair value was $36 and ($9), respectively. As of December 31, 2011 and 2010, the notional amount related to credit derivatives that assume credit risk was $3.0 billion and $2.6 billion, respectively, while the fair value was ($648) and ($434), respectively. For further information on credit derivatives, see the Capital Markets Risk Management section of the MD&A and Note 5 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Investment Portfolio Risks and Risk Management Investment Portfolio Composition The following table presents the Company fixed maturities, AFS, by credit quality. The ratings referenced below are based on the ratings of a nationally recognized rating organization or, if not rated, assigned based on the Company internal analysis of such securities Fixed Maturities by Credit Quality December 31, 2011 December 31, 2010 Percent of Percent of Amortized Total Fair Amortized Total Fair Cost Fair Value Value Cost Fair Value Value United States Government/Government agencies $ 8,901 $ 9,364 11.4 % $ 9,961 $ 9,918 12.7 % AAA 9,631 10,113 12.4 % 10,080 10,174 13.1 % AA 15,471 15,844 19.4 % 15,933 15,554 20.0 % A 19,501 21,053 25.7 % 19,265 19,460 25.0 % BBB 20,972 21,760 26.6 % 18,849 19,153 24.6 % BB & below 4,502 3,675 4.5 % 4,331 3,561 4.6 % Total fixed maturities $ 78,978 81,809 100.0 % $ 78,419 77,820 100.0 % The movement in the overall credit quality of the Company portfolio was primarily attributable to sales of U.S. Treasuries as the Company continues to reinvest in spread product and purchase investment grade corporate securities concentrated in industrial and utility issuers. Fixed maturities, FVO, are not included in the above table. For further discussion on fair value option securities, see Note 4 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 112 Table of Contents The following table presents the Company AFS securities by type, as well as fixed maturities, FVO. Securities by Type December 31, 2011 December 31, 2010 Percent Percent Cost or Gross Gross of Total Cost or Gross Gross of Total Amortized Unrealized Unrealized Fair Fair Amortized Unrealized Unrealized Fair Fair Cost Gains Losses Value Value Cost Gains Losses Value Value Asset-backed securities ( ABS ) Consumer loans $ 2,688 34 $ (208 ) $ 2,514 3.1 % $ 2,496 $ 23 $ (221 ) $ 2,298 2.9 % Small business 418 1 (123 ) 296 0.4 % 453 (141 ) 312 0.4 % Other 324 20 (1 ) 343 0.4 % 298 15 (34 ) 279 0.4 % CDOs Collateralized loan obligations ( CLOs ) 2,334 (181 ) 2,153 2.6 % 2,429 1 (212 ) 2,218 2.9 % CREs 485 16 (167 ) 334 0.4 % 653 (266 ) 387 0.5 % Other 6 6 CMBS Agency backed [1] 637 40 677 0.8 % 519 9 (4 ) 524 0.7 % Bonds 5,992 182 (487 ) 5,687 7.0 % 6,985 147 (583 ) 6,549 8.4 % Interest only ( IOs ) 563 49 (25 ) 587 0.7 % 793 79 (28 ) 844 1.1 % Corporate Basic industry [2] 3,690 309 (19 ) 3,979 4.9 % 2,993 190 (24 ) 3,159 4.1 % Capital goods 3,327 331 (33 ) 3,625 4.4 % 3,179 223 (23 ) 3,379 4.3 % Consumer cyclical 2,277 206 (8 ) 2,475 3.0 % 1,883 115 (12 ) 1,986 2.6 % Consumer non-cyclical 5,985 644 (13 ) 6,616 8.1 % 6,126 444 (29 ) 6,541 8.4 % Energy 3,338 381 (15 ) 3,704 4.5 % 3,377 212 (23 ) 3,566 4.6 % Financial services 7,763 334 (526 ) 7,571 9.3 % 7,545 253 (470 ) 7,328 9.4 % Tech./comm. 4,357 443 (61 ) 4,739 5.8 % 4,268 269 (68 ) 4,469 5.7 % Transportation 1,285 123 (6 ) 1,402 1.7 % 1,141 69 (13 ) 1,197 1.5 % Utilities 8,236 857 (38 ) 9,055 11.2 % 7,099 386 (58 ) 7,427 9.5 % Other [2] 903 33 (20 ) 845 1.0 % 885 13 (27 ) 832 1.1 % Foreign govt./govt. agencies 2,030 141 (10 ) 2,161 2.6 % 1,627 73 (17 ) 1,683 2.2 % Municipal Taxable 1,688 120 (51 ) 1,757 2.1 % 1,319 9 (129 ) 1,199 1.5 % Tax-exempt 10,869 655 (21 ) 11,503 14.1 % 11,150 141 (366 ) 10,925 14.0 % Residential mortgage-backed securities ( RMBS ) Agency 4,436 222 4,658 5.7 % 4,283 109 (27 ) 4,365 5.6 % Non-agency 62 (2 ) 60 0.1 % 78 (3 ) 75 0.1 % Alt-A 115 5 (21 ) 99 0.1 % 168 (19 ) 149 0.2 % Sub-prime 1,348 25 (433 ) 940 1.1 % 1,507 (413 ) 1,094 1.4 % U.S. Treasuries 3,828 203 (2 ) 4,029 4.9 % 5,159 24 (154 ) 5,029 6.5 % Fixed maturities, AFS 78,978 5,374 (2,471 ) 81,809 100 % 78,419 2,804 (3,364 ) 77,820 100.0 % Equity securities Financial services 479 10 (187 ) 302 569 4 (127 ) 446 Other 577 58 (16 ) 619 444 88 (5 ) 527 Equity securities, AFS 1,056 68 (203 ) 921 1,013 92 (132 ) 973 Total AFS securities $ 80,034 5,442 $ (2,674 ) $ 82,730 $ 79,432 $ 2,896 $ (3,496 ) $ 78,793 Fixed maturities, FVO $ 1,328 $ 649 [1] Represents securities with pools of loans issued by the Small Business Administration which are backed by the full faith and credit of the U.S. government. [2] Gross unrealized gains (losses) exclude the fair value of bifurcated embedded derivative features of certain securities. Subsequent changes in value will be recorded in net realized capital gains (losses). The Company continues to invest in a diversified portfolio with a focus on investment grade basic industry and utility issuers, while reducing its exposure to U.S. Treasuries, commercial real estate securities and subordinated financial services securities. The Company AFS net unrealized position improved primarily as a result of improved security valuations largely due to declining interest rates, partially offset by credit spread widening. Fixed maturities, FVO, represents Japan government securities supporting the Japan fixed annuity product, as well as securities containing an embedded credit derivative for which the Company elected the fair value option. The underlying credit risk of the securities containing credit derivatives are primarily investment grade CRE CDOs and a subordinated position on a basket of corporate bonds. For further discussion on fair value option securities, see Note 4 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 113 Table of Contents European Exposure Many economies within Europe continue to experience significant adverse economic conditions which have been precipitated in part by high unemployment rates and government debt levels. As a result, issuers in several European countries have experienced credit deterioration and rating downgrades and a reduced ability to access capital markets and/or higher borrowing costs. The concerns regarding the European countries have impacted the capital markets which, in turn, has made it more difficult to contain the European financial crisis. Austerity measures aimed at reducing sovereign debt levels, along with steps taken by the European Central Bank to provide liquidity and credit support to certain countries issuing debt, have helped to stabilize markets recently. However, risks remain elevated. The Company manages the credit risk associated with the European securities within the investment portfolio on an on-going basis using several processes which are supported by macroeconomic analysis and issuer credit analysis. For additional details regarding the Company management of credit risk, see the Credit Risk section of this MD&A. The Company considers alternate scenarios, including a base-case and both a positive and negative tail scenario that includes a partial or full break-up of the Eurozone. The outlook for key factors is evaluated, including the economic prospects for key countries, the potential for the spread of sovereign debt contagion, and the likelihood that policymakers and politicians pursue sufficient fiscal discipline and introduce appropriate backstops. Given the inherent uncertainty in the outcome of developments in the Eurozone, however, the Company has been focused on controlling both absolute levels of exposure and the composition of that exposure through both bond and derivative transactions. The Company has limited direct European exposure, totaling only 5% of total invested assets as of December 31, 2011. The following tables present the Company European securities included in the Securities by Type table above. The Company identifies exposures with the issuers ultimate parent country of domicile, which may not be the country of the security issuer. Certain European countries were separately listed below, Greece, Italy, Ireland, Portugal and Spain ( GIIPS ), because of the current significant economic strains persisting in these countries. The criteria used for indentifying the countries separately listed includes credit default spreads that exceed the iTraxx SovX index level and an S&P credit quality rating of A or lower. The following tables present the Company European securities included in the Securities by Type table above. December 31, 2011 Corporate & Equity, Corporate & Equity, Foreign Govt./ AFS Non-Finan. [1] AFS Financials Govt. Agencies Total Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Cost Value Cost Value Cost Value Cost Value Italy $ 314 $ 255 $ $ $ $ $ 314 $ 255 Spain 191 189 20 19 211 208 Ireland 163 162 163 162 Portugal 15 15 15 15 Greece Higher risk 683 621 20 19 703 640 Europe excluding higher risk 4,277 4,698 1,255 1,135 901 970 6,433 6,800 Total Europe $ 4,960 $ 5,316 $ 1,275 $ 1,154 $ 901 $ 970 $ 7,136 $ 7,440 Europe exposure net of credit default swap protection [2] $ 6,439 $ 7,467 114 Table of Contents December 31, 2010 Corporate & Equity, AFS Corporate & Equity, AFS Foreign Govt./ Non-Finan. [1] Financials Govt. Agencies Total Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Cost Value Cost Value Cost Value Cost Value Italy $ 374 $ 359 $ 17 $ 17 $ $ $ 391 $ 376 Spain 263 279 54 46 317 325 Ireland 178 173 4 3 182 176 Portugal 31 28 31 28 Greece Higher risk 846 839 75 66 921 905 Europe excluding higher risk 4,837 5,229 1,682 1,623 592 606 7,111 7,458 Total Europe $ 5,683 $ 6,068 $ 1,757 $ 1,689 $ 592 $ 606 $ 8,032 $ 8,363 Europe exposure net of credit default swap protection [2] $ 6,695 $ 8,358 [1] Includes amortized cost and fair value of $67 and $67 as of December 31, 2011 and $27 and $27, respectively, as of December 31, 2010 related to limited partnerships and other alternative investments, the majority of which is domiciled in the United Kingdom. [2] Includes a notional amount and fair value of $697 and $27, respectively, as of December 31, 2011 and $1.3 billion and ($5), respectively, as of December 31, 2010 related to credit default swap protection. This includes a notional amount of $89 and $42 as of December 31, 2011 and 2010, respectively, related to single name corporate issuers in the financial services sector. The Company European investment exposure largely relates to corporate entities which are domiciled in or generated a significant portion of its revenue within the United Kingdom, Germany, the Netherlands and Switzerland. As of December 31, 2011 and 2010, exposure to the United Kingdom totals less than 2% of total invested assets. The majority of investments are U.S. dollar-denominated, and those securities that are pound and euro-denominated are hedged to U.S. dollars or support foreign-denominated liabilities. For a discussion of foreign currency risks, see the Foreign Currency Exchange Risk section of this MD&A. The Company does not hold any sovereign exposure to the higher risk countries and does not hold any exposure to issuers in Greece. As of December 31, 2011 and 2010, the Company unfunded commitments associated with its investment portfolio was immaterial, and the weighted average credit quality of European investments was A and A-, respectively. As of December 31, 2011 and 2010, the Company total credit default swaps that provide credit protection had a notional amount of $697 and $1.3 billion, respectively, and a fair value of $27 and ($5), respectively. Included in those notional amounts as of December 31, 2011 and 2010 were $407 and $532, respectively, on credit default swaps that reference single name corporate and financial European issuers, of which $125 and $57, respectively, related to the higher risk countries. The maturity dates of credit defaults swaps are primarily consistent with the hedged bonds. Also included are credit default swaps with a notional amount of $290 and $805, respectively, as of December 31, 2011 and 2010 which reference a standard basket of European corporate and financial issuers. For further information on the use of the Company credit derivatives and counterparty credit quality, see Derivative Instruments within the Credit Risk section of this MD&A. In addition to the credit risk associated with the investment portfolio, the Company has $247 of reinsurance recoverables due from legal entity counterparties domiciled within Europe. For a more detail discussion of the Company reinsurance arrangements, see Note 6 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. Included in the Company equity securities, trading, portfolio are investments in World Government Bond Index Funds ( WGBI funds ). The fair value of the WGBI funds at December 31, 2011 and 2010 was $12.5 billion and $12.9 billion, respectively. Because several of these funds are managed by third party asset managers, the Company does not have access to detailed holdings; however, the WGBI funds investment mandate follows the Citigroup non-Japan World Government Fund Index ( the index ) and includes allocations to certain European sovereign debt. The estimated fair value of the European allocation based upon the index benchmark allocation was $5.4 billion and $5.8 billion as of December 31, 2011 and 2010, respectively. Included in this estimated European exposure were investments in Ireland, Italy, Portugal and Spain with an estimated fair value of $1.7 billion and $2.0 billion as of December 31, 2011 and 2010, respectively. The index guidelines allow investment in issuers rated BBB- or higher by Standard and Poors or Baa3 or higher by Moodys. Should an issuer credit rating fall below both of these rating levels they will be removed from the Index and the holdings will be liquidated. Because these assets support the international variable annuity business, changes in the value of these investments are reflected in the corresponding policyholder liabilities. The Company indirect exposure to these holdings is through any guarantees issued on the underlying variable annuity policies. 115 Table of Contents Financial Services The Company exposure to the financial services sector is predominantly through banking and insurance institutions. The following table presents the Company exposure to the financial services sector included in the Securities by Type table above. December 31, 2011 December 31, 2010 Amortized Net Amortized Net Cost Fair Value Unrealized Cost Fair Value Unrealized AAA $ 240 $ 245 $ 5 $ 302 $ 309 $ 7 AA 1,698 1,675 (23 ) 2,085 2,095 10 A 3,664 3,685 21 3,760 3,599 (161 ) BBB 2,335 1,998 (337 ) 1,677 1,518 (159 ) BB & below 305 270 (35 ) 290 253 (37 ) Total $ 8,242 $ 7,873 $ (369 ) $ 8,114 $ 7,774 $ (340 ) Domestic financial companies continued to stabilize throughout 2011 due to improved earnings performance, strengthening of asset quality and capital retention. However, spread volatility remains high due to concerns around European sovereign risks and potential contagion, regulatory pressures and a weaker U.S. macroeconomic environment. Financial institutions remain vulnerable to these concerns, as well as ongoing stress in the real estate markets which could adversely impact the Company net unrealized position. Included in the table above as of December 31, 2011, is an amortized cost and fair value of $1.3 billion and $1.2 billion, respectively, related to European investment exposure, of which only $20 and $19, respectively, relates to GIIPS. As of December 31, 2010, amortized cost and fair value includes $1.8 billion and $1.7 billion, respectively, of European exposure, of which only $75 and $66, respectively, relates to GIIPS. Commercial Real Estate The commercial real estate market continued to show signs of improving fundamentals, such as increases in transaction activities, more readily available financing and new issuances. While delinquencies still remain at historically high levels, they are expected to move lower in 2012. The following table presents the Company exposure to commercial mortgage backed-securities ( CMBS ) bonds by current credit quality and vintage year, included in the Securities by Type table above. Credit protection represents the current weighted average percentage of the outstanding capital structure subordinated to the Company investment holding that is available to absorb losses before the security incurs the first dollar loss of principal and excludes any equity interest or property value in excess of outstanding debt. CMBS Bonds [1] December 31, 2011 AAA AA A BBB BB and Below Total Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Cost Value Cost Value Cost Value Cost Value Cost Value Cost Value 2003 & Prior $ 408 $ 415 $ 148 $ 144 $ 83 $ 81 $ 16 $ 13 $ 33 $ 30 $ 688 $ 683 2004 333 349 68 75 45 41 30 28 26 21 502 514 2005 520 556 101 96 178 151 177 138 71 57 1,047 998 2006 713 762 516 493 180 159 362 298 430 302 2,201 2,014 2007 245 267 296 275 123 97 166 130 195 149 1,025 918 2008 55 60 55 60 2009 28 29 28 29 2010 29 31 29 31 2011 417 440 417 440 Total $ 2,748 $ 2,909 $ 1,129 $ 1,083 $ 609 $ 529 $ 751 $ 607 $ 755 $ 559 $ 5,992 $ 5,687 Credit protection 27.3 % 22.7 % 19.7 % 13.8 % 8.2 % 21.6 % 116 Table of Contents December 31, 2010 AAA AA A BBB BB and Below Total Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Amortized Fair Cost Value Cost Value Cost Value Cost Value Cost Value Cost Value 2003 & Prior $ 782 $ 803 $ 146 $ 142 $ 107 $ 103 $ 24 $ 21 $ 26 $ 22 $ 1,085 $ 1,091 2004 489 511 35 35 68 61 33 27 6 5 631 639 2005 610 632 131 121 213 177 182 147 123 96 1,259 1,173 2006 1,016 1,050 566 536 256 224 496 416 436 339 2,770 2,565 2007 305 320 278 250 71 55 253 200 278 198 1,185 1,023 2008 55 58 55 58 Total $ 3,257 $ 3,374 $ 1,156 $ 1,084 $ 715 $ 620 $ 988 $ 811 $ 869 $ 660 $ 6,985 $ 6,549 Credit protection 28.8 % 22.5 % 13.3 % 13.8 % 8.0 % 21.5 % [1] The vintage year represents the year the pool of loans was originated. The Company also has AFS exposure to commercial real estate ( CRE ) collateralized debt obligations ( CDOs ) with an amortized cost and fair value of $485 and $334, respectively, as of December 31, 2011 and $653 and $387, respectively, as of December 31, 2010. These securities are comprised of diversified pools of commercial mortgage loans or equity positions of other CMBS securitizations. Although the Company does not plan to invest in this asset class going forward, we continue to monitor these investments as economic and market uncertainties regarding future performance impacts market liquidity and results in higher risk premiums. In addition to CMBS bonds and CRE CDOs, the Company has exposure to commercial mortgage loans as presented in the following table. These loans are collateralized by a variety of commercial properties and are diversified both geographically throughout the United States and by property type. These loans may be either in the form of a whole loan, where the Company is the sole lender, or a loan participation. Loan participations are loans where the Company has purchased or retained a portion of an outstanding loan or package of loans and participates on a pro-rata basis in collecting interest and principal pursuant to the terms of the participation agreement. In general, A-Note participations have senior payment priority, followed by B-Note participations and then mezzanine loan participations. As of December 31, 2011, loans within the Company mortgage loan portfolio that have had extensions or restructurings other than what is allowable under the original terms of the contract are immaterial. Commercial Mortgage Loans December 31, 2011 December 31, 2010 Amortized Valuation Carrying Amortized Valuation Carrying Cost [1] Allowance Value Cost [1] Allowance Value Agricultural $ 268 $ (19 ) $ 249 $ 339 $ (23 ) $ 316 Whole loans 4,892 (17 ) 4,875 3,326 (23 ) 3,303 A-Note participations 265 265 319 319 B-Note participations 296 (66 ) 230 327 (70 ) 257 Mezzanine loans 109 109 181 (36 ) 145 Total $ 5,830 $ (102 ) $ 5,728 $ 4,492 $ (152 ) $ 4,340 [1] Amortized cost represents carrying value prior to valuation allowances, if any. Since December 31, 2010, the Company funded $1.8 billion of commercial whole loans with a weighted average loan-to-value ( LTV ) ratio of 62% and a weighted average yield of 4.5%. The Company continues to originate commercial whole loans in primary markets, such as multi-family and retail, focusing on loans with strong LTV ratios and high quality property collateral. As of December 31, 2011, the Company had mortgage loans held-for-sale with a carrying value and valuation allowance of $74 and $4, respectively, and $87 and $7, respectively, as of December 31, 2010. Municipal Bonds The Company holds investments in securities backed by states, municipalities and political subdivisions ( municipal ) with an amortized cost and fair value of $12.6 billion and $13.3 billion, respectively, as of December 31, 2011 and $12.5 billion and $12.1 billion, respectively, as of December 31, 2010. The Company municipal bond portfolio primarily consists of high quality essential service revenue and general obligation bonds. As of December 31, 2011, the largest issuer concentrations were the states of California, Massachusetts and Illinois, which each comprised less than 3% of the municipal bond portfolio and were primarily comprised of general obligation bonds. As of December 31, 2010, the largest issuer concentrations were the states of California, Massachusetts and Georgia, which each comprised less than 3% of the municipal bond portfolio and were primarily comprised of general obligation bonds. 117 Table of Contents Limited Partnerships and Other Alternative Investments The following table presents the Company investments in limited partnerships and other alternative investments which include hedge funds, mortgage and real estate funds, mezzanine debt funds, and private equity and other funds. Hedge funds include investments in funds of funds and direct funds. These hedge funds invest in a variety of strategies including global macro and long/short credit and equity. Mortgage and real estate funds consist of investments in funds whose assets consist of mortgage loans, mortgage loan participations, mezzanine loans or other notes which may be below investment grade, as well as equity real estate and real estate joint ventures. Mezzanine debt funds include investments in funds whose assets consist of subordinated debt that often incorporates equity-based options such as warrants and a limited amount of direct equity investments. Private equity and other funds primarily consist of investments in funds whose assets typically consist of a diversified pool of investments in small to mid-sized non-public businesses with high growth potential. December 31, 2011 December 31, 2010 Amount Percent Amount Percent Hedge funds $ 896 35.4 % $ 439 22.8 % Mortgage and real estate funds 479 18.9 % 406 21.2 % Mezzanine debt funds 118 4.7 % 132 6.9 % Private equity and other funds 1,039 41.0 % 941 49.1 % Total $ 2,532 100.0 % $ 1,918 100.0 % Since December 31, 2010, the increase in hedge funds relates to additional investments in the type of fund strategies that the Company expects to generate superior risk-adjusted returns over time. Available-for-Sale Securities Unrealized Loss Aging The total gross unrealized losses were $2.7 billion as of December 31, 2011, which have improved $822, or 24%, from December 31, 2010 as interest rates declined, partially offset by credit spread widening. As of December 31, 2011, $743 of the gross unrealized losses were associated with securities depressed less than 20% of cost or amortized cost. The remaining $1.9 billion of gross unrealized losses were associated with securities depressed greater than 20%, which includes $156 associated with securities depressed over 50% for twelve months or more. These securities are backed primarily by commercial and residential real estate that have market spreads that continue to be wider than the spreads at the security respective purchase date. The unrealized losses remain largely due to the continued market and economic uncertainties surrounding residential and certain commercial real estate and lack of liquidity. Based upon the Company cash flow modeling and current market and collateral performance assumptions, these securities have sufficient credit protection levels to receive contractually obligated principal and interest payments. Also included in the gross unrealized losses depressed greater than 20% are financial services securities that have a floating-rate coupon and/or long-dated maturities. As part of the Company ongoing security monitoring process, the Company has reviewed its AFS securities in an unrealized loss position and concluded that there were no additional impairments as of December 31, 2011 and that these securities are temporarily depressed and are expected to recover in value as the securities approach maturity or as real estate related market spreads continue to improve. For these securities in an unrealized loss position where a credit impairment has not been recorded, the Company best estimate of expected future cash flows are sufficient to recover the amortized cost basis of the security. Furthermore, the Company neither has an intention to sell nor does it expect to be required to sell these securities. For further information regarding the Company impairment analysis, see Other-Than-Temporary Impairments in the Investment Portfolio Risks and Risk Management section of this MD&A. The following table presents the Company unrealized loss aging for AFS securities by length of time the security was in a continuous unrealized loss position. December 31, 2011 December 31, 2010 Cost or Cost or Amortized Fair Unrealized Amortized Fair Unrealized Items Cost Value Loss [1] Items Cost Value Loss [1] Three months or less 855 $ 3,933 $ 3,672 $ (261 ) 1,503 $ 17,431 $ 16,783 $ (643 ) Greater than three to six months 485 2,617 2,517 (100 ) 115 732 690 (42 ) Greater than six to nine months 224 1,181 1,097 (84 ) 91 438 397 (41 ) Greater than nine to eleven months 42 106 95 (11 ) 42 185 169 (16 ) Greater than twelve months 943 11,613 9,324 (2,218 ) 1,231 15,599 12,811 (2,754 ) Total 2,549 $ 19,450 $ 16,705 $ (2,674 ) 2,982 $ 34,385 $ 30,850 $ (3,496 ) [1] Unrealized losses exclude the fair value of bifurcated embedded derivative features of certain securities as changes in value are recorded in net realized capital gains (losses). 118 Table of Contents The following tables present the Company unrealized loss aging for AFS securities continuously depressed over 20% by length of time (included in the table above). December 31, 2011 December 31, 2010 Cost or Cost or Amortized Fair Unrealized Amortized Fair Unrealized Consecutive Months Items Cost Value Loss [1] Items Cost Value Loss Three months or less 206 $ 1,823 $ 1,289 $ (500 ) 99 $ 771 $ 582 $ (189 ) Greater than three to six months 134 1,749 1,205 (544 ) 22 136 104 (32 ) Greater than six to nine months 42 406 269 (137 ) 28 234 169 (65 ) Greater than nine to eleven months 9 1 (1 ) 13 43 32 (11 ) Greater than twelve months 239 1,806 1,057 (749 ) 390 4,361 2,766 (1,595 ) Total 630 $ 5,785 $ 3,820 $ (1,931 ) 552 $ 5,545 $ 3,653 $ (1,892 ) [1] Unrealized losses exclude the fair value of bifurcated embedded derivative features of certain securities as changes in value are recorded in net realized capital gains (losses). The following tables present the Company unrealized loss aging for AFS securities continuously depressed over 50% by length of time (included in the tables above). December 31, 2011 December 31, 2010 Cost or Cost or Amortized Fair Unrealized Amortized Fair Unrealized Consecutive Months Items Cost Value Loss Items Cost Value Loss Three months or less 50 $ 152 $ 55 $ (97 ) 20 $ 27 $ 12 $ (15 ) Greater than three to six months 26 110 46 (64 ) 1 2 1 (1 ) Greater than six to nine months 7 33 11 (22 ) 12 65 29 (36 ) Greater than nine to eleven months 5 5 1 (4 ) Greater than twelve months 54 227 71 (156 ) 94 722 260 (462 ) Total 142 $ 527 $ 184 $ (343 ) 127 $ 816 $ 302 $ (514 ) Other-Than-Temporary Impairments The following table presents the Company impairments recognized in earnings by security type. For the years ended December 31, 2011 2010 2009 ABS $ 27 $ 13 $ 54 CDOs 41 164 511 CMBS Bonds 16 157 257 IOs 5 3 25 Corporate 50 33 198 Equity 17 14 145 RMBS Non-agency 2 4 Alt-A 1 10 62 Sub-prime 15 37 232 Other 2 1 20 Total $ 174 $ 434 $ 1,508 Year ended December 31, 2011 For the year ended December 31, 2011, impairments recognized in earnings were comprised of credit impairments of $125, securities that the Company intends to sell of $32 and impairments on equity securities of $17. Credit impairments were primarily concentrated in structured securities associated with commercial real estate, as well as direct private investments. The structured securities were impaired primarily due to property-specific deterioration of the underlying collateral. The Company calculated these impairments utilizing both a top down modeling approach and a security-specific collateral review. The top down modeling approach used discounted cash flow models that considered losses under current and expected future economic conditions. Assumptions used over the current period included macroeconomic factors, such as a high unemployment rate, as well as sector specific factors such as property value declines, commercial real estate delinquency levels and changes in net operating income. The macroeconomic assumptions considered by the Company did not materially change during 2011 and, as such, the credit impairments recognized for the year ended December 31, 2011 were primarily driven by actual or expected collateral deterioration, largely as a result of the Company security-specific collateral review. 119 Table of Contents The security-specific collateral review is performed to estimate potential future losses. This review incorporates assumptions about expected future collateral cash flows, including projected rental rates and occupancy levels that varied based on property type and sub-market. The results of the security-specific collateral review allowed the Company to estimate the expected timing of a security first loss, if any, and the probability and severity of potential ultimate losses. The Company then discounted these anticipated future cash flows at the security book yield prior to impairment. Included in corporate and equity security types were direct private investments that were impaired primarily due to the likelihood of a disruption in contractual principal and interest payments due to the restructuring of the debtor obligation. Impairments on equity securities were primarily related to preferred stock associated with these direct private investments. Impairments on securities for which the Company has the intent to sell were primarily on corporate bonds, certain ABS aircraft bonds and CMBS as market pricing continues to improve and the Company would like the ability to reduce certain exposures. In addition to the credit impairments recognized in earnings, the Company recognized non-credit impairments in other comprehensive income of $89 for the year ended December 31, 2011, predominantly concentrated in CRE CDOs and RMBS. These non-credit impairments represent the difference between fair value and the Company best estimate of expected future cash flows discounted at the security effective yield prior to impairment, rather than at current market implied credit spreads. These non-credit impairments primarily represent increases in market liquidity premiums and credit spread widening that occurred after the securities were purchased, as well as a discount for variable-rate coupons which are paying less than at purchase date. In general, larger liquidity premiums and wider credit spreads are the result of deterioration of the underlying collateral performance of the securities, as well as the risk premium required to reflect future uncertainty in the real estate market. Future impairments may develop as the result of changes in intent to sell of specific securities or if actual results underperform current modeling assumptions, which may be the result of, but are not limited to, macroeconomic factors and security-specific performance below current expectations. Ultimate loss formation will be a function of macroeconomic factors and idiosyncratic security-specific performance. Year ended December 31, 2010 For the year ended December 31, 2010, impairments recognized in earnings were comprised of credit impairments of $372 primarily concentrated on structured securities associated with commercial and residential real estate. Also included were impairments on debt securities for which the Company intended to sel1 of $54, mainly comprised of CMBS bonds in order to take advantage of price appreciation, as well as impairments on equity securities of $8 primarily on below investment grade securities depressed 20% for more than six months. Year ended December 31, 2009 Impairments recognized in earnings were comprised of credit impairments of $1.2 billion primarily concentrated on CRE CDOs, below-prime RMBS and CMBS. Also included were impairments on debt securities for which the Company intended to sell of $156, mainly comprised of corporate financial services securities, as well as impairments on equity securities of $136 related to below investment grade hybrid securities. Valuation Allowances on Mortgage Loans The following table presents (additions)/reversals to valuation allowances on mortgage loans. For the years ended December 31, 2011 2010 2009 Credit-related concerns $ 27 $ (70 ) $ (310 ) Held for sale Agricultural loans (3 ) (10 ) (4 ) B-note participations (22 ) (51 ) Mezzanine loans (52 ) (43 ) Total $ 24 $ (154 ) $ (408 ) Year ended December 31, 2011 For the year ended December 31, 2011, valuation allowances on mortgage loan reversals of $24 were largely driven by the release of a reserve associated with the sale of a previously reserved for mezzanine loan. Continued improvement in commercial real estate property valuations will positively impact future loss development, with future impairments driven by idiosyncratic loan-specific performance. Excluded from the table above are valuation allowances associated with mortgage loans related to the divestiture of Federal Trust Corporation. For further information regarding the divestiture of Federal Trust Corporation, see Note 20 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. Years ended December 31, 2010 and 2009 For the years ended December 31, 2010 and 2009, valuation allowances on mortgage loan additions of ($154) and ($408), respectively, primarily related to B-Note participant and mezzanine loan sales. Also included were additions for expected credit losses due to borrower financial difficulty and/or collateral deterioration. 120 Table of Contents CAPITAL RESOURCES AND LIQUIDITY Capital resources and liquidity represent the overall financial strength of The Hartford and its insurance operations and their ability to generate cash flows from each of their business segments, borrow funds at competitive rates and raise new capital to meet operating and growth needs over the next twelve months. Liquidity Requirements and Sources of Capital The Hartford Financial Services Group, Inc. The liquidity requirements of the holding company of The Hartford Financial Services Group, Inc. ( HFSG Holding Company ) have been and will continue to be met by HFSG Holding Company fixed maturities, short-term investments and cash of $1.6 billion at December 31, 2011, dividends from its insurance operations, as well as the issuance of common stock, debt or other capital securities and borrowings from its credit facilities. Expected liquidity requirements of the HFSG Holding Company for the next twelve months include interest on debt of approximately $480, common stockholder dividends, subject to the discretion of the Board of Directors, of approximately $170, and preferred stock dividends of approximately $42. Furthermore, the Company Board of Directors has authorized a $500 stock repurchase program that permits purchases of common stock, as well as warrants and other derivative securities. The Hartford has repurchased $94 of its common stock under this program through February 17, 2012. In addition, in 2010 The Hartford entered into an intercompany liquidity agreement that allows for short-term advances of funds among the HFSG Holding Company and certain affiliates of up to $2.0 billion for liquidity and other general corporate purposes. The Connecticut Insurance Department granted approval for certain affiliated insurance companies that are parties to the agreement to treat receivables from a parent, including the HFSG Holding Company, as admitted assets for statutory accounting purposes. Debt On October 17, 2011, The Hartford repaid its $400, 5.25% senior notes at maturity. For additional information regarding debt, see Note 14 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Dividends On February 23, 2012, The Hartford Board of Directors declared a quarterly dividend of $0.10 per common share payable on April 2, 2012 to common shareholders of record as of March 5, 2012 and a dividend of $18.125 on each share of Series F preferred stock payable on April 2, 2012 to shareholders of record as of March 15, 2012. Pension Plans and Other Postretirement Benefits While the Company has significant discretion in making voluntary contributions to the U. S. qualified defined benefit pension plan, the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, as amended by the Pension Protection Act of 2006 and further amended by the Worker, Retiree, and Employer Recovery Act of 2008, and Internal Revenue Code regulations mandate minimum contributions in certain circumstances. The Company made contributions to the U. S. qualified defined benefit pension plan of $200, $200, and $200 in 2011, 2010 and 2009. No contributions were made to the other postretirement plans in 2011, 2010 and 2009. The Company 2011 required minimum funding contribution was immaterial. The Company presently anticipates contributing approximately $200 to its U. S. qualified defined benefit pension plan in 2012, based upon certain economic and business assumptions. These assumptions include, but are not limited to, equity market performance, changes in interest rates and the Company other capital requirements. The Company does not have a required minimum funding contribution for the U.S. qualified defined benefit pension plan for 2012 and the funding requirements for all of the pension plans is expected to be immaterial. 121 Table of Contents Dividends from Insurance Subsidiaries Dividends to the HFSG Holding Company from its insurance subsidiaries are restricted. The payment of dividends by Connecticut-domiciled insurers is limited under the insurance holding company laws of Connecticut. These laws require notice to and approval by the state insurance commissioner for the declaration or payment of any dividend, which, together with other dividends or distributions made within the preceding twelve months, exceeds the greater of (i) 10% of the insurer policyholder surplus as of December 31 of the preceding year or (ii) net income (or net gain from operations, if such company is a life insurance company) for the twelve-month period ending on the thirty-first day of December last preceding, in each case determined under statutory insurance accounting principles. In addition, if any dividend of a Connecticut-domiciled insurer exceeds the insurer earned surplus, it requires the prior approval of the Connecticut Insurance Commissioner. The insurance holding company laws of the other jurisdictions in which The Hartford insurance subsidiaries are incorporated (or deemed commercially domiciled) generally contain similar (although in certain instances somewhat more restrictive) limitations on the payment of dividends. Dividends paid to HFSG Holding Company by its life insurance subsidiaries are further dependent on cash requirements of HLI and other factors. The Company property-casualty insurance subsidiaries are permitted to pay up to a maximum of approximately $1.4 billion in dividends to HFSG Holding Company in 2012 without prior approval from the applicable insurance commissioner. The Company life insurance subsidiaries are permitted to pay up to a maximum of approximately $625 in dividends to HLI in 2012 without prior approval from the applicable insurance commissioner. The aggregate of these amounts is the maximum the insurance subsidiaries could pay to HFSG Holding Company in 2012 without prior approval from the applicable insurance commissioner. In addition to statutory limitations on paying dividends, the Company also takes other items into consideration when determining dividends from subsidiaries. These considerations include, but are not limited to expected earnings and capitalization of the subsidiary, regulatory capital requirements and liquidity requirements of the individual operating company. In 2012, HFSG Holding Company anticipates receiving $800 in dividends from its property-casualty insurance subsidiaries, net of dividends to fund interest payments on an intercompany note between Hartford Holdings, Inc. and Hartford Fire Insurance Company, and no dividends from the life insurance subsidiaries. In 2011, HFSG Holding Company and HLI received $80 in dividends from the life insurance subsidiaries, and HFSG Holding Company received $1.1 billion in dividends from its property-casualty insurance subsidiaries, including $150 reflecting the net realized capital gain on the sale of SRS, $160 related to funding interest payments on an intercompany note between Hartford Holdings Inc. and Hartford Fire Insurance Company and $800 used in conjunction with other resources at the HFSG Holding Company principally to fund dividends, interest, capital contributions to subsidiaries and debt maturities. Other Sources of Capital for the HFSG Holding Company The Hartford endeavors to maintain a capital structure that provides financial and operational flexibility to its insurance subsidiaries, ratings that support its competitive position in the financial services marketplace (see the Ratings section below for further discussion), and shareholder returns. As a result, the Company may from time to time raise capital from the issuance of equity, equity-related debt or other capital securities and is continuously evaluating strategic opportunities. The issuance of common equity, equity-related debt or other capital securities could result in the dilution of shareholder interests or reduced net income due to additional interest expense. Shelf Registrations On August 4, 2010, The Hartford filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission (the SEC ) an automatic shelf registration statement (Registration No. 333-168532) for the potential offering and sale of debt and equity securities. The registration statement allows for the following types of securities to be offered: debt securities, junior subordinated debt securities, preferred stock, common stock, depositary shares, warrants, stock purchase contracts, and stock purchase units. In that The Hartford is a well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in Rule 405 under the Securities Act of 1933, the registration statement went effective immediately upon filing and The Hartford may offer and sell an unlimited amount of securities under the registration statement during the three-year life of the registration statement. Contingent Capital Facility The Hartford is party to a put option agreement that provides The Hartford with the right to require the Glen Meadow ABC Trust, a Delaware statutory trust, at any time and from time to time, to purchase The Hartford junior subordinated notes in a maximum aggregate principal amount not to exceed $500. Under the Put Option Agreement, The Hartford will pay the Glen Meadow ABC Trust premiums on a periodic basis, calculated with respect to the aggregate principal amount of Notes that The Hartford had the right to put to the Glen Meadow ABC Trust for such period. The Hartford has agreed to reimburse the Glen Meadow ABC Trust for certain fees and ordinary expenses. The Company holds a variable interest in the Glen Meadow ABC Trust where the Company is not the primary beneficiary. As a result, the Company did not consolidate the Glen Meadow ABC Trust. As of December 31, 2011, The Hartford has not exercised its right to require Glen Meadow ABC Trust to purchase the Notes. As a result, the Notes remain a source of capital for the HFSG Holding Company. 122 Table of Contents Commercial Paper and Revolving Credit Facility The table below details the Company short-term debt programs and the applicable balances outstanding. Maximum Available As of Outstanding As of Effective Expiration December 31, December 31, Description Date Date 2011 2010 2011 2010 Commercial Paper The Hartford 11/10/86 N/A $ 2,000 $ 2,000 $ $ Revolving Credit Facility 5-year revolving credit facility [1] 8/9/07 8/9/12 1,900 1,900 Total Commercial Paper and Revolving Credit Facility $ 3,900 $ 3,900 $ $ [1] Terminated in January 2012, see discussion that follows. While The Hartford maximum borrowings available under its commercial paper program are $2.0 billion, the Company is dependent upon market conditions to access short-term financing through the issuance of commercial paper to investors. As of December 31, 2011, the Company has no commercial paper outstanding. In January 2012, the Company entered into a senior unsecured revolving credit facility (the Credit Facility ) that provides for borrowing capacity up to $1.75 billion (which is available in U.S. dollars, and in Euro, Sterling, Canadian dollars and Japanese Yen) through January 6, 2016 and terminated its $1.9 billion unsecured revolving credit facility due August 9, 2012. As of December 31, 2011, the Company was in compliance with all financial covenants under the terminated credit facility. Of the total availability under the Credit Facility, up to $250 is available to support letters of credit issued on behalf of the Company or subsidiaries of the Company. Under the Credit Facility, the Company must maintain a minimum level of consolidated net worth of $16 billion. The minimum level of consolidated net worth, as defined, will be adjusted in the first quarter of 2012 upon the adoption of a new DAC accounting standard, see Note 1 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, by the lesser of approximately $1.0 billion, after-tax representing 70% of the adoption-related estimated DAC charge, or $1.7 billion. The definition of consolidated net worth under the terms of the credit facility excludes AOCI and includes the Company outstanding junior subordinated debentures and perpetual preferred securities, net of discount. In addition, the Company maximum ratio of consolidated total debt to consolidated total capitalization is 35%, and the ratio of consolidated total debt of subsidiaries to consolidated total capitalization is limited to 10%. The Company will certify compliance with the financial covenants for the syndicate of participating financial institutions on a quarterly basis. The Hartford Japan operations also maintain two lines of credit in support of operations. Both lines of credit are in the amount of $65, or 5 billion, and individually have expiration dates of September 30, 2012 and January 3, 2013. Derivative Commitments Certain of the Company derivative agreements contain provisions that are tied to the financial strength ratings of the individual legal entity that entered into the derivative agreement as set by nationally recognized statistical rating agencies. If the legal entity financial strength were to fall below certain ratings, the counterparties to the derivative agreements could demand immediate and ongoing full collateralization and in certain instances demand immediate settlement of all outstanding derivative positions traded under each impacted bilateral agreement. The settlement amount is determined by netting the derivative positions transacted under each agreement. If the termination rights were to be exercised by the counterparties, it could impact the legal entity ability to conduct hedging activities by increasing the associated costs and decreasing the willingness of counterparties to transact with the legal entity. The aggregate fair value of all derivative instruments with credit-risk-related contingent features that are in a net liability position as of December 31, 2011, is $725. Of this $725 the legal entities have posted collateral of $716 in the normal course of business. Based on derivative market values as of December 31, 2011, a downgrade of one level below the current financial strength ratings by either Moody or S&P could require approximately an additional $37 to be posted as collateral. Based on derivative market values as of December 31, 2011, a downgrade by either Moody or S&P of two levels below the legal entities current financial strength ratings could require approximately an additional $48 of assets to be posted as collateral. These collateral amounts could change as derivative market values change, as a result of changes in our hedging activities or to the extent changes in contractual terms are negotiated. The nature of the collateral that we would post, if required, would be primarily in the form of U.S. Treasury bills and U.S. Treasury notes. The aggregate notional amount of derivative relationships that could be subject to immediate termination in the event of rating agency downgrades to either BBB+ or Baa1 as of December 31, 2011 was $14.5 billion with a corresponding fair value of $418. The notional and fair value amounts include a customized GMWB derivative with a notional amount of $4.2 billion and a fair value of $207, for which the Company has a contractual right to make a collateral payment in the amount of approximately $45 to prevent its termination. This customized GMWB derivative contains an early termination trigger such that if the unsecured, unsubordinated debt of the counterparty related party guarantor is downgraded two levels or more below the current ratings by Moody and one or more levels by S&P, the counterparty could terminate all transactions under the applicable International Swaps and Derivatives Association Master Agreement. As of December 31, 2011, the gross fair value of the affected derivative contracts is $223, which would approximate the settlement value. 123 Table of Contents Insurance Operations Current and expected patterns of claim frequency and severity or surrenders may change from period to period but continue to be within historical norms and, therefore, the Company insurance operations current liquidity position is considered to be sufficient to meet anticipated demands over the next twelve months, including any obligations related to the Company restructuring activities. For a discussion and tabular presentation of the Company current contractual obligations by period, refer to Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements and Aggregate Contractual Obligations within the Capital Resources and Liquidity section of the MD&A. The principal sources of operating funds are premiums, fees earned from assets under management and investment income, while investing cash flows originate from maturities and sales of invested assets. The primary uses of funds are to pay claims, claim adjustment expenses, commissions and other underwriting expenses, to purchase new investments and to make dividend payments to the HFSG Holding Company. The Company insurance operations consist of property and casualty insurance products (collectively referred to as Property & Casualty Operations ) and life insurance products (collectively referred to as Life Operations ). Property & Casualty Operations Property & Casualty Operations holds fixed maturity securities including a significant short-term investment position (securities with maturities of one year or less at the time of purchase) to meet liquidity needs. The following table summarizes Property & Casualty Operations fixed maturities, short-term investments, and cash, as of December 31, 2011: Fixed maturities $ 26,034 Short-term investments 658 Cash 203 Less: Derivative collateral (222 ) Total $ 26,673 Liquidity requirements that are unable to be funded by Property & Casualty Operation short-term investments would be satisfied with current operating funds, including premiums received or through the sale of invested assets. A sale of invested assets could result in significant realized losses. Life Operations Life Operations total general account contractholder obligations are supported by $76 billion of cash and total general account invested assets, excluding equity securities, trading, which includes a significant short-term investment position to meet liquidity needs. The following table summarizes Life Operations fixed maturities, short-term investments, and cash, as of December 31, 2011: Fixed maturities $ 56,950 Short-term investments 5,641 Cash 2,377 Less: Derivative collateral (2,836 ) Cash associated with Japan variable annuities (684 ) Total $ 61,448 Capital resources available to fund liquidity, upon contract holder surrender, are a function of the legal entity in which the liquidity requirement resides. Generally, obligations of Group Benefits will be funded by Hartford Life and Accident Insurance Company; obligations of Individual Annuity, Individual Life and private placement life insurance products will be generally funded by both Hartford Life Insurance Company and Hartford Life and Annuity Insurance Company; obligations of Retirement Plans and institutional investment products will be generally funded by Hartford Life Insurance Company; and obligations of the Company international annuity subsidiaries will be generally funded by the legal entity in the country in which the obligation was generated. Hartford Life Insurance Company ( HLIC ), an indirect wholly owned subsidiary, became a member of the Federal Home Loan Bank of Boston ( FHLBB ) in May 2011. Membership allows HLIC access to collateralized advances, which may be used to support various spread-based business and enhance liquidity management. The Connecticut Department of Insurance ( CTDOI ) will permit HLIC to pledge up to $1.48 billion in qualifying assets to secure FHLBB advances for 2012. The amount of advances that can be taken are dependent on the asset types pledged to secure the advances. The pledge limit is recalculated annually based on statutory admitted assets and capital and surplus. HLIC would need to seek the prior approval of the CTDOI if there were a desire to exceed these limits. As of December 31, 2011, HLIC had no advances outstanding under the FHLBB facility. 124 Table of Contents As of December 31, Contractholder Obligations 2011 Total Life contractholder obligations $ 239,723 Less: Separate account assets [1] (143,870 ) International statutory separate accounts [1] (30,461 ) General account contractholder obligations $ 65,392 Composition of General Account Contractholder Obligations Contracts without a surrender provision and/or fixed payout dates [2] $ 30,339 Fixed MVA annuities [3] 9,727 International fixed MVA annuities 2,642 Guaranteed investment contracts ( GIC ) [4] 567 Other [5] 22,117 General account contractholder obligations $ 65,392 [1] In the event customers elect to surrender separate account assets or international statutory separate accounts, Life Operations will use the proceeds from the sale of the assets to fund the surrender, and Life Operations liquidity position will not be impacted. In many instances Life Operations will receive a percentage of the surrender amount as compensation for early surrender (surrender charge), increasing Life Operations liquidity position. In addition, a surrender of variable annuity separate account or general account assets (see below) will decrease Life Operations obligation for payments on guaranteed living and death benefits. [2] Relates to contracts such as payout annuities or institutional notes, other than guaranteed investment products with an MVA feature (discussed below) or surrenders of term life, group benefit contracts or death and living benefit reserves for which surrenders will have no current effect on Life Operations liquidity requirements. [3] Relates to annuities that are held in a statutory separate account, but under U.S. GAAP are recorded in the general account as Fixed MVA annuity contract holders are subject to the Company credit risk. In the statutory separate account, Life Operations is required to maintain invested assets with a fair value equal to the MVA surrender value of the Fixed MVA contract. In the event assets decline in value at a greater rate than the MVA surrender value of the Fixed MVA contract, Life Operations is required to contribute additional capital to the statutory separate account. Life Operations will fund these required contributions with operating cash flows or short-term investments. In the event that operating cash flows or short-term investments are not sufficient to fund required contributions, the Company may have to sell other invested assets at a loss, potentially resulting in a decrease in statutory surplus. As the fair value of invested assets in the statutory separate account are generally equal to the MVA surrender value of the Fixed MVA contract, surrender of Fixed MVA annuities will have an insignificant impact on the liquidity requirements of Life Operations. [4] GICs are subject to discontinuance provisions which allow the policyholders to terminate their contracts prior to scheduled maturity at the lesser of the book value or market value. Generally, the market value adjustment reflects changes in interest rates and credit spreads. As a result, the market value adjustment feature in the GIC serves to protect the Company from interest rate risks and limit Life Operations liquidity requirements in the event of a surrender. [5] Surrenders of, or policy loans taken from, as applicable, these general account liabilities, which include the general account option for Individual Annuity individual variable annuities and Individual Life variable life contracts, the general account option for Retirement Plans annuities and universal life contracts sold by Individual Life may be funded through operating cash flows of Life Operations, available short-term investments, or Life Operations may be required to sell fixed maturity investments to fund the surrender payment. Sales of fixed maturity investments could result in the recognition of significant realized losses and insufficient proceeds to fully fund the surrender amount. In this circumstance, Life Operations may need to take other actions, including enforcing certain contract provisions which could restrict surrenders and/or slow or defer payouts. Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements and Aggregate Contractual Obligations The Company does not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that are reasonably likely to have a material effect on the financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, or capital resources of the Company, except for the contingent capital facility described above and the following: The Company has unfunded commitments to purchase investments in limited partnerships, private placements and mortgage loans of approximately $1.4 billion as disclosed in Note 12 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 125 Table of Contents The following table identifies the Company aggregate contractual obligations as of December 31, 2011: Payments due by period Less than 1-3 3-5 More than Total 1 year years years 5 years Property and casualty obligations [1] $ 22,093 $ 5,721 $ 4,384 $ 2,818 $ 9,170 Life, annuity and disability obligations [2] 341,984 22,894 34,895 30,701 253,494 Operating lease obligations [3] 242 58 81 47 56 Long-term debt obligations [4] 19,202 480 1,460 1,678 15,584 Consumer notes [5] 348 168 104 55 21 Purchase obligations [6] 3,484 2,693 544 214 33 Other long-term liabilities reflected on the balance sheet [7] 2,505 1,986 379 140 Total [8] $ 389,858 $ 34,000 $ 41,847 $ 35,653 $ 278,358 [1] The following points are significant to understanding the cash flows estimated for obligations under property and casualty contracts: Reserves for Property & Casualty unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses include IBNR and case reserves. While payments due on claim reserves are considered contractual obligations because they relate to insurance policies issued by the Company, the ultimate amount to be paid to settle both case reserves and IBNR is an estimate, subject to significant uncertainty. The actual amount to be paid is not finally determined until the Company reaches a settlement with the claimant. Final claim settlements may vary significantly from the present estimates, particularly since many claims will not be settled until well into the future. In estimating the timing of future payments by year, the Company has assumed that its historical payment patterns will continue. However, the actual timing of future payments could vary materially from these estimates due to, among other things, changes in claim reporting and payment patterns and large unanticipated settlements. In particular, there is significant uncertainty over the claim payment patterns of asbestos and environmental claims. In addition, the table does not include future cash flows related to the receipt of premiums that may be used, in part, to fund loss payments. Under U.S. GAAP, the Company is only permitted to discount reserves for losses and loss adjustment expenses in cases where the payment pattern and ultimate loss costs are fixed and determinable on an individual claim basis. For the Company, these include claim settlements with permanently disabled claimants. As of December 31, 2011, the total property and casualty reserves in the above table are gross of a reserve discount of $542. [2] Estimated life, annuity and disability obligations include death and disability claims, policy surrenders, policyholder dividends and trail commissions offset by expected future deposits and premiums on in-force contracts. Estimated life, annuity and disability obligations are based on mortality, morbidity and lapse assumptions comparable with the Company historical experience, modified for recent observed trends. The Company has also assumed market growth and interest crediting consistent with other assumptions. In contrast to this table, the majority of the Company obligations are recorded on the balance sheet at the current account values and do not incorporate an expectation of future market growth, interest crediting, or future deposits. Therefore, the estimated obligations presented in this table significantly exceed the liabilities recorded in reserve for future policy benefits and unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses, other policyholder funds and benefits payable and separate account liabilities. Due to the significance of the assumptions used, the amounts presented could materially differ from actual results. [3] Includes future minimum lease payments on operating lease agreements. See Note 12 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional discussion on lease commitments. [4] Includes contractual principal and interest payments. See Note 14 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional discussion of long-term debt obligations. [5] Consumer notes include principal payments and contractual interest for fixed rate notes and interest based on current rates for floating rate notes. See Note 14 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional discussion of consumer notes. [6] Includes $1.4 billion in commitments to purchase investments including approximately $700 of limited partnership, $108 of private placements and $553 of mortgage loans. Outstanding commitments under these limited partnerships and mortgage loans are included in payments due in less than 1 year since the timing of funding these commitments cannot be reliably estimated. The remaining commitments to purchase investments primarily represent payables for securities purchased which are reflected on the Company consolidated balance sheet. Also included in purchase obligations is $1.1 billion relating to contractual commitments to purchase various goods and services such as maintenance, human resources, information technology, and transportation in the normal course of business. Purchase obligations exclude contracts that are cancelable without penalty or contracts that do not specify minimum levels of goods or services to be purchased. [7] Includes cash collateral of $2 billion which the Company has accepted in connection with the Company derivative instruments. Since the timing of the return of the collateral is uncertain, the return of the collateral has been included in the payments due in less than 1 year. Also included in other long term liabilities is $48 of net unrecognized tax benefits. [8] Does not include estimated voluntary contribution of $200 to the Company pension plan in 2012. 126 Table of Contents Capitalization The capital structure of The Hartford as of December 31, 2011 and December 31, 2010 consisted of debt and stockholders equity, summarized as follows: December 31, December 31, 2011 2010 Change Short-term debt (includes current maturities of long-term debt) $ $ 400 (100 %) Long-term debt 6,216 6,207 Total debt [1] 6,216 6,607 (6 %) Stockholders equity excluding accumulated other comprehensive loss, net of tax ( AOCI ) 21,753 21,312 2 % AOCI, net of tax 1,157 (1,001 ) NM Total stockholders equity $ 22,910 $ 20,311 13 % Total capitalization including AOCI $ 29,126 $ 26,918 8 % Debt to stockholders equity 27 % 33 % Debt to capitalization 21 % 25 % [1] Total debt of the Company excludes $314 and $382 billion of consumer notes as of December 31, 2011 and December 31, 2010, respectively. The Hartford total capitalization increased $2.2 billion, or 8%, from December 31, 2010 to December 31, 2011 due to improvements in AOCI, net of tax, and increases in stockholders equity, excluding AOCI. AOCI, net of tax, improved primarily due to improvements in the Company net unrealized position on available-for-sale securities of $2.0 billion primarily as a result of improved security valuations largely due to declining interest rates, partially offset by credit spread widening. The increase in stockholders equity, excluding AOCI, was primarily due to net income of $662. For additional information on equity and AOCI, net of tax, see Notes 15 and 16, respectively, of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Cash Flow 2011 2010 2009 Net cash provided by operating activities $ 2,274 $ 3,309 $ 2,974 Net cash used for investing activities $ (1,182 ) $ (434 ) $ (3,123 ) Net cash provided by (used for) financing activities $ (609 ) $ (2,955 ) $ 523 Cash end of year $ 2,581 $ 2,062 $ 2,142 Year ended December 31, 2011 compared to the year ended December 31, 2010 The decrease in cash provided by operating activities compared to the prior year period reflected an increase in losses paid on property and casualty insurance products, and to a lesser extent, lower net investment income on available-for-sale securities, excluding limited partnerships and other alternative investments. Cash used for investing activities in 2011 primarily relates to net purchases of mortgage loans of $1.3 billion and net purchases of fixed maturities, fair value option of $627, partially offset by net receipts on derivatives of $720 and net proceeds of available-for-sale securities of $256. Cash used for investing activities in 2010 primarily relates to net purchases of available-for-sale securities of $1.5 billion and net payments on derivatives of $338, partially offset by net proceeds from sales of mortgage loans of $1.4 billion. Cash used for financing activities in 2011 primarily consists of repayment of long-term debt and dividends paid on common and preferred stock, partially offset by net inflows on investment and universal life-type contracts. In the comparable prior period of 2010, cash used for financing activities increased primarily due to repayments of consumer notes of $754, repayment of $275 in senior notes and net outflows on investment and universal life-type contracts. Year ended December 31, 2010 compared to the year ended December 31, 2009 The increase in cash provided by operating activities, compared to the prior year period, was primarily the result of increases in fee income. Cash used for investing activities in 2010 primarily relates to net purchases of available-for-sale securities of $1.5 billion and net payments on derivatives of $338, partially offset by net proceeds from sales of mortgage loans of $1.4 billion. Cash used for investing activities in 2009 consisted of net outflows of $2.9 billion from changes in payables on securities lending, net purchases of available-for-sale securities and $561of net payments on derivatives, partially offset by net proceeds from sales of mortgage loans of $396. Cash used for financing activities in 2010 primarily consists of repayments of consumer notes of $754, repayment of $275 in senior notes and net outflows on investment and universal life-type contracts. Cash provided by financing activities in 2009 primarily consists of proceeds from the issuance of preferred stock and warrants to U.S. Treasury of $3.4 billion, partially offset by net outflows on investment and universal life-type contracts. Operating cash flows in each of the last three years have been adequate to meet liquidity requirements. 127 Table of Contents Equity Markets For a discussion of the potential impact of the equity markets on capital and liquidity, see the Financial Risk on Statutory Capital and Liquidity Risk section in this MD&A. Ratings Ratings impact the Company cost of borrowing and its ability to access financing and are an important factor in establishing competitive position in the insurance and financial services marketplace. There can be no assurance that the Company ratings will continue for any given period of time or that they will not be changed. In the event the Company ratings are downgraded, the Company cost of borrowing and ability to access financing, as well as the level of revenues or the persistency of its business may be adversely impacted. The following table summarizes The Hartford significant member companies financial ratings from the major independent rating organizations as of February 17, 2012. Insurance Financial Strength Ratings: A.M. Best Fitch Standard & Poor Moody Hartford Fire Insurance Company A A+ A A2 Hartford Life Insurance Company A A- A A3 Hartford Life and Accident Insurance Company A A- A A3 Hartford Life and Annuity Insurance Company A A- A A3 Other Ratings: The Hartford Financial Services Group, Inc.: Senior debt bbb+ BBB- BBB Baa3 Commercial paper AMB-2 F2 A-2 P-3 These ratings are not a recommendation to buy or hold any of The Hartford securities and they may be revised or revoked at any time at the sole discretion of the rating organization. The agencies consider many factors in determining the final rating of an insurance company. One consideration is the relative level of statutory surplus necessary to support the business written. Statutory surplus represents the capital of the insurance company reported in accordance with accounting practices prescribed by the applicable state insurance department. See Part I, Item 1A. Risk Factors Downgrades in our financial strength or credit ratings, which may make our products less attractive, could increase our cost of capital and inhibit our ability to refinance our debt, which would have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, results of operations and liquidity. Statutory Surplus The table below sets forth statutory surplus for the Company insurance companies. The statutory surplus amounts as of December 31, 2011 and 2010 in the table below are based on actual statutory filings with the applicable regulatory authorities. 2011 2010 U.S. life insurance subsidiaries, includes domestic captive insurance subsidiaries $ 7,388 $ 7,731 Property and casualty insurance subsidiaries 7,412 7,721 Total $ 14,800 $ 15,452 Total statutory capital and surplus for the U.S. life insurance subsidiaries, including domestic captive insurance subsidiaries, decreased by $343, primarily due to variable annuity surplus impacts of $470 and an increase in the asset valuation reserve of $323, partially offset by an increase in capital contributions of $287 and an increase in statutory admitted deferred tax assets of $268. Total statutory capital and surplus for the property and casualty insurance subsidiaries decreased by $309, primarily due to dividends to the HFSG Holding Company of $1.1 billion, partially offset by statutory net income, after tax, of $514, an increase in statutory admitted assets of $145, unrealized gains of $90, and an increase in statutory admitted deferred tax assets of $26. The Company also holds regulatory capital and surplus for its operations in Japan. Under the accounting practices and procedures governed by Japanese regulatory authorities, the Company statutory capital and surplus was $1.3 billion as of December 31, 2011 and 2010. 128 Table of Contents Statutory Capital The Company stockholders equity, as prepared using U.S. generally accepted accounting principles ( U.S. GAAP ) was $22.9 billion as of December 31, 2011. The Company estimated aggregate statutory capital and surplus, as prepared in accordance with the National Association of Insurance Commissioners Accounting Practices and Procedures Manual ( U.S.STAT ) was $14.8 billion as of December 31, 2011. Significant differences between U.S.GAAP stockholders equity and aggregate statutory capital and surplus prepared in accordance with U.S.STAT include the following: Costs incurred by the Company to acquire insurance policies are deferred under U.S.GAAP while those costs are expensed immediately under U.S.STAT. Temporary differences between the book and tax basis of an asset or liability which are recorded as deferred tax assets are evaluated for recoverability under U.S.GAAP while those amounts deferred are subject to limitations under U.S.STAT. The assumptions used in the determination of Life benefit reserves is prescribed under U.S.STAT, while the assumptions used under U.S.GAAP are generally the Company best estimates. The methodologies for determining life insurance reserve amounts may also be different. For example, reserving for living benefit reserves under U.S.STAT is generally addressed by the Commissioners Annuity Reserving Valuation Methodology and the related Actuarial Guidelines, while under U.S.GAAP, those same living benefits may be considered embedded derivatives and recorded at fair value or they may be considered SOP 03-1 reserves. The sensitivity of these life insurance reserves to changes in equity markets, as applicable, will be different between U.S.GAAP and U.S.STAT. The difference between the amortized cost and fair value of fixed maturity and other investments, net of tax, is recorded as an increase or decrease to the carrying value of the related asset and to equity under U.S.GAAP, while U.S.STAT only records certain securities at fair value, such as equity securities and certain lower rated bonds required by the NAIC to be recorded at the lower of amortized cost or fair value. U.S.STAT for life insurance companies establishes a formula reserve for realized and unrealized losses due to default and equity risks associated with certain invested assets (the Asset Valuation Reserve), while U.S.GAAP does not. Also, for those realized gains and losses caused by changes in interest rates, U.S.STAT for life insurance companies defers and amortizes the gains and losses, caused by changes in interest rates, into income over the original life to maturity of the asset sold (the Interest Maintenance Reserve) while U.S.GAAP does not. Goodwill arising from the acquisition of a business is tested for recoverability on an annual basis (or more frequently, as necessary) for U.S.GAAP, while under U.S.STAT goodwill is amortized over a period not to exceed 10 years and the amount of goodwill is limited. In addition, certain assets, including a portion of premiums receivable and fixed assets, are non-admitted (recorded at zero value and charged against surplus) under U.S.STAT. U.S.GAAP generally evaluates assets based on their recoverability. Risk-Based Capital State insurance regulators and the NAIC have adopted risk-based capital requirements for life insurance companies to evaluate the adequacy of statutory capital and surplus in relation to investment and insurance risks. The requirements provide a means of measuring the minimum amount of statutory surplus appropriate for an insurance company to support its overall business operations based on its size and risk profile. Under risk-based capital ( RBC ) requirements, a company RBC is calculated by applying factors and performing calculations relating to various asset, premium, claim, expense and reserve items. The adequacy of a company actual capital is determined by the ratio of a company total adjusted capital, as defined by the insurance regulators, to its company action level of RBC (known as the RBC ratio), also as defined by insurance regulators. RBC standards are used by regulators to set in motion appropriate regulatory actions related to insurers that show indications of inadequate conditions. In addition, rating agencies consider RBC ratios, along with their proprietary models, in making ratings determinations. Sensitivity In any particular year, statutory surplus amounts and RBC ratios may increase or decrease depending upon a variety of factors. The amount of change in the statutory surplus or RBC ratios can vary based on individual factors and may be compounded in extreme scenarios or if multiple factors occur at the same time. At times the impact of changes in certain market factors or a combination of multiple factors on RBC ratios can be counterintuitive. For further discussion on these factors and the potential impacts to the life insurance subsidiaries, see the Financial Risk on Statutory Capital section within Enterprise Risk Management. Statutory capital at the property and casualty subsidiaries has historically been maintained at or above the capital level required to meet AA level ratings from rating agencies. Statutory capital generated by the property and casualty subsidiaries in excess of the capital level required to meet AA level ratings is available for use by the enterprise or for corporate purposes. The amount of statutory capital can increase or decrease depending on a number of factors affecting property and casualty results including, among other factors, the level of catastrophe claims incurred, the amount of reserve development, the effect of changes in interest rates on investment income and the discounting of loss reserves, and the effect of realized gains and losses on investments. In addition, the Company can access the $500 Glen Meadow trust contingent capital facility and maintains the ability to access $1.9 billion of capacity under its revolving credit facility. 129 Table of Contents Contingencies Legal Proceedings For a discussion regarding contingencies related to The Hartford legal proceedings, please see the information contained under Litigation and Asbestos and Environmental Claims, in Note 12 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, which is incorporated herein by reference. For a discussion of terrorism reinsurance legislation and how it affects The Hartford, see Terrorism under the Insurance Risk Management section of the MD&A. Tax proposals and regulatory initiatives which have been or are being considered by Congress and/or the United States Treasury Department could have a material effect on the insurance business. These proposals and initiatives include, or could include, new taxes or assessments on large financial institutions, changes pertaining to the income tax treatment of insurance companies and life insurance products and annuities, repeal or reform of the estate tax and comprehensive federal tax reform, and changes to the regulatory structure for financial institutions. The nature and timing of any Congressional or regulatory action with respect to any such efforts is unclear. Legislative Developments The Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act of 2010 (the Dodd-Frank Act ) was enacted on July 21, 2010, mandating changes to the regulation of the financial services industry. The Dodd-Frank Act may affect our operations and governance in ways that could adversely affect our financial condition and results of operations. In particular, the Dodd-Frank Act vests a newly created Financial Services Oversight Council with the power to designate systemically important institutions, which will be subject to special regulatory supervision and other provisions intended to prevent, or mitigate the impact of, future disruptions in the U.S. financial system. Systemically important institutions are limited to large bank holding companies and nonbank financial companies that are so important that their potential failure could pose a threat to the financial stability of the United States. If we are designated as a systemically important institution, we could be subject to higher capital requirements and additional regulatory oversight imposed by The Federal Reserve, as well as to post-event assessments imposed by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation ( FDIC ) to recoup the costs associated with the orderly liquidation of other systemically important institutions in the event one or more such institutions fails. Further, the FDIC is authorized to petition a state court to commence an insolvency proceeding to liquidate an insurance company that fails in the event the insurer state regulator fails to act. Other provisions will require central clearing of, and/or impose new margin and capital requirements on, derivatives transactions, which we expect will increase the costs of our hedging program. The Hartford is subject to a number of applicable Dodd-Frank Act provisions. For example, if we are designated a systemically important financial institution, the Dodd-Frank Act may restrict us from sponsoring and investing in private equity and hedge funds, which would limit our discretion in managing our general account. Other provisions in the Dodd-Frank Act that may impact us include: a new Federal Insurance Office within Treasury; discretionary authority for the SEC to impose a harmonized standard of care for investment advisers and broker-dealers who provide personalized advice about securities to retail customers; possible adverse impact on the pricing and liquidity of the securities in which we invest resulting from the proprietary trading and market making limitation of the Volcker Rule; possible prohibition of certain asset-backed securities transactions that could adversely impact our ability to offer insurance-linked securities; and enhancements to corporate governance, especially regarding risk management. FY 2013, Budget of the United States Government On February 13, 2012, the Obama Administration released its FY 2013, Budget of the United States Government (the Budget ). Although the Administration has not released proposed statutory language, the Budget includes proposals which if enacted, would affect the taxation of life insurance companies and certain life insurance products. In particular, the proposals would affect the treatment of corporate owned life insurance ( COLI ) policies by limiting the availability of certain interest deductions for companies that purchase those policies. The proposals would also change the method used to determine the amount of dividend income received by a life insurance company on assets held in separate accounts used to support products, including variable life insurance and variable annuity contracts, that are eligible for the dividends received deduction ( DRD ). The DRD reduces the amount of dividend income subject to tax and is a significant component of the difference between the Company actual tax expense and expected amount determined using the federal statutory tax rate of 35%. If proposals of this type were enacted, the Company sale of variable annuities and variable life products and its profits on COLI policies could be adversely affected and the Company actual tax expense could increase, reducing earnings. Guaranty Fund and Other Insurance-related Assessments For a discussion regarding Guaranty Fund and Other Insurance-related Assessments, see Note 12 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 130 Table of Contents IMPACT OF NEW ACCOUNTING STANDARDS For a discussion of accounting standards, see Note 1 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 
