CIK: 874766
Company Name: HARTFORD FINANCIAL SERVICES GROUP INC DE
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2007-02-23


Item 7. MANAGEMENT S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS (Dollar amounts in millions, except for per share data, unless otherwise stated) Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations ( MD&A ) addresses the financial condition of The Hartford Financial Services Group, Inc. and its subsidiaries (collectively, The Hartford or the Company ) as of December 31, 2006, compared with December 31, 2005, and its results of operations for each of the three years in the period ended December 31, 2006. This discussion should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and related Notes beginning on page F-1. Certain reclassifications have been made to prior year financial information to conform to the current year presentation. Certain of the statements contained herein are forward-looking statements. These forward-looking statements are made pursuant to the safe harbor provisions of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 and include estimates and assumptions related to economic, competitive and legislative developments. These forward-looking statements are subject to change and uncertainty which are, in many instances, beyond the Company control and have been made based upon management expectations and beliefs concerning future developments and their potential effect upon the Company. There can be no assurance that future developments will be in accordance with management expectations or that the effect of future developments on The Hartford will be those anticipated by management. Actual results could differ materially from those expected by the Company, depending on the outcome of various factors, including, but not limited to, those set forth in Part II, Item 1A, Risk Factors. These factors include: the difficulty in predicting the Company potential exposure for asbestos and environmental claims; the possible occurrence of terrorist attacks; the response of reinsurance companies under reinsurance contracts and the availability, pricing and adequacy of reinsurance to protect the Company against losses; changes in the stock markets, interest rates or other financial markets, including the potential effect on the Company statutory capital levels; the inability to effectively mitigate the impact of equity market volatility on the Company financial position and results of operations arising from obligations under annuity product guarantees; the Company potential exposure arising out of regulatory proceedings or private claims relating to incentive compensation or payments made to brokers or other producers and alleged anti-competitive conduct; the uncertain effect on the Company of regulatory and market-driven changes in practices relating to the payment of incentive compensation to brokers and other producers, including changes that have been announced and those which may occur in the future; the possibility of unfavorable loss development; the incidence and severity of catastrophes, both natural and man-made; stronger than anticipated competitive activity; unfavorable judicial or legislative developments; the potential effect of domestic and foreign regulatory developments, including those which could increase the Company business costs and required capital levels; the possibility of general economic and business conditions that are less favorable than anticipated; the Company ability to distribute its products through distribution channels, both current and future; the uncertain effects of emerging claim and coverage issues; a downgrade in the Company financial strength or credit ratings; the ability of the Company subsidiaries to pay dividends to the Company; the Company ability to adequately price its property and casualty policies; the ability to recover the Company systems and information in the event of a disaster or other unanticipated event; potential for difficulties arising from outsourcing relationships; potential changes in Federal or State tax laws; and other factors described in such forward-looking statements. INDEX Overview 32 Critical Accounting Estimates 33 Consolidated Results of Operations 46 Life 51 Retail 58 Retirement Plans 60 Institutional 62 Individual Life 64 Group Benefits 66 International 67 Other 69 Property & Casualty 70 Total Property & Casualty 92 Ongoing Operations 93 Business Insurance 97 Personal Lines 102 Specialty Commercial 107 Other Operations (Including Asbestos and Environmental Claims) 111 Investments 118 Investment Credit Risk 128 Capital Markets Risk Management 132 Capital Resources and Liquidity 140 Impact of New Accounting Standards 149 OVERVIEW The Hartford is a diversified insurance and financial services company with operations dating back to 1810. The Company is headquartered in Connecticut and is organized into two major operations: Life and Property & Casualty, each containing reporting segments. Within the Life and Property & Casualty operations, The Hartford conducts business principally in ten operating segments. Additionally, Corporate primarily includes the Company debt financing and related interest expense, as well as certain capital raising activities and purchase accounting adjustments. 32 Table of Contents Life is organized into six reportable operating segments: Retail Products Group ( Retail ), Retirement Plans, Institutional Solutions Group ( Institutional ), Individual Life, Group Benefits and International. Through Life the Company provides retail and institutional investment products such as variable and fixed annuities, mutual funds, private placement life insurance and retirement plan services, individual life insurance products including variable universal life, universal life, interest sensitive whole life and term life; and group benefit products, such as group life and group disability insurance. Property & Casualty is organized into four reportable operating segments: the underwriting segments of Business Insurance, Personal Lines and Specialty Commercial (collectively Ongoing Operations ), and the Other Operations segment. Through Property & Casualty the Company provides a number of coverages, as well as insurance-related services, to businesses throughout the United States, including workers compensation, property, automobile, liability, umbrella, specialty casualty, marine, livestock, fidelity and surety, professional liability and director and officer liability coverages. Property & Casualty also provides automobile, homeowners, and home-based business coverage to individuals throughout the United States, as well as insurance-related services to businesses. Many of the principal factors that drive the profitability of The Hartford Life and Property & Casualty operations are separate and distinct. Management considers this diversification to be a strength of The Hartford that distinguishes the Company from many of its peers. To present its operations in a more meaningful and organized way, management has included separate overviews within the Life and Property & Casualty sections of MD&A. For further overview of Life profitability and analysis, see page 51. For further overview of Property & Casualty profitability and analysis, see page 70. Broker Compensation As the Company has disclosed previously, the Company pays brokers and independent agents commissions and other forms of incentive compensation in connection with the sale of many of the Company insurance products. Since the New York Attorney General Office filed a civil complaint against Marsh on October 14, 2004, several of the largest national insurance brokers, including Marsh, Aon Corporation and Willis Group Holdings Limited, have announced that they have discontinued the use of contingent compensation arrangements. Other industry participants may make similar, or different, determinations in the future. In addition, legal, legislative, regulatory, business or other developments may require changes to industry practices relating to incentive compensation. Pursuant to settlement agreements reached with regulators, several insurance companies have agreed to restrictions on the payment of contingent compensation relating to the placement of excess casualty insurance policies. These insurers have agreed that the restrictions may be extended in time, and to other property and casualty lines, if insurers in a given line or segment, that together represent more than 65% of the market share in the insurance line (based upon national gross written premiums), do not pay contingent compensation. On November 30, 2006, the New York Attorney General Office notified these insurers that the 65% threshold had been reached for a number of insurance lines, including personal automobile and homeowners insurance. As a result, beginning January 1, 2007, these insurers were prohibited from paying contingent compensation relating to the placement of these types of insurance. In addition, on December 21, 2006, Chubb Corporation agreed to forego the payment of contingent compensation for all P&C insurance lines pursuant to a settlement agreement reached with regulators. These insurers, including Chubb, have also agreed to support legislation and regulations to abolish contingent compensation and to require greater disclosure of compensation. At this time, it is not possible to predict the effect of these announced or potential future changes on our business or distribution strategies, but such changes could have a material adverse effect on us in the future. CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES The preparation of financial statements, in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America ( GAAP ), requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates. The Company has identified the following estimates as critical in that they involve a higher degree of judgment and are subject to a significant degree of variability: property and casualty reserves for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses, net of reinsurance; Life deferred policy acquisition costs and present value of future profits associated with variable annuity and other universal life-type contracts; the evaluation of other-than-temporary impairments on investments in available-for-sale securities; the valuation of guaranteed minimum withdrawal benefit derivatives; pension and other postretirement benefit obligations; and contingencies relating to corporate litigation and regulatory matters. In developing these estimates management makes subjective and complex judgments that are inherently uncertain and subject to material change as facts and circumstances develop. Although variability is inherent in these estimates, management believes the amounts provided are appropriate based upon the facts available upon compilation of the financial statements. 33 Table of Contents Property & Casualty Reserves, Net of Reinsurance The Hartford establishes property and casualty reserves to provide for the estimated costs of paying claims under insurance policies written by the Company. These reserves include estimates for both claims that have been reported and those that have been incurred but not reported, and include estimates of all expenses associated with processing and settling these claims. Estimating the ultimate cost of future losses and loss adjustment expenses is an uncertain and complex process. This estimation process is based largely on the assumption that past developments are an appropriate predictor of future events and involves a variety of actuarial techniques that analyze experience, trends and other relevant factors. Reserve estimates can change over time because of unexpected changes in the external environment. Potential external factors include (1) changes in the inflation rate for goods and services related to covered damages such as medical care, hospital care, auto parts, wages and home repair, (2) changes in the general economic environment that could cause unanticipated changes in the claim frequency per unit insured, (3) changes in the litigation environment as evidenced by changes in claimant attorney representation in the claims negotiation and settlement process, (4) changes in the judicial environment regarding the interpretation of policy provisions relating to the determination of coverage and/or the amount of damages awarded for certain types of damages, (5) changes in the social environment regarding the general attitude of juries in the determination of liability and damages, (6) changes in the legislative environment regarding the definition of damages and (7) new types of injuries caused by new types of injurious exposure: past examples include breast implants, lead paint and construction defects. Reserve estimates can also change over time because of changes in internal company operations. Potential internal factors include (1) periodic changes in claims handling procedures, (2) growth in new lines of business where exposure and loss development patterns are not well established or (3) changes in the quality of risk selection in the underwriting process. In the case of assumed reinsurance, all of the above risks apply. In addition, changes in ceding company case reserving and reporting patterns can create additional factors that need to be considered in estimating the reserves. Due to the inherent complexity of the assumptions used, final claim settlements may vary significantly from the present estimates, particularly when those settlements may not occur until well into the future. Through both facultative and treaty reinsurance agreements, the Company cedes a share of the risks it has underwritten to other insurance companies. The Company net reserves for loss and loss adjustment expenses include anticipated recovery from reinsurers on unpaid claims. The estimated amount of the anticipated recovery, or reinsurance recoverable, is net of an allowance for uncollectible reinsurance. Reinsurance recoverables include an estimate of the amount of gross loss and loss adjustment expense reserves that may be ceded under the terms of the reinsurance agreements, including incurred but not reported unpaid losses. The Company calculates its ceded reinsurance projection based on the terms of any applicable facultative and treaty reinsurance, including an estimate of how incurred but not reported losses will ultimately be ceded by reinsurance agreement. Accordingly, the Company estimate of reinsurance recoverables is subject to similar risks and uncertainties as the estimate of the gross reserve for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses. The Company provides an allowance for uncollectible reinsurance, reflecting management best estimate of reinsurance cessions that may be uncollectible in the future due to reinsurers unwillingness or inability to pay. The Company analyzes recent developments in commutation activity between reinsurers and cedants, recent trends in arbitration and litigation outcomes in disputes between reinsurers and cedants and the overall credit quality of the Company reinsurers. Where its contracts permit, the Company secures future claim obligations with various forms of collateral, including irrevocable letters of credit, secured trusts, funds held accounts and group-wide offsets. The allowance for uncollectible reinsurance was $412 as of December 31, 2006, including $294 related to Other Operations and $118 related to Ongoing Operations. Due to the inherent uncertainties as to collection and the length of time before reinsurance recoverables become due, it is possible that future adjustments to the Company reinsurance recoverables, net of the allowance, could be required, which could have a material adverse effect on the Company consolidated results of operations or cash flows in a particular quarter or annual period. The Hartford, like other insurance companies, categorizes and tracks its insurance reserves for its segments by line of business , such as property, auto physical damage, auto liability, commercial multi-peril package business, workers compensation, general liability professional liability and fidelity and surety. Furthermore, The Hartford regularly reviews the appropriateness of reserve levels at the line of business level, taking into consideration the variety of trends that impact the ultimate settlement of claims for the subsets of claims in each particular line of business. In addition, within the Other Operations segment, the Company has reserves for asbestos and environmental (A&E) claims. Adjustments to previously established reserves, which may be material, are reflected in the operating results of the period in which the adjustment is determined to be necessary. In the judgment of management, information currently available has been properly considered in the reserves established for losses and loss adjustment expenses. Incurred but not reported (IBNR) reserves represent the difference between the estimated ultimate cost of all claims and the actual reported loss and loss adjustment expenses ( reported losses ). Reported losses represent cumulative loss and loss adjustment expenses paid plus case reserves for outstanding reported claims. Company actuaries evaluate the total reserves (IBNR and case reserves) on an accident year basis. An accident year is the calendar year in which a loss is incurred, or, in the case of claims-made policies, the calendar year in which a loss is reported. 34 Table of Contents The following table shows loss and loss adjustment expense reserves by line of business and by operating segment as of December 31, 2006, net of reinsurance: Business Personal Specialty Other Total Insurance Lines Commercial Operations P&C Reserve Line of Business Property $ 65 $ 225 $ 63 $ $ 353 Auto physical damage 15 26 9 50 Auto liability 625 1,526 94 2,245 Package business 2,028 2,028 Workers compensation 3,816 7 1,830 5,653 General liability 587 39 1,504 2,130 Professional liability 556 556 Fidelity and surety 158 158 Assumed Reinsurance [1] 813 813 All other non-A&E 1,045 1,045 A&E 8 2 5 2,558 2,573 Total reserves-net 7,144 1,825 4,219 4,416 17,604 Reinsurance and other recoverables 650 134 2,303 1,300 4,387 Total reserves-gross $ 7,794 $ 1,959 $ 6,522 $ 5,716 $ 21,991 [1] These net loss and loss adjustment expense reserves relate to assumed reinsurance underwritten by Reinsurance operations that were moved into Other Operations (formerly known as HartRe ). Reserving for non-A&E reserves within Ongoing and Other Operations How non-A&E reserves are set Reserves are set by line of business within the various operating segments. As indicated in the above table, a single line of business may be written in one or more of the segments. Case reserves are established by a claims handler on each individual claim and are adjusted as new information becomes known during the course of handling the claim. Lines of business for which loss data (e.g., paid losses and case reserves) emerge (i.e., is reported) over a long period of time are referred to as long-tail lines of business. Lines of business for which loss data emerge more quickly are referred to as short-tail lines of business. Within the Company Ongoing Operations the shortest-tail lines of business are property and auto physical damage. The longest tail lines of business within Ongoing Operations include workers compensation, general liability, and professional liability. Assumed reinsurance, which is within Other Operations, is also long-tail business. For short-tail lines of business, emergence of paid loss and case reserves is credible and likely indicative of ultimate losses. For long-tail lines of business, emergence of paid losses and case reserves is less credible in the early periods and, accordingly may not be indicative of ultimate losses. An expected loss ratio is used in initially recording the reserves for both short-tail and long-tail lines of business. This expected loss ratio is determined through a review of prior accident years loss ratios and expected changes to earned pricing, loss costs, mix of business, ceded reinsurance and other factors that are expected to impact the loss ratio for the current accident year. For short-tail lines, IBNR for the current accident year is initially recorded as the product of the expected loss ratio for the period, earned premium for the period and the proportion of losses expected to be reported in future calendar periods for the current accident period. For long-tailed lines, IBNR reserves for the current accident year are initially recorded as the product of the expected loss ratio for the period and the earned premium for the period, less reported losses for the period. Company reserving actuaries, who are independent of the business units, regularly review reserves for both current and prior accident years using the most current claim data. These reserve reviews incorporate a variety of actuarial methods and judgments and involve rigorous analysis. Most non-A&E reserves are reviewed fully each quarter, including loss reserves for property, auto physical damage, auto liability, package business, workers compensation, most general liability, professional liability and fidelity and surety. Other non-A&E reserves are reviewed semi-annually (twice per year) or annually. These include, but are not limited to, reserves for allocated loss adjustment expenses, assumed reinsurance, latent exposures such as construction defects, unallocated loss adjustment expense and all other non-A&E exposures within Other Operations. For reserves that are reviewed semi-annually and annually, management monitors the emergence of paid and reported losses in the intervening quarters to either confirm that its estimate of ultimate losses should not change or, if necessary, perform a reserve review to determine whether the reserve estimate should change. For most lines of business, a variety of actuarial methods are reviewed and the actuaries select methods and specific assumptions appropriate for each line of business based on the current circumstances affecting that line of business. These selections incorporate input, as judged by the reserving actuaries to be appropriate, from claims personnel, pricing actuaries and operating management on 35 Table of Contents reported loss cost trends and other factors that could affect the reserve estimates. The output of the reserve reviews are reserve estimates that are referred to herein as the actuarial indication . The actuarial techniques or methods used include paid and reported loss development, frequency / severity, expected loss ratio and Bornhuetter-Ferguson techniques. Within any one line of business, a variety of techniques are used. Within any one line of business, certain methods are generally given more influence in determining the actuarial indication. The methods that are given more influence vary within a line of business based primarily on the maturity of the accident year, the mix of business and the particular internal and external influences impacting the claims experience or the methods. The following is a discussion of the most common methods used; these methods are not used for every line of business or every accident year within a line of business. Paid Development method . Historical data, organized by accident period and calendar period, is used to develop paid loss development patterns, which are then applied to current paid losses by accident period to estimate ultimate losses. The paid development method is also used to estimate reserves for allocated loss adjustments expenses (ALAE). Paid development techniques do not use information about case reserves and, therefore, are not affected by changes in case reserving practices. Paid development techniques can, however, be significantly affected by changes in claim closure patterns. Paid development techniques for longer-tailed lines are generally less useful for more recent accident years since a low percentage of ultimate losses are paid to date in early periods of development and small changes in paid losses can have a large impact on estimated ultimate losses. Reported Development method. Historical data, organized by accident period and calendar period, is used to develop reported loss development patterns, which are then applied to current reported losses by accident period to estimate ultimate losses. The reported losses used in this analysis refer to cumulative paid losses plus case reserves and do not include IBNR. Compared to the paid development technique, the reported development technique has the advantage that a higher percentage of ultimate losses are reflected in reported losses than in cumulative paid losses. The reported development technique estimates only the unreported losses rather than the total unpaid losses. While the reported development technique takes advantage of information contained in the case reserves, estimates determined from this technique are affected by changes in case reserving practices. Both paid and reported development techniques assume that historical development patterns are predictive of future development patterns. Frequency / Severity methods . Historical data is used to develop claim count development patterns and those patterns are applied to the number of current reported claims to estimate ultimate claim counts. Estimated ultimate claim counts are multiplied by an estimated average severity (i.e., an average cost per claim) to calculate estimated ultimate losses. Average severity is estimated by fitting historical severity data to a trend line and making assumptions about how the current environment would affect claim severity. In making assumptions about the current environment, industry data is used where such data is available and appropriate. The advantage of frequency / severity techniques is that frequency estimates are generally easier to predict and external information can be used to supplement internal data in making severity estimates. Expected Loss Ratio method . Loss ratios for prior accident years are used to determine the appropriate expected loss ratio for the current accident year after applying anticipated changes in rates, pricing and loss costs. The current accident year expected loss ratio is multiplied by earned premium to calculate estimated ultimate losses. Expected Loss Ratio techniques are useful for early periods of maturity on long-tailed lines of business, where very little paid or reported loss information is available. Bornhuetter-Ferguson method . This method is a combination of the expected loss ratio method and the reported development method, where the reported loss development method is given more weight as an accident year matures. For all lines of business, variations of the above methods are used. Examples of variation within the paid and reported development methods include: The accident period used may vary (e.g., year, quarter, or month) The Company may analyze the data by coverage (e.g., bodily injury separate from property damage) There may be adjustments for unusual loss activity For ALAE, the Company uses patterns of the relationship between paid ALAE and paid losses. Examples of variation within the frequency /severity methods include: For one sub-set of professional liability business, management estimates frequency, not through historical claim count development, but through an analysis of the securities class actions filed and policy listings For some methods, management projects severity on only open claims In the commercial liability lines, the Company performs the frequency / severity technique only on claims over a certain size 36 Table of Contents For allocated loss adjustment expenses (ALAE), the Company analyzes ALAE on claims in suit and associated legal expenses separately from ALAE on other claims. For each line of business, certain methods are given more influence than other methods. The discussion below gives a general indication of which methods are preferred by line of business. Because the actuarial estimates are generated at a much finer level of detail than line of business (e.g., by distribution channel, coverage, accident period), this description should not be assumed to apply to each coverage and accident year within a line of business. Also, as circumstances change, the methods that are given more influence will change. For example, for Personal Lines auto liability claims, reported development techniques are currently not given significant influence in making estimates for recent accident years because case reserving practices have been changing in the recent past. If case reserving practices become more stable, reported development techniques may be given more weight. Property and Auto Physical Damage. These lines are fast-developing and paid and reported development techniques are used. The Company performs and relies primarily on reported development techniques and frequency/severity and Bornhuetter-Ferguson techniques for the most immature accident months. Auto Liability Personal Lines. For auto liability, and bodily injury in particular, the Company performs a greater number of techniques than it does for property and auto physical damage, including paid and reported development, and several frequency / severity approaches. The Company generally uses the reported development method for older accident years and the frequency / severity methods for more recent accident years. Recent periods are heavily influenced by changes in case reserve practices and changing disposal rates, and the frequency / severity techniques are not affected as much by these changes. Auto Liability Commercial Lines, Package Business and Short-Tailed General Liability. As with Personal Lines auto liability, the Company performs a variety of techniques, including the paid and reported development methods and frequency / severity techniques. For older, more mature accident years, management finds that reported development techniques are best. For more recent accident years, management typically prefers frequency / severity techniques that allow it to make assumptions about the frequency of larger claims. Long-Tailed General Liability, Fidelity and Surety and Large Deductible Workers Compensation . For these very long-tailed lines of business, the Company generally relies on the expected loss ratio, Bornhuetter-Ferguson and reported development techniques. Management generally weights these techniques together, relying more heavily on the expected loss ratio method at early ages of development and more on the reported development method as an accident year matures. Workers Compensation . Workers compensation is the Company single largest reserve line of business and management does the largest amount of actuarial analysis on this line of business. Methods performed include paid and reported development, variations on expected loss ratio methods, and an in-depth analysis on the largest states. Paid development patterns are historically very stable in the Company workers compensation business, so paid techniques are preferred for older accident periods. For more recent periods, paid techniques are less predictive of the ultimate liability since such a low percentage of ultimate losses are paid in early periods of development. Accordingly, for more recent accident periods, the Company generally relies more heavily on a state-by-state analysis and the expected loss ratio approach. Professional Liability. Reported and paid loss developments patterns for this line tend to be volatile. Therefore, the Company typically relies on frequency and severity techniques. Assumed Reinsurance and All Other within Other Operations. For these lines, management tends to rely on the reported development techniques. In assumed reinsurance, assumptions are influenced by information gained from claim and underwriting audits. Allocated Loss Adjustment Expenses (ALAE). For some lines of business (e.g., professional liability and assumed reinsurance), ALAE and losses are analyzed together. For most lines of business, however, ALAE is analyzed separately, using paid development and frequency / severity techniques. The final step in the reserve review process involves a comprehensive review by senior reserving actuaries who apply their judgment and, in concert with senior management, determine the appropriate level of reserves based on the various information that has been accumulated. Numerous factors are considered in this determination process including, but not limited to, the assessed reliability of key loss trends and assumptions that may be significantly influencing the current actuarial indications, the maturity of the accident year, pertinent trends observed over the recent past, the level of volatility within a particular line of business, and the improvement or deterioration of actuarial indications in the current period as compared to the prior periods. In general, changes are made more quickly to more mature accident years and less volatile lines of business. At year-end 2006, total recorded net reserves excluding asbestos and environmental and excluding the allowance for uncollectible reinsurance were 2.2% higher than the actuarial indication of the reserves. Annually, as part of the statutory reporting requirements, IBNR is allocated to accident year by statutory line of business. This work forms the basis for the loss development table and reserve re-estimates table shown in the Business section. During 2006, there were numerous changes to non-A&E reserve estimates. Among other loss developments in 2006, these changes included an $83 reduction in catastrophe reserves related to the 2005 and 2004 hurricanes, a $58 release of Business Insurance allocated 37 Table of Contents loss adjustment expense reserves for workers compensation and package business related to accident years 2003 to 2005, and a $45 strengthening of Specialty Commercial construction defect claim reserves for accident years 1997 and prior. See Reserves within the Property and Casualty MD&A for further discussion of reserve developments. Current trends contributing to reserve uncertainty The Hartford is a multi-line company in the property and casualty business. The Hartford is therefore subject to reserve uncertainty stemming from a number of conditions, including but not limited to those noted above, any of which could be material at any point in time for any segment. Certain issues may become more or less important over time as conditions change. As various market conditions develop, management must assess whether those conditions constitute a long-term trend that should result in a reserving action (i.e., increasing or decreasing the reserve). Within the commercial segments and the Other Operations segment, the Company has exposure to claims asserted for bodily injury as a result of long-term or continuous exposure to harmful products or substances. Examples include, but are not limited to, pharmaceutical products, latex gloves, silica and lead paint. The Company also has exposure to claims from construction defects, where property damage or bodily injury from negligent construction is alleged. The Company also has exposure to claims asserted against religious institutions and other organizations relating to molestation or abuse. Such exposures may involve potentially long latency periods and may implicate coverage in multiple policy periods. These factors make reserves for such claims more uncertain than other bodily injury or property damage claims. With regard to these exposures, the Company is monitoring trends in litigation, the external environment, the similarities to other mass torts and the potential impact on the Company reserves. In Personal Lines, reserving estimates are generally less variable than for the Company other property and casualty segments. This is largely due to the coverages having relatively shorter periods of loss emergence. Estimates, however, can still vary due to a number of factors, including interpretations of frequency and severity trends and their impact on recorded reserve levels. Severity trends can be impacted by changes in internal claim handling and case reserving practices in addition to changes in the external environment. These changes in claim practices increase the uncertainty in the interpretation of case reserve data, which increases the uncertainty in recorded reserve levels. In addition, the success of the Company new Dimensions class plan for automobile first introduced in 2004 has lead to a different mix of business by type of insured than the Company experienced in the past. In general, the Company now has a lower proportion of preferred risks than in the past. Such a change in mix increases the uncertainty of the reserve projections, since historical data and reporting patterns may not be applicable to the new business. In Business Insurance, workers compensation is the Company single biggest line of business and the line of business with the longest pattern of loss emergence. Reserve estimates for workers compensation are particularly sensitive to assumptions about medical inflation and the changing use of medical care procedures. In addition, changes in state legislative and regulatory environments impact the Company estimates. These changes increase the uncertainty in the application of development patterns. In the Specialty Commercial segment, many lines of insurance, such as excess insurance and large deductible workers compensation insurance are long-tail lines of insurance. For long-tail lines, the period of time between the incidence of the insured loss and either the reporting of the claim to the insurer, the settlement of the claim, or the payment of the claim can be substantial, and in some cases, several years. As a result of this extended period of time for losses to emerge, reserve estimates for these lines are more uncertain (i.e. more variable) than reserve estimates for shorter-tail lines of insurance. Estimating required reserve levels for large deductible workers compensation insurance is further complicated by the uncertainty of whether losses that are attributable to the deductible amount can be paid by the insured; if such losses are not paid by the insured due to financial difficulties, the Company would be contractually liable. Another example of reserve variability relates to reserves for directors and officers insurance. There is uncertainty in the required level of reserves due to the impact of recent allegations within the financial services industry, including those in the mutual fund, investment banking and insurance industries. Impact of changes in key assumptions on reserve volatility As stated above, the Company practice is to estimate reserves using a variety of methods, assumptions and data elements. Within its reserve estimation process for reserves other than asbestos and environmental, the Company does not derive statistical loss distributions or confidence levels around its reserve estimate and, as a result, does not have reserve range estimates to disclose. The reserve estimation process includes explicit assumptions about a number of factors in the internal and external environment. Across most lines of business, the most important assumptions are future loss development factors applied to paid or reported losses to date. For most lines, the reported loss development factor is most important. In workers compensation, paid loss development factors are also important. The trend in loss costs is also a key assumption, particularly in the most recent accident years, where loss development factors are less credible. The following discussion includes disclosure of possible variation from current estimates of loss reserves due to a change in certain key assumptions. Each of the impacts described below is estimated individually, without consideration for any correlation among key assumptions or among lines of business. Therefore, it would be inappropriate to take each of the amounts described below and add them together in an attempt to estimate volatility for the Company reserves in total. The estimated variation in reserves due to changes 38 Table of Contents in key assumptions is a reasonable estimate of possible variation that may occur in the future, likely over a period of several calendar years. It is important to note that the variation discussed is not meant to be a worst-case scenario, and therefore, it is possible that future variation may be more than the amounts discussed below. Recorded reserves for workers compensation, net of reinsurance, are $5.7 billion across Business Insurance and Specialty Commercial. The two most important assumptions for workers compensation reserves are loss development factors and loss cost trends, particularly medical cost inflation. Loss development patterns are dependent on medical cost inflation. Approximately half of the workers compensation net reserves are related to future medical costs. A review of National Council on Compensation Insurance ( NCCI ) data suggests that the annual growth in industry medical claim costs has varied from -2% to +12% since 1991. This data shows that medical inflation has been highly variable over the past decade. Across the entire workers compensation reserve base, a 1 point change in calendar year medical inflation would change the estimated net reserve by $600, in either direction. Recorded reserves for auto liability, net of reinsurance, are $2.2 billion across all lines, $1.5 billion of which is in Personal Lines. Personal auto liability reserves are shorter-tailed than other lines of business (such as workers compensation) and, therefore, less volatile. However, the size of the reserve base means that future changes in estimates could be material to the Company results of operations in any given period. The key assumption for Personal Lines auto liability is the annual loss cost trend, particularly the severity trend component of loss costs. A review of Insurance Services Office ( ISO ) data suggests that annual growth in industry severity since 1999 has varied from +1% to +6%. The ISO data shows recent severity changes to be in the middle of this range. A 2.5 point change in assumed annual severity is within historical variation for the industry and for the Company. A 2.5 point change in assumed annual severity for the two most recent accident years would change the estimated net reserve need by $70, in either direction. Assumed annual severity for accident years prior to the two most recent accident years is likely to have minimal variability. Recorded reserves for general liability, net of reinsurance, are $2.1 billion across Business Insurance and Specialty Commercial. Reported loss development patterns are a key assumption for this line of business, particularly for more mature accident years. Historically, assumptions on reported loss development patterns have been impacted by, among other things, emergence of new types of claims (e.g. construction defect claims) or a shift in the mixture between smaller, more routine claims and larger, more complex claims. The Company has reviewed the historical variation in reported loss development patterns. If the reported loss development patterns change by 10%, a change that is within historical variation, the estimated net reserve need would change by $300, in either direction. A 10% change in reported loss development patterns is within historical variation, as measured by the variation around the average development factors as reported in statutory accident year reports. Similar to general liability, assumed casualty reinsurance is affected by reported loss development pattern assumptions. In addition to the items identified above that would affect both direct and reinsurance liability claim development patterns, there is also an impact to assumed reporting patterns for any changes in claim notification from ceding companies to the reinsurer. Recorded net reserves for HartRe assumed reinsurance business, excluding asbestos and environmental liabilities, within Other Operations were $813 as of December 31, 2006. If the reported loss development patterns underlying the Company net reserves for HartRe assumed casualty reinsurance change by 10%, the estimated net reserve need would change by $254, in either direction. A 10% change in reported loss development patterns is within historical variation, as measured by the variation around the average development factors as reported in statutory accident year reports. Reserving for Asbestos and Environmental Claims within Other Operations How A&E reserves are set The Company continues to receive asbestos and environmental claims. Asbestos claims relate primarily to bodily injuries asserted by people who came in contact with asbestos or products containing asbestos. Environmental claims relate primarily to pollution and related clean-up costs. The Company wrote several different categories of insurance contracts that may cover asbestos and environmental claims. First, the Company wrote primary policies providing the first layer of coverage in an insured liability program. Second, the Company wrote excess policies providing higher layers of coverage for losses that exhaust the limits of underlying coverage. Third, the Company acted as a reinsurer assuming a portion of those risks assumed by other insurers writing primary, excess and reinsurance coverages. Fourth, subsidiaries of the Company participated in the London Market, writing both direct insurance and assumed reinsurance business. In establishing reserves for asbestos claims, the Company evaluates its insureds estimated liabilities for such claims using a ground-up approach. The Company considers a variety of factors, including the jurisdictions where underlying claims have been brought, past, pending and anticipated future claim activity, disease mix, past settlement values of similar claims, dismissal rates, allocated loss adjustment expense, and potential bankruptcy impact. Similarly, a ground-up exposure review approach is used to establish environmental reserves. The Company evaluation of its insureds estimated liabilities for environmental claims involves consideration of several factors, including historical values of similar claims, the number of sites involved, the insureds alleged activities at each site, the alleged environmental damage at each site, the 39 Table of Contents respective shares of liability of potentially responsible parties at each site, the appropriateness and cost of remediation at each site, the nature of governmental enforcement activities at each site, and potential bankruptcy impact. Having evaluated its insureds probable liabilities for asbestos and/or environmental claims, the Company then evaluates its insureds insurance coverage programs for such claims. The Company considers its insureds total available insurance coverage, including the coverage issued by the Company. The Company also considers relevant judicial interpretations of policy language and applicable coverage defenses or determinations, if any. Evaluation of both the insureds estimated liabilities and the Company exposure to the insureds depends heavily on an analysis of the relevant legal issues and litigation environment. This analysis is conducted by the Company lawyers and is subject to applicable privileges. For both asbestos and environmental reserves, the Company also compares its historical direct net loss and expense paid and incurred experience, and net loss and expense paid and incurred experience year by year, to assess any emerging trends, fluctuations or characteristics suggested by the aggregate paid and incurred activity. Once the gross ultimate exposure for indemnity and allocated loss adjustment expense is determined for its insureds by each policy year, the Company calculates its ceded reinsurance projection based on any applicable facultative and treaty reinsurance and the Company experience with reinsurance collections. Uncertainties Regarding Adequacy of Asbestos and Environmental Reserves With regard to both environmental and particularly asbestos claims, significant uncertainty limits the ability of insurers and reinsurers to estimate the ultimate reserves necessary for unpaid losses and related expenses. Traditional actuarial reserving techniques cannot reasonably estimate the ultimate cost of these claims, particularly during periods where theories of law are in flux. The degree of variability of reserve estimates for these exposures is significantly greater than for other more traditional exposures. In particular, the Company believes there is a high degree of uncertainty inherent in the estimation of asbestos loss reserves. In the case of the reserves for asbestos exposures, factors contributing to the high degree of uncertainty include inadequate loss development patterns, plaintiffs expanding theories of liability, the risks inherent in major litigation, and inconsistent emerging legal doctrines. Furthermore, over time, insurers, including the Company, have experienced significant changes in the rate at which asbestos claims are brought, the claims experience of particular insureds, and the value of claims, making predictions of future exposure from past experience uncertain. Plaintiffs and insureds also have sought to use bankruptcy proceedings, including pre-packaged bankruptcies, to accelerate and increase loss payments by insurers. In addition, some policyholders have asserted new classes of claims for coverages to which an aggregate limit of liability may not apply. Further uncertainties include insolvencies of other carriers and unanticipated developments pertaining to the Company ability to recover reinsurance for asbestos and environmental claims. Management believes these issues are not likely to be resolved in the near future. In the case of the reserves for environmental exposures, factors contributing to the high degree of uncertainty include expanding theories of liability and damages; the risks inherent in major litigation; inconsistent decisions concerning the existence and scope of coverage for environmental claims; and uncertainty as to the monetary amount being sought by the claimant from the insured. It is also not possible to predict changes in the legal and legislative environment and their effect on the future development of asbestos and environmental claims. It is unknown whether potential Federal asbestos-related legislation will be enacted or what its effect would be on the Company aggregate asbestos liabilities. The reporting pattern for assumed reinsurance claims, including those related to asbestos and environmental claims is much longer than for direct claims. In many instances, it takes months or years to determine that the policyholder own obligations have been met and how the reinsurance in question may apply to such claims. The delay in reporting reinsurance claims and exposures adds to the uncertainty of estimating the related reserves. Given the factors described above, the Company believes the actuarial tools and other techniques it employs to estimate the ultimate cost of claims for more traditional kinds of insurance exposure are less precise in estimating reserves for its asbestos and environmental exposures. For this reason, the Company relies on exposure-based analysis to estimate the ultimate costs of these claims and regularly evaluates new information in assessing its potential asbestos and environmental exposures. A number of factors affect the variability of estimates for asbestos and environmental reserves including assumptions with respect to the frequency of claims, the average severity of those claims settled with payment, the dismissal rate of claims with no payment and the expense to indemnity ratio. The uncertainty with respect to the underlying reserve assumptions for asbestos and environmental adds a greater degree of variability to these reserve estimates than reserve estimates for more traditional exposures. While this variability is reflected in part in the size of the range of reserves developed by the Company, that range may still not be indicative of the potential variance between the ultimate outcome and the recorded reserves. The recorded net reserves as of December 31, 2006 of $2.57 billion ($2.25 billion and $322 for asbestos and environmental, respectively) is within an estimated range, unadjusted for covariance, of $1.99 billion to $3.05 billion. The process of estimating asbestos and environmental reserves remains subject to a wide variety of 40 Table of Contents uncertainties, which are detailed in Note 12 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Due to these uncertainties, further developments could cause the Company to change its estimates and ranges of its asbestos and environmental reserves, and the effect of these changes could be material to the Company consolidated operating results, financial condition and liquidity. Total Property & Casualty Reserves, Net of Reinsurance In the opinion of management, based upon the known facts and current law, the reserves recorded for the Company property and casualty businesses at December 31, 2006 represent the Company best estimate of its ultimate liability for losses and loss adjustment expenses related to losses covered by policies written by the Company. However, because of the significant uncertainties surrounding reserves, and particularly asbestos exposures, it is possible that management estimate of the ultimate liabilities for these claims may change and that the required adjustment to recorded reserves could exceed the currently recorded reserves by an amount that could be material to the Company results of operations, financial condition and liquidity. Life Deferred Policy Acquisition Costs and Present Value of Future Profits Associated with Variable Annuity and Other Universal Life-Type Contracts Accounting Policy and Assumptions Life policy acquisition costs include commissions and certain other expenses that vary with and are primarily associated with acquiring business. Present value of future profits ( PVFP ) is an intangible asset recorded upon applying purchase accounting in an acquisition of a life insurance company. Deferred policy acquisition costs and the present value of future profits intangible asset are amortized in the same way. Both are amortized over the estimated life of the contracts acquired. Within the following discussion, deferred policy acquisition costs and the present value of future profits intangible asset will be referred to as DAC . At December 31, 2006 and December 31, 2005, the carrying value of the Company Life DAC asset was $9.1 billion and $8.6 billion, respectively. Of those amounts, $4.4 billion and $4.5 billion related to individual variable annuities sold in the U.S., $1.4 billion and $1.2 billion related to individual variable annuities sold in Japan and $2.1 billion and $1.9 billion related to universal life-type contracts sold by Individual Life. The Company amortizes DAC related to investment contracts and universal life-type contracts (including individual variable annuities) using the retrospective deposit method. Under the retrospective deposit method, acquisition costs are amortized in proportion to the present value of estimated gross profits ( EGPs ). EGPs are also used to amortize other assets and liabilities on the Company balance sheet, such as sales inducement assets and unearned revenue reserves. Components of EGPs are used to determine reserves for guaranteed minimum death and income benefits. For most contracts, the Company evaluates EGPs over a 20 year horizon as estimated profits emerging subsequent to year 20 are immaterial. The Company uses other measures for amortizing DAC, such as gross costs (net of reinsurance), as a replacement for EGPs when EGPs are expected to be negative for multiple years of the contract life. The Company also adjusts the DAC balance, through other comprehensive income, by an amount that represents the amortization of DAC that would have been required as a charge or credit to operations had unrealized gains and losses on investments been realized. Actual gross profits, in a given reporting period, that vary from management initial estimates result in increases or decreases in the rate of amortization, commonly referred to as a true-up , which are recorded in the current period. The true-up recorded for the years ended December 31, 2006, 2005 and 2004 was an increase to amortization of $41, $18 and $16, respectively. Each year, the Company develops future EGPs for the products sold during that year. The EGPs for products sold in a particular year are aggregated into cohorts. Future gross profits are projected for the estimated lives of the contracts, and are, to a large extent, a function of future account value projections for individual variable annuity products and to a lesser extent for variable universal life products. The projection of future account values requires the use of certain assumptions. The assumptions considered to be important in the projection of future account value, and hence the EGPs, include separate account fund performance, which is impacted by separate account fund mix, less fees assessed against the contract holder account balance, surrender and lapse rates, interest margin, and mortality. The assumptions are developed as part of an annual process and are dependent upon the Company current best estimates of future events. The Company current aggregate separate account return assumption is approximately 8.0% (after fund fees, but before mortality and expense charges) for U.S. products and 5.0% (after fund fees, but before mortality and expense charges) in aggregate for all Japanese products, but varies from product to product. The overall actual return generated by the separate account is dependent on several factors, including the relative mix of the underlying sub-accounts among bond funds and equity funds as well as equity sector weightings. The Company overall U.S. separate account fund performance has been reasonably correlated to the overall performance of the S&P 500 Index (which closed at 1,418 on December 29, 2006), although no assurance can be provided that this correlation will continue in the future. Estimating future gross profits is a complex process requiring considerable judgment and the forecasting of events well into the future. Estimating future gross profits is important not only for determining the amortization of DAC but also in the accounting and valuation of sales inducement assets, unearned revenue reserves and guaranteed minimum death and income benefit reserves. The estimation process, the underlying assumptions and the resulting EGPs, are evaluated regularly. 41 Table of Contents During the fourth quarter of 2006, the Company refined its estimation process for DAC amortization and completed a comprehensive study of assumptions. The Company plans to complete a comprehensive assumption study and refine its estimate of future gross profits in the third quarter of 2007 and at least annually thereafter. Upon completion of an assumption study, the Company revises its assumptions to reflect its current best estimate, thereby changing its estimate of projected account values and the related EGPs in the DAC, sales inducement and unearned revenue reserve amortization models as well as the guaranteed minimum death and income benefit reserving models. The cumulative balance of DAC as well as sales inducement assets, unearned revenue reserves and guaranteed minimum death and income benefit reserves are adjusted with an offsetting benefit or charge to income to reflect such changes in the period of the revision, a process known as unlocking . An unlock that results in an after-tax benefit generally occurs as a result of actual experience or future expectations being favorable compared to previous estimates of account value growth and EGPs. An unlock that results in an after-tax charge generally occurs as a result of actual experience or future expectations being unfavorable compared to previous estimates of account value growth and EGPs. In addition to when a comprehensive assumption study is completed, revisions to best estimate assumptions used to estimate future gross profits are necessary when the EGPs in the Company models fall outside of a reasonable range of EGPs. The Company performs a quantitative process each quarter to determine the reasonable range of EGPs. This process involves the use of internally developed models, which run a large number of stochastically determined scenarios of separate account fund performance. Incorporated in each scenario are assumptions with respect to lapse rates, mortality, and expenses, based on the Company most recent assumption study. These scenarios are run for individual variable annuity business in the U.S. and independently for individual variable annuity business in Japan and are used to calculate statistically significant ranges of reasonable EGPs. The statistical ranges produced from the stochastic scenarios are compared to the present value of EGPs used in the Company models. If EGPs used in the Company models fall outside of the statistical ranges of reasonable EGPs, an unlock would be necessary. A similar approach is used for variable universal life business. Unlock and Sensitivity Analysis As described above, during the fourth quarter of 2006, the Company completed a comprehensive study of assumptions underlying EGPs, resulting in an unlock . The study covered all assumptions, including mortality, lapses, expenses and separate account returns, in substantially all product lines. The new best estimate assumptions were applied to the current in-force to project future gross profits. The impact on the Company assets and liabilities as a result of the unlock during the fourth quarter was as follows: Death and Unearned Income Sales Segment DAC and Revenue Benefit Inducement After-tax (charge) benefit PVFP Reserves Reserves [1] Assets Total Retail Products Group $ (70 ) $ 5 $ (10 ) $ 3 $ (72 ) Retirement Plans 20 20 Individual Life (49 ) 31 (18 ) International Japan Annuity 26 27 53 Life Other (46 ) (46 ) Corporate (13 ) (13 ) Total $ (132 ) $ 36 $ 17 $ 3 $ (76 ) [1] As a result of the unlock, death benefit reserves, in the Retail Products Group, increased $294, offset by an increase of $279 in reinsurance recoverables. As a result of the unlock in the fourth quarter of 2006, the Company expects total Company DAC amortization to be lower than it would have been in 2007 if the unlock had not occurred. This effect of the lower DAC amortization in 2007 is expected to result in an increase to net income of approximately $12, after-tax, of which approximately $6 relates to Retail Products Group. The impact on amortization in 2007 for other segments is immaterial. The Company performs sensitivity analyses with respect to the effect certain assumptions have on our DAC balances. Each of the sensitivities illustrated below are estimated individually, without consideration for any correlation among the key assumptions. Therefore, it would be inappropriate to take each of the sensitivity amounts below and add them together in an attempt to estimate volatility for the respective DAC balances in total. The following tables depict the estimated sensitivities for U.S. variable annuities and Japan variable annuities DAC: 42 Table of Contents U.S. Variable Annuities (Increasing separate account returns and decreasing lapse rates result in benefits. Decreasing separate accounts and increasing lapse rates result in charges.) Effect on DAC if unlocked (after-tax)[1] If actual separate account returns were 1% above or below our estimated return $20 - $30 If actual lapse rates were 1% above or below our estimated aggregate lapse rate $20 - $30 [2] If we changed our future separate account return rate by 1% from our estimated future return $60 - $70 If we changed our future lapse rate by 1% from our estimated aggregate future lapse rate $70 - $80 [2] Japan Variable Annuities (Increasing separate account returns and decreasing lapse rates result in benefits. Decreasing separate accounts and increasing lapse rates result in charges.) Effect on DAC if unlocked (after-tax)[1] If actual separate account returns were 1% above or below our aggregated estimated return $1 - $10 If actual lapse rates were 1% above or below our estimated aggregate lapse rate $1 - $10 [2] If we changed our future separate account return rate by 1% from our aggregated estimated future return $1 - $10 If we changed our future lapse rate by 1% from our estimated aggregate future lapse rate $12 - $22 [2] [1] These sensitivities do not include the estimated impacts on sales inducement assets, unearned revenue reserves and death and income benefit reserves and are not reflective of any future refinements to the Company gross profit estimation process. The Company DAC models assume that separate account returns are earned linearly and that lapses occur linearly (except for certain dynamic lapse features) throughout the year. Similarly, the sensitivities assume that differential separate account and lapse rates are linear and parallel and persist throughout a full 12 month period. These sensitivities are not perfectly linear nor perfectly symmetrical for increases and decreases and are most accurate for small changes in assumptions. As such, extrapolating results over a wide range will decrease the accuracy of the sensitivities predictive ability. Sensitivity results are, in part, based on the current in-the-moneyness of various guarantees offered with the products. Future market conditions could significantly change the sensitivity results. [2] Sensitivity around lapses assumes lapses increase or decrease consistently across all cohort years and products. An unlock only revises EGPs to reflect current best estimate assumptions. The Company must also test the aggregate recoverability of the DAC asset by comparing the amounts deferred to the present value of total EGPs. In addition, the Company routinely stress tests its DAC asset for recoverability against severe declines in its separate account assets, which could occur if the equity markets experienced a significant sell-off, as the majority of policyholders funds in the separate accounts is invested in the equity market. As of December 31, 2006, the Company believed U.S. individual and Japan individual variable annuity separate account assets could fall, through a combination of negative market returns, lapses and mortality, by at least 53% and 70%, respectively, before portions of its DAC asset would be unrecoverable. Valuation of Guaranteed Minimum Withdrawal Benefit Derivatives The Company offers certain variable annuity products with a guaranteed minimum withdrawal benefit ( GMWB ) rider. The fair value of the GMWB is calculated based on actuarial and capital market assumptions related to the projected cash flows, including benefits and related contract charges, over the lives of the contracts, incorporating expectations concerning policyholder behavior. Because of the dynamic and complex nature of these cash flows, best estimate assumptions and stochastic techniques under a variety of market return scenarios are used. Estimating these cash flows involves numerous estimates and subjective judgments including those regarding expected market rates of return, market volatility, correlations of market returns and discount rates. At each valuation date, the Company assumes expected returns based on risk-free rates as represented by the current LIBOR forward curve rates; market volatility assumptions for each underlying index based on a blend of observed market implied volatility data and annualized standard deviations of monthly returns using the most recent 20 years of observed market performance; correlations of market returns across underlying indices based on actual observed market returns and relationships over the ten years preceding the valuation date; and current risk-free spot rates as represented by the current LIBOR spot curve to determine the present value of expected future cash flows produced in the stochastic projection process. Changes in capital market assumptions can significantly change the value of the GMWB. For example, independent future decreases in equity market returns, future decreases in interest rates and future increases in equity index volatility will all have the effect of decreasing the GMWB asset as of December 31, 2006 resulting in a realized loss in net income. Furthermore, changes in policyholder behavior can also significantly change the value of the GMWB. For example, independent future increases in fund mix towards equity based funds vs. bond funds, future increases in withdrawals, future increasing mortality, future increasing usage of the step-up feature and decreases in lapses will all have the effect of decreasing the GMWB asset as of December 31, 2006 resulting in a realized loss in net income. Independent changes in any one of these assumptions moving in the opposite direction will have the effect of increasing the GMWB asset as of December 31, 2006 resulting in a realized gain in net 43 Table of Contents income. As markets change, mature and evolve and actual policyholder behavior emerges, management continually evaluates the appropriateness of its assumptions. In addition, management regularly evaluates the valuation model, incorporating emerging valuation techniques where appropriate, including drawing on the expertise of market participants and valuation experts. Upon adoption of Statement of Financial Accounting Standard No. 157, Fair Value Measurements , (SFAS 157) the Company will revise many of the assumptions used to value GMWB. See Note 1 in Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for a discussion of SFAS 157. Evaluation of Other-Than-Temporary Impairments on Available-for-Sale Securities The Hartford investments in fixed maturities, which include bonds, redeemable preferred stock and commercial paper; and certain equity securities, which include common and non-redeemable preferred stocks, are classified as available-for-sale and accordingly are carried at fair value with the after-tax difference from cost or amortized cost, as adjusted for the effect of deducting the life and pension policyholders share of the immediate participation guaranteed contracts; and certain life and annuity deferred policy acquisition costs and reserve adjustments, reflected in stockholders equity as a component of accumulated other comprehensive income ( AOCI ). One of the significant estimates related to available-for-sale securities is the evaluation of investments for other-than-temporary impairments. If a decline in the fair value of an available-for-sale security is judged to be other-than-temporary, a charge is recorded in net realized capital losses equal to the difference between the fair value and cost or amortized cost basis of the security. In addition, for securities expected to be sold, an other-than-temporary impairment charge is recognized if the Company does not expect the fair value of a security to recover to cost or amortized cost prior to the expected date of sale. The fair value of the other-than-temporarily impaired investment becomes its new cost basis. For fixed maturities, the Company amortizes the new cost basis to par or to estimated future value over the remaining life of the security based on future estimated cash flows. The evaluation of impairments is a quantitative and qualitative process, which is subject to risks and uncertainties and is intended to determine whether declines in the fair value of investments should be recognized in current period earnings. The risks and uncertainties include changes in general economic conditions, the issuer financial condition or near term recovery prospects and the effects of changes in interest rates. The Company has a security monitoring process overseen by a committee of investment and accounting professionals ( the committee ) that identifies securities that, due to certain characteristics, as described below, are subjected to an enhanced analysis on a quarterly basis. Securities not subject to Emerging Issues Task Force ( EITF ) Issue No. 99-20, Recognition of Interest Income and Impairment on Purchased Beneficial Interests and Beneficial Interests That Continued to Be Held by a Transferor in Securitized Financial Assets ( non-EITF Issue No. 99-20 securities ) that are in an unrealized loss position, are reviewed at least quarterly to determine if an other-than-temporary impairment is present based on certain quantitative and qualitative factors. The primary factors considered in evaluating whether a decline in value for non-EITF Issue No. 99-20 securities is other-than-temporary include: (a) the length of time and the extent to which the fair value has been less than cost or amortized cost, (b) the financial condition, credit rating and near-term prospects of the issuer, (c) whether the debtor is current on contractually obligated interest and principal payments and (d) the intent and ability of the Company to retain the investment for a period of time sufficient to allow for recovery. Each quarter, during this analysis, the Company asserts its intent and ability to retain until recovery those securities judged to be temporarily impaired. Once identified, these securities are systematically restricted from trading unless approved by the committee. The committee will only authorize the sale of these securities based on predefined criteria that relate to events that could not have been foreseen. Examples of the criteria include, but are not limited to, the deterioration in the issuer creditworthiness, a change in regulatory requirements or a major business combination or major disposition. For certain securitized financial assets with contractual cash flows including asset-backed securities, ( ABS ), EITF Issue No. 99-20 requires the Company to periodically update its best estimate of cash flows over the life of the security. If the fair value of a securitized financial asset is less than its cost or amortized cost and there has been a decrease in the present value of the estimated cash flows since the last revised estimate, considering both timing and amount, an other-than-temporary impairment charge is recognized. The Company also considers its intent and ability to retain a temporarily depressed security until recovery. Estimating future cash flows is a quantitative and qualitative process that incorporates information received from third party sources along with certain internal assumptions and judgments regarding the future performance of the underlying collateral. In addition, projections of expected future cash flows may change based upon new information regarding the performance of the underlying collateral. Pension and Other Postretirement Benefit Obligations The Company maintains a U.S. qualified defined benefit pension plan (the Plan ) that covers substantially all employees, as well as unfunded excess plans to provide benefits in excess of amounts permitted to be paid to participants of the Plan under the provisions of the Internal Revenue Code. The Company has also entered into individual retirement agreements with certain retired directors providing for unfunded supplemental pension benefits. In addition, the Company provides certain health care and life insurance benefits for eligible retired employees. The Company maintains international plans which represent an immaterial percentage of total pension assets, liabilities and expense and, for reporting purposes, are combined with domestic plans. 44 Table of Contents Pursuant to accounting principles related to the Company pension and other postretirement obligations to employees under its various benefit plans, the Company is required to make a significant number of assumptions in order to calculate the related liabilities and expenses each period. The two economic assumptions that have the most impact on pension and other postretirement expense are the discount rate and the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets. In determining the discount rate assumption, the Company utilizes a discounted cash flow analysis of the Company pension and other postretirement obligations, currently available market and industry data and consultation with its plan actuaries. The yield curve utilized in the cash flow analysis is comprised of bonds rated Aa or higher with maturities primarily between zero and thirty years. Based on all available information, it was determined that 5.75% was the appropriate discount rate as of December 31, 2006 to calculate the Company benefit liability. Accordingly, the 5.75% discount rate will also be used to determine the Company 2007 pension and other postretirement expense. At December 31, 2005, the discount rate was 5.50%. The Company determines the expected long-term rate of return assumption based on an analysis of the Plan portfolio historical compound rates of return since 1979 (the earliest date for which comparable portfolio data is available) and over rolling 5 year and 10 year periods, balanced along with future long-term return expectations that generally anticipate an investment mix of 60% equity securities and 40% fixed income securities. The Company selected these periods, as well as shorter durations, to assess the portfolio volatility, duration and total returns as they relate to pension obligation characteristics, which are influenced by the Company workforce demographics. In addition, the Company also applies market return assumptions, utilized in Life DAC analysis, to an investment mix that generally anticipates 60% equity securities and 40% fixed income securities to derive an expected long-term rate of return. Based upon this analysis, the portfolio historical rates of return and management outlook with respect to market returns and the planned asset mix, management maintained the long-term rate of return assumption at 8.00% as of December 31, 2006. This assumption is used to determine the Company 2007 expense. The long-term rate of return assumption at December 31, 2005 was 8.00%. To illustrate the impact of these assumptions on annual pension and other postretirement expense for 2007 and going forward, a 25 basis point change in the discount rate will increase/decrease pension and other postretirement expense by approximately $15 and a 25 basis point change in the long-term asset return assumption will increase/decrease pension and other postretirement expense by approximately $9. Contingencies Relating to Corporate Litigation and Regulatory Matters Management follows the requirements of SFAS No. 5 Accounting for Contingencies . This statement requires management to evaluate each contingent matter separately. A loss is recorded if probable and reasonably estimable. Management establishes reserves for these contingencies at its best estimate , or, if no one number within the range of possible losses is more probable than any other, the Company records an estimated reserve at the low end of the range of losses. The Company has a quarterly monitoring process involving legal and accounting professionals. Legal personnel first identify outstanding corporate litigation and regulatory matters posing a reasonable possibility of loss. These matters are then jointly reviewed by accounting and legal personnel to evaluate the facts and changes since the last review in order to determine if a provision for loss should be recorded or adjusted, the amount that should be recorded, and the appropriate disclosure. The outcomes of certain contingencies currently being evaluated by the Company, which relate to corporate litigation and regulatory matters, are inherently difficult to predict, and the reserves that have been established for the estimated settlement amounts are subject to significant changes. In view of the uncertainties regarding the outcome of these matters, as well as the tax-deductibility of payments, it is possible that the ultimate cost to the Company of these matters could exceed the reserve by an amount that would have a material adverse effect on the Company consolidated results of operations or cash flows in a particular quarterly or annual period. 45 Table of Contents CONSOLIDATED RESULTS OF OPERATIONS For the Years Ended December 31, Operating Summary 2006 2005 2004 Earned premiums $ 15,023 $ 14,359 $ 13,566 Fee income 4,739 4,012 3,471 Net investment income Securities available-for-sale and other 4,691 4,384 4,144 Equity securities held for trading [1] 1,824 3,847 799 Total net investment income 6,515 8,231 4,943 Other revenues 474 464 437 Net realized capital gains (losses) (251 ) 17 291 Total revenues 26,500 27,083 22,708 Benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses [1] 15,042 16,776 13,640 Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs and present value of future profits 3,558 3,169 2,843 Insurance operating costs and expenses 3,252 3,227 2,776 Interest expense 277 252 251 Other expenses 769 674 675 Total benefits, losses and expenses 22,898 24,098 20,185 Income before income taxes and cumulative effect of accounting change 3,602 2,985 2,523 Income tax expense 857 711 385 Income before cumulative effect of accounting change 2,745 2,274 2,138 Cumulative effect of accounting change, net of tax [2] (23 ) Net income $ 2,745 $ 2,274 $ 2,115 [1] Includes investment income and mark-to-market effects of equity securities held for trading supporting the international variable annuity business, which are classified in net investment income with corresponding amounts credited to policyholders within benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses. [2] For the year ended December 31, 2004, represents the cumulative impact of the Company adoption of the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants ( AICPA ) issued Statement of Position ( SOP ) 03-1, Accounting and Reporting by Insurance Enterprises for Certain Nontraditional Long-Duration Contracts and for Separate Accounts ( SOP 03-1 ). Net Income (Loss) by Operation and Life Segment 2006 2005 2004 Life Retail $ 628 $ 622 $ 503 Retirement Plans 109 75 66 Institutional 99 88 68 Individual Life 170 166 155 Group Benefits 303 272 229 International 246 96 39 Other (114 ) (115 ) 322 Total Life 1,441 1,204 1,382 Property & Casualty Ongoing Operations 1,554 1,165 955 Other Operations (35 ) 71 (45 ) Total Property & Casualty 1,519 1,236 910 Corporate (215 ) (166 ) (177 ) Net income $ 2,745 $ 2,274 $ 2,115 Ongoing Operations Underwriting Results by Segment 2006 2005 2004 Business Insurance $ 618 $ 396 $ 360 Personal Lines 429 460 138 Specialty Commercial 64 (165 ) (53 ) 46 Table of Contents Operating Results Year ended December 31, 2006 compared to the year ended December 31, 2005 Net income increased $471 due to the following: Property & Casualty net income increased $283, as a result of a $389 increase in Ongoing Operations net income, partially offset by a decrease in Other Operations results from net income of $71 in 2005 to a net loss of $35 in 2006. Ongoing Operations net income increased due to increases in underwriting results and net investment income, partially offset by a decrease in net realized capital gains. The increase in Ongoing Operations underwriting results was principally due to lower current accident year catastrophe losses, lower insurance operating costs and expenses due to a change in estimated Florida Citizens assessments, a change to net favorable prior accident year loss development and the effect of catastrophe treaty reinstatement premium recorded as a reduction of earned premium in 2005. The net loss in Other Operations was primarily a result of prior year reserve development of $243, pre-tax, recorded in 2006, resulting from the agreement with Equitas and the Company evaluation of the reinsurance recoverables and allowance for uncollectible reinsurance associated with older, long-term casualty liabilities. Life net income increased $237 primarily due to growth in assets under management resulting from market growth and strong sales along with higher earned premiums. Also contributing to Life increased net income were the following: During 2006, the Company achieved favorable settlements in several cases brought against the Company by policyholders regarding their purchase of broad-based leveraged corporate owned life insurance policies in the early to mid-1990s. The Company reduced its estimate of the ultimate cost of these cases in 2006. This reserve reduction resulted in an after-tax benefit of $34. A charge of $102, after-tax, recorded in 2005 in Life to reserve for investigations related to market timing by the SEC and New York Attorney General Office, directed brokerage by the SEC and single premium group annuities by the New York Attorney General Office and the Connecticut Attorney General Office. During 2005, the Company recorded an after-tax expense of $46, related to the termination of a provision of an agreement with a mutual fund distribution partner of the Company retail mutual funds. Partially offsetting the increase in Life net income was a $63, after-tax, charge related to the DAC unlock. See the Critical Accounting Estimates section of the MD&A for further information on the DAC unlock. Total revenues decreased $583 primarily due to the following: A decrease in net investment income of $1.7 billion, driven primarily by a $2.0 billion decrease in net investment income on the Company equity securities, held for trading. The underlying fund performance of assets supporting the Company Japanese variable annuity business was not as strong in 2006 as compared to 2005, resulting in a decrease in net investment income from equity securities, held for trading. The increase in net investment income on securities available-for-sale and other of $307 was primarily due to income earned on higher average invested assets base, increase in interest rates and a change in asset mix to a greater investment in mortgage loans and limited partnerships. Net realized capital losses occurred in 2006 as compared to gains in 2005, primarily as a result of a higher interest rate environment. The components that drove the increase in net losses during the year ended December 31, 2006 included net losses on sales of fixed maturity securities and other-than-temporary impairments. Partially offsetting the decrease in total revenues were the following: Fee income increased $727 as a result of increases in the Life operation Retail and International segments. The increase in fee income occurred primarily as the result of growth in average account values. Earned premium increased $664 as a result of $387 from Life operations and $277 from Property & Casualty operations. The increase in Life earned premiums was primarily related to Group Benefits where the increase was driven by year-to-date sales (excluding buyouts) growth, particularly in group life insurance. Contributing to the growth in Property & Casualty earned premium was a $73 reduction of earned premium in 2005 due to catastrophe treaty reinstatement premium payable to reinsurers as a result of losses from the 2005 hurricanes. Apart from the effect of the reinstatement premium in 2005, the growth was primarily driven by new business premium outpacing non-renewals over the last six months of 2005 and the full year of 2006 and the effect of earned pricing increases in homeowners, partially offset by an increase in reinsurance costs. Growth in Business Insurance and Personal Lines earned premium was partially offset by a decrease in Specialty Commercial earned premium. Year ended December 31, 2005 compared to the year ended December 31, 2004 Net income increased $159 primarily due to the following: An increase in Property & Casualty net income of $326, driven primarily by improved underwriting results in the Personal Lines and Other Operations segments, increased net investment income, and a reduction in other expenses; partially offset by a decrease in net realized capital gains. The improved underwriting results in Personal Lines was driven primarily by a reduction in current year catastrophe losses, a reduction in net unfavorable prior accident year loss reserve development and earned premium growth. 47 Table of Contents The improvement in underwriting results for Other Operations was primarily due to a reduction in net unfavorable prior accident year loss reserve development. The increase in net investment income was primarily due to higher assets under management resulting from increased cash flows from underwriting, higher investment yields on fixed maturity investments and an increase in income from limited partnership investments. An increase in net income for Retail of $119, principally driven by higher fee income from growth in the variable annuity and mutual fund businesses as a result of higher assets under management as compared to the prior year periods. An increase in net income for International of $57, principally driven by higher fee income and investment spread in Japan derived from a 78% increase in the assets under management. An increase in net income for the Group Benefits segment of $43, driven primarily by higher earned premiums and net investment income as well as a favorable loss ratio. Partially offsetting these increases were: A $216 tax benefit recorded in 2004 to reflect the effect of the IRS audit settlement on tax years prior to 2004. A charge of $102, after-tax, recorded in 2005 in Life to reserve for investigations related to market timing by the SEC and New York Attorney General Office, directed brokerage by the SEC and single premium group annuities by the New York Attorney General Office and the Connecticut Attorney General Office. An after-tax expense of $46 recorded in Life during 2005, related to the termination of a provision of an agreement with a mutual fund distribution partner of the Company retail mutual funds. Total revenues increased $4.4 billion primarily due to the following: An increase of $3.3 billion in net investment income, driven primarily by a $3.0 billion increase in net investment income on the Company equity securities, held for trading. Also contributing to the increase was a higher average invested asset base. An increase of $793 in earned premiums. Earned premium growth of $486 in Business Insurance was primarily driven by new business premium growth outpacing non-renewals in the prior 12 months. Earned premium growth of $165 in Personal Lines was primarily driven by new business growth outpacing non-renewals in auto and the effect of earned pricing increases in homeowners. Earned premiums and other increased $158 in Group Benefits primarily due to increased sales, particularly in group disability, and continued strong persistency. An increase of $541 in fee income primarily driven by increased individual annuity assets under management in the United States and Japan. Partially offsetting these increases was a decrease of $274 in net realized capital gains primarily due to lower net gains on the sale of fixed maturity securities, losses associated with GMWB derivatives, Japanese fixed annuity contract hedges and periodic net coupon settlements. These losses were offset in part by changes in the value of non-qualifying foreign currency swaps. Net Realized Capital Gains and Losses See Investment Results in the Investments section. Income Taxes The effective tax rate for 2006, 2005 and 2004 was 24%, 24% and 15%, respectively. The principal causes of the difference between the effective rate and the U.S. statutory rate of 35% for 2006 and 2005 were tax-exempt interest earned on invested assets and the separate account dividends received deduction ( DRD ). For 2004, the principal causes were tax exempt interest earned on invested assets, the separate account DRD and the tax benefit associated with the settlement of the 1998-2001 IRS audit. Income taxes paid in 2006, 2005 and 2004 were $179, $447 and $32, respectively. For additional information, see Note 13 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. The separate account DRD is estimated for the current year using information from the prior year-end, adjusted for current year equity market performance. The estimated DRD is generally updated in the third quarter for the provision-to-filed-return adjustments, and in the fourth quarter based on current year ultimate mutual fund distributions and fee income from the Company variable insurance products. The actual current year DRD can vary from the estimates based on, but not limited to, changes in eligible dividends received by the mutual funds, amounts of distributions from these mutual funds, the utilization of capital loss carry forwards at the mutual fund level and appropriate levels of taxable income. The Company receives a foreign tax credit ( FTC ) against its U.S. tax liability for foreign taxes paid by the Company including payments from its separate account assets. The separate account FTC is estimated for the current year using information from the most recent filed return, adjusted for the change in the allocation of separate account investments to the international equity markets during the current year. The actual current year FTC can vary from the estimates due to the actual FTC passed through by the mutual funds. 48 Table of Contents Earnings Per Common Share The following table represents earnings per common share data for the past three years: 2006 2005 2004 | | | Basic earnings per share $ 8.89 $ 7.63 $ 7.24 Diluted earnings per share $ 8.69 $ 7.44 $ 7.12 Weighted average common shares outstanding (basic) 308.8 298.0 292.3 Weighted average common shares outstanding and dilutive potential common shares (diluted) 315.9 305.6 297.0 Outlooks The Hartford provides projections and other forward-looking information in the Outlook sections within MD&A. The Outlook sections contain many forward-looking statements, particularly relating to the Company future financial performance. These forward-looking statements are estimates based on information currently available to the Company, are made pursuant to the safe harbor provisions of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 and are subject to the precautionary statements set forth in the introduction to MD&A above. Actual results are likely to differ materially from those forecast by the Company, depending on the outcome of various factors, including, but not limited to, those set forth in each Outlook section and in Item 1A, Risk Factors. Outlook Life To a large extent, the future profitability of Life will depend on Life ability to increase assets under management across all businesses and maintain its investment spread on general account products. Management believes the market for retirement products continues to expand as individuals increasingly save and plan for retirement. Demographic trends suggest that as the baby boom generation matures, a significant portion of the United States population will allocate a greater percentage of their disposable incomes to saving for their retirement years due to uncertainty surrounding the Social Security system and increases in average life expectancy. Competition has increased substantially in the variable annuities market with most major variable annuity writers now offering living benefits such as GMWB riders. The highly competitive environment in this market and the success of these riders and any new product will ultimately be based on customer acceptance. Future sales and revenues will be largely dependent on the Company ability to attract new customers and to retain contract holder account values in existing or new product offerings as they reach the end of the surrender charge period of their contract. The Company strategy in 2007 revolves around introducing new products and continually evaluating the portfolio of products currently offered. As a result, sales may be lower than the level of sales attained in 2006 when considering the highly competitive environment, the risk of disruption on new sales from product offering changes, customer acceptance of new products and the effect on the distribution related to product offering changes. In 2007, Life will begin selling mutual fund based products in the 401(k) market that will increase Life ability to grow assets under management in the medium size 401(k) market. Life will also be selling mutual fund based products in the 403(b) market as it looks to grow assets in a highly competitive environment. Disciplined expense management will continue to be a focus; however, as Life looks to expand its reach in these markets, additional investments in service and technology will occur. The Institutional Investment Products ( IIP ) markets are highly competitive from a pricing perspective, and a small number of cases often account for a significant portion of deposits, therefore the Company may not be able to sustain the level of assets under management growth attained in 2006. The Company success depends in part on the level of credited interest rates and the Company credit rating. IIP has launched new products in 2006 to provide solutions that deal specifically with longevity risk, and will continue to introduce products in 2007. Longevity risk is defined as the likelihood of an individual outliving their assets. IIP is also designing innovative solutions to corporation defined benefit liabilities. The focus of the PPLI business is variable PPLI products to fund non-qualified benefits or other post employment benefit liabilities. The market served by PPLI is subject to extensive legal and regulatory review that could have an adverse effect on its business. Individual Life continues to focus on its core distribution model of sales through financial advisors, while also pursuing growth opportunities through other distribution sources such as independent life professionals. Variable universal life sales and account values remain sensitive to equity market levels and returns. Individual Life continues to face uncertainty surrounding estate tax legislation, a high level of competition from other life insurance providers, reduced availability and higher price of reinsurance, and the current regulatory environment related to reserving for universal life products with no-lapse guarantees, which may negatively affect Individual Life future earnings. The increased scale of the group life and disability operations and the expanded distribution network for its products and services has generated strong premium and sales growth in 2006. Management is committed to selling competitively priced products that meet the 49 Table of Contents Company internal rate of return guidelines and sales may be negatively affected by the competitive pricing environment in the marketplace. Although sales may fluctuate from year to year, the Company has experienced consistent premium growth over the past few years which results from the combination of sales, renewal pricing and persistency. Despite the current market conditions, including rising medical costs, the changing regulatory environment and cost containment pressure on employers, the Company continues to leverage its strength in claim practices risk management, service and distribution, enabling the Company to capitalize on market opportunities. Additionally, employees continue to look to the workplace for a broader and ever expanding array of insurance products. As employers design benefit strategies to attract and retain employees, while attempting to control their benefit costs, management believes that the need for the Company products will continue to expand. This combined with the significant number of employees who currently do not have coverage or adequate levels of coverage, creates opportunities for our products and services. Management continues to be optimistic about growth potential of the retirement savings market in Japan. Several trends such as an aging population, longer life expectancies and declining birth rate leading to a smaller number of younger workers to support each retiree have resulted in greater need for an individual to plan and adequately fund retirement savings. Competition has continued to increase in the Japanese market with the most significant competition the result of the strengthening of domestic competitors. This competition has resulted in changes in key distribution relationships that have negatively impacted current year deposits and could potentially impact future deposits. The Company continues to focus its efforts on strengthening our distribution relationships and improving our wholesaling and servicing efforts. In addition, the Company continues to evaluate product designs that meet customers needs while maintaining prudent risk management. In the first quarter 2007, the Company is launching a new variable annuity product to complement its existing variable annuity product offerings. The success of the Company enhanced product offering will ultimately be based on customer acceptance in an highly competitive environment. The Company will adopt Statement of Position 05-1, Accounting by Insurance Enterprises for Deferred Acquisition Costs in Connection with Modifications of Exchanges of Insurance Contracts ( SOP 05-1 ) on January 1, 2007. The Company expects the cumulative effect upon adoption of SOP 05-1 to be $50 to $65, after-tax, which will be recorded as a reduction in retained earnings as of January 1, 2007. In addition, the Company expects an after-tax reduction in net income, in 2007, of $15 to $25 assuming the level of internal replacement activity in 2007 is consistent with prior years. Property & Casualty In 2007, management expects continued growth in written and earned premiums in Business Insurance and Personal Lines and a return to written premium growth in Specialty Commercial. Within Business Insurance, management expects written premium to grow 2% to 5% in 2007, comprised of 4% to 7% growth in small commercial and no growth in middle market. Growth in small commercial is expected to primarily come from an increase in agency appointments, better segmented pricing and improved product features. As competition among P&C insurers puts downward pressure on prices in Business Insurance, the Company may non-renew some accounts or decide to write less new business. The Personal Lines segment is expected to deliver written premium growth of 4% to 7% in 2007, including growth from both AARP and Agency. The Company expects personal auto written premium to increase 3% to 6% and homeowners written premium to increase 7% to 10% as management expects that growth from Agency business will be largely driven by an increase in the number of agency appointments and growth in AARP business will be largely driven an increase in marketing to AARP members. Within Specialty Commercial, management expects written premium growth of 3% to 6% in 2007, driven by increases in property, casualty and professional liability, fidelity and surety. Lines of business within Business Insurance and Personal Lines experienced either lower written price increases or a continuation of written price declines in 2006. Despite the downward pressure on rates, the Company expects market pricing to remain largely rational in 2007, although underwriting margins will likely lessen as loss costs outpace earned pricing increases. Management believes that 2006 represented the peak year of profitability in the underwriting cycle. Across Business Insurance and Personal Lines, management expects that loss costs will increase in 2007 as claim frequency is expected to be less favorable than in 2006 and claim severity is expected to increase. Due to the earned pricing and loss cost trends, management expects that, in 2007, the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes will increase in Business Insurance. While Personal Lines earned pricing and loss cost trends are expected to be less favorable in 2007, the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes is expected to remain relatively unchanged as underwriting results will benefit from the sale of Omni, which generated an underwriting loss of $52 in 2006. Within Specialty Commercial, management expects that current accident year underwriting results before catastrophes in 2007 will be relatively consistent with results in 2006. Current accident year catastrophe losses in 2006, at 1.9 percent of Ongoing Operations earned premium, were lower than the long-term historical average. While catastrophe losses vary significantly from year to year and are unpredictable, management has assumed that catastrophe losses in 2007 will be closer to 3.0% to 3.5% of earned premium. Despite a mild hurricane season and a relatively low level of catastrophe losses in 2006, the Company will continue to manage its exposure to catastrophe losses through the ongoing assessment of its risk, disciplined underwriting and the use of reinsurance and other risk transfer alternatives, as appropriate. As of January 1, 2007, the Company retention under its principal property catastrophe reinsurance program was increased from $175 to $250 per catastrophe event, although under certain conditions, the Company loss retention from a single event could be reduced to 50 Table of Contents $200 for a second or subsequent event. With the January 1 renewal, the cost of the company principal property catastrophe reinsurance program increased by approximately 28%. The expense ratio is expected to increase slightly in 2007 since the 2006 expense ratio benefited from a $41 reduction in Florida Citizens assessments. In addition, the expense ratio in 2007 will likely reflect an increase in spending for AARP marketing initiatives and investments in technology. As a result of less favorable or unfavorable earned pricing changes and increases in loss costs and underwriting expenses, the Company expects an Ongoing Operations combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development of between 87.5 and 90.5 in 2007, compared to 88.0 in 2006. Likewise, P&C operating cash flow is expected to be less favorable than in 2006, although still very positive. Management expects a mid-single digit increase in net investment income in 2007, driven by net underwriting cash inflows and a change in asset mix. Based upon current market forward interest rate expectations and an expectation of moderating partnership income, management expects the after-tax investment yield for Property & Casualty to be about 4.0% in 2007, consistent with an after-tax yield of 4.1% in 2006. The Other Operations segment will continue to manage the discontinued operations of the Company as well as claims (and associated reserves) related to asbestos, environmental and other exposures. The Company will continue to review various components of all of its reserves on a regular basis. LIFE Executive Overview Life provides retail and institutional investment products such as variable and fixed annuities, mutual funds, PPLI, and retirement plan services, individual life insurance and group benefit products, such as group life and group disability insurance. Retail offers individual variable and fixed market value adjusted ( MVA ) annuities, retail mutual funds, 529 college savings plans, Canadian and offshore investment products. Retirement Plans offers retirement plan products and services to corporations and municipalities under Section 401(k), 403(b) and 457 plans. Institutional primarily offers institutional liability products, including stable value products and institutional annuities (primarily terminal funding cases), as well as variable Private Placement Life Insurance ( PPLI ) owned by corporations and high net worth individuals. Within stable value, Institutional has an investor note program that offers both institutional and retail investor notes. Institutional and Retail notes are sold as funding agreement backed notes through trusts and may also be issued directly from the Company to investors. Institutional also offers mutual funds to institutional investors. Furthermore, Institutional offers additional individual products including structured settlements, consumer notes and single premium immediate annuities and longevity assurance. Individual Life sells a variety of life insurance products, including variable universal life, universal life, interest sensitive whole life and term life. Group Benefits provides employers, associations, affinity groups and financial institutions with group life, accident and disability coverage, along with other products and services, including voluntary benefits, group retiree health, and medical stop loss. International, which has operations located in Japan, Brazil, Ireland and the United Kingdom, provides investments, retirement savings and other insurance and savings products to individuals and groups outside the United States and Canada. Life charges direct operating expenses to the appropriate segment and allocates the majority of indirect expenses to the segments based on an intercompany expense arrangement. Intersegment revenues primarily occur between Life Other category and the operating segments. These amounts primarily include interest income on allocated surplus, interest charges on excess separate account surplus, the allocation of certain net realized capital gains and losses and the allocation of credit risk charges. Life derives its revenues principally from: (a) fee income, including asset management fees, on separate account and mutual fund assets and mortality and expense fees, as well as cost of insurance charges; (b) net investment income on general account assets; (c) fully insured premiums; and (d) certain other fees. Asset management fees and mortality and expense fees are primarily generated from separate account assets, which are deposited with Life through the sale of variable annuity and variable universal life products and from mutual funds. Cost of insurance charges are assessed on the net amount at risk for investment-oriented life insurance products. Premium revenues are derived primarily from the sale of group life, group disability and individual term insurance products. Life expenses essentially consist of interest credited to policyholders on general account liabilities, insurance benefits provided, amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs, expenses related to selling and servicing the various products offered by the Company, dividends to policyholders, and other general business expenses. Life profitability in its variable annuity, mutual fund and, to a lesser extent, variable universal life businesses, depends largely on the amount of the contract holder account value or assets under management on which it earns fees and the level of fees charged. Changes 51 Table of Contents in account value or assets under management are driven by two main factors: net flows, which measure the success of the Company asset gathering and retention efforts, and the market return of the funds, which is heavily influenced by the return realized in the equity markets. Net flows are comprised of new sales and other deposits less surrenders, death benefits, policy charges and annuitizations of investment type contracts, such as: variable annuity contracts. In the mutual fund business, net flows are known as net sales. Net sales are comprised of new sales less redemptions by mutual fund customers. Life uses the average daily value of the S&P 500 Index as an indicator for evaluating market returns of the underlying account portfolios in the United States. Relative profitability of variable products is highly correlated to the growth in account values or assets under management since these products generally earn fee income on a daily basis. An immediate significant downturn in the financial markets could result in a charge against deferred acquisition costs. See the Critical Accounting Estimates section of the MD&A for further information on DAC unlocks. The profitability of Life fixed annuities and other spread-based products depends largely on its ability to earn target spreads between earned investment rates on its general account assets and interest credited to policyholders. Profitability is also influenced by operating expense management including the benefits of economies of scale in the administration of its United States variable annuity businesses in particular. In addition, the size and persistency of gross profits from these businesses is an important driver of earnings as it affects the rate of amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs. Life profitability in its individual life insurance and group benefits businesses depends largely on the size of its in force block, the adequacy of product pricing and underwriting discipline, actual mortality and morbidity experience, and the efficiency of its claims and expense management. Performance Measures Fee Income Fee income is largely driven from amounts collected as a result of contractually defined percentages of assets under management on investment type contracts. These fees are generally collected on a daily basis from the contract holder account. For individual life insurance products, fees are contractually defined percentages based on levels of insurance, age, premiums and deposits collected and contractholder account value. Life insurance fees are generally collected on a monthly basis. Therefore, the growth in assets under management either through positive net flows or net sales and favorable equity market performance will have a favorable impact on fee income. Conversely, negative net flows or net sales and unfavorable equity market performance will reduce fee income generated from investment type contracts. As of and for the years ended December 31, Product/Key Indicator Information 2006 2005 2004 United States Individual Variable Annuities Account value, beginning of period $ 105,314 $ 99,617 $ 86,501 Net flows (3,150 ) (881 ) 5,471 Change in market value and other 12,201 6,578 7,645 Account value, end of period $ 114,365 $ 105,314 $ 99,617 Retail Mutual Funds Assets under management, beginning of period $ 29,063 $ 25,240 $ 20,301 Net sales 5,659 1,335 2,505 Change in market value and other 3,814 2,488 2,434 Assets under management, end of period $ 38,536 $ 29,063 $ 25,240 Retirement Plans Account value, beginning of period $ 19,317 $ 16,493 $ 13,571 Net flows 2,545 1,618 1,636 Change in market value and other 1,713 1,206 1,286 Account value, end of period $ 23,575 $ 19,317 $ 16,493 Individual Life Insurance Variable universal life account value, end of period $ 6,637 $ 5,902 $ 5,356 Total life insurance in-force 164,227 150,801 139,889 S&P 500 Index Year end closing value 1,418 1,248 1,212 Daily average value 1,310 1,208 1,131 Japan Annuities Account value, beginning of period $ 26,104 $ 14,631 $ 6,220 Net flows 4,393 10,857 7,249 Change in market value and other 846 616 1,162 Account value, end of period $ 31,343 $ 26,104 $ 14,631 52 Table of Contents Year ended December 31, 2006 compared to year ended December 31, 2005 The increase in U.S. variable annuity account values can be attributed to market growth during 2006. Net flows for the U.S. variable annuity business were negative and have worsened from prior year levels resulting from higher surrenders outpacing increased deposits. Mutual Fund net sales increased substantially over the prior year as a result of focused wholesaling efforts and favorable fund and equity market performance. The increase in Retirement Plans account values is due to positive net flows over the past year due to higher deposits and market appreciation. Individual Life variable universal life account value increased due primarily to premiums, deposits and market appreciation. Life insurance inforce increased from December 31, 2005 due to business growth. Japan annuity account values as of December 31, 2006 were higher as a result of positive net flows and fund performance, offset by the effects of currency translation. Japan net flows have decreased from the prior year due to increased competition. Changes in market value were based on market conditions and investment management performance in 2006. Year ended December 31, 2005 compared to year ended December 31, 2004 The increase in U.S. variable annuity account values can be attributed to market growth during 2005. Net flows and net deposits for the U.S. variable annuity and retail mutual fund businesses decreased in particular, as variable annuity net flows and mutual fund net sales were negatively affected due to lower sales levels and higher surrenders due to increased competition. Changes in market value were based on market conditions and investment management performance in 2005. Japan annuity account values and net flows grew as a result of strong deposits and significant market growth in 2005. Net Investment Income and Interest Credited Certain investment type contracts such as fixed annuities and other spread-based contracts generate deposits that the Company collects and invests to earn investment income. These investment type contracts use this investment income to credit the contract holder an amount of interest specified in the respective contract; therefore, management evaluates performance of these products based on the spread between net investment income and interest credited. Net investment income and interest credited can be volatile period over period, which can have a significant positive or negative effect on the operating results of each segment. The volatile nature of net investment income is driven primarily by prepayments on securities and earnings on partnership investments. In addition, insurance type contracts such as those sold by Group Benefits (discussed below) collect and invest premiums to pay for losses specified in the particular insurance contract and those sold by Institutional, collect and invest premiums for certain life contingent benefits. For these insurance products the investment spread is reflected in net investment income and policyholder benefits. Finally, the return of the funds underlying the Japan variable annuities is reported in net investment income in Other with an offsetting amount credited to those contractholders in interest credited. The net investment income and interest credited from the Japan variable annuities will be volatile due to the volatile performance of the funds and, similar to returns on U.S. separate account assets, accrues to the benefit of the policyholders, not the Company. For the years ended December 31, Net Investment Income 2006 2005 2004 | | | Retail $ 839 $ 933 $ 1,011 Retirement Plans 326 311 306 Institutional 1,003 802 664 Individual Life 324 305 303 Group Benefits 415 398 373 International 123 75 11 Other 1,978 4,021 1,007 Total net investment income $ 5,008 $ 6,845 $ 3,675 Interest Credited on General Account Assets Retail $ 640 $ 717 $ 841 Retirement Plans 208 197 186 Institutional 522 383 300 Individual Life 237 225 216 International 21 14 (1 ) Other 1,925 4,135 939 Total interest credited on general account assets $ 3,553 $ 5,671 $ 2,481 53 Table of Contents Year ended December 31, 2006 compared to year ended December 31, 2005 Net investment income and interest credited on general account assets in Retail declined due to a decline in general account assets as a result of surrenders on market value adjusted ( MVA ) fixed annuity products at the end of the guarantee period. Also contributing to the decline in general account assets were transfers within variable annuity products from the general account to separate account funds. Net investment income and interest credited on general account assets in Institutional increased primarily due to an increase in general account assets as a result of sales in the Company funding agreement backed Investor Notes program. Net investment income and interest credited in Other decreased due to a decrease in the mark-to-market effects of trading account securities supporting the Japanese variable annuity business. In addition to interest credited on general account assets, Institutional also had other contract benefits for limited payment contracts of $345 and $212 for the years ended December 31, 2006 and 2005, respectively. These amounts need to be deducted from net investment income to understand the net interest spread on these businesses because these contracts are accounted for as traditional insurance products. Year ended December 31, 2005 compared to year ended December 31, 2004 Net investment income and interest credited in Other increased due to $3.8 billion increase in the mark-to-market effects of trading account securities supporting the Japanese variable annuity business. Net investment income and interest credited on general account assets in Retail declined due to lower assets under management from surrenders on market value adjusted ( MVA ) fixed annuity products at the end of their guarantee period. Net investment income and interest credited on general account assets in Institutional increased as a result of the Company funding agreement backed Investor Notes program, partially offset by surrenders in the PPLI business. In addition to interest credited on general account assets, Institutional also had other contract benefits for limited payment contracts of $292 and $279 for the years ended December 31, 2005 and 2004, respectively. These amounts need to be deducted from net investment income to understand the net interest spread on these businesses because these contracts are accounted for as traditional insurance products. Premiums As discussed above, traditional insurance type products, such as those sold by Group Benefits, collect premiums from policyholders in exchange for financial protection for the policy holder from a specified insurable loss, such as death or disability. These premiums together with net investment income earned from the overall investment strategy are used to pay the contractual obligations under these insurance contracts. Two major factors, new sales and persistency, impact premium growth. Sales can increase or decrease in a given year based on a number of factors, including but not limited to, customer demand for the Company product offerings, pricing competition, distribution channels and the Company reputation and ratings. A majority of sales correspond with the open enrollment periods of employers benefits, typically January 1 or July 1. Persistency is the percentage of insurance policies remaining in force from year to year as measured by premiums. For the years ended December 31, Group Benefits 2006 2005 2004 | | | Total premiums and other considerations $ 4,150 $ 3,810 $ 3,652 Fully insured ongoing sales (excluding buyouts) 861 779 632 Persistency [1] 87 % 87 % 85 % [1] The persistency rate represents group life and disability business sold to employer groups, which accounts for, on average, 72% to 75% of in-force premiums. Earned premiums and other considerations include $12, $27 and $4 in buyout premiums for the years ended December 31, 2006, 2005 and 2004 respectively. The increase in premiums and other considerations for Group Benefits in 2006 compared to 2005 was driven by sales growth of 11%. The increase in premiums and other considerations for Group Benefits in 2005 compared to 2004 was driven by sales growth of 23%. Expenses There are three major categories for expenses. The first major category of expenses is benefits and losses. These include the costs of mortality and morbidity, particularly in the group benefits business, and mortality in the individual life businesses, as well as other contractholder benefits to policyholders. In addition, traditional insurance type products generally use a loss ratio which is expressed as the amount of benefits incurred during a particular period divided by total premiums and other considerations, as a key indicator of underwriting performance. Since Group Benefits occasionally buys a block of claims for a stated premium amount, the Company excludes this buyout from the loss ratio used for evaluating the underwriting results of the business as buyouts may distort the loss ratio. The second major category is insurance operating costs and expenses, which is commonly expressed in a ratio of a revenue measure depending on the type of business. The third category is the amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs and the present value of 54 Table of Contents future profits, which is typically expressed as a percentage of pre-tax income before the cost of this amortization. The individual annuity business within Retail accounts for the majority of the amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs and present value of future profits for Life. For the years ended December 31, Retail 2006 2005 2004 General insurance expense ratio (individual annuity) 17.2 bps 17.9 bps 18.3 bps DAC amortization ratio (individual annuity) 58.1 % 49.6 % 50.9 % Insurance expenses, net of deferrals $ 995 $ 869 $ 687 Individual Life Death benefits $ 251 $ 241 $ 245 Insurance expenses, net of deferrals $ 179 $ 167 $ 164 Group Benefits Total benefits and losses $ 3,002 $ 2,794 $ 2,703 Loss ratio (excluding buyout premiums) 72.3 % 73.1 % 74.0 % Insurance expenses, net of deferrals $ 1,102 $ 1,022 $ 989 Expense ratio (excluding buyout premiums) 27.6 % 27.8 % 27.7 % International Japan General insurance expense ratio 49.1 bps 68.6 bps 92.1 bps DAC amortization ratio 29.0 % 41.4 % 56.6 % Insurance expenses, net of deferrals $ 159 $ 148 $ 83 Individual annuity asset growth in 2006 and 2005 decreased individual annuity expense ratio to a level lower than prior years. The ratio of individual annuity DAC amortization increased due to the DAC unlock in 2006. Excluding the DAC unlock, the ratio was 50.8%, slightly higher than 2005 and consistent with 2004. Individual Life death benefits increased 4% in 2006 primarily due to a larger insurance inforce. Individual Life Insurance expenses, net of deferrals increased 7% for 2006 consistent with the growth of life insurance inforce. Death benefits decreased in 2005 as compared to 2004 due to favorable mortality in 2005. The Group Benefits loss ratio, excluding buyouts, for 2006 decreased due to favorable mortality experience, partially offset by unfavorable morbidity experience. Loss ratios experience volatility in period over period comparisons due to fluctuations in mortality and morbidity experience. The Group Benefits loss ratio, excluding buyouts, for 2005, decreased due to favorable mortality and morbidity experience, as compared to 2004. International expense ratio continued to decline in 2006 as Japan further leveraged the existing infrastructure as it attains economies of scale. The International DAC amortization ratio decreased due to the DAC unlock in 2006. Excluding the DAC unlock, the ratio was down slightly to 38.8%. Profitability Management evaluates the rates of return various businesses can provide as an input in determining where additional capital should be invested to increase net income and shareholder returns. Specifically, because of the importance of its individual annuity products, the Company uses the return on assets for the individual annuity business for evaluating profitability. In Group Benefits, after tax margin is a key indicator of overall profitability. Ratios 2006 2005 2004 Retail Individual annuity return on assets ( ROA ) 47.6 bps 54.6 bps 44.8 bps Group Benefits After-tax margin (excluding buyouts) 7.3 % 7.2 % 6.3 % International Japan International return on assets ( ROA ) 93.0 bps 59.2 bps 34.5 bps Individual annuity ROA decreased primarily due to the DAC unlock in 2006. Excluding the DAC unlock, ROA was 53.6 bps in 2006. Contributing to the decline was an increase in trail commissions. Individual annuity ROA increased for 2005, compared to the prior year. In particular, variable annuity fees and fixed annuity general account spreads each increased for 2005 compared to the prior year. The increase in the ROA can be attributed to the increase in account values and resulting increased fees including GMWB rider fees without a corresponding increase in expenses, while the increase in fixed annuity general account spread resulted 55 Table of Contents from fixed annuity contracts that were repriced upon the contract reaching maturity. Also, contributing to a higher ROA in 2005 is an increase in the separate account dividends received deduction ( DRD ) tax benefit compared to 2004. The improvement in the Group Benefits after-tax margin for 2006 was primarily due to an improvement in the loss and expense ratios partially offset by a lower net investment income rate and higher income tax expense. The improvement in the Group Benefits after tax margin for 2005 as compared to 2004 was primarily due to the favorable loss ratios and higher net investment income. International ROA increased significantly in 2006 primarily due to the DAC unlock and the leveraging of its existing infrastructure through disciplined expense management. Excluding the DAC unlock, ROA was 74 bps in 2006. Life Operating Summary 2006 2005 2004 Earned premiums $ 4,590 $ 4,203 $ 4,072 Fee income 4,726 4,000 3,464 Net investment income Securities available-for-sale and other 3,184 2,998 2,876 Equity securities held for trading [1] 1,824 3,847 799 Total net investment income 5,008 6,845 3,675 Other revenues Net realized capital gains (losses) (260 ) (25 ) 164 Total revenues 14,064 15,023 11,375 Benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses [1] 8,040 9,809 6,630 Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs and present value of future profits 1,452 1,172 993 Insurance operating costs and other expenses 2,708 2,522 2,145 Total benefits, losses and expenses 12,200 13,503 9,768 Income before income taxes and cumulative effect of accounting change 1,864 1,520 1,607 Income tax expense 423 316 202 Income before cumulative effect of accounting change 1,441 1,204 1,405 Cumulative effect of accounting change, net of tax [2] (23 ) Net income $ 1,441 $ 1,204 $ 1,382 [1] Includes investment income and mark-to-market effects of equity securities held for trading supporting the international variable annuity business, which are classified in net investment income with corresponding amounts credited to policyholders within benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses. [2] For the year ended December 31, 2004, represents the cumulative impact of the Company adoption of SOP 03-1. Year ended December 31, 2006 compared to the year ended December 31, 2005 The change in Life net income was due to the following: Net income increased primarily due to growth in assets under management resulting from market growth and sales, along with higher earned premiums in Group Benefits. The increase in net investment income was primarily due to income earned on higher average invested assets base, an increase in interest rates and a change in asset mix (e.g. greater investment in mortgage loans and limited partnerships). The increase in average invested assets base, as compared to the prior year, was primarily due to positive operating cash flows, investment contract sales such as retail and institutional notes, and universal life-type product sales. Net realized capital losses were larger in the year ended December 31, 2006 compared to 2005 primarily due to rising interest rates. Components of the increased realized losses included increased other than temporary impairments (see the Other-Than-Temporary Impairments discussion within Investment Results for more information on the increase in impairments), losses on non-qualifying derivatives and net losses on sales of investments. During 2006, the Company achieved favorable settlements in several cases brought against the Company by policyholders regarding their purchase of broad-based leveraged corporate owned life insurance ( leveraged COLI ) policies in the early to mid-1990s. The Company ceased offering this product in 1996. Based on the favorable outcome of these cases, together with the Company current assessment of the few remaining leveraged COLI cases, the Company reduced its estimate of the ultimate cost of these cases during 2006. This reserve reduction, recorded in insurance operating costs and other expenses, resulted in an after-tax benefit of $34. During 2005, the Company recorded an after-tax expense of $46, related to the termination of a provision of an agreement with a mutual fund distribution partner of the Company retail mutual funds. Life recorded an after-tax charge of $102 in 2005 to establish reserves for regulatory matters for investigations related to market timing by the SEC and New York Attorney General Office, directed brokerage by the SEC, and single premium group annuities by the New York Attorney General Office and the Connecticut Attorney General Office. 56 Table of Contents Year ended December 31, 2005 compared to the year ended December 31, 2004 The change in Life net income was due to the following: Life recorded an after-tax charge of $102 in 2005 to establish reserves for regulatory matters for investigations related to market timing by the SEC and New York Attorney General Office, directed brokerage by the SEC, and single premium group annuities by the New York Attorney General Office and the Connecticut Attorney General Office. Life recorded an after-tax expense of $46 in 2005, which related to the termination of a provision of an agreement with a mutual fund distribution partner. The effective tax rate was 21% for Life operations for the current year as compared to an effective tax rate of 13% for Life operations for the respective prior year period. The 2005 higher effective tax rate was attributed to the absence of the 2004 tax benefit of $190 offset by an increase in the DRD tax benefit of $50. Partially offsetting the decreases to earnings discussed above was: Net income increased due to growth in assets under management resulting from sales as well as higher premium and favorable loss ratios in Group Benefits. Net investment income increased for all Life segments during 2005, driven by a higher asset base and increased partnership income, as compared to the prior year. Income Taxes The effective tax rate for 2006, 2005 and 2004 was 23%, 21% and 13%, respectively. The principal causes of the difference between the effective rate and the U.S. statutory rate of 35% for 2006 and 2005 were tax-exempt interest earned on invested assets and the separate account dividends received deduction ( DRD ). For 2004, the principal causes were tax exempt interest earned on invested assets, the separate account DRD and the tax benefit associated with the settlement of the 1998-2001 IRS audit. For additional information, see Note 13 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. The separate account DRD is estimated for the current year using information from the prior year-end, adjusted for current year equity market performance. The estimated DRD is generally updated in the third quarter for the provision-to-filed-return adjustments, and in the fourth quarter based on current year ultimate mutual fund distributions and fee income from the Company variable insurance products. The actual current year DRD can vary from the estimates based on, but not limited to, changes in eligible dividends received by the mutual funds, amounts of distributions from these mutual funds, the utilization of capital loss carry forwards at the mutual fund level and appropriate levels of taxable income. The Company receives a foreign tax credit ( FTC ) against its U.S. tax liability for foreign taxes paid by the Company including payments from its separate account assets. The separate account FTC is estimated for the current year using information from the most recent filed return, adjusted for the change in the allocation of separate account investments to the international equity markets during the current year. The actual current year FTC can vary from the estimates due to the actual FTC passed through by the mutual funds. 57 Table of Contents A description of each segment as well as an analysis of the operating results summarized above is included on the following pages. RETAIL Operating Summary 2006 2005 2004 Fee income and other $ 2,697 $ 2,325 $ 2,019 Earned premiums (86 ) (52 ) 5 Net investment income 839 933 1,011 Net realized capital gains 7 9 Total revenues 3,457 3,215 3,035 Benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses 819 895 1,074 Insurance operating costs and other expenses 995 869 687 Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs and present value of future profits 930 744 647 Total benefits, losses and expenses 2,744 2,508 2,408 Income before income taxes and cumulative effect of accounting change 713 707 627 Income tax expense 85 85 105 Income before cumulative effect of accounting change 628 622 522 Cumulative effect of accounting change, net of tax [1] (19 ) Net income $ 628 $ 622 $ 503 Assets Under Management 2006 2005 2004 Individual variable annuity account values $ 114,365 $ 105,314 $ 99,617 Individual fixed annuity and other account values 9,937 10,222 11,384 Other retail products account values 525 336 182 Total account values [2] 124,827 115,872 111,183 Retail mutual fund assets under management 38,536 29,063 25,240 Other mutual fund assets under management 1,489 1,004 641 Total mutual fund assets under management 40,025 30,067 25,881 Total assets under management $ 164,852 $ 145,939 $ 137,064 [1] Represents the cumulative impact of the Company adoption of SOP 03-1. [2] Includes policyholders balances for investment contracts and reserve for future policy benefits for insurance contracts. Retail focuses on the savings and retirement needs of the growing number of individuals who are preparing for retirement, or have already retired, through the sale of individual variable and fixed annuities, mutual funds and other investment products. Life is both a leading writer of individual variable annuities and a top seller of individual variable annuities through banks in the United States. Year ended December 31, 2006 compared to the year ended December 31, 2005 Net income in the Retail segment for the year ended December 31, 2006 increased primarily due to improved fee income partially offset by higher amortization of DAC resulting from the DAC unlock during the fourth quarter of 2006. Higher fee income was driven by higher assets under management resulting primarily from market growth. A more expanded discussion of earnings can be found below: The increase in fee income in the variable annuity business for the year ended December 31, 2006 was mainly a result of growth in average account values. The year-over-year increase in average account values of 7% or $7.4 billion can be attributed to market appreciation of $12.2 billion during 2006. Variable annuities had net outflows of $3.2 billion for the year ended December 31, 2006 compared to net outflows of $881 for the year ended December 31, 2005. Net outflows from additional surrender activity were due to increased deposits competition, particularly from competitors offering variable annuity products with guaranteed living benefits. Mutual fund fee income increased 26% for the year ended December 31, 2006 due to increased assets under management driven by market appreciation of $3.9 billion and net deposits of $5.7 billion during the year. This increase was primarily attributable to focused wholesaling efforts. Despite stable general account investment spread during the year, net investment income has steadily declined for the year ended December 31, 2006 due to variable annuity transfers from the fixed account to the separate account combined with surrenders in the fixed MVA contracts. Despite these outflows, a more favorable interest rate environment during 2006 has resulted in increased deposits and a lower surrender rate due to fewer contracts up for renewal for the year ended December 31, 2006 resulting in a decrease in net outflows of $1.3 billion compared to the prior year. 58 Table of Contents Benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses have decreased for the year ended December 31, 2006 due to a decline in interest credited as a result of fixed annuity outflows which decreased fixed annuity account values. Insurance operating costs and other expenses increased for the year ended December 31, 2006 primarily due to an increase in mutual fund commissions due to significant growth in deposits. In addition, variable annuity asset based commissions increased due to 9% growth in assets under management, as well as an increase in the number of contracts reaching anniversaries when trail commission payments begin. During 2005, the Company recorded an after-tax expense of $46, for the termination of a provision of an agreement with a distribution partner of the Company retail mutual funds. Higher amortization of DAC resulted from the DAC unlock during the fourth quarter of 2006. The earnings impact of the DAC unlock was an increase to amortization of $72 after-tax. (For further discussion, see DAC Unlock Analysis in the Critical Accounting Estimates section of the MD&A). The effective tax rate remained steady for the year ended December 31, 2006 compared to the prior year. Year ended December 31, 2005 compared to the year ended December 31, 2004 Net income in Retail increased for the year ended December 31, 2005 primarily due to improved fee income driven by higher assets under management. Assets under management increased primarily as a result of market growth. A more expanded discussion of earnings growth can be found below: The increase in fee income in the variable annuity business for the year ended December 31, 2005 was mainly a result of growth in average account values. The year-over-year increase in average account values of 10% can be attributed to market appreciation of $6.6 billion during 2005. Variable annuities had net outflows of $881 for the year ended December 31, 2005 compared to net inflows of $5.5 billion for the year ended December 31, 2004. The net outflows in 2005 were due to increased surrender activity and increased competition for deposits particularly from competitors that offered guaranteed living benefits riders with their variable annuity products. Mutual fund fee income increased for the year ended December 31, 2005 due to increased assets under management driven by market appreciation of $2.6 billion and net deposits of $1.3 billion. Despite the increase in assets under management, the amount of net deposits has declined for the year ended December 31, 2005 compared to the prior year. This decrease is attributed to market competition and higher redemption amounts. The fixed annuity business contributed $66 of higher investment spread income in 2005 compared to 2004, excluding the cumulative effects of accounting change, due to improved investment spreads from the MVA products. Benefits and losses and loss adjustment expenses have decreased for the year ended December 31, 2005 due to an increase in reserves in 2004 related to the acquisition of a block of acquired business from London Pacific Life and Annuity Company in liquidation. The increase in reserves of $62 was offset by an equivalent increase in earned premium. Also contributing to the decrease in benefits expense is a decrease in interest credited as older fixed annuity MVA business with higher credited rates matures and either lapses or renews at lower credited rates. The effective tax rate decreased for the year ended December 31, 2005 compared to the prior year end due to an increase in the DRD benefit as a percentage of pre-tax income. Partially offsetting these positive earnings drivers were the following items: Throughout Retail, insurance operating costs and other expenses increased for the year ended December 31, 2005 compared to the prior year. General insurance expenses increased due to increased costs related to technology services as well as sales and marketing. In addition, the Company recorded an after-tax expense of $46, for the termination of a provision of an agreement with a mutual fund distribution partner. There was higher amortization of DAC, which resulted from higher gross profits due to the positive earnings drivers as discussed above. Outlook Management believes the market for retirement products continues to expand as individuals increasingly save and plan for retirement. Demographic trends suggest that as the baby boom generation matures, a significant portion of the United States population will allocate a greater percentage of their disposable incomes to saving for their retirement years due to uncertainty surrounding the Social Security system and increases in average life expectancy. Competition has increased substantially in the variable annuities market with most major variable annuity writers now offering living benefits such as GMWB riders. The Company strategy in 2007 revolves around introducing new products and continually evaluating the portfolio of products currently offered. As a result, deposits may be lower than the level of deposits attained in 2006 due to the increasingly competitive environment, the risk of disruption on new deposits from product offering changes, customer acceptance of new products and the effect on the distribution related to product offering changes. Individual annuity deposits of $13.1 billion in 2006 increased 14% compared to prior year levels of $11.5 billion. Significantly contributing to the Company variable annuity deposits since August of 2002 are GMWB riders. The highly competitive environment in this market and the success of these riders and new product development will ultimately be based on customer acceptance. Future 59 Table of Contents deposits and revenues will be largely dependent on the Company ability to attract new customers and to retain contract holder account values in existing or new product offerings as they reach the end of the surrender charge period of their contracts. The growth and profitability of the individual annuity and mutual fund businesses is dependent to a large degree on the performance of the equity markets. In periods of favorable equity market performance, Life may experience stronger deposits and higher net flows, which will increase assets under management and thus increase fee income earned on those assets. In addition, higher equity market levels will generally reduce certain costs to Life of individual annuities, such as guaranteed minimum death benefit ( GMDB ) and GMWB benefits. Conversely, weak equity markets may dampen deposits activity and increase surrender activity causing declines in assets under management and lower fee income. Such declines in the equity markets will also increase the cost to Retail of GMDB and GMWB benefits associated with individual annuities. Life attempts to mitigate some of the volatility associated with the GMDB and GMWB benefits using reinsurance or other risk management strategies, such as hedging. Future net income for Life will be affected by the effectiveness of the risk management strategies Life has implemented to mitigate the net income volatility associated with the GMDB and GMWB benefits of variable annuity contracts. For spread-based products sold in the Life segment, the future growth will depend on the ability to earn targeted returns on new business given competition, retention of account values in the fixed annuity business when the contract holder rate guarantee expires and the future interest rate environment. Management current full year projections for 2007 are as follows: Variable annuity deposits of $12.0 billion to $13.0 billion Fixed annuity deposits of $500 to $1.0 billion Retail mutual fund deposits of $10.5 billion to $12.5 billion Variable annuity outflows of $3.0 billion to $4.0 billion Fixed annuity outflows of $500 to $1.0 billion Retail mutual fund net sales of $4.5 billion to $5.5 billion Individual annuity return on assets of 55 to 57 basis points Other retail return on assets of 13 to 15 basis points RETIREMENT PLANS Operating Summary 2006 2005 2004 | | | Fee income and other $ 192 $ 152 $ 121 Earned premiums 19 10 10 Net investment income 326 311 306 Net realized capital gains (losses) 1 (3 ) (3 ) Total revenues 538 470 434 Benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses 250 231 220 Insurance operating costs and other expenses 135 115 96 Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs 1 26 29 Total benefits, losses and expenses 386 372 345 Income before income taxes and cumulative effect of account change 152 98 89 Income tax expense 43 23 22 Income before cumulative effect of accounting change 109 75 67 Cumulative effect of accounting change, net of tax [1] (1 ) Net income $ 109 $ 75 $ 66 Assets Under Management 2006 2005 2004 Governmental account values $ 11,540 $ 10,475 $ 9,962 401(k) account values 12,035 8,842 6,531 Total account values [2] 23,575 19,317 16,493 Government mutual fund assets under management [3] 163 756 401(k) mutual fund assets under management 1,140 947 755 Total mutual fund assets under management 1,140 1,110 1,511 Total assets under management $ 24,715 $ 20,427 $ 18,004 [1] Represents the cumulative impact of the Company adoption of SOP 03-1. [2] Includes policyholder balances for investment contracts and reserves for future policy benefits for insurance contracts. [3] Government Mutual Fund assets declined to zero due to a large case surrender in 2005 and the remaining business being transferred to the Institutional segment. 60 Table of Contents The Retirement Plans segment primarily offers customized wealth creation and financial protection for corporate and government employers through its two business units, Government and 401(k). Year ended December 31, 2006 compared to the year ended December 31, 2005 Net income in the Retirement segment for the year ended December 31, 2006 increased primarily due to improved fee income combined with lower amortization of DAC resulting from the DAC unlock during the fourth quarter of 2006. Higher fee income was driven by higher assets under management resulting primarily from net flows and market growth. A more expanded discussion of earnings can be found below: Fee income for 401(k) increased 34%, or $37 for the year ended December 31, 2006 compared to the prior year due to the growth in average account values. This growth is primarily driven by positive net flows of $2.0 billion during the year resulting from strong deposits. Total 401(k) deposits and net flows increased by 22% and 16%, respectively, over the prior year. The increase in average account values can also be attributed to market appreciation of $1.1 billion during the year. General account spread remained stable for the year ended December 31, 2006 compared to the prior year. Overall, net investment income and the associated interest credited within benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses each increased as a result of the growth in general account assets under management. Additionally, benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses increased for the year ended December 31, 2006 compared to the prior year due to a large case annuitization in the 401(k) business which also resulted in a corresponding increase in earned premiums of $12. Insurance operating costs and other expenses increased for the year ended December 31, 2006 primarily driven by the 401(k) business. The additional costs can be attributed to greater assets under management resulting in higher trail commissions and maintenance expenses. Lower amortization of DAC resulted from a $20 benefit due to the unlocking of Retirement Plans DAC assumptions during the fourth quarter of 2006 in both the 401(k) and Government businesses of $25 and ($5) after-tax, respectively. (For further discussion, see DAC Unlock and Sensitivity Analysis in this section of the MD&A). Year ended December 31, 2005 compared to the year ended December 31, 2004 Net income in the Retirement Plans segment increased for the year ended December 31, 2005 compared to the prior year end primarily due to higher earnings in the 401(k) business while net income for the Government business was relatively stable as positive market appreciation was largely offset by negative net flows resulting in little growth in assets under management. A more expanded discussion of earnings growth can be found below. Fee income for 401(k) increased 39% or $30 for year ended December 31, 2005 compared to the prior year. This increase is a result of positive net flows from the 401(k) business of $1.8 billion over the prior year driven by strong deposits and increasing ongoing deposits contributing to the growth in 401(k) assets under management of 34% to $9.7 billion. Total 401(k) deposits and net flows increased substantially by 32% and 26%, respectively, over the prior year primarily due to the full year impact of 2004 expansion of wholesaling capabilities and new product offerings. The DAC amortization rate decreased in 2005 compared to 2004 as a result of higher profits. Partially offsetting these positive earnings drivers were the following items: General account spread decreased for both 401(k) and Governmental businesses for December 31, 2005 compared to prior year. The decrease is attributable to a decrease in the net investment income earned rate for both businesses. Average general account assets for the Retirement segment increased approximately 7% in 2005 compared to 2004, while net investment income increased only 2%. Benefits and claims expense, which mainly consists of interest credited, increased 5% for the year ended December 31, 2005 compared to prior year. An increase in insurance operating costs and other expenses of $19 for the year ended December 31, 2005 was principally driven by the 401(k) business. The additional costs can be attributed to greater deposits and assets under management, resulting in a 20% increase in commissions, technology expenditures, and marketing and servicing costs supporting the segment business. However, the increase in 401(k) deposits has driven down the overall general insurance expense per case by over 4% compared to prior year. Outlook The future profitability of this segment will depend on Life ability to increase assets under management across all businesses and maintain its investment spread earnings on the general account products sold largely in the Government business. As the baby boom generation approaches retirement, management believes these individuals will contribute more of their income to retirement plans due to the uncertainty of the Social Security system and the increase in average life expectancy. In 2007, Life will begin selling mutual fund based products in the 401(k) market that will increase Life ability to grow assets under management in the medium size 401(k) market. Life will also be selling mutual fund based products in the 403(b) market as they look to grow assets in a highly competitive environment. Disciplined expense management will continue to be a focus; however, as Life looks to expand its reach in these markets, additional investments in service and technology will occur. 61 Table of Contents Management current full year projections for 2007 are as follows: Deposits of $5.5 billion to $6.5 billion Net flows of $2.0 billion to $3.0 billion Return on assets of 36 to 38 basis points INSTITUTIONAL Operating Summary 2006 2005 2004 Fee income and other $ 124 $ 119 $ 161 Earned premiums 607 504 463 Net investment income 1,003 802 664 Net realized capital gains (losses) (5 ) (5 ) 3 Total revenues 1,729 1,420 1,291 Benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses 1,484 1,212 1,116 Insurance operating costs and expenses 78 56 55 Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs and present value of future profits 32 32 26 Total benefits, losses and expenses 1,594 1,300 1,197 Income before income taxes 135 120 94 Income tax expense 36 32 26 Net income $ 99 $ 88 $ 68 Assets Under Management 2006 2005 2004 Institutional account values [1] $ 22,214 $ 17,917 $ 14,599 Private Placement Life Insurance account values 26,131 23,836 22,498 Mutual fund assets under management [2] 2,567 1,528 676 Total assets under management $ 50,912 $ 43,281 $ 37,773 [1] Institutional investment product account values include transfers from Retirement Plans and Retail of $763 during 2006. [2] Mutual fund assets under management include transfers from the Retirement Plan segment of $178 during 2006. Institutional primarily offers customized wealth creation and financial protection for institutions, corporate and high net worth individuals through its two business units: Institutional Investment Products ( IIP ) and PPLI. Year ended December 31, 2006 compared to the year ended December 31, 2005 Net income in Institutional increased for the year ended December 31, 2006 compared to the prior year driven by higher earnings in both the IIP and PPLI businesses. A more expanded discussion of earnings can be found below: Higher net investment income increased in Institutional driven by positive net flows of $2.2 billion during the year, which resulted in higher assets under management. Net flows for IIP were strong primarily as a result of the Company funding agreement backed Investor Notes program. Investor Note deposits for the years ended December 31, 2006 and 2005 were $2.3 billion and $2.0 billion, respectively. General account spread is one of the main drivers of net income for the Institutional line of business. The increase in spread income in 2006 was driven by higher assets under management as noted above, combined with improved partnership income. For the year ended December 31, 2006 and 2005, income from partnership investments were $15 and $6 after-tax, respectively. For the year ended December 31, 2006, earned premiums increased as a result of two large terminal funding cases that were sold during the period. This increase in earned premiums was offset by a corresponding increase in benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses. PPLI net income increased compared to prior year primarily due to asset growth in the variable business combined with increased tax benefits. Partially offsetting these positive earnings drivers was the following item: IIP operating expenses increased in the year ended December 31, 2006 due to higher costs related to the launch of new retirement products targeting the baby boom generation in 2006. Year ended December 31, 2005 compared to the year ended December 31, 2004 Net income in Institutional increased for the year ended December 31, 2005 compared to the prior year driven by higher earnings in both the IIP and PPLI businesses. A more expanded discussion of earnings can be found below: 62 Table of Contents Total revenues increased in Institutional driven by positive net flows of $2.4 billion during 2005, which resulted in higher assets under management. Net flows for Institutional increased for the year ended December 31, 2005 compared to the prior year, primarily as a result of the Company funding agreement backed Investor Notes program, which was launched in the third quarter of 2004. Investor Note deposits for the years ended December 31, 2005 and 2004 were $2.0 billion and $643, respectively. General account spread is one of the main drivers of net income for the Institutional line of business. An increase in spread income in 2005 was driven by higher assets under management noted above, combined with improved partnership income and mortality gains related to terminal funding and structured settlement contracts that include life contingencies. For the year ended December 31, 2005 and 2004, gains related to mortality, investments or other activity were $10 and $3 after-tax, respectively. During 2005, the Company invested in more variable rate assets to back the increasing block of variable rate liabilities sold under the stable value product line. This asset/liability matching strategy decreased portfolio yields, as variable rate assets had lower initial coupon yields then fixed rate assets. At the same time, the stable value variable rate liabilities have lower crediting rates in 2005 than stable value fixed rate liabilities, which allowed the Company to maintain-to-slightly-increase its general account spread on a yield basis. PPLI net income increased $3 or 17% compared to prior year primarily due to asset growth in the variable business combined with favorable mortality experience. Partially offsetting these positive earnings drivers was the following item: PPLI cost of insurance charges has decreased due to reductions in the face amount of certain cases. These face reductions have also resulted in lower death benefits. This impact combined with favorable mortality, which increases the provision for future experience rate credits has led to the year over year decrease in fee income and other. Outlook The future net income of this segment will depend on Institutional ability to increase assets under management across all businesses and maintain its investment spread earnings on the products sold largely in the IIP business. The IIP markets are highly competitive from a pricing perspective, and a small number of cases often account for a significant portion of deposits, therefore the Company may not be able to sustain the level of assets under management growth attained in 2006. In 2004, IIP introduced the Hartford Income Notes which is a product that provides the Company with opportunity for future growth. This product provides access to both a multi-billion dollar retail market, and a nearly trillion dollar institutional market. These markets are highly competitive and the Company success depends in part on the level of credited interest rates and the Company credit rating. As the baby boom generation approaches retirement, management believes these individuals will seek investment and insurance vehicles that will give them steady streams of income throughout retirement. IIP has launched new products in 2006 to provide solutions that deal specifically with longevity risk, and will continue to introduce products in 2007. Longevity risk is defined as the likelihood of an individual outliving their assets. IIP is also designing innovative solutions to corporations defined benefit liabilities. The focus of the PPLI business is variable PPLI products to fund non-qualified benefits or other post employment benefit liabilities. The market served by PPLI is subject to extensive legal and regulatory review that could have an adverse effect on its business. Management current full year projections for 2007 are as follows: Deposits (includes mutual funds) $5.0 billion $6.0 billion Net flows (excludes mutual funds) $2.0 billion $3.0 billion Return on assets (includes mutual funds) 18 to 20 basis points 63 Table of Contents INDIVIDUAL LIFE Operating Summary 2006 2005 2004 Fee income and other $ 883 $ 802 $ 767 Earned premiums (53 ) (33 ) (21 ) Net investment income 324 305 303 Net realized capital gains 5 5 7 Total revenues 1,159 1,079 1,056 Benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses 497 469 480 Insurance operating costs and other expenses 179 167 164 Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs and present value of future profits 241 205 185 Total benefits, losses and expenses 917 841 829 Income before income taxes and cumulative effect of accounting change 242 238 227 Income tax expense 72 72 71 Income before cumulative effect of accounting change 170 166 156 Cumulative effect of accounting change, net of tax [1] (1 ) Net income $ 170 $ 166 $ 155 Account Values 2006 2005 2004 Variable universal life insurance $ 6,637 $ 5,902 $ 5,356 Universal life/interest sensitive whole life 4,035 3,696 3,402 Modified guaranteed life and other 699 716 729 Total account values $ 11,371 $ 10,314 $ 9,487 Life Insurance Inforce Variable universal life insurance $ 73,770 $ 71,365 $ 69,089 Universal life/interest sensitive whole life 45,230 41,714 39,109 Modified guaranteed life and other 45,227 37,722 31,691 Total life insurance inforce $ 164,227 $ 150,801 $ 139,889 [1] Represents the cumulative impact of the Company adoption of SOP 03-1. Individual Life provides life insurance strategies to a wide array of business intermediaries to solve the wealth protection, accumulation and transfer needs of their affluent, emerging affluent and small business insurance clients. Year ended December 31, 2006 compared to the year ended December 31, 2005 Net Income in Individual Life for 2006, includes an unfavorable $18 after tax impact related to the DAC unlock in the fourth quarter of 2006, partially offset by $7, after-tax, favorable revisions to prior year net DAC estimates reflected in the first half of 2006. Excluding these net impacts of $11, net income increased $15 or 9% for 2006 primarily due to growth in life insurance and account values, and favorable mortality experience in 2006 compared to 2005. The following factors contributed to the earnings results: Cost of insurance charges, the largest component of fee income, increased $30 for the year ended December 31, 2006, driven by growth in the variable universal and universal life insurance inforce. Variable fee income increased, consistent with the growth in the variable universal life insurance account value. Other fee income, another component of total fee income, increased primarily due to additional amortization of deferred revenues of $48 associated with the DAC unlock. Earned premiums, which include premiums for ceded reinsurance, decreased primarily due to increased ceded reinsurance premiums for the year ended December 31, 2006. Net investment income increased primarily due to increased general account assets from sales growth. Benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses increased for 2006 consistent with the growth in account values and life insurance inforce, and also reflect favorable mortality experience in 2006 compared to 2005. Insurance operating costs and other expenses increased for the year ended December 31, 2006 consistent with the growth of life insurance inforce. Amortization of DAC for the year ended December 31, 2006 increased $76 related to the DAC unlock, partially offset by revisions to prior year estimates. Excluding the impacts of the DAC unlock and revisions, the amortization of DAC decreased for the year ended December 31, 2006, consistent with the mix of products and the level and mix of product profitability. 64 Table of Contents Year ended December 31, 2005 compared to the year ended December 31, 2004 Net income increased for the year ended December 31, 2005 compared to 2004, primarily due to increases in both life insurance inforce and account values. The following factors contributed to the earnings results: Fee income increased $35 for the year ended December 31, 2005 compared to 2004. Cost of insurance charges, a component of total fee income, increased $22 in 2005, driven by business growth and aging of the prior year block of variable universal, universal, and interest-sensitive whole life insurance inforce. Other fee income, another component of total fee income, increased $7 in 2005 primarily due to growth and improved product performance primarily in interest-sensitive whole life and variable universal life insurance products. Variable fee income grew $6 in 2005, as equity market performance and premiums in excess of withdrawals added to the variable universal life account value. Net investment income increased moderately for the year ended December 31, 2005 compared to 2004 due to increased general account assets from business growth, partially offset by lower interest rates on new investments and reduced prepayments on bonds in 2005. Benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses decreased for the year ended December 31, 2005 compared to 2004 consistent with growth in account values and life insurance inforce. Income tax expense and the resulting tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2005 was impacted by a DRD tax benefit of $7, whereas income tax expense for the year ended December 31, 2004 included a DRD tax benefit of $5. Partially offsetting these positive earnings drivers were the following items: Amortization of DAC increased for the year ended December 31, 2005 compared to 2004 primarily as a result of product mix and higher gross margins within variable universal and interest-sensitive whole life insurance products. Insurance operating costs and other expenses increased for the year ended December 31, 2005 compared to 2004 as a result of business growth. Outlook Individual Life sales were $284 in 2006, an increase of $34 or 14% over sales of $250 in 2005. Sales results in 2006 were strong across major distribution channels and product lines. Individual Life continues to focus on its core distribution model of sales through financial advisors, while also pursuing growth opportunities through other distribution sources such as independent life professionals. The variable universal life mix remains strong at 40% of total sales in 2006. Overall, product sales were enhanced by new product launches in each quarter in 2006. In the first quarter of 2006, Individual Life introduced a new variable life product that blends the benefits of universal life insurance and variable annuities and in the second quarter launched Hartford Term, which has additional term insurance durations and new competitive features. In late June 2006, Individual Life launched a flexible premium last survivor variable universal life product. In early October 2006, Individual Life introduced a new product rider to its existing Stag Whole Life product for the employer market. Variable universal life sales and account values remain sensitive to equity market levels and returns. Individual Life continues to face uncertainty surrounding estate tax legislation, a high level of competition from other life insurance providers, reduced availability and higher price of reinsurance, and the current regulatory environment related to reserving for universal life products with no-lapse guarantees, which may negatively affect Individual Life future earnings. Management full year 2007 projections are as follows: Sales of $305 to $315 Life insurance inforce increase of 8% to 10% After tax margin on total revenues of 15% to 16% 65 Table of Contents GROUP BENEFITS Operating Summary 2006 2005 2004 Earned premiums and other $ 4,150 $ 3,810 $ 3,652 Net investment income 415 398 373 Net realized capital gains (losses) (6 ) 1 2 Total revenues 4,559 4,209 4,027 Benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses 3,002 2,794 2,703 Insurance operating costs and other expenses 1,102 1,022 989 Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs 41 31 23 Total benefits, losses and expenses 4,145 3,847 3,715 Income before income taxes 414 362 312 Income tax expense 111 90 83 Net income $ 303 $ 272 $ 229 Earned Premiums and Other 2006 2005 2004 Fully insured ongoing premiums $ 4,100 $ 3,747 $ 3,611 Buyout premiums 12 27 4 Other 38 36 37 Total earned premiums and other $ 4,150 $ 3,810 $ 3,652 The Group Benefits segment provides employers, associations, affinity groups and financial institutions with group life, accident and disability coverage, along with other products and services, including voluntary benefits, group retiree health, and medical stop loss. The Company also offers disability underwriting, administration, claims processing services and reinsurance to other insurers and self-funded employer plans. Group Benefits has a block of financial institution business that is experience rated. This business comprised approximately 10%, 9% and 9% of the segment 2006, 2005 and 2004 premiums and other considerations (excluding buyouts) respectively, and, on average, 4% to 5% of the segment 2006, 2005 and 2004 net income. Year ended December 31, 2006 compared to the year ended December 31, 2005 Net income increased for the year ended December 31, 2006, primarily due to higher earned premiums and a lower expense ratio excluding the financial institution business. The results for the year ended December 31, 2006 included a net benefit of $11 resulting from the completion of life reserve studies during the fourth quarter. The results for the year ended December 31, 2005 included a non-recurring tax benefit of $9 related to the CNA Acquisition. The following factors contributed to the earnings increase: Earned premiums increased driven by year-to-date sales (excluding buyouts) growth of 11%, particularly in group life insurance. The loss ratio (defined as benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses as a percentage of premiums and other considerations excluding buyouts) was 72.3% for the year ended December 31, 2006, down from 73.1% in the prior year period. For the year ended December 31, 2006, the loss ratio excluding financial institutions was 77.2% as compared to 77.3% in the prior year period. The expense ratio was 27.6% for the year ended December 31, 2006 as compared to 27.8% in the prior year period. Excluding financial institutions, the expense ratio for the year ended December 31, 2006 was 22.9%, down from 24.0% in the prior year period. The decline in expense ratio excluding financial institutions for the year ended December 31, 2006 was due to growth in premiums outpacing growth in expenses. Year ended December 31, 2005 compared to the year ended December 31, 2004 Net income of $272 included a non-recurring tax benefit of $9 related to the CNA Acquisition. Excluding this tax benefit, net income increased 15% to $263 for the year ended December 31, 2005 as compared to $229 for the prior year due primarily to higher earned premiums and net investment income as well as a favorable loss ratio. The following factors contributed to the earnings increase: Earned premiums, excluding buyouts, increased 4% driven by sales growth of 23%, particularly in disability, for the year ended December 31, 2005 and continued strong persistency during 2005. Net investment income increased due to higher average asset balances as well as slightly higher average investment yields. The segment loss ratio (defined as benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses as a percentage of premiums and other considerations excluding buyouts) was 73.1% for the year ended December 31, 2005, down from 74.0% in the prior year due to improved morbidity experience as well as favorable mortality experience. Excluding financial institutions, the loss ratio was 77.3%, down from 78.7% in the prior year. 66 Table of Contents Partially offsetting the positive earnings drivers noted above was the following item: Operating costs were higher for the year ended December 31, 2005 as compared to the prior year primarily due to higher operating expenses related to business growth. Outlook The increased scale of the group life and disability operations and the expanded distribution network for its products and services has generated strong premium and sales growth in 2006. Fully insured ongoing premiums for the year ended December 31, 2006 was $4.1 billion, a 9% increase over the prior year. Sales for the year ended December 31, 2006 were $861 (excluding buyout premiums and premium equivalents) representing an increase of 11% over the prior year. Management is committed to selling competitively priced products that meet the Company internal rate of return guidelines and sales may be negatively affected by the competitive pricing environment in the marketplace. Although sales may fluctuate from year to year, the Company has experienced consistent premium growth over the past few years which results from the combination of sales, renewal pricing and persistency. Despite the current market conditions, including rising medical costs, the changing regulatory environment and cost containment pressure on employers, the Company continues to leverage its strength in claim practices risk management, service and distribution, enabling the Company to capitalize on market opportunities. Additionally, employees continue to look to the workplace for a broader and ever expanding array of insurance products. As employers design benefit strategies to attract and retain employees, while attempting to control their benefit costs, management believes that the need for the Company products will continue to expand. This combined with the significant number of employees who currently do not have coverage or adequate levels of coverage, creates opportunities for our products and services. Management current 2007 full year projections are as follows: Fully insured ongoing premiums (excluding buyout premiums and premium equivalents) $4.4 billion to $4.5 billion Sales (excluding buyout premiums and premium equivalents) $800 to $850 Loss ratio (excluding buyout premiums) between 72% and 74% Expense ratio (excluding buyout premiums) between 27% and 29% After tax margin, on earned premiums and other (excluding buyout premiums), between 6.8% and 7.2%, which reflects the estimated impact of adopting SOP 05-1 Accounting by Insurance Enterprises for Deferred Acquisition Costs in Connections with Modifications or Exchanges of Insurance Contracts. INTERNATIONAL Operating Summary 2006 2005 2004 Fee income and other $ 700 $ 483 $ 240 Net investment income 123 75 11 Net realized capital losses (64 ) (34 ) (1 ) Total revenues 759 524 250 Benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses 3 42 20 Insurance operating costs and other expenses 208 188 98 Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs and present value of future profits 167 133 77 Total benefits, losses and expenses 378 363 195 Income before income taxes and cumulative effect of accounting change 381 161 55 Income tax expense 135 65 12 Income before cumulative effect of accounting change 246 96 43 Cumulative effect of accounting change, net of tax [1] (4 ) Net income $ 246 $ 96 $ 39 Assets Under Management 2006 2005 2004 Japan variable annuity account values $ 29,653 $ 24,641 $ 14,129 Japan MVA fixed annuity account values 1,690 1,463 502 Total Japan assets under management $ 31,343 $ 26,104 $ 14,631 [1] Represents the cumulative impact of the Company adoption of SOP 03-1. International, with operations in Japan, Brazil, Ireland and the United Kingdom, focuses on the savings and retirement needs of the growing number of individuals outside the United States who are preparing for retirement, or have already retired, through the sale of variable annuities, fixed annuities and other insurance and savings products. The Company Japan operation, which began selling 67 Table of Contents variable annuities at the end of 2000, has grown significantly to become a significant distributor of variable annuities and is the market leader in variable annuity assets under management in Japan and is the largest component of the International segment. Year ended December 31, 2006 compared to the year ended December 31, 2005 Net income in International increased for the year ended December 31, 2006, principally driven by higher fee income in Japan, which was derived from an increase in average assets under management. A more expanded discussion of earnings growth can be found below: Fee income increased $217 or 45%, for the year ended December 31, 2006. As of December 31, 2006, Japan variable annuity assets under management were $29.7 billion, a 20% increase from the prior year period. The increase in average assets under management was driven by positive net flows of $4.2 billion and market appreciation of $1.2 billion during the year. The amount of variable annuity deposits has declined for the year ended December 31, 2006 by 46%, compared to the prior year periods primarily due to increased competition and changes in key distribution relationships. Also contributing to the higher fee income was increased surrender activity as some customers surrendered policies in order to lock in favorable market appreciation in their account balances. Surrender fees increased by $19, or 53% from the prior year. The decrease in benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses by 93% over prior year can be attributed to the unlock of the GMDB/GMIB reserve of $27 after-tax. For further discussion, see DAC Unlock and Sensitivity Analysis in the Critical Accounting Estimates section of the MD&A. Contributing to the increase in net income for the year ended December 31, 2006 was a cumulative tax benefit of $9, that resulted from a change in the effective tax rate on Japan earnings resulting from a change in management intent under APB 23. The increase in fixed annuity assets under management can be attributed to positive net flows of $224 during the year. Partially offsetting the positive earnings drivers discussed above were the following items: DAC amortization was higher due to higher actual gross profits consistent with growth in the Japan operation, off-set by $26 after-tax amortization benefit associated with the DAC amortization unlock. For further discussion, see DAC Unlock and Sensitivity Analysis in the Critical Accounting Estimates section of the MD&A. Insurance operating costs and other expenses increased for the year ended December 31, 2006 by 11%. These increases are due to higher maintenance costs and non-deferred asset-based commissions resulting from the growth in the Japan operation. Year ended December 31, 2005 compared to the year ended December 31, 2004 Net income increased significantly for the year ended December 31, 2005, principally driven by higher fee income and investment spread in Japan, derived from a 78% increase in the assets under management. A more expanded discussion of earnings growth can be found below: The increase in fee income in 2005 was mainly a result of growth in Japan variable annuity assets under management. As of December 31, 2005, Japan variable annuity assets under management were $24.6 billion, a 74% increase from the prior year. The increase in assets under management was driven by positive net flow of $9.8 billion and favorable market appreciation of $3.4 billion, partially offset by a ($2.6) billion impact of foreign currency exchange. Higher fees in 2005 were also the result of increased surrender activity, as customers surrendered policies in order to take advantage of significant appreciation in their account balances. The Japan MVA fixed annuity business contributed $13 of higher investment spread income, including net periodic coupon settlements included in realized losses, in 2005 compared to 2004. This increase in investment spread was driven by higher assets under management. As of December 31, 2005, Japan MVA assets under management increased to $1.5 billion compared to $502 in the prior year. The increase in fixed annuity assets under management can be attributed to deposits of $1.2 billion for the year ending December 31, 2005 as compared to $521 for the prior year. Partially offsetting the positive earnings drivers discussed above were the following items: The increase in operating costs in 2005 was primarily due to the significant growth in the Japan operation and investment in our Ireland operation. DAC amortization was higher in the current year as compared to the prior year due to higher EGP consistent with the growth in the Japan operation. Tax rates increased in 2005 primarily due to a deferred tax valuation allowance established for losses on the United Kingdom operation. Outlook Management continues to be optimistic about growth potential of the retirement savings market in Japan. Several trends such as an aging population, longer life expectancies and declining birth rates leading to a smaller number of younger workers to support each retiree, have resulted in greater need for an individual to plan and adequately fund retirement savings. 68 Table of Contents Profitability depends on the account values of our customers, which are affected by equity, bond and currency markets. Periods of favorable market performance will increase assets under management and thus increase fee income earned on those assets. In addition, higher account value levels will generally reduce certain costs for individual annuities to the Company, such as guaranteed minimum death benefits ( GMDB ) and guaranteed minimum income benefits ( GMIB ). Expense management is also an important component of product profitability. Competition has continued to increase in the Japanese market with the most significant competition the result of the strengthening of domestic competitors. This competition has resulted in changes to key distribution relationships that have negatively impacted current year deposits and could potentially impact future deposits. The Company continues to focus its efforts on strengthening our distribution relationships and improving our wholesaling and servicing efforts. In addition, the Company continues to evaluate product designs that meet customers needs while maintaining prudent risk management. In the first quarter 2007, the company is launching a new variable annuity product to complement its existing variable annuity product offerings. The success of the Company enhanced product offering will ultimately be based on customer acceptance in an increasingly competitive environment. International continues to invest in its operations outside of Japan. In the short term, the Company expects losses in these operations outside of Japan to be relatively consistent with 2006. Management full year projections for Japan for 2007 are now as follows (using 118/$1 exchange rate for 2007): Variable annuity deposits of 530 billion to 825 billion ($4.5 billion to $7.0 billion) Variable annuity net flows of 350 billion to 650 billion ($3.0 billion to $5.5 billion) Return on assets of 68 to 72 basis points OTHER Operating Summary 2006 2005 2004 Fee income and other $ 83 $ 83 $ 119 Net investment income Securities available-for-sale and other 154 174 208 Equity securities held for trading [1] 1,824 3,847 799 Total net investment income 1,978 4,021 1,007 Net realized capital gains (losses) (198 ) 2 156 Total revenues 1,863 4,106 1,282 Benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses [1] 1,985 4,166 1,017 Insurance operating costs and other expenses 11 105 56 Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs and present value of future profits 40 1 6 Total benefits, losses and expenses 2,036 4,272 1,079 Income (loss) before income taxes and cumulative effect of accounting change (173 ) (166 ) 203 Income tax benefit (59 ) (51 ) (117 ) Income (loss) before cumulative effect of accounting change (114 ) (115 ) 320 Cumulative effect of accounting change, net of tax [2] 2 Net income (loss) $ (114 ) $ (115 ) $ 322 [1] Includes investment income and mark-to-market effects of equity securities held for trading supporting the international variable annuity business, which are classified in net investment income with corresponding amounts credited to policyholders within benefits, losses and loss adjustment expenses. [2] Represents the cumulative impact of the Company adoption of SOP 03-1. Net investment income includes the mark-to-market adjustment for equity securities held for trading which decreased primarily due to decreased fund performance in International. This decrease in net investment income is offset by a decrease in benefit, losses and loss adjustment expenses which reflects the interest credited on the Japan account balance liability. Year ended December 31, 2006 compared to the year ended December 31, 2005 The change in Other net income was due to the following: Net realized capital losses occurred in the year ended December 31, 2006 compared to net realized capital gains in the prior year period due primarily to rising interest rates. Components of the increased realized losses included increased other than temporary impairments (see the Other-Than-Temporary Impairments discussion within Investment Results for more information on the increase in impairments), losses on non-qualifying derivatives and net losses on sales of investments. Life recorded an after-tax charge of $102 for the year ended December 31, 2005 to establish reserves for regulatory matters for investigations related to market timing by the SEC and New York Attorney General Office, directed brokerage by the SEC, and single premium group annuities by the New York Attorney General Office and the Connecticut Attorney General Office. 69 Table of Contents During 2006, the Company achieved favorable settlements in several cases brought against the Company by policyholders regarding their purchase of broad-based leveraged corporate owned life insurance ( leveraged COLI ) policies in the early to mid-1990s. The Company ceased offering this product in 1996. Based on the favorable outcome of these cases, together with the Company current assessment of the few remaining leveraged COLI cases, the Company reduced its estimate of the ultimate cost of these cases during 2006. This reserve reduction, recorded in insurance operating costs and other expenses, resulted in an after-tax benefit of $34. Also contributing to the insurance operating costs and other expenses decreases for the year ended December 31, 2006 was a lower level of dividends to leveraged COLI policyholders. During 2005, the Company recorded a charge of $18, after-tax, related to the settlement of certain annuity contracts. The increase in the DAC amortization in 2006 was due to the DAC unlock of $46, after-tax. Year ended December 31, 2005 compared to the year ended December 31, 2004 Net income decreased for the year ended December 31, 2005. The following factors contributed to the change in earnings: Net realized capital gains decreased for the year ended December 31, 2005 due to increasing interest rates and the realized loss associated with the GMWB derivatives. Income tax benefit decreased for the year ended December 31, 2005 due to the absence of a $190 tax benefit recorded during 2004. Other than the impact of Japan interest credited, benefits, losses, and loss adjustment expenses increased for the year ended December 31, 2005 primarily due to the establishment of a $102 after-tax reserve for investigations related to market timing by the SEC and the New York Attorney General Office, directed brokerage by the SEC and single premium group annuities by the New York Attorney General Office and the Connecticut Attorney General Office. PROPERTY & CASUALTY Executive Overview Property & Casualty is organized into four reportable operating segments: the underwriting segments of Business Insurance, Personal Lines and Specialty Commercial (collectively Ongoing Operations ); and the Other Operations segment. Property & Casualty provides a number of coverages, as well as insurance related services, to businesses throughout the United States, including workers compensation, property, automobile, liability, umbrella, specialty casualty, marine, livestock, fidelity, surety, professional liability and directors and officers liability coverages. Property & Casualty also provides automobile, homeowners and home-based business coverage to individuals throughout the United States as well as insurance-related services to businesses. Property & Casualty derives its revenues principally from premiums earned for insurance coverages provided to insureds, investment income, and, to a lesser extent, from fees earned for services provided to third parties and net realized capital gains and losses. Premiums charged for insurance coverages are earned principally on a pro rata basis over the terms of the related policies in force. Service fees principally include revenues from third party claims administration services provided by Specialty Risk Services and revenues from member contact center services provided through AARP Health Care Options program. Total Property & Casualty Financial Highlights Premium revenue 2006 2005 2004 Earned premiums $ 10,433 $ 10,156 $ 9,494 Year ended December 31, 2006 compared to the year ended December 31, 2005 Earned premiums grew $277, or 3%, primarily due to: A $436 increase in Business Insurance and Personal Lines earned premium before considering catastrophe treaty reinstatement premium, primarily driven by new business outpacing non-renewals in Personal Lines auto, Personal Lines homeowners and small commercial, $73 of catastrophe treaty reinstatement premium related to the 2005 hurricanes that depressed 2005 earned premium, and Earned pricing increases in Personal Lines homeowners. Partially offsetting these favorable drivers were factors that decreased earned premium: Non-renewal of a single captive insurance program in specialty casualty that accounted for $241 of earned premium in 2005, and Higher property catastrophe treaty reinsurance costs. 70 Table of Contents Year ended December 31, 2005 compared to the year ended December 31, 2004 Earned premiums grew $662, or 7%, primarily due to: A $651 increase in Business Insurance and Personal Lines earned premium before considering catastrophe treaty reinstatement premium, primarily driven by new business outpacing non-renewals, A $90 decrease in 2004 earned premiums under retrospectively-rated policies, and Earned pricing increases in small commercial and Personal Lines homeowners. Partially offsetting these favorable drivers was a $56 increase in catastrophe treaty reinstatement premium as a result of the 2005 hurricanes. Net income 2006 2005 2004 Underwriting results $ 745 $ 465 $ (3 ) Net servicing and other income [1] 53 49 42 Net investment income 1,486 1,365 1,248 Other expenses (223 ) (203 ) (235 ) Net realized capital gains 9 44 133 Income tax expense (551 ) (484 ) (275 ) Net income $ 1,519 $ 1,236 $ 910 [1] Net of expenses related to service business. Year ended December 31, 2006 compared to the year ended December 31, 2005 Net income increased $283 for the year ended December 31, 2006, primarily due to: A $152 decrease in current accident year catastrophe losses, A $121 increase in net investment income, A $41 reduction of estimated Citizens assessments in 2006 related to the 2005 hurricanes compared to a charge of $64 for Citizens assessments in 2005 related to the 2005 and 2004 hurricanes, $73 of catastrophe treaty reinstatement premium recorded as a reduction of earned premium in 2005, and A $51 increase in underwriting results from earned premium growth in Business Insurance and Personal Lines before considering catastrophe treaty reinstatement premium. Partially offsetting these favorable drivers were factors reducing net income: A $67 increase in income tax expense, reflecting an increase in income before income taxes, partially offset by a $49 income tax benefit resulting from the sale of Omni, A $48 increase in net unfavorable prior accident year development, A $35 decrease in net realized capital gains, primarily due to a $24, pre-tax, realized capital loss from the sale of Omni, and A $20 increase in other expenses, primarily due to lower bad debt expense in 2005. The $152 decrease in current accident year catastrophe losses was largely due to $264 of losses in 2005 related to hurricanes Katrina, Rita and Wilma, partially offset by an increase in non-hurricane catastrophe losses in 2006. The current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes of 62.4 for Ongoing Operations was relatively flat from 2005 to 2006 as a lower current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio for workers compensation business in small commercial was largely offset by an increase in non-catastrophe property loss costs in middle market Business Insurance and Personal Lines homeowners. Primarily driving the $121 increase in net investment income was a larger investment base due to increased cash flows from underwriting as well as an increase in interest rates and a change in asset mix (i.e., a greater share of investments in mortgage loans and limited partnerships). The $35 decrease in net realized capital gains was primarily due to a $24 pre-tax realized capital loss from the sale of Omni, an increase in other-than-temporary-impairments and losses on the sale of fixed maturity investments, partially offset by an increase in income from other sources. (See the Other-Than-Temporary Impairments discussion within Investment Results for more information on the increase in impairments). The $48 increase in net unfavorable prior accident year development was primarily due to a $148 increase in net unfavorable loss development in Other Operations, partially offset by a change in Ongoing Operations from $36 of net unfavorable prior accident year development in 2005 to $64 of net favorable prior accident year development in 2006. The $148 increase in net unfavorable prior accident year development in Other Operations was primarily due to a $243 reduction of reinsurance recoverables in 2006 resulting from an agreement with Equitas and the Company evaluation of the reinsurance recoverables and allowance for uncollectible reinsurance associated with older, long-term casualty liabilities. The $64 of net favorable prior accident year development in 2006 for 71 Table of Contents Ongoing Operations was primarily due to an $83 release of prior accident year hurricane reserves and a $58 release of allocated loss adjustment expense reserves for workers compensation and package business, partially offset by reserve strengthenings in Specialty Commercial. See the Reserves section for a discussion of prior accident year reserve development. Year ended December 31, 2005 compared to the year ended December 31, 2004 Net income increased $326 for the year ended December 31, 2005 primarily due to: A $172 decrease in current accident year catastrophe losses, A $166 decrease in net unfavorable prior accident year development, A $117 increase in net investment income, A $90 decrease in 2004 earned premiums under retrospectively-rated policies, An improvement in current accident year loss costs before catastrophes, A $32 decrease in other expenses, primarily due to lower bad debt expense in 2005, and A $76 increase in underwriting results from earned premium growth in Business Insurance and Personal Lines at a combined ratio less than 100.0. Partially offsetting these improvements were factors reducing net income: An $89 decrease in net realized capital gains, $64 of Citizens assessments in 2005 related to the 2005 and 2004 hurricanes, A $56 increase in catastrophe treaty reinstatement premium recorded as a reduction of earned premium, and A $209 increase in income tax expense, reflecting an increase in income before income taxes. The $172 decrease in current accident year catastrophe losses was primarily due to $264 of losses from Hurricanes Katrina, Rita and Wilma in 2005 compared to $394 of losses from Hurricanes Charley, Frances, Ivan and Jeanne in 2004. The $166 decrease in net unfavorable prior accident year development was primarily due to $181 of unfavorable development in 2004 related to a reduction in the reinsurance recoverable asset associated with older, long-term casualty liabilities, including asbestos liabilities. Primarily driving the $117 increase in net investment income was a larger investment base due to increased cash flows from underwriting, higher investment yields on fixed maturity investments and an increase in income from limited partnership investments. The $89 decrease in net realized capital gains was primarily due to lower net realized gains on the sale of fixed maturity investments and net losses on non-qualifying derivatives during 2005 compared to net gains during 2004. 72 Table of Contents Key Performance Ratios and Measures The Company considers several measures and ratios to be the key performance indicators for the property and casualty underwriting businesses. The following table and the segment discussions for the years ended December 31, 2006, 2005 and 2004 include various ratios and measures of profitability. Management believes that these ratios and measures are useful in understanding the underlying trends in The Hartford property and casualty insurance underwriting business. However, these key performance indicators should only be used in conjunction with, and not in lieu of, underwriting income for the underwriting segments of Business Insurance, Personal Lines and Specialty Commercial and net income for the Property & Casualty business as a whole, Ongoing Operations and Other Operations. These ratios and measures may not be comparable to other performance measures used by the Company competitors. Ongoing Operations earned premium growth 2006 2005 2004 Business Insurance 7 % 11 % 16 % Personal Lines 4 % 5 % 8 % Specialty Commercial (12 %) 2 % 11 % Ongoing Operations 3 % 7 % 12 % Ongoing Operations combined ratio Combined ratio before catastrophes and prior year development 88.0 89.4 89.7 Catastrophe ratio Current year 1.9 3.5 5.5 Prior years [1] (0.7 ) 0.1 (3.3 ) Total catastrophe ratio 1.2 3.6 2.2 Non-catastrophe prior year development 0.1 0.2 3.4 Combined ratio 89.3 93.2 95.3 Other Operations net income (loss) $ (35 ) $ 71 $ (45 ) Total Property & Casualty measures of net investment income Investment yield, after-tax 4.1 % 4.1 % 4.1 % Average annual invested assets at cost $ 27,324 $ 25,148 $ 23,437 [1] Included in the prior year catastrophe ratio is the net reserve release of (3.1) points related to September 11 in 2004. Year ended December 31, 2006 compared to the year ended December 31, 2005 Ongoing Operations earned premium growth The lower growth rate in Business Insurance was primarily attributable to a decrease in new business written premium, lower earned pricing increases in small commercial, larger earned pricing decreases in middle market and higher property catastrophe treaty reinsurance costs. The lower growth in Personal Lines was primarily due to unfavorable changes in earned pricing and the effect of higher property catastrophe treaty reinsurance costs. Partially offsetting the lower growth rate was the effect of $31 of catastrophe treaty reinstatement premium recorded as a reduction of earned premium in 2005 and an increase in new business written premium in auto and homeowners. During 2006, there was a decline in earned pricing increases in homeowners and a change from slight earned pricing increases for auto in 2005 to flat earned pricing for auto in 2006. The decline in Specialty Commercial earned premium primarily resulted from the non-renewal of a single captive insurance program within specialty casualty that accounted for $241 of earned premium in 2005 and a decrease in specialty property earned premium, partially offset by the effect of $26 of catastrophe treaty reinstatement recorded as a reduction of earned premium in 2005 and a higher growth rate in professional liability, fidelity and surety business. Ongoing Operations combined ratio For 2006, the combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development decreased by 1.4 points, to 88.0, driven largely by the effect of $73 of catastrophe treaty reinstatement premium recorded as a reduction of earned premium in 2005 and an improvement in the expense ratio. Before the effect of reinstatement premium in 2005, the combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development decreased by 0.7 points, primarily due to a 0.8 point decrease in the expense ratio and a lower current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio for workers compensation business in small commercial, partially offset by an increase in non-catastrophe property loss costs in middle market and Personal Lines homeowners. The decrease in the expense ratio was primarily driven by a reduction of $41 for Citizens assessments in 2006 and a charge of $64 for Citizens assessments in 2005. 73 Table of Contents The decrease in the current accident year catastrophe ratio for 2006 was primarily due to $264 of net losses incurred in 2005 for hurricanes Katrina, Rita and Wilma, partially offset by an increase in non-hurricane catastrophe losses. Catastrophe losses for 2006 included tornadoes and hail storms in the Midwest and windstorms in Texas and on the East coast. Prior accident year catastrophe reserves were reduced by $70 in 2006 primarily due to $83 of favorable development related to the 2005 and 2004 hurricanes. Net prior accident year development for non-catastrophe claims was not significant as reserve strengthenings were largely offset by reserve releases. See the Reserves section for a discussion of prior accident year reserve development for Ongoing Operations in 2006. Other Operations net income (loss) Other Operations reported a net loss of $35 for 2006 compared to net income of $71 for 2005. The change from net income to a net loss was primarily due to a $148 increase in unfavorable prior accident year development and a $22 decrease in net investment income, partially offset by a change to an income tax benefit in 2006 as a result of a pre-tax loss in 2006. The $148 increase in prior accident year development was primarily due to a $243 reduction in net reinsurance recoverables as a result of the agreement with Equitas and the Company evaluation of the reinsurance recoverables and allowance for uncollectible reinsurance associated with older, long-term casualty liabilities. Partially offsetting the increase in prior accident year development in 2006 was $85 of unfavorable reserve development for assumed reinsurance in 2005. The $22 decrease in net investment income was primarily due to lower invested assets as a result of loss and loss adjustment expense payments and the reallocation of capital from Other Operations to Ongoing Operations. Investment yield and average invested assets The after-tax investment yield remained flat at 4.1% from 2005 to 2006. An increase in the yield on investments in fixed maturities was offset by a decrease in the yield on limited partnerships. The average annual invested assets at cost increased as a result of net underwriting cash inflows and investment income. Year ended December 31, 2005 compared to the year ended December 31, 2004 Ongoing Operations earned premium growth Contributing to the decrease in the earned premium growth rate for Business Insurance were lower earned pricing increases in small commercial, earned pricing decreases in middle market and a decrease in new business growth, partially offset by increased renewal retention. The decrease in the earned premium growth rate for Personal Lines was primarily due to lower earned pricing increases in both auto and homeowners business, a decrease in premium renewal retention and a decline in Omni and Other Affinity earned premium. The decline in the Specialty Commercial earned premium growth rate primarily resulted from a decrease in property business due to a decline in new business and the Company exit from the multi-peril crop insurance business. Ongoing Operations combined ratio Before catastrophes and prior accident year development, the combined ratio improved from 2004 to 2005 principally due to improved current accident year performance for auto bodily injury and workers compensation claims, partially offset by the effect of an increase in non-catastrophe loss costs for property coverages and an increase in the expense ratio, which was largely due to the hurricane-related assessments of $64 in 2005. The decrease in the current accident year catastrophe ratio for 2005 was primarily due to $264 of net losses incurred for hurricanes Katrina, Rita and Wilma in 2005 compared to $394 of losses from Hurricanes Charley, Frances, Ivan and Jeanne in 2004. Net prior accident year development was not significant in 2005 as reserve strengthenings were largely offset by reserve releases. In 2004, strengthening of non-catastrophe loss reserves was almost entirely offset by a release of catastrophe reserves. Prior accident year catastrophe reserves related to September 11 were reduced by $298 in 2004. Net prior accident year reserve increases in 2004 for non-catastrophe losses included $190 for construction defects claims, $38 for small commercial package business and $25 for auto liability claims. See the Reserves section for a discussion of net favorable prior accident year reserve development for Ongoing Operations in 2006. Other Operations net income (loss) Other Operations reported net income of $71 for 2005 compared to a net loss of $45 for 2004. The change from a net loss to net income was primarily due to a $233 decrease in unfavorable prior accident year development, partially offset by a $62 decrease in net investment income and a change to income tax expense due to the pre-tax income in 2005. The $233 decrease in net reserve strengthening was primarily due to $181 of unfavorable development in 2004 related to a reduction in the reinsurance recoverable asset associated with older, long-term casualty liabilities, including asbestos liabilities, as well as $85 more of unfavorable prior accident year reserve development in 2004 on assumed reinsurance reserves. The $62 decrease in net investment income was 74 Table of Contents primarily due to lower invested assets as a result of loss and loss adjustment expense payments and the reallocation of capital from Other Operations to Ongoing Operations. Investment yield and average invested assets The after-tax investment yield of 4.1% for 2005 was consistent with the after-tax yield in 2004. The average annual invested assets increased over the same period as a result of net underwriting cash inflows and investment income. How Property & Casualty seeks to earn income Net income is the measure of profit or loss used in evaluating the performance of Total Property & Casualty and the Ongoing Operations and Other Operations segments. Within Ongoing Operations, the underwriting segments of Business Insurance, Personal Lines and Specialty Commercial are evaluated by The Hartford management primarily based upon underwriting results. Underwriting results within Ongoing Operations are influenced significantly by earned premium growth and the adequacy of the Company pricing. Underwriting profitability over time is also greatly influenced by the Company underwriting discipline, which seeks to manage exposure to loss through favorable risk selection and diversification, its management of claims, its use of reinsurance and its ability to manage its expense ratio which it accomplishes through economies of scale and its management of acquisition costs and other underwriting expenses. Pricing adequacy depends on a number of factors, including the ability to obtain regulatory approval for rate changes, proper evaluation of underwriting risks, the ability to project future loss cost frequency and severity based on historical loss experience adjusted for known trends, the Company response to rate actions taken by competitors, and expectations about regulatory and legal developments and expense levels. Property & Casualty seeks to price its insurance policies such that insurance premiums and future net investment income earned on premiums received will cover underwriting expenses and the ultimate cost of paying claims reported on the policies and provide for a profit margin. For many of its insurance products, Property & Casualty is required to obtain approval for its premium rates from state insurance departments. In setting its pricing, Property & Casualty assumes an expected level of losses from natural or man-made catastrophes that will cover the Company exposure to catastrophes over the long-term. In most years, however, Property & Casualty actual losses from catastrophes will be more or less than that assumed in its pricing due to the significant volatility of catastrophe losses. ISO defines a catastrophe loss as an event that causes $25 or more in industry insured property losses and affects a significant number of property and casualty policyholders and insurers. Given the lag in the period from when claims are incurred to when they are reported and paid, final claim settlements may vary from current estimates of incurred losses and loss expenses, particularly when those payments may not occur until well into the future. Reserves for lines of business with a longer lag (or tail ) in reporting are more difficult to estimate. Reserve estimates for longer tail lines are initially set based on loss and loss expense ratio assumptions estimated when the business was priced and are adjusted as the paid and reported claims develop, indicating that the ultimate loss and loss expense ratio will differ from the initial assumptions. Adjustments to previously established loss and loss expense reserves, if any, are reflected in underwriting results in the period in which the adjustment is determined to be necessary. The investment return, or yield, on Property & Casualty invested assets is an important element of the Company earnings since insurance products are priced with the assumption that premiums received can be invested for a period of time before loss and loss adjustment expenses are paid. For longer tail lines, such as workers compensation and general liability, claims are paid over several years and, therefore, the premiums received for these lines of business can generate significant investment income. Due to the emphasis on preservation of capital and the need to maintain sufficient liquidity to satisfy claim obligations, the vast majority of Property & Casualty invested assets have been held in fixed maturities, including, among other asset classes, corporate bonds, municipal bonds, government debt, short-term debt, mortgage-backed securities and asset-backed securities. Through its Other Operations segment, Property & Casualty is responsible for managing operations of The Hartford that have discontinued writing new or renewal business as well as managing the claims related to asbestos and environmental exposures. Definitions of key ratios and measures Written and earned premiums Written premium is a statutory accounting financial measure which represents the amount of premiums charged for policies issued, net of reinsurance, during a fiscal period. Earned premium is a GAAP and statutory measure. Premiums are considered earned and are included in the financial results on a pro rata basis over the policy period. Management believes that written premium is a performance measure that is useful to investors as it reflects current trends in the Company sale of property and casualty insurance products. Written and earned premium are recorded net of ceded reinsurance premium. 75 Table of Contents Reinstatement premiums Reinstatement premium represents additional ceded premium paid for the reinstatement of the amount of reinsurance coverage that was reduced as a result of a reinsurance loss payment. Policies in force as of year end Policies in force represent the number of policies with coverage in effect as of the end of the period. The number of policies in force is a growth measure used for Personal Lines only and is affected by both new business growth and premium renewal retention, including growth in both AARP and Agency lines of business. Written pricing increase (decrease) Written pricing increase (decrease) over the comparable period of the prior year includes the impact of rate filings, the impact of changes in the value of the rating bases and individual risk pricing decisions. A number of factors impact written pricing increases (decreases) including expected loss costs as projected by the Company pricing actuaries, rate filings approved by state regulators, risk selection decisions made by the Company underwriters and marketplace competition. Written pricing changes reflect the property and casualty insurance market cycle. Prices tend to increase for a particular line of business when insurance carriers have incurred significant losses in that line of business in the recent past or the industry as a whole commits less of its capital to writing exposures in that line of business. Prices tend to decrease when recent loss experience has been favorable or when competition among insurance carriers increases. Earned pricing increase (decrease) Written premiums are earned over the policy term, which is six months for certain Personal Lines auto business and 12 months for substantially all of the remainder of the Company business. Because the Company earns premiums over the 6 to 12 month term of the policies, earned pricing increases (decreases) lag written pricing increases (decreases) by 6 to 12 months. Premium renewal retention Premium renewal retention represents the ratio of net written premium in the current period that is not derived from new business divided by total net written premium of the prior period. Accordingly, premium renewal retention includes the effect of written pricing changes on renewed business. In addition, the renewal retention rate is affected by a number of other factors, including the percentage of renewal policy quotes accepted and decisions by the Company to non-renew policies because of specific policy underwriting concerns or because of a decision to reduce premium writings in certain lines of business or states. Premium renewal retention is also affected by advertising and rate actions taken by competitors. Loss and loss adjustment expense ratio The loss and loss adjustment expense ratio is a measure of the cost of claims incurred in the calendar year divided by earned premium and includes losses incurred for both the current and prior accident years. Among other factors, the loss and loss adjustment expense ratio needed for the Company to achieve its targeted return on equity fluctuates from year to year based on changes in the expected investment yield over the claim settlement period, the timing of expected claim settlements and the targeted returns set by management based on the competitive environment. The loss and loss adjustment expense ratio is affected by claim frequency and claim severity, particularly for shorter-tail property lines of business, where the emergence of claim frequency and severity is credible and likely indicative of ultimate losses. Claim frequency represents the percentage change in the average number of reported claims per unit of exposure in the current accident year compared to that of the previous accident year. Claim severity represents the percentage change in the estimated average cost per claim in the current accident year compared to that of the previous accident year. As one of the factors used to determine pricing, the Company practice is to first make an overall assumption about claim frequency and severity for a given line of business and then, as part of the ratemaking process, adjust the assumption as appropriate for the particular state, product or coverage. Current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio The current year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio is a measure of the cost of claims incurred in the current accident year divided by earned premiums. The current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio includes both the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes and the current accident year catastrophe ratio. Management believes that the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes is a performance measure that is useful to investors as it removes the impact of volatile and unpredictable catastrophe losses and prior accident year reserve development. Prior accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio The prior year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio represents the increase (decrease) in the estimated cost of settling catastrophe and non-catastrophe claims incurred in prior accident years as recorded in the current calendar year divided by earned premiums. 76 Table of Contents Expense ratio The expense ratio is the ratio of underwriting expenses, excluding bad debt expense, to earned premiums. Underwriting expenses include the amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs and insurance operating costs and expenses. Deferred policy acquisition costs include commissions, taxes, licenses and fees and other underwriting expenses and are amortized over the policy term. Policyholder dividend ratio The policyholder dividend ratio is the ratio of policyholder dividends to earned premium. Combined ratio The combined ratio is the sum of the loss and loss adjustment expense ratio, the expense ratio and the policyholder dividend ratio. This ratio is a relative measurement that describes the related cost of losses and expense for every $100 of earned premiums. A combined ratio below 100.0 demonstrates underwriting profit; a combined ratio above 100.0 demonstrates underwriting losses. Catastrophe ratio The catastrophe ratio (a component of the loss and loss adjustment expense ratio) represents the ratio of catastrophe losses (net of reinsurance) to earned premiums. A catastrophe is an event that causes $25 or more in industry insured property losses and affects a significant number of property and casualty policyholders and insurers. By their nature, catastrophe losses vary dramatically from year to year. Based on the mix and geographic dispersion of premium written and estimates derived from various catastrophe loss models, the Company expected catastrophe ratio over the long-term is 3.0 to 3.5 points. See Risk Management Strategy below for a discussion of the Company property catastrophe risk management program that serves to mitigate the Company net exposure to catastrophe losses. The catastrophe ratio includes the effect of catastrophe losses, but does not include the effect of reinstatement premiums. Combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development The combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development represents the combined ratio for the current accident year, excluding the impact of catastrophes. The Company believes this ratio is an important measure of the trend in profitability since it removes the impact of volatile and unpredictable catastrophe losses and prior accident year reserve development. Underwriting results Underwriting results is a before-tax measure that represents earned premiums less incurred losses, loss adjustment expenses and underwriting expenses. The Hartford believes that underwriting results provides investors with a valuable measure of before-tax profitability derived from underwriting activities, which are managed separately from the Company investing activities. Underwriting results is also presented for Ongoing Operations and Other Operations. A reconciliation of underwriting results to net income for Ongoing Operations and Other Operations is set forth in their respective discussions herein. Investment yield The investment yield, or return, on the Company invested assets primarily includes interest income on fixed maturity investments. Based upon the fair value of Property & Casualty investments as of December 31, 2006 and 2005, approximately 93% and 94%, respectively, of invested assets were held in fixed maturities. A number of factors affect the yield on fixed maturity investments, including fluctuations in interest rates and the level of prepayments. The Company also invests in equity securities, mortgage loans and limited partnership arrangements. Property & Casualty insurance business has been written by a number of writing companies that, under a pooling arrangement, participate in the Hartford Fire Insurance Pool, the lead company of which is the Hartford Fire Insurance Company ( Hartford Fire ). Property & Casualty maintains one portfolio of invested assets for all business written by the Hartford Fire Insurance Pool companies, including business reported in both the Ongoing Operations and Other Operations segments. Separate investment portfolios are maintained within Other Operations for the runoff of international assumed reinsurance claims and for the runoff business of Heritage Holdings, Inc., including its subsidiaries, Excess Insurance Company Ltd., First State Insurance Company and Heritage Reinsurance Company, Ltd. Within the Hartford Fire Insurance Pool, invested assets are attributed to Ongoing Operations and Other Operations pursuant to the Company capital attribution process. The Hartford attributes capital to each line of business or segment using an internally-developed, risk-based capital attribution methodology that incorporates management assessment of the relative risks within each line of business or segment, as well as the capital requirements of external parties, such as regulators and rating agencies. Net investment income earned on the Hartford Fire invested asset portfolio is allocated between Ongoing Operations and Other Operations based on the allocation of invested assets to each segment and the expected investment yields earned by each segment. Net investment income earned on the separate portfolios within Other Operations is recorded entirely within Other Operations. Based on 77 Table of Contents the Company method of allocating net investment income for the Hartford Fire Insurance Pool and the net investment income earned by Other Operations on its separate investment portfolios, in 2006, the after-tax investment yield for Ongoing Operations was 4.2% and the after-tax investment yield for Other Operations was 3.9%. Net realized capital gains (losses) When fixed maturity or equity investments are sold, any gain or loss is reported in net realized capital gains (losses). Individual securities may be sold for a variety of reasons, including a decision to change the Company asset allocation in response to market conditions and the need to liquidate funds to meet large claim settlements. Accordingly, net realized capital gains (losses) for any particular period are not predictable and can vary significantly. In addition, net realized capital gains (losses) include the pre-tax loss from the sale of Omni (see Ongoing Operations segment MD&A for further discussion). Refer to the Investment section of MD&A for further discussion of net investment income and net realized capital gains (losses). Reserves Reserving for property and casualty losses is an estimation process. As additional experience and other relevant claim data become available, reserve levels are adjusted accordingly. Such adjustments of reserves related to claims incurred in prior years are a natural occurrence in the loss reserving process and are referred to as reserve development . Reserve development that increases previous estimates of ultimate cost is called reserve strengthening . Reserve development that decreases previous estimates of ultimate cost is called reserve releases . Reserve development can influence the comparability of year over year underwriting results and is set forth in the paragraphs and tables that follow. The prior accident year development in the following table represents the ratio of reserve development to earned premiums. For a detailed discussion of the Company reserve policies, see Notes 1, 11 and 12 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements and the discussion in Critical Accounting Estimates. Based on the results of the quarterly reserve review process, the Company determines the appropriate reserve adjustments, if any, to record. Recorded reserve estimates are changed after consideration of numerous factors, including but not limited to, the magnitude of the difference between the actuarial indication and the recorded reserves, improvement or deterioration of actuarial indications in the period, the maturity of the accident year, trends observed over the recent past and the level of volatility within a particular line of business. In general, changes are made more quickly to more mature accident years and less volatile lines of business. For information regarding reserving for asbestos and environmental claims within Other Operations, refer to the Other Operations segment discussion. As part of its quarterly reserve review process, the Company is closely monitoring reported loss development in certain lines where the recent emergence of paid losses and case reserves could indicate a trend that may eventually lead the Company to change its estimate of ultimate losses in those lines. If, and when, the emergence of reported losses is determined to be a trend that changes the Company estimate of ultimate losses, prior accident year reserves would be adjusted in the period the change in estimate is made. For example, for both Personal Lines homeowners claims and Business Insurance workers compensation claims, during the latter half of 2006 there was an increase in severity in reported losses for recent accident years. While it is too early to tell whether this increase in severity constitutes a reliable trend, if reported losses continue to emerge unfavorably in 2007, prior accident year reserves may be strengthened. For Personal Lines auto liability claims, the Company estimates of ultimate losses include assumptions about frequency and severity trends. These assumptions are updated each quarter as the Company actuaries complete a review of reserves. During 2005 and 2006, these updates resulted in improvements in estimates of both frequency and severity trends and, as a result, the Company released reserves in the first, second, and fourth quarters of 2006. If, during 2007, frequency and severity trends continue to improve and the development of reported losses indicates that the assumptions made in the prior reserve review are too high, prior accident years may develop favorably. 78 Table of Contents A rollforward of liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses by segment for Property & Casualty for the year ended December 31, 2006 follows: For the year ended December 31, 2006 Business Personal Specialty Ongoing Other Total Insurance Lines Commercial Operations Operations P&C Beginning liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses-gross $ 7,066 $ 2,152 $ 6,202 $ 15,420 $ 6,846 $ 22,266 Reinsurance and other recoverables 709 385 2,354 3,448 1,955 5,403 Beginning liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses-net 6,357 1,767 3,848 11,972 4,891 16,863 Provision for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses Current year 3,127 2,516 1,063 6,706 6,706 Prior years (61 ) (38 ) 35 (64 ) 360 296 Total provision for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses 3,066 2,478 1,098 6,642 360 7,002 Less: Payments (2,279 ) (2,309 ) (727 ) (5,315 ) (835 ) (6,150 ) Less: Net reserves of Omni business sold (111 ) (111 ) (111 ) Ending liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses-net 7,144 1,825 4,219 13,188 4,416 17,604 Reinsurance and other recoverables 650 134 2,303 3,087 1,300 4,387 Ending liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses-gross $ 7,794 $ 1,959 $ 6,522 $ 16,275 $ 5,716 $ 21,991 Earned premiums $ 5,118 $ 3,760 $ 1,550 $ 10,428 $ 5 $ 10,433 Loss and loss expense paid ratio [1] 44.6 61.4 46.8 51.0 Loss and loss expense incurred ratio 59.9 65.9 70.8 63.7 Prior accident year development (pts.) [2] (1.2 ) (1.0 ) 2.3 (0.6 ) [1] The loss and loss expense paid ratio represents the ratio of paid loss and loss adjustment expenses to earned premiums. [2] Prior accident year development (pts) represents the ratio of prior accident year development to earned premiums. 79 Table of Contents Prior accident year development recorded in 2006 Included within prior accident year development for the year ended December 31, 2006 were the following reserve strengthenings (releases). Business Personal Specialty Ongoing Other Total Insurance Lines Commercial Operations Operations P&C Net release of catastrophe loss reserves for 2004 and 2005 hurricanes $ (25 ) $ (23 ) $ (35 ) $ (83 ) $ $ (83 ) Release of Personal Lines auto liability reserves for accident year 2005 (31 ) (31 ) (31 ) Strengthening of Personal Lines auto liability reserves for claims with exposure in excess of policy limits 30 30 30 Release of Business Insurance allocated loss adjustment expense reserves for workers compensation and package business for accident years 2003 to 2005 (58 ) (58 ) (58 ) Release of Personal Lines auto liability reserves for accident year 2003 to 2005 (22 ) (22 ) (22 ) Strengthening of Specialty Commercial construction defect claim reserves for accident years 1997 and prior 45 45 45 Strengthening of Specialty Commercial workers compensation allocated loss adjustment expense reserves 20 20 20 Effect of Equitas agreement and strengthening of allowance for uncollectible reinsurance 243 243 Strengthening of environmental reserves 43 43 Other reserve re-estimates, net [1] 22 8 5 35 74 109 Total prior accident year development for the year ended December 31, 2006 $ (61 ) $ (38 ) $ 35 $ (64 ) $ 360 $ 296 [1] Includes reserve discount accretion of $32, including $14 in Business Insurance, $11 in Specialty Commercial and $7 in Other Operations. During the year ended December 31, 2006, the Company reestimates of prior accident year reserves included the following significant reserve changes. Ongoing Operations Released net reserves related to prior year hurricanes by a total of $83, including $57 for hurricanes Katrina and Rita in 2005 and $26 for hurricanes Charley, Frances and Jeanne in 2004. Initial reserve estimates for the 2005 and 2004 hurricanes were higher because of the difficulty claim adjusters had in accessing the most significantly impacted areas and initially higher estimates of the cost of building materials and contractors due to demand surge . As the reported claims have matured, the estimated settlement value of the claims has decreased from the initial estimates. The ultimate estimate for hurricane Katrina was increased in the first quarter of 2006 because of higher than expected claim reporting, particularly in Personal Lines. Net loss reserves within Specialty Commercial decreased, primarily because hurricane Katrina losses on specialty property business were reimbursable under a specialty property reinsurance treaty as well as under the Company principal property catastrophe reinsurance program. After the first quarter of 2006, Katrina new claim intake abated and settlement percentages increased, resulting in a reduction of reserves in the last nine months of 2006. In addition, the rate of newly reported compensable claims for Rita and the 2004 hurricanes was less than expected, resulting in a reduction of reserves for these hurricanes. Released Personal Lines auto liability reserves by $31 related to the fourth accident quarter of 2005 as a result of better than expected frequency trends. During the third and fourth quarter of 2005, the Company had reduced the 2005 accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio for Personal Lines auto liability claims related to the first three accident quarters of 2005. Favorable frequency for the fourth accident quarter of 2005 emerged during the fourth quarter of 2005. However, the Company did not release reserves at that time, since reserve indications at only three months of development were not reliable. The Company released reserves in 2006 after further development indicated that early indications of reduced frequency were representative of a real trend. The $31 reserve release represented 2% of the Company net reserves for Personal Lines auto liability claims as of December 31, 2005. 80 Table of Contents Strengthened reserves for personal auto liability claims by $30 due to an increase in estimated severity on claims where the Company is exposed to losses in excess of policy limits. From the Company reserve review during the first quarter of 2006, the Company determined that the facts and circumstances necessitated an increase in the reserve estimate. The $30 of reserve strengthening represented 2% of the Company net reserves for Personal Lines auto liability claims as of December 31, 2005. Released Business Insurance allocated loss adjustment expense reserves by $58 for accident years 2003 to 2005, primarily for workers compensation business and package business, as a result of cost reduction initiatives implemented by the Company to reduce allocated loss adjustment expenses for both legal and non-legal expenses. The Company began implementing cost reduction initiatives in late 2003. It was initially uncertain what effect those efforts would have on controlling allocated loss adjustment expenses. During 2004, favorable trends started to emerge, particularly on shorter-tailed auto liability claims, but it was not clear if these trends would be sustained. In early 2005, favorable trends continued and the Company analyzed claims involving legal expenses separate from claims that do not involve legal expenses. This analysis included a review of the trends in the number of claims involving legal expenses, the average expenses incurred and trends in legal expenses. During the second quarter of 2005, the Company released allocated loss adjustment expense reserves on shorter-tailed auto liability claims as the favorable trends on shorter-tailed business emerged more quickly and were determined to be reliable. During both the second and fourth quarter of 2006, the Company determined that the favorable development on package business and workers compensation business had become a verifiable trend and, accordingly, reserves were reduced. The $58 reserve release represented 1% of Business Insurance net reserves as of December 31, 2005. Released Personal Lines auto liability reserves related to AARP and other affinity business by $22. AARP auto liability reserves for accident year 2004 were reduced as a result of favorable loss cost severity trends. AARP auto liability severity, as measured by reported data, began declining in 2005; however, the Company was uncertain whether this trend would prove persistent over time since paid loss data did not support a decline. During the second quarter of 2006, the Company determined that all the metrics supported a decline in severity estimates and, therefore, the Company released reserves. Auto liability reserves for other affinity business related to accident years 2003 to 2005 were reduced to recognize favorable developments in loss costs that have emerged. The $22 reserve release represented 1% of the Company net reserves for Personal Lines auto liability claims as of December 31, 2005. Strengthened Specialty Commercial construction defect claim reserves by $45 for accident years 1997 and prior as a result of an increase in claim severity trends. In 2004, two large construction defects claims were reported, but these were not viewed as an indication of an increase in the severity trend for all claims. In 2005, two additional large cases were reported. Management performed an expanded review of construction defects claims in the second quarter of 2006. Based on the expanded review and additional reported claim experience, management concluded that reported losses would likely continue at a higher level in the future and this resulted in strengthening the recorded reserves. The $45 of reserve strengthening represented 16% of the Company net reserves for Specialty Commercial property claims as of December 31, 2005. Strengthened Specialty Commercial workers compensation allocated loss adjustment expense reserves by $20 for loss adjustment expense payments expected to emerge after 20 years of development. During 2005, the Company had done an in-depth study of loss payments expected to emerge after 20 years of development. At that time, it was believed that allocated loss adjustment expenses for a particular subset of business (primary policies on national accounts business) developed more quickly than allocated loss adjustment expenses for smaller insureds and that a similar reserve strengthening for national accounts business was not required. During the second quarter of 2006, the Company reserve review indicated that the development pattern for this business should be adjusted to be more consistent with that for smaller insureds. Because the Company has written very little of this business in recent years, the increase in reserves affects accident years 1995 and prior. The $20 of reserve strengthening represented 1% of the Company net reserves for Specialty Commercial workers compensation claims as of December 31, 2005. Other Operations Reduced the reinsurance recoverable asset associated with older, longer-term casualty liabilities by $243. The Company reviewed the reinsurance recoverables and allowance for uncollectible reinsurance associated with older, long-term casualty liabilities in the second quarter 2006. As a result of this study, and the outcome of an agreement that resolved, with minor exception, all of the Company ceded and assumed domestic reinsurance exposures with Equitas, Other Operations recorded prior accident year development of $243. Strengthened environmental reserves by $43 as a result of an environmental reserve evaluation completed in the third quarter of 2006. As part of this evaluation, the Company reviewed all of its domestic direct and assumed reinsurance accounts exposed to environmental liability. The Company also examined its London Market exposures for both direct insurance and assumed reinsurance. The Company found estimates for individual cases changed based upon the particular circumstances of each account, although the review found no underlying cause or change in the claim environment. The $43 of reserve strengthening represented 2% of the Company net reserves for asbestos and environmental claims as of December 31, 2005. 81 Table of Contents A rollforward of liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses by segment for Property & Casualty for the year ended December 31, 2005 follows: For the year ended December 31, 2005 Business Personal Specialty Ongoing Other Total Insurance Lines Commercial Operations Operations P&C Beginning liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses-gross $ 6,057 $ 2,000 $ 5,519 $ 13,576 $ 7,753 $ 21,329 Reinsurance and other recoverables 474 190 2,091 2,755 2,383 5,138 Beginning liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses-net 5,583 1,810 3,428 10,821 5,370 16,191 Provision for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses Current year 2,949 2,389 1,377 6,715 6,715 Prior years 22 (95 ) 109 36 212 248 Total provision for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses 2,971 2,294 1,486 6,751 212 6,963 Less: Payments (2,197 ) (2,337 ) (1,066 ) (5,600 ) (691 ) (6,291 ) Ending liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses-net 6,357 1,767 3,848 11,972 4,891 16,863 Reinsurance and other recoverables 709 385 2,354 3,448 1,955 5,403 Ending liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses-gross $ 7,066 $ 2,152 $ 6,202 $ 15,420 $ 6,846 $ 22,266 Earned premiums $ 4,785 $ 3,610 $ 1,757 $ 10,152 $ 4 $ 10,156 Loss and loss expense paid ratio [1] 45.9 64.8 60.6 55.1 Loss and loss expense incurred ratio 62.1 63.6 84.6 66.5 Prior accident year development (pts.) [2] 0.5 (2.6 ) 6.2 0.4 [1] The loss and loss expense paid ratio represents the ratio of paid loss and loss adjustment expenses to earned premiums. [2] Prior accident year development (pts) represents the ratio of prior accident year development to earned premiums. 2005 accident year catastrophe loss and loss adjustment expenses record in 2005 In 2005, the current accident year provision for loss and loss adjustment expenses of $6.7 billion included net catastrophe loss and loss adjustment expenses of $351, of which $264 related to hurricanes Katrina, Rita and Wilma. The following table shows current accident year catastrophe impacts in 2005, including reinstatement premium owed to reinsurers: Year Ended December 31, 2005 Business Personal Specialty Ongoing Other Total Insurance Lines Commercial Operations Operations P&C Gross incurred loss and loss adjustment expenses for current accident year catastrophes $ 337 $ 394 $ 594 $ 1,325 $ $ 1,325 Ceded loss and loss adjustment expenses for current accident year catastrophes 248 296 430 974 974 Net incurred loss and loss adjustment expenses for current accident year catastrophes $ 89 $ 98 $ 164 $ 351 $ $ 351 Reinstatement premium ceded to reinsurers $ 16 $ 31 $ 26 $ 73 $ $ 73 A significant portion of the gross incurred loss and loss adjustment expenses are recoverable from reinsurers under the Company principal catastrophe reinsurance program in addition to other reinsurance programs. Reinsurance recoveries under the Company principal catastrophe reinsurance program, which covers multiple lines of business, are allocated to the segments in accordance with a pre-established methodology that is consistent with the method used to allocate the ceded premium to each segment. In addition to its retention, the Company has a co-participation in the losses ceded under the principal catastrophe reinsurance program, which varies by layer, and is recorded in Specialty Commercial. In the third and fourth quarters of 2005, the Company reinstated the limits under its reinsurance programs that were exhausted by hurricane Katrina and Wilma, resulting in additional ceded premium of $73, which is reflected as a reduction in earned premium. 82 Table of Contents Net current accident year catastrophe losses decreased by $171, from $522 in 2004 to $351 in 2005, as the increase in ceded catastrophe losses exceeded the increase in gross catastrophe losses. While gross current accident year catastrophe losses increased by $514, from $811 in 2004 to $1,325 in 2005, ceded current accident year catastrophe losses increased by $686, from $288 in 2004, to $974 in 2005. The amount of gross losses ceded to reinsurers depends, in large part, on the extent to which gross losses incurred from a single event exceed the Company attachment point under its principal catastrophe reinsurance program. Compared to the hurricanes of 2004, the individual hurricanes in 2005 significantly exceeded the attachment point, resulting in greater reinsurance recoveries. Most of the current accident year catastrophe losses ceded in 2004 related to hurricanes Charley and Francis. Most of the current accident year catastrophe losses ceded in 2005 related to hurricanes Katrina and Wilma. The Company estimate of loss and loss expenses under hurricanes Katrina, Rita and Wilma is based on covered losses under the terms of the policies. The Company does not provide residential flood insurance on its Personal Lines homeowners policies so the Company estimate of hurricane losses on Personal Lines homeowners business does not include any provision for damages arising from flood waters. The Company acts as an administrator for the Write Your Own flood program on behalf of the National Flood Insurance Program under FEMA, for which it earns a fee for collecting premiums and processing claims. Under the program, the Company services both personal lines and commercial lines flood insurance policies and does not assume any underwriting risk. As a result, catastrophe losses in the above table do not include any losses related to the Write Your Own flood program. Prior accident year development recorded in 2005 Included within prior accident year development for the year ended December 31, 2005 were the following reserve strengthenings (releases). Business Personal Specialty Ongoing Other Total Insurance Lines Commercial Operations Operations P&C Strengthening of workers compensation reserves for claim payments expected to emerge after 20 years of development $ 50 $ $ 70 $ 120 $ $ 120 Release of 2003 and 2004 accident year workers compensation reserves (75 ) (75 ) (75 ) Release of reserves for allocated loss adjustment expenses (25 ) (95 ) (120 ) (120 ) Strengthening of general liability reserves in Business Insurance 40 40 40 Strengthening of reserves for 2004 hurricanes 20 9 4 33 33 Strengthening of assumed casualty reinsurance reserves 85 85 Strengthening of environmental reserves 37 37 Other reserve reestimates, net [1] 12 (9 ) 35 38 90 128 Total prior accident year development for the year ended December 31, 2005 $ 22 $ (95 ) $ 109 $ 36 $ 212 $ 248 [1] Includes reserve discount accretion of $30, including $13 in Business Insurance, $10 in Specialty Commercial and $7 in Other Operations. During the year ended December 31, 2005, the Company re-estimates of prior accident year reserves included the following significant reserve changes. Ongoing Operations Strengthened workers compensation reserves for claim payments expected to emerge after 20 years of development by $120. For workers compensation claims involving permanent disability, it is particularly difficult to estimate how such claims will develop more than 20 years after the year the claims were incurred (known as the tail ). During 2005, the Company actuaries performed an actuarial study to re-estimate the required reserves for additional development beyond the 20th year following a claim being incurred. This study involved gathering extensive historical data dating back over 50 years which could be used for making these estimates and incorporated modeling using actuarial techniques that have recently been developed within the actuarial profession. Based on the results of this analysis the Company changed its previous estimate and increased the percentage of ultimate claim costs expected to be paid after 20 years of development. As an example, within Business Insurance this development percentage was increased from 8% to 9%. The $120 of reserve strengthening represented a change in estimate which was 3% of the Company net reserves for workers compensation claims as of December 31, 2004. Released reserves for workers compensation losses in Business Insurance on accident years 2003 and 2004 by $75. The state of California instituted reforms to its workers compensation laws that began in 2003 and continued through 2005. In addition, in this same time frame, the Company was taking underwriting actions to improve workers compensation underwriting performance. Management recognized that the combination of the Company underwriting initiatives and the state of California changes could, 83 Table of Contents over time, improve the Company workers compensation experience. Verification of this improvement as a probable outcome, however, would require sufficient supporting evidence. While there appeared to be some favorable trends emerging in late 2004 with respect to accident year 2003 and while early indications on accident year 2004 were favorable, senior reserving actuaries and senior management were uncertain that these favorable trends were real and would be sustained. In the third quarter of 2005, management concluded that sufficient evidence existed in the actuarial data and methods to support a release of reserves. The actuarial work was further supported by a review of underwriting metrics, supporting the effectiveness of the actions taken, and by discussions with claim handlers involved with the California workers compensation business. The $75 reserve release represented a change in estimate which was 2% of the Company net reserves for workers compensation claims as of December 31, 2004. Released prior accident year reserves for allocated loss adjustment expenses by $120, largely as the result of cost reduction initiatives implemented by the Company to reduce allocated loss adjustment expenses for both legal and non-legal expenses as well as improved actuarial techniques. The improved actuarial techniques included an analysis of claims involving legal expenses separate from claims that do not involve legal expenses. This analysis included a review of the trends in the number of claims involving legal expenses, the average expenses incurred and trends in legal expenses. The release of $95 in Personal Lines represented 5% of Personal Lines net reserves as of December 31, 2004. Strengthened general liability reserves within Business Insurance by $40 for accident years 2000-2003 due to higher than anticipated loss payments beyond four years of development. The $40 reserve strengthening represented 2% of the Company net reserves for general liability claims as of December 31, 2004. Strengthened reserves for loss and loss adjustment expenses related to the third quarter 2004 hurricanes by a total of $33. The main drivers of the increase were late-reported claims for condominium assessments and increases in the costs of building materials and contracting services. Within the Specialty Commercial segment, there were other offsetting positive and negative adjustments to prior accident year reserves. The principal offsetting adjustments were a release of reserves for directors and officers insurance related to accident years 2003 and 2004 and strengthening of prior accident year reserves for contracts that provide auto financing gap coverage and auto lease residual value coverage; the release and offsetting strengthening were each approximately $80. Other Operations Strengthened assumed reinsurance reserves by $85, principally for accident years 1997 through 2001. In recent years, the Company has seen an increase in reported losses above previous expectations and this increase in reported losses contributed to the reserve re-estimates. Assumed reinsurance exposures are inherently less predictable than direct insurance exposures because the Company may not receive notice of a reinsurance claim until the underlying direct insurance claim is mature. The reserve strengthening of $85 represents 6% of the $1.3 billion of net Reinsurance reserves within Other Operations as of December 31, 2004. Strengthened environmental reserves by $37 as a result of an environmental reserve evaluation completed during the third quarter of 2005. While the review found no underlying cause or change in the claim environment, loss estimates for individual cases changed based upon the particular circumstances of each account. The $37 of reserve strengthening represented 1% of the Company net reserves for asbestos and environmental claims as of December 31, 2004. 84 Table of Contents A rollforward of liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses by segment for Property & Casualty for the year ended December 31, 2004 follows: For the year ended December 31, 2004 Business Personal Specialty Ongoing Other Total Insurance Lines Commercial Operations Operations[1] P&C Beginning liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses-gross $ 5,296 $ 1,733 $ 5,148 $ 12,177 $ 9,538 $ 21,715 Reinsurance and other recoverables 395 43 2,096 2,534 2,963 5,497 Beginning liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses-net 4,901 1,690 3,052 9,643 6,575 16,218 Provision for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses Current year 2,700 2,509 1,345 6,554 36 6,590 Prior years (67 ) 3 69 5 409 414 Total provision for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses 2,633 2,512 1,414 6,559 445 7,004 Payments [1] (1,951 ) (2,392 ) (1,038 ) (5,381 ) (1,650 ) (7,031 ) Ending liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses-net 5,583 1,810 3,428 10,821 5,370 16,191 Reinsurance and other recoverables 474 190 2,091 2,755 2,383 5,138 Ending liabilities for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses-gross $ 6,057 $ 2,000 $ 5,519 $ 13,576 $ 7,753 $ 21,329 Earned premiums $ 4,299 $ 3,445 $ 1,726 $ 9,470 $ 24 $ 9,494 Loss and loss expense paid ratio [2] 45.4 69.4 59.9 56.8 Loss and loss expense incurred ratio 61.2 72.9 81.9 69.3 Prior accident year development (pts.) [3] (1.6 ) 0.1 4.0 0.1 [1] Other Operations included payments pursuant to the MacArthur settlement. [2] The loss and loss expense paid ratio represents the ratio of paid loss and loss adjustment expenses to earned premiums. [3] Prior accident year development (pts) represents the ratio of prior accident year development to earned premiums. 2004 accident year catastrophe loss and loss adjustment expenses recorded in 2004 In 2004, the current accident year provision for loss and loss adjustment expenses of $6.6 billon included net catastrophe loss and loss adjustment expenses of $523, of which $394 related to hurricanes Charley, Frances, Ivan and Jeanne. Gross of reinsurance, current accident year catastrophe losses were $811. The Company estimates of net loss and loss expenses arising from hurricanes Charley, Frances, Ivan and Jeanne were based on information from reported claims and estimates of reinsurance recoverables on ceded losses. In the third quarter of 2004, the Company reinstated the limits under its reinsurance programs that were exhausted by the 2004 hurricanes, resulting in additional ceded premium of $17, which was reflected as a reduction in earned premium. 85 Table of Contents Prior accident year development recorded in 2004 Included within prior accident year development for the year ended December 31, 2004 were the following reserve strengthenings (releases). Year Ended December 31, 2004 Business Personal Specialty Ongoing Other Total Insurance Lines Commercial Operations Operations P&C Release of September 11 reserves $ (175 ) $ (7 ) $ (116 ) $ (298 ) $ (97 ) $ (395 ) Strengthening of reserves for construction defects claims 23 167 190 190 Strengthening of reserves for auto liability and package business 63 63 63 Reduction in the reinsurance recoverable asset associated with older, long-term casualty liabilities, including asbestos liabilities 181 181 Strengthening of environmental reserves 75 75 Strengthening of reserves for assumed casualty reinsurance 170 170 Other reserve re-estimates, net [1] 22 10 18 50 80 130 Total prior accident year development for the year ended December 31, 2004 $ (67 ) $ 3 $ 69 $ 5 $ 409 $ 414 [1] Includes reserve discount accretion of $29, including $13 in Business Insurance, $10 in Specialty Commercial and $6 in Other Operations. During the year ended December 31, 2004, the Company re-estimates of prior accident year reserves included the following significant reserve changes. Ongoing Operations Released September 11 net reserves by $298 due to favorable developments in 2004, including the closure of primary insurance property cases, a high participation rate within the Victim Compensation Fund and the expiration of the deadline for filing a liability claim in March 2004. Strengthened reserves for construction defects claims by $190, representing 11% of the Company $1.8 billion of net reserves for general liability claims as of December 31, 2004. The Company construction defects claims, which relate primarily to accident years prior to 2000, experienced increasing severity, particularly due to losses from contractors in California. Strengthened auto liability reserves by $25 and package business reserves by $38 related to accident years 1998 to 2002 as actual reported losses were above previous expectations. In particular, the Company observed a higher frequency of large claims (generally those greater than $100,000) than had been anticipated in prior estimates. The auto liability reserve strengthening of $25 represented 1% of the Company net reserves for auto liability claims as of December 31, 2004 and the package business reserve strengthening of $38 represented 3% of the Company net reserves for package business as of December 31, 2004. Within the Specialty Commercial segment there were other offsetting positive and negative adjustments. The principal offsetting adjustments related to a strengthening in specialty large deductible workers compensation reserves and a release in other liability reserves, each approximately $150. Other Operations Reduced the reinsurance recoverable asset associated with older, long-term casualty liabilities, including asbestos liabilities, by $181. Strengthened environmental reserves by $75. Strengthened reserves for assumed casualty reinsurance by $170, primarily related to assumed casualty treaty reinsurance for the years 1997 through 2001. The $170 of strengthening represented 13% of the $1.3 billion of net Reinsurance reserves as of December 31, 2004. In recent years, the Company had seen an increase in reported assumed reinsurance claims above previous expectations and this increase in reported claims contributed to the reserve re-estimates. Released September 11 net reserves by $97 due to favorable developments, including a lack of significant additional loss notices on assumed reinsurance property treaties. Impact of Re-estimates As explained in connection with the Company discussion of Critical Accounting Estimates, the establishment of Property and Casualty reserves is an estimation process, using a variety of methods, assumptions and data elements. Ultimate losses may vary significantly from the current estimates. Many factors can contribute to these variations and the need to change the previous estimate 86 Table of Contents of required reserve levels. Subsequent changes can generally be thought of as being the result of the emergence of additional facts that were not known or anticipated at the time of the prior reserve estimate and/or changes in interpretations of information and trends. The table below shows the range of annual reserve re-estimates experienced by The Hartford over the past six years. The amount of prior accident year development (as shown in the reserve rollforward) for a given calendar year is expressed as a percent of the beginning calendar year reserves, net of reinsurance. The percentage relationships presented are significantly influenced by the facts and circumstances of each particular year and by the fact that only the last six years are included in the range. Accordingly, these percentages are not intended to be a prediction of the range of possible future variability. See Impact of key assumptions on reserve volatility within Critical Accounting Estimates for further discussion of the potential for variability in recorded loss reserves. Business Personal Specialty Ongoing Other Total Insurance Lines Commercial Operations Operations P&C Range of prior accident year development for the six years ended December 31, 2006 [1] [2] (1.4) 0.5 (5.2) 5.1 0.8 3.2 (0.5) 1.4 2.9 67.5 1.2 21.5 [1] Bracketed prior accident year development indicates favorable development. Unbracketed amounts represent unfavorable development. [2] Before the reserve strengthening for asbestos and environmental reserves over the past ten years, reserve re-estimates for total Property & Casualty ranged from (3.0%) to 1.6% . The potential variability of the Company Property & Casualty reserves would normally be expected to vary by segment and the types of loss exposures insured by those segments. Illustrative factors influencing the potential reserve variability for each of the segments are discussed under Critical Accounting Estimates. In general, over the long term, the Company would expect the variability of its Personal Lines reserve estimates to be relatively less than the variability of the reserve estimates for its other property and casualty segments. The Company would expect the degree of variability of the remaining segments reserve estimates, from lower variability to higher variability, to be generally Business Insurance, Specialty Commercial, and Other Operations. The actual relative variability could prove to be different than anticipated. Risk Management Strategy The Hartford property and casualty operations have processes to manage catastrophic risk exposures to natural disasters, such as hurricanes and earthquakes, and other perils, such as terrorism. The Hartford risk management processes include, but are not limited to, disciplined underwriting protocols, exposure controls, sophisticated risk modeling, effective risk transfer, and efficient capital management strategies. In managing risk, The Hartford management processes involve establishing underwriting guidelines for both individual risks, including individual policy limits, and in aggregate, including aggregate exposure limits by geographic zone and peril. The Company establishes risk limits and actively monitors the risk exposures as a percent of Property & Casualty surplus. For natural catastrophe perils, the Company generally limits its estimated loss to natural catastrophes from a single 250-year event prior to reinsurance to less than 30% of statutory surplus of the Property & Casualty operations and its estimated loss to natural catastrophes from a single 250-year event after reinsurance to less than 15% of statutory surplus of the Property & Casualty operations. Currently, the Company estimated pre-tax loss to a single 250-year natural catastrophe event prior to reinsurance is 31% of statutory surplus of the Property & Casualty operations and the Company estimated pre-tax loss net of reinsurance is less than 15% of statutory surplus of the Property & Casualty operations. For terrorism, the Company monitors its exposure in major metropolitan areas to a single-site conventional terrorism attack scenario, and manages its potential estimated loss, including exposures resulting from the Company Group Life operations, to less than 7% of the combined statutory surplus of the Life and Property and Casualty operations. Among the 208 locations specifically monitored by the Company, the largest estimated modeled loss arising from a single event is approximately $736, which represents 5.1% of the combined statutory surplus of the Life and Property and Casualty operations as of December 31, 2006. The Company monitors exposures monthly and employs both internally developed and vendor-licensed loss modeling tools as part of its risk management discipline. Use of Reinsurance In managing risk, The Hartford utilizes reinsurance to transfer risk to well-established and financially secure reinsurers. Reinsurance is used to manage aggregations of risk as well as specific risks based on accumulated property and casualty liabilities in certain geographic zones. All treaty purchases related to the Company property and casualty operations are administered by a centralized function to support a consistent strategy and ensure that the reinsurance activities are fully integrated into the organization risk management processes. A variety of traditional reinsurance products are used as part of the Company risk management strategy, including excess of loss occurrence-based products that protect aggregate property and workers compensation exposures, and individual risk or quota share arrangements, that protect specific classes or lines of business. There are no significant finite risk contracts in place and the statutory surplus benefit from all such prior year contracts is immaterial. Facultative reinsurance is also used to manage policy-specific risk exposures based on established underwriting guidelines. The Hartford also participates in governmentally administered reinsurance facilities such as the Florida Hurricane Catastrophe Fund ( FHCF ), the Terrorism Risk Insurance Program established under The 87 Table of Contents Terrorism Risk Insurance Extension Act of 2005 and other reinsurance programs relating to particular risks or specific lines of business. The Company has several catastrophe reinsurance programs, including reinsurance treaties that cover property and workers compensation losses aggregating from single catastrophe events. The following table summarizes the primary catastrophe treaty reinsurance coverages that the Company has in place as of January 1, 2007: % of layer(s) Coverage Treaty term reinsured Per occurrence limit Retention Principal property catastrophe program covering property catastrophe losses from a single event 1/1/2007 to 1/1/2008 Varies by layer, but averages 87% across all layers Aggregates to $750 across all layers $ 250 [1] Layer covering property catastrophe losses from a single wind or earthquake event affecting the northeast of the United States from Virginia to Maine 6/1/2006 to 6/1/2007 90 % 300 1,000 Property catastrophe losses from a single event on excess and surplus property business 1/1/2007 to 1/1/2008 95 % 330 20 Property catastrophe losses from a single event on property business written with national accounts 7/1/2006 to 7/1/2007 82 % 150 25 Reinsurance with the Florida Hurricane Catastrophe Fund covering Florida Personal Lines property catastrophe losses from a single event 6/1/2006 to 6/1/2007 90 % 264 89 Workers compensation losses arising from a single catastrophe event 7/1/2006 to 7/1/2007 95 % 280 20 [1] Under certain conditions, the Company loss retention from a single event could be reduced to $200 for a second or subsequent event. In addition to the property catastrophe reinsurance coverage described in the above table, the Company has other treaties and facultative reinsurance agreements that cover property catastrophe losses on an aggregate excess of loss and on a per risk basis. Property catastrophe losses incurred on property business written with national accounts is also reimbursable under the principal catastrophe reinsurance program, subject to the overall program limits and retention. In the aftermath of the 2004 and 2005 hurricane season, third-party catastrophe loss models for hurricane loss events were updated to incorporate medium-term forecasts of increased hurricane frequency and severity. The principal property catastrophe reinsurance program and other reinsurance programs include a provision to reinstate limits in the event that a catastrophe loss exhausts limits on one or more layers under the treaties. In addition to the reinsurance protection provided by The Hartford reinsurance program described above, the Company has fully collateralized reinsurance coverages from Foundation Re and Foundation Re II for losses sustained from qualifying hurricane and earthquake loss events and other qualifying catastrophe losses. Foundation Re and Foundation Re II are Cayman Islands reinsurance companies which financed the provision of the reinsurance through the issuance of catastrophe bonds. Under the terms of the treaties with Foundation Re and Foundation Re II, the Company is reimbursed for losses from natural disaster events using a customized industry index contract designed to replicate the Hartford own catastrophe losses, with a provision that the actual losses incurred by the Company for covered events, net of reinsurance recoveries, cannot be less than zero. 88 Table of Contents The following table summarizes the terms of the reinsurance treaties with Foundation Re and Foundation Re II that were in place as of January 1, 2007: Bond amount issued by Foundation Re or Covered perils Treaty term Covered losses Foundation Re II Hurricane loss events affecting the Gulf and Eastern Coast of the United States 11/17/2004 to 11/24/2008 45% of $400 in losses in excess of an index loss trigger equating to approximately $1.3 billion in Hartford losses. $ 180 Hurricane and earthquake loss events which occur in the year following a large hurricane or earthquake event that has an estimated occurrence probability of 1-in-100 years 11/17/2004 to 1/6/2009 90% of $75 in losses in excess of an index loss trigger equating to approximately $125 in Hartford losses. 68 Hurricane loss events affecting the Gulf and Eastern Coast of the United States and loss events arising from California, Pacific Northwest, and New Madrid earthquakes. 2/17/2006 to 2/24/2010 26% of $400 in losses in excess of an index loss trigger equating to approximately $1.3 billion in Hartford losses. 105 Hurricane loss events affecting the Gulf and Eastern Coast of the United States 11/17/2006 to 11/26/2010 45% of $400 in losses in excess of an index loss trigger equating to approximately $1.85 billion in Hartford losses. 180 Annual aggregate of hurricane, earthquake and tornado/hail events in the continuous continental United States that result in $100 and $29.5 billion in industry losses 11/17/2006 to 1/8/2009 45% of $150 in losses in excess of an index loss trigger equating to approximately $462 in annual aggregate Hartford losses. 68 As of December 31, 2006, there have been no events that are expected to trigger a recovery under any of the reinsurance programs with Foundation Re or Foundation Re II and, accordingly, the Company has not recorded any recoveries from the associated reinsurance treaties. Estimated Catastrophe Exposures The Company uses third party models to estimate the potential loss resulting from various catastrophe events and the potential financial impact those events would have on the Company financial position and results of operations. The following table shows modeled loss estimates before expected reinsurance recoveries and after expected reinsurance recoveries. The loss estimates represent total property losses for hurricane events and property and workers compensation losses for earthquake events resulting from a single event. The estimates provided are based on 250-year return period loss estimates, which have a 0.4% likelihood of being exceeded in any single year. The net loss estimates assume that the Company would be able to recover all losses ceded to reinsurers under its reinsurance programs. There are various methodologies used in the industry to estimate the potential property and workers compensation losses that would arise from various catastrophe events and companies may use different models and assumptions in their estimates. Therefore, the Company estimates of gross and net losses arising from a 250-year hurricane or earthquake event may not be comparable to estimates provided by other companies. Furthermore, the Company estimates are subject to significant uncertainty and could vary materially from the actual losses that would arise from these events. 89 Table of Contents The Company modeled loss estimates are derived by averaging 21 modeled loss events representing a 250-year return period loss. For the peril of earthquake, the 21 events averaged to determine the modeled loss estimate include events occurring in California as well as the Northeastern, Southeastern and Midwestern regions of the United States with associated magnitudes ranging from 6.5 to 7.9 on the Richter scale. For the peril of hurricane, the 21 events averaged to determine the modeled loss estimate include category 3, 4 and 5 events in Florida as well as other Southeastern, Northeastern and Gulf region landfalls. Hurricane Earthquake Net of Expected Net of Expected Before Reinsurance Before Reinsurance Reinsurance Recoveries Reinsurance Recoveries Estimated 250-year probable maximum loss, before-tax $ 2,522 $ 824 $ 1,259 $ 290 Percentage of statutory surplus of the Property & Casualty operations as of December 31, 2006 10 % 4 % Terrorism For terrorism, private sector catastrophe reinsurance capacity is limited and generally unavailable for terrorism losses caused by nuclear, biological, chemical or radiological weapons attacks. As such, the Company principal reinsurance protection against large-scale terrorist attacks is the coverage currently provided through the Terrorism Risk Insurance Extension Act of 2005 (TRIEA). On December 22, 2005, the President signed TRIEA extending the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act of 2002 ( TRIA ) through the end of 2007. TRIA provides a backstop for insurance-related losses resulting from any act of terrorism certified by the Secretary of the Treasury, in concurrence with the Secretary of State and Attorney General, that results in industry losses in excess of $100 in 2007. Under the program, the federal government would pay 85% of covered losses from a certified act of terrorism in 2007 after an insurer losses exceed 20% of the Company eligible direct commercial earned premiums in 2006, up to a combined annual aggregate limit for the federal government and all insurers of $100 billion. If an act of terrorism or acts of terrorism result in covered losses exceeding the $100 billion annual limit, Congress will be responsible for determining how additional losses in excess of $100 billion will be paid. Among other items, TRIEA required that the President Working Group on Financial Markets (PWG) perform an analysis regarding the long-term availability and affordability of insurance for terrorism risk. Among the findings detailed in the PWG report, released October 2, 2006, were that the high level of uncertainty associated with predicting the frequency of terrorist attacks, coupled with the unwillingness of some insurance policyholders to purchase insurance coverage, makes predicting long term development of the terrorism risk market difficult, and that there is likely little potential for future market development for nuclear, biological, chemical and radiological (NBCR) coverage. A September 2006 study by the U.S. Government Accountability Office on insuring NBCR terrorism risk similarly concluded that any market-driven expansion of coverage is highly unlikely in the foreseeable future. It is uncertain whether a federal terrorism risk insurance program similar to TRIEA will be enacted to cover events occurring after December 31, 2007. Given the possibility that TRIEA may not be extended beyond December 31, 2007 and the limited private terrorism reinsurance capacity available, including reinsurance against losses from terrorism acts using weapons of mass destruction, the Company has been actively managing its exposures to the peril of terrorism, including adopting underwriting actions designed to reduce exposures in specific locations of the country. The Company has worked with various industry groups to develop policy exclusions related to the peril of terrorism, including those associated with nuclear, biological, chemical and radiological attacks. The Company may include such exclusions in policies in the future in those jurisdictions and classes of business where such exclusions are permitted, and take additional underwriting actions as deemed appropriate. Florida Citizens Assessments Citizens Property Insurance Corporation in Florida ( Citizens ) provides property insurance to Florida homeowners and businesses that are unable to obtain insurance from other carriers, including for properties deemed to be high risk . Citizens maintains a Personal Lines account, a Commercial Lines account and a High Risk account. If Citizens incurs a deficit in any of these accounts, Citizens may impose a regular assessment on other insurance carriers in the state to fund the deficits, subject to certain restrictions and subject to approval by the Florida Office of Insurance Regulation. Carriers are then permitted to surcharge policyholders to recover the assessments over the next few years. Citizens may also opt to finance a portion of the deficits through issuing bonds and may impose emergency assessments on other insurance carriers to fund the bond repayments. Unlike with regular assessments, however, insurance carriers only serve as a collection agent for emergency assessments and are not required to remit surcharges for emergency assessments to Citizens until they collect surcharges from policyholders. Under generally accepted accounting principles, the Company is required to accrue for regular assessments in the period the assessments become probable and estimable and the obligating event has 90 Table of Contents occurred. Surcharges to recover the amount of regular assessments may not be recorded as an asset until the related premium is written. Emergency assessments that may be levied by Citizens are not recorded in the income statement. In the fourth quarter of 2005, the Company accrued an estimated $46 for regular assessments based on estimates of the deficits in each account at the time. In the second quarter of 2006, the Florida legislature approved the use of $715 of state tax revenues to partially offset the deficits in Citizens High Risk, Commercial Lines and Personal Lines accounts. During the second quarter of 2006, Citizens management also finalized its estimate of the 2004 and 2005 hurricane losses that would be used in calculating the deficits in each account. In the third quarter of 2006, the Board of Governors of Citizens approved a final assessment for the 2005 account year and the Company received the assessment notice during the fourth quarter of 2006. The estimates of the deficits in the Personal Lines account and Commercial Lines account were lower than previously anticipated by the Company. As a result of these changes in estimates, during the Company reduced its accrual for Citizens assessments by $41, from $46 to $5. The reduction in the amount of the estimated regular assessment also reduces the amount of surcharges that will be billed to policyholders to recoup the assessments in the future. As of December 31, 2006, the Company has collected $12 in surcharges related to the $15 Citizens assessment for the 2004 Florida hurricanes. Reinsurance Recoverables The following table shows the components of the gross and net reinsurance recoverable as of December 31, 2006 and 2005: December 31, December 31, 2006 2005 Reinsurance Recoverable Paid loss and loss adjustment expenses $ 460 $ 580 Unpaid loss and loss adjustment expenses 4,417 5,393 Gross reinsurance recoverable 4,877 5,973 Less: allowance for uncollectible reinsurance (412 ) (413 ) Net reinsurance recoverable $ 4,465 $ 5,560 Reinsurance recoverables represent loss and loss adjustment expenses recoverable from a number of entities, including reinsurers and pools. As shown in the following table, a portion of the total gross reinsurance recoverable relates to the Company mandatory participation in various involuntary assigned risk pools and the value of annuity contracts held under structured settlement agreements. Reinsurance recoverables due from mandatory pools are backed by the financial strength of the property and casualty insurance industry. Annuities purchased from third party life insurers under structured settlements are recognized as reinsurance recoverables in cases where the Company has not obtained a release from the claimant. Of the remaining gross reinsurance recoverable as of December 31, 2006 and 2005, the following table shows the portion of recoverables due from companies rated by A.M. Best. December 31, 2006 December 31, 2005 Distribution of gross reinsurance recoverable Gross reinsurance recoverable $ 4,877 $ 5,973 Less: mandatory (assigned risk) pools and structured settlements (673 ) (495 ) Gross reinsurance recoverable excluding mandatory pools and structured settlements $ 4,204 $ 5,478 % of Total % of Total Rated A- (Excellent) or better by A.M. Best [1] $ 3,050 72.5 % $ 3,629 66.2 % Other rated by A.M. Best 162 3.9 % 233 4.3 % Total rated companies 3,212 76.4 % 3,862 70.5 % Voluntary pools 223 5.3 % 291 5.3 % Captives 197 4.7 % 188 3.4 % Other not rated companies 572 13.6 % 1,137 20.8 % Total $ 4,204 100.0 % $ 5,478 100.0 % [1] Based on A.M. Best ratings as of December 31, 2006 and 2005, respectively . Where its contracts permit, the Company secures future claim obligations with various forms of collateral, including irrevocable letters of credit, secured trusts, funds held accounts and group wide offsets. As part of its reinsurance recoverable review, the Company analyzes recent developments in commutation activity between reinsurers and cedants, recent trends in arbitration and litigation outcomes in disputes between cedants and reinsurers and the overall credit quality of the Company reinsurers. Due to the inherent uncertainties as to collection and the length of time before such amounts will be due, it is possible that future adjustments to the Company reinsurance recoverables, net of the allowance, could be required, which could have a material adverse effect on the Company consolidated results of operations or cash flows in a particular quarterly or annual period. 91 Table of Contents Annually, the Company completes an evaluation of the reinsurance recoverable asset associated with older, long-term casualty liabilities reported in the Other Operations segment. As a result of this evaluation, the Company reduced its net reinsurance recoverable by $243 in 2006. See the Other Operations section of the MD&A for further discussion. Monitoring Reinsurer Security To manage the potential credit risk resulting from the use of reinsurance, management evaluates the credit standing, financial performance, management and operational quality of each potential reinsurer. Through that process, the Company maintains a list of reinsurers approved for participation on all treaty and facultative reinsurance placements. The Company approval designations reflect the differing credit exposure associated with various classes of business. Participation authorizations are categorized along property, short-tail casualty and long-tail casualty lines. In addition to defining participation eligibility, the Company regularly monitors each active reinsurer credit risk exposure in the aggregate and limits that exposure based upon independent credit rating levels. Unless otherwise specified, the following discussion speaks to changes for the year ended December 31, 2006 compared to the year ended December 31, 2005 and the year ended December 31, 2005 compared to the year ended December 31, 2004. TOTAL PROPERTY & CASUALTY 2006 2005 2004 Operating Summary Earned premiums [1] $ 10,433 $ 10,156 $ 9,494 Net investment income 1,486 1,365 1,248 Other revenues [2] 473 463 436 Net realized capital gains 9 44 133 Total revenues 12,401 12,028 11,311 Losses and loss adjustment expenses [3] Current year 6,706 6,715 6,590 Prior year [4] 296 248 414 Total losses and loss adjustment expenses 7,002 6,963 7,004 Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs 2,106 1,997 1,850 Insurance operating costs and expenses 580 731 643 Other expense 643 617 629 Total benefits, losses and expenses 10,331 10,308 10,126 Income before income taxes 2,070 1,720 1,185 Income tax expense 551 484 275 Net income [5] $ 1,519 $ 1,236 $ 910 Net Income (Loss) Ongoing Operations $ 1,554 $ 1,165 $ 955 Other Operations (35 ) 71 (45 ) Total Property & Casualty net income $ 1,519 $ 1,236 $ 910 [1] Includes reinstatement premiums related to hurricanes of $73 in 2005 and reinstatement premiums related to hurricanes of $17 in 2004. [2] Primarily servicing revenue. [3] Includes 2006 catastrophes of $129, 2005 catastrophes of $365 and 2004 catastrophes of $507, before the net reserve release of $395 related to September 11. [4] Net prior year incurred losses in 2006 includes the effect of reducing net reinsurance recoverables by $243 as a result of an agreement with Equitas and strengthening of the allowance for uncollectible reinsurance. [5] Includes net realized capital gains, after tax, of $46 , $29 and $87 for the years ended December 31, 2006, 2005 and 2004, respectively. Year ended December 31, 2006 compared to the year ended December 31, 2005 Net income increased by $283, or 23%, as a result of a $389 increase in Ongoing Operations net income partially offset by a $106 decrease in Other Operations results. Other Operations reported a net loss of $35 in 2006 compared to net income of $71 in 2005. See the Ongoing Operations and Other Operations segment MD&A discussions for an analysis of the underwriting results and investment performance driving the change in net income. Year ended December 31, 2005 compared to the year ended December 31, 2004 Net income increased by $326, or 36%, as a result of a $210 increase in Ongoing Operations net income and a $116 increase in Other Operations net income. See the Ongoing Operations and Other Operations segment MD&A discussions for an analysis of the underwriting results and investment performance driving the change in net income. 92 Table of Contents ONGOING OPERATIONS Ongoing Operations includes the three underwriting segments of Business Insurance, Personal Lines and Specialty Commercial. Earned Premiums Earned premium growth is an objective for Business Insurance and Personal Lines. Earned premium growth is not a specific objective for Specialty Commercial since Specialty Commercial is comprised of transactional businesses where premium writings may fluctuate based on the segment view of perceived market opportunity. Written premiums are earned over the policy term, which is six months for certain Personal Lines auto business and 12 months for substantially all of the remainder of the Company business. Written pricing, new business growth and premium renewal retention are factors that contribute to growth in written and earned premium. 2006 2005 2004 Written premiums [1] Business Insurance $ 5,185 $ 5,001 $ 4,575 Personal Lines 3,877 3,676 3,557 Specialty Commercial 1,596 1,806 1,840 Total $ 10,658 $ 10,483 $ 9,972 Earned premiums [1] Business Insurance $ 5,118 $ 4,785 $ 4,299 Personal Lines 3,760 3,610 3,445 Specialty Commercial 1,550 1,757 1,726 Total $ 10,428 $ 10,152 $ 9,470 [1] The difference between written premiums and earned premiums is attributable to the change in unearned premium reserve. Year ended December 31, 2006 compared to the year ended December 31, 2005 Total Ongoing Operations earned premiums grew $276, or 3%, due primarily to growth in Business Insurance and Personal Lines, partially offset by a decrease in Specialty Commercial. Contributing to the growth in earned premium was a $73 reduction of earned premium in 2005 due to catastrophe treaty reinstatement premium payable to reinsurers as a result of losses from hurricanes Katrina, Rita and Wilma, including $16 in Business Insurance, $31 in Personal Lines and $26 in Specialty Commercial. Before catastrophe treaty reinstatement premium, Ongoing Operations earned premium grew $203, or 2%, for 2006. For the year ended December 31, 2006, earned premiums grew $333, or 7%, in Business Insurance and grew $150, or 4%, in Personal Lines. Apart from the effect of catastrophe treaty reinstatement premium in 2005, the growth was primarily driven by new business premium outpacing non-renewals over the last six months of 2005 and the full year of 2006 and the effect of earned pricing increases in homeowners, partially offset by the effect of higher property catastrophe treaty reinsurance costs and earned pricing decreases in middle market. Specialty Commercial earned premiums decreased by $207, or 12%, primarily driven by a decrease in casualty, property and other earned premiums, partially offset by an increase in professional liability, fidelity and surety. Casualty earned premiums decreased by $220, primarily because of the non-renewal of a single captive insurance program. The decrease in property earned premium is primarily due to a decline in new business, an increase in catastrophe treaty reinsurance costs and a strategic decision not to renew certain accounts with properties in catastrophe-prone areas. Year ended December 31, 2005 compared to the year ended December 31, 2004 Total Ongoing Operations earned premiums grew $682, or 7%, due primarily to growth in Business Insurance and Personal Lines. Earned premiums were net of third and fourth quarter property catastrophe reinstatement premiums related to hurricanes totaling $73 in 2005 and $17 in 2004. Earned premium growth of $486 in Business Insurance was primarily driven by new business premium growth outpacing non-renewals over the last six months of 2004 and the full year of 2005. Earned premium growth of $165 in Personal Lines was primarily driven by new business growth outpacing non-renewals in auto and the effect of earned pricing increases in homeowners. Specialty Commercial earned premiums increased by $31, primarily driven by a $90 reduction in earned premiums under retrospectively-rated policies during 2004 and increases in casualty, professional liability, fidelity and surety and other premiums, partially offset by a $216 decrease in property earned premiums, primarily due to a decrease of $127 from exiting the multi-peril crop insurance business during 2004. 93 Table of Contents Operating Summary Net income for Ongoing Operations includes underwriting results for each of its segments, income from servicing businesses, net investment income, other expenses and net realized capital gains (losses), net of related income taxes. 2006 2005 2004 Operating Summary Written premiums $ 10,658 $ 10,483 $ 9,972 Change in unearned premium reserve 230 331 502 Earned premiums 10,428 10,152 9,470 Losses and loss adjustment expenses Current year 6,706 6,715 6,554 Prior year (64 ) 36 5 Total losses and loss adjustment expenses 6,642 6,751 6,559 Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs 2,106 2,000 1,845 Insurance operating costs and expenses 569 710 621 Underwriting results 1,111 691 445 Net servicing income [1] 53 49 42 Net investment income 1,225 1,082 903 Net realized capital gains (losses) (17 ) 19 98 Other expenses (222 ) (202 ) (198 ) Income tax expense (596 ) (474 ) (335 ) Net income $ 1,554 $ 1,165 $ 955 Loss and loss adjustment expense ratio Current year 64.3 66.1 69.2 Prior year (0.6 ) 0.4 0.1 Total loss and loss adjustment expense ratio 63.7 66.5 69.3 Expense ratio 25.6 26.5 25.9 Policyholder dividend ratio 0.1 0.1 0.1 Combined ratio 89.3 93.2 95.3 Catastrophe ratio Current year 1.9 3.5 5.5 Prior year (0.7 ) 0.1 (3.3 ) Total catastrophe ratio 1.2 3.6 2.2 Combined ratio before catastrophes 88.1 89.6 93.1 Combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development 88.0 89.4 89.7 [1] Net of expenses related to service business. Current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio Current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes 62.4 62.7 63.7 Current accident year catastrophe ratio 1.9 3.5 5.5 Current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio 64.3 66.1 69.2 Year ended December 31, 2006 compared to the year ended December 31, 2005 Net income increased by $389, or 33%, driven primarily by the following factors: A $420 increase in underwriting results with a corresponding decrease in the combined ratio of 3.9 points, to 89.3, and A $143 increase in net investment income. Partially offsetting the improvements in net income were the following factors: Net realized capital losses were $17 in 2006 compared to net realized gains of $19 in 2005, A $20 increase in other expenses, due primarily to lower bad debt expense in 2005, and A $122 increase in income tax expense, primarily reflecting an increase in income before income taxes, partially offset by a $49 income tax benefit resulting from the sale of Omni. 94 Table of Contents Underwriting results increased by $420 due to: Increase in current accident year underwriting results before catastrophes $ 168 Lower current accident year catastrophe losses 152 Change to net favorable prior accident year development 100 Increase in underwriting results from 2005 to 2006 $ 420 Increase in current accident year underwriting results before catastrophes The $168 improvement in current accident year underwriting results before catastrophes was primarily due to: The catastrophe treaty reinstatement premium that was recorded as a reduction of earned premium in 2005 $ 73 Excluding catastrophe treaty reinstatement premium: A decrease in the combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development 72 A $203 increase in earned premium growth at a combined ratio less than 100.0 23 Increase in current accident year underwriting results before catastrophes from 2005 to 2006 $ 168 Before reinstatement premium, a lower combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development improved current accident year underwriting results before catastrophes by $72. The 1.4 point decrease in the combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development, to 88.0, was primarily driven by: A 0.9 point decrease in the expense ratio, to 25.6, largely because of a $41 decrease in estimated Citizens assessments in 2006 compared to a $64 increase in Citizens assessments in 2005. Almost all of the Citizens assessments are for assessments charged by the Citizens Property Insurance Corporation (Citizens) in Florida, a company established by the State of Florida to provide personal and commercial insurance to individuals and businesses in Florida who are in high risk areas of the state and are unable to obtain insurance through the private insurance markets. A 0.3 point decrease in the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes, to 62.4, largely due to the effect that catastrophe treaty reinstatement premium had on the ratio in 2005. Apart from the effect of catastrophe treaty reinstatement premium, the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes increased slightly due to a slight increase in the ratio for both Business Insurance and Personal Lines. The slight deterioration in Business Insurance was primarily due to an increase in non-catastrophe property loss costs in middle market, the effect of earned pricing decreases in middle market and the effect of a shift to more workers compensation premium which has a higher loss and loss adjustment expense ratio than other business in the segment. Partially offsetting the deterioration in Business Insurance was a lower loss and loss adjustment expense ratio on small commercial workers compensation business. The deterioration in Personal Lines was principally due to an increase in non-catastrophe property loss costs for homeowners and an increase in the loss and loss adjustment expense ratio for auto liability claims due to a shift to more Dimensions product business within Agency. Lower current accident year catastrophe losses Current accident year catastrophe losses decreased by $152, from $351 in 2005 to $199 in 2006. The decrease in current accident year catastrophe losses was primarily due to $264 of net losses incurred for hurricanes Katrina, Rita and Wilma in 2005, partially offset by an increase in non-hurricane related catastrophes in 2006. Catastrophe losses in 2006 included tornadoes and hail storms in the Midwest and windstorms in Texas and on the East coast. Change to net favorable prior accident year development The $64 of net favorable prior accident year development in 2006 for Ongoing Operations was primarily due to an $83 release of prior accident year hurricane reserves and a $58 release of allocated loss adjustment expense reserves for workers compensation and package business, partially offset by reserve strengthenings in Specialty Commercial. Net unfavorable reserve development of $36 in 2005 included a $120 increase in workers compensation reserves related to reserves for claim payments expected to emerge after 20 years of development, a $40 strengthening of general liability reserves within Business Insurance for accident years 2000 to 2003 due to higher than anticipated loss payments beyond four years of development and $33 of reserve strengthening related to the third quarter 2004 hurricanes. Partially offsetting the reserve increases in 2005 was a $95 reduction in prior accident year reserves for allocated loss adjustment expenses, predominantly related to auto liability claims and a $75 reduction in workers compensation reserves recorded related to accident years 2003 and 2004. See the Reserves section of the MD&A for further discussion of reserve development. The $143 increase in net investment income was primarily because of a larger investment base due to increased cash flows from underwriting and an increase in capital and invested assets attributed to Ongoing Operations as well as an increase in interest rates and 95 Table of Contents a change in asset mix (i.e., a greater share of investments in mortgage loans and limited partnerships). The $17 in net realized capital losses during 2006 included a $24 pre-tax realized capital loss from the sale of Omni, an increase in other-than-temporary-impairments and losses on the sale of fixed maturity investments, partially offset by an increase in income from other sources. (See the Other-Than-Temporary Impairments discussion within Investment Results for more information on the increase in impairments). Year ended December 31, 2005 compared to the year ended December 31, 2004 Net income increased $210, or 22%, driven primarily by the following: A $246 increase in underwriting results with a corresponding 2.1 point improvement in the combined ratio, from 95.3 to 93.2, and A $179 increase in net investment income. The improvements in net income were partially offset by: A $79 decrease in net realized capital gains due to lower net realized gains on the sale of fixed maturity investments and lower net gains on non-qualifying derivatives, and A $139 increase in income tax expense, reflecting an increase in income before income taxes. Underwriting results increased by $246 due to: Lower current accident year catastrophe losses $ 171 Increase in current accident year underwriting results before catastrophes 106 Increase in net unfavorable prior accident year development (31 ) Increase in underwriting results from 2004 to 2005 $ 246 Lower current accident year catastrophe losses Current accident year catastrophe losses decreased by $171, from $522 in 2004 to $351 in 2005. Catastrophe losses in 2005 for Hurricanes Katrina, Rita and Wilma were $264 compared to catastrophe losses in 2004 for Hurricanes Charley, Frances, Ivan and Jeanne of $394. Increase in current accident year underwriting results before catastrophes The $106 improvement in current accident year underwriting results before catastrophes was primarily due to: An increase in catastrophe treaty reinstatement premium recorded as a reduction of earned premium $ (56 ) Excluding catastrophe treaty reinstatement premium: A decrease in the combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development 85 A $738 increase in earned premium at a combined ratio less than 100.0 77 Increase in current accident year underwriting results before catastrophes from 2004 to 2005 $ 106 Before reinstatement premium, a lower combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development improved current accident year underwriting results before catastrophes by $85. The 0.3 point decrease in the combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development, to 89.4, was primarily driven by a 1.0 point decrease in the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes, partially offset by a 0.6 point increase in the expense ratio. The current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes decreased by 1.0 point, to 62.7, primarily due to improved current accident year performance for auto bodily injury and workers compensation claims, partially offset by the effect of an increase in non-catastrophe property loss costs. Non-catastrophe property loss costs increased primarily due to increasing claim severity and, in specialty property, increasing claim frequency as well. The expense ratio increased 0.6 points during 2005, to 26.5, primarily due to $64 of hurricane related assessments incurred in 2005 related to the 2004 and 2005 hurricanes. Apart from the impact of hurricane related assessments, the favorable effects on the expense ratio of an increase in earned premiums, a reduction in contingent commissions and a shift to lower commission workers compensation business were offset by the unfavorable effects of an increase in catastrophe treaty reinstatement premiums and reduced catastrophe treaty profit commissions. The reduction in contingent commissions was due, in part, to a decision made by some agents and brokers not to accept contingent commissions after the third quarter of 2004. The hurricane-related assessments were predominantly from Citizens. The third quarter 2004 hurricanes caused a deficit in Citizens high risk account, which triggered an assessment to the Company of $15. In addition, the Company recorded an estimated Citizens assessment of $46 based on losses sustained by Citizens as a result of hurricane Wilma in the fourth quarter of 2005. 96 Table of Contents Increase in net unfavorable prior accident year development There was a $31 increase in net unfavorable prior accident year reserve development, from $5 of net unfavorable prior accident year development in 2004 to $36 of net unfavorable prior accident year reserve development in 2005. Net unfavorable reserve development of $36 in 2005 included a $120 increase in workers compensation reserves related to reserves for claim payments expected to emerge after 20 years of development, a $40 strengthening of general liability reserves within Business Insurance for accident years 2000 to 2003 due to higher than anticipated loss payments beyond four years of development and $33 of reserve strengthening related to the third quarter 2004 hurricanes. Partially offsetting the reserve increases in 2005 was a $95 reduction in prior accident year reserves for allocated loss adjustment expenses, predominantly related to auto liability claims and a $75 reduction in workers compensation reserves recorded related to accident years 2003 and 2004. Net unfavorable prior accident year reserve development of $5 in 2004 included reserve increases of $303, partially offset by a reserve release of $298 for September 11. Reserve increases in 2004 included $190 for construction defect claims, $38 for small commercial package business and $25 for auto liability claims. The $179 increase in net investment income was due, in part, to a larger investment base due to increased cash flows from underwriting, higher investment yields on fixed maturity investments and an increase in income from limited partnership investments. Also contributing to the increase, was an increase in capital and invested assets attributed to Ongoing Operations in 2005. Less invested assets were needed in Other Operations given the reduction in Other Operations loss reserves and the reduction in invested assets needed to support those reserves. BUSINESS INSURANCE Business Insurance provides standard commercial insurance coverage to small and middle market commercial businesses, primarily throughout the United States. This segment offers workers compensation, property, automobile, liability, umbrella and marine coverages. The Business Insurance segment also provides commercial risk management products and services. 2006 2005 2004 Premiums Written Premiums [1] Small Commercial $ 2,728 $ 2,545 $ 2,255 Middle Market 2,457 2,456 2,320 Total $ 5,185 $ 5,001 $ 4,575 Earned Premiums [1] Small Commercial $ 2,652 $ 2,421 $ 2,077 Middle Market 2,466 2,364 2,222 Total $ 5,118 $ 4,785 $ 4,299 [1] The difference between written premiums and earned premiums is attributable to the change in unearned premium reserve . 2006 2005 2004 Premium Measures New Business Premium Small Commercial $ 533 $ 580 $ 575 Middle Market $ 458 $ 596 $ 574 Premium Renewal Retention Small Commercial 87 % 88 % 87 % Middle Market 82 % 81 % 83 % Written Pricing Increase (Decrease) Small Commercial 1 % 2 % 5 % Middle Market (4 %) (5 %) (1 %) Earned Pricing Increase (Decrease) Small Commercial 1 % 3 % 7 % Middle Market (5 %) (3 %) 3 % Earned Premiums Year ended December 31, 2006 compared to the year ended December 31, 2005 Earned premiums for the Business Insurance segment increased $333, or 7%. The increase was primarily due to new business growth outpacing non-renewals in both small commercial and middle market over the last six months of 2005 and the full year of 2006. Also contributing to the increase in earned premiums was $16 of catastrophe treaty reinstatement premium payable to reinsurers recorded as a reduction of earned premium in 2005. Partially offsetting the increase in earned premium was the effect of earned pricing decreases in middle market and higher property catastrophe treaty reinsurance costs. 97 Table of Contents Small commercial earned premium grew $231, or 10%, driven primarily by earned premium growth in workers compensation and package business for both Select Xpand and traditional Select business. Premium renewal retention for small commercial decreased slightly for the year ended December 31, 2006, from 88% to 87%, primarily due to commercial auto business. New business written premium for small commercial decreased by $47, or 8%, for the year ended December 31, 2006, primarily due to lower production of new workers compensation, auto and package policies. Despite an increase in the number of appointed agents to expand writings in certain territories, actions taken by some of the Company competitors to increase commissions for workers compensation business may be contributing to the Company lower new business growth. Middle market earned premium grew $102, or 4%, driven primarily by growth in workers compensation and marine earned premium. Premium renewal retention for middle market increased slightly for the year ended December 31, 2006, from 81% to 82%, primarily driven by workers compensation business. In response to increased competition, management has focused heavily on premium renewal retention. New business written premium for middle market decreased by $138, or 23%, for the year ended December 31, 2006, primarily due to increased competition for workers compensation business. As written premium is earned over the 12 month term of the policies, the unfavorable trend in earned pricing during 2006 was primarily a reflection of the written pricing changes over the last six months of 2005 and the year ended December 31, 2006. Year ended December 31, 2005 compared to the year ended December 31, 2004 Earned premiums for Business Insurance increased $486, or 11%, in 2005, primarily due to new business growth outpacing non-renewals in both small commercial and middle market over the preceding twelve months and modest earned pricing increases in small commercial, partially offset by earned pricing decreases in middle market. Growth in small commercial earned premium was driven primarily by growth in workers compensation and package business for both Select Xpand and traditional Select. New business written premium for small commercial increased by $5, or 1%, as an increase in new business for workers compensation was largely offset by a decrease in new business for package and commercial auto. Premium renewal retention for small commercial increased from 87% to 88%, primarily due to workers compensation and package business, partially offset by lower written pricing increases. Growth in middle market earned premium was driven primarily by growth in workers compensation and marine, partially offset by a decrease in property and commercial auto. New business written premium for middle market increased by $22, or 4%, for the year ended December 31, 2005, mostly related to workers compensation business. Premium renewal retention for middle market decreased from 83% to 81%, primarily due to the effect of larger written pricing decreases and a decrease in retention on larger accounts. As substantially all premiums in the segment are earned over a 12 month policy period, earned pricing changes for the year ended December 31, 2005 primarily reflected written pricing changes during the last six months of 2004 and the year ended December 31, 2005. 98 Table of Contents Underwriting Summary 2006 2005 2004 Written premiums $ 5,185 $ 5,001 $ 4,575 Change in unearned premium reserve 67 216 276 Earned premiums 5,118 4,785 4,299 Losses and loss adjustment expenses Current year 3,127 2,949 2,700 Prior year (61 ) 22 (67 ) Total losses and loss adjustment expenses 3,066 2,971 2,633 Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs 1,184 1,138 1,058 Insurance operating costs and expenses 250 280 248 Underwriting results $ 618 $ 396 $ 360 Loss and loss adjustment expense ratio Current year 61.1 61.6 62.8 Prior year (1.2 ) 0.5 (1.6 ) Total loss and loss adjustment expense ratio 59.9 62.1 61.2 Expense ratio 27.7 29.5 30.1 Policyholder dividend ratio 0.3 0.1 0.2 Combined ratio 87.9 91.7 91.6 Catastrophe ratio Current year 1.4 1.9 3.4 Prior year (0.4 ) 0.1 (4.3 ) Total catastrophe ratio 1.0 2.0 (0.9 ) Combined ratio before catastrophes 86.9 89.7 92.5 Combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development 87.7 89.4 89.7 Current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio Current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes 59.7 59.8 59.3 Current accident year catastrophe ratio 1.4 1.9 3.4 Current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio 61.1 61.6 62.8 Underwriting results and ratios Year ended December 31, 2006 compared to the year ended December 31, 2005 Underwriting results increased by $222, or 56%, with a corresponding 3.8 point decrease in the combined ratio, to 87.9. The net increase in underwriting results was principally driven by the following factors: Increase in current accident year underwriting results before catastrophes $ 121 Change to net favorable prior accident year development 83 Lower current accident year catastrophe losses 18 Increase in underwriting results from 2005 to 2006 $ 222 Increase in current accident year underwriting results before catastrophes The $121 improvement in current accident year underwriting results before catastrophes was primarily due to: The catastrophe treaty reinstatement premium that was recorded as a reduction of earned premium in 2005 $ 16 Excluding catastrophe treaty reinstatement premium: A decrease in the combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development 70 A $317 increase in earned premium (before catastrophe treaty reinstatement premium) at a combined ratio less than 100.0 35 Increase in current accident year underwriting results before catastrophes from 2005 to 2006 $ 121 Before reinstatement premium, a lower combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development improved current accident year underwriting results before catastrophes by $70. The 1.7 point decrease in the combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development, to 87.7, was primarily driven by an improvement in the expense ratio. 99 Table of Contents The expense ratio decreased by 1.8 points, primarily due to the impact in 2006 and 2005 of changes in the expected assessments from Citizens and a continued shift to lower commission workers compensation business. The year ended December 31, 2006 benefited from a $22 reduction in estimated Citizens assessments related to the 2005 Florida hurricanes and the year ended December 31, 2005 included a charge of $33 for assessments related to the 2004 and 2005 Florida hurricanes. Before catastrophes, the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio decreased slightly, to 59.7, primarily due to a lower loss and loss adjustment expense ratio on small commercial workers compensation business, a decrease in non-catastrophe property loss costs in small commercial and the effect on the ratio of catastrophe treaty reinstatement premium in 2005. Largely offsetting the improvement was, an increase in non-catastrophe property loss costs in middle market, the effect of earned pricing decreases in middle market and the effect of a shift to more workers compensation premium which has a higher loss and loss adjustment expense ratio than other business in the segment. The increase in non-catastrophe property loss costs in middle market was primarily due to increasing claim severity. In small commercial, non-catastrophe property loss costs were favorable due to favorable claim frequency. Change to net favorable prior accident year development There was a change from $22 of net unfavorable prior accident year reserve development in 2005 to $61 of net favorable prior accident year reserve development in 2006. Net favorable reserve development of $61 in 2006 included a $58 reduction in allocated loss adjustment expense reserves, primarily for workers compensation and package business related to accident years 2003 to 2005 and a $25 reduction in prior accident year catastrophe reserves in 2006, of which $9 related to hurricanes Katrina, Rita and Wilma in 2005 and $16 related to hurricanes Charley, Frances and Jeanne in 2004. Net unfavorable reserve development of $22 in 2005 included a $50 increase in workers compensation reserves related to reserves for claim payments expected to emerge after 20 years of development and a $40 strengthening of general liability reserves for accident years 2000 to 2003 due to higher than anticipated loss payments beyond four years of development. Partially offsetting the reserve increases in 2005 was a $75 reduction in workers compensation reserves related to accident years 2003 and 2004. Lower current accident year catastrophe losses Current accident year catastrophe losses decreased by $18, from $89 in 2005 to $71 in 2006. Catastrophe losses in 2005 included $68 of catastrophe losses from Hurricanes Katrina, Rita and Wilma. While hurricane losses were significantly lower in 2006, non-hurricane catastrophe losses increased significantly due, in large part, to tornadoes and hail storms in the Midwest and windstorms in Texas and on the East coast. Year ended December 31, 2005 compared to the year ended December 31, 2004 Underwriting results increased by $36, with a 0.1 point increase in the combined ratio to 91.7. The net increase in underwriting results was principally driven by the following factors: Increase in current accident year underwriting results before catastrophes $ 67 Lower current accident year catastrophe losses 58 Change to net unfavorable prior accident year development (89 ) Increase in underwriting results from 2004 to 2005 $ 36 Increase in current accident year underwriting results before catastrophes The $67 improvement in current accident year underwriting results before catastrophes was primarily due to: An increase in catastrophe treaty reinstatement premium recorded as a reduction of earned premium $ (10 ) Excluding catastrophe treaty reinstatement premium: A $496 increase in earned premium at a combined ratio less than 100.0 52 A decrease in the combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development 25 Increase in current accident year underwriting results before catastrophes from 2004 to 2005 $ 67 Before reinstatement premium, a lower combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development improved current accident year underwriting results before catastrophes by $25. The 0.3 point decrease in the combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development, to 89.4, was primarily driven by a 0.6 point improvement in the expense ratio, partially offset by a 0.5 point increase in the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes. Contributing to the 0.6 point decrease in the expense ratio was earned premium growth, a shift to more workers compensation business which has lower commissions and a $16 reduction in contingent commissions, partially offset by $20 of hurricane related assessments in 2005. The $16 reduction in contingent commissions was due, in part, to a decision made by some agents and brokers not to accept contingent commissions after the third quarter of 2004. 100 Table of Contents The 0.5 point increase in the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes, to 59.8, was primarily due to earned pricing decreases in middle market and increasing non-catastrophe property claim costs, partially offset by earned pricing increases in small commercial and improved current accident year underwriting results for workers compensation business. The improved current accident year performance for workers compensation business was consistent with the favorable prior accident year development recorded in 2005 related to accident years 2003 and 2004. Lower current accident year catastrophe losses Current accident year catastrophe losses decreased by $58, from $147 in 2004 to $89 in 2005. Catastrophe losses in 2005 for Hurricanes Katrina, Rita and Wilma were $68 compared to catastrophe losses in 2004 for Hurricanes Charley, Frances, Ivan and Jeanne of $98. Change to net unfavorable prior accident year development There was a change from $67 of net favorable prior accident year reserve development in 2004 to $22 of net unfavorable prior accident year reserve development in 2005. Net unfavorable reserve development of $22 in 2005 included a $50 increase in workers compensation reserves related to reserves for claim payments expected to emerge after 20 years of development and a $40 strengthening of general liability reserves for accident years 2000 to 2003 due to higher than anticipated loss payments beyond four years of development. Partially offsetting the reserve increases in 2005 was a $75 reduction in workers compensation reserves recorded related to accident years 2003 and 2004. Net favorable reserve development of $67 in 2004 included a $175 release of September 11 reserves, partially offset by a $38 strengthening of reserves for small commercial package business, a $25 strengthening of automobile liability reserves and a $23 strengthening of reserves for construction defects claims. Outlook For the 2007 full year, management expects the Business Insurance segment to achieve 2% to 5% written premium growth compared to written premium growth of 4% achieved in 2006. In small commercial, the Company expects to generate 4% to 7% written premium growth in 2007 by further increasing the number of appointed agents and growing premium in under-represented territories. In addition, small commercial expects to grow new business by expanding its underwriting appetite, refining its pricing models and upgrading product features. To support the expected increase in premium writings, small commercial continues to build a low-cost operating model that is scalable for further expansion. Within middle market, the Company expects no written premium growth in 2007 as the Company takes a disciplined approach to evaluating and pricing risks in the face of a decline in written pricing. Nevertheless, the Company will seek to increase its market share in a number of regions where the Company is currently under-represented. While the Company will continue to focus on growing its workers compensation business in the most profitable states, the Company expects to shift the mix of middle market business from workers compensation to other lines in 2007. To support this objective, the Company plans to develop new underwriting and pricing models for commercial auto and property business. In 2007, the Company will continue to focus on renewal retention, particularly in the mid-Western states, where competition is expected to be particularly strong. Written pricing trends in 2006 were affected by increased competition as evidenced by 1% written pricing increases in small commercial and 4% written pricing decreases in middle market. During 2006, non-catastrophe property loss costs increased, driven by increasing claim severity in middle market, partially offset by favorable claim frequency and severity in small commercial. In 2007, management expects claim severity to increase and claim frequency to be less favorable. Based on anticipated trends in earned pricing and loss costs, the combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development is expected to be in the range of 88.5 to 91.5 in 2007. The combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development was 87.7 in 2006. To summarize, management outlook in Business Insurance for the 2007 full year is: Written premium growth of 2% to 5%, including growth of 4% to 7% in small commercial and no growth in middle market A combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development of 88.5 to 91.5 101 Table of Contents PERSONAL LINES Personal Lines provides automobile, homeowners and home-based business coverages to the members of AARP through a direct marketing operation and to individuals who prefer local agent involvement through a network of independent agents in the standard personal lines market ( Standard ). Up until the sale of the business on November 30, 2006, the Company also sold non-standard auto insurance through the Company Omni Insurance Group, Inc. ( Omni ) subsidiary. Personal Lines also operates a member contact center for health insurance products offered through AARP Health Care Options. The Hartford exclusive licensing arrangement with AARP continues until January 1, 2020 for automobile, homeowners and home-based business. The Health Care Options agreement continues through 2009. Written Premiums [1] 2006 2005 2004 Business Unit AARP $ 2,580 $ 2,373 $ 2,244 Agency 1,100 1,020 942 Other 197 283 371 Total $ 3,877 $ 3,676 $ 3,557 Product Line Automobile $ 2,856 $ 2,753 $ 2,685 Homeowners 1,021 923 872 Total $ 3,877 $ 3,676 $ 3,557 Earned Premiums [1] 2006 2005 2004 Business Unit AARP $ 2,466 $ 2,296 $ 2,146 Agency 1,068 997 907 Other 226 317 392 Total $ 3,760 $ 3,610 $ 3,445 Product Line Automobile $ 2,792 $ 2,728 $ 2,622 Homeowners 968 882 823 Total $ 3,760 $ 3,610 $ 3,445 [1] The difference between written premiums and earned premiums is attributable to the change in unearned premium reserve. Premium Measures 2006 2005 2004 Policies in force at year end Automobile 2,276,165 2,222,688 2,166,922 Homeowners 1,460,679 1,384,364 1,348,573 Total policies in force at year end 3,736,844 3,607,052 3,515,495 New business premium Automobile $ 469 $ 426 $ 469 Homeowners $ 161 $ 131 $ 115 Premium Renewal Retention Automobile 87 % 87 % 89 % Homeowners 94 % 94 % 100 % Written Pricing Increase (Decrease) Automobile (1 %) 3 % Homeowners 5 % 6 % 9 % Earned Pricing Increase (Decrease) Automobile (1 %) 1 % 5 % Homeowners 5 % 7 % 11 % Earned Premiums Year ended December 31, 2006 compared to the year ended December 31, 2005 Earned premiums for the Personal Lines segment increased $150, or 4%, due primarily to earned premium growth in both AARP and Agency business, partially offset by higher property catastrophe treaty reinsurance costs and a reduction in other earned premium. Also 102 Table of Contents contributing to the increase in earned premiums was $31 of catastrophe treaty reinstatement premium payable to reinsurers recorded as a reduction of earned premium in 2005. Other earned premium consists of premium earned on non-standard auto business written by Omni and on business written through affinity partners other than AARP. AARP earned premium grew $170, or 7%, reflecting growth in the size of the AARP target market and the effect of direct marketing programs to increase premium writings of both auto and homeowners. Agency earned premium grew $71, or 7%, primarily as a result of an increase in the number of agency appointments and further refinement of the Dimensions class plans first introduced in 2003. Dimensions, which had been rolled out to 42 states for auto and 39 states for homeowners as of December 31, 2006, enables agents to generate a customized price for each policyholder, independent of the risks and rates of other members of the same household. The plan, which is available through the company network of independent agents, was enhanced beginning in the third quarter of 2006 as Dimensions with Auto Packages and the enhanced plan is now offered in 29 states with four distinct package offerings. Other earned premium decreased by $91, or 29%, because of a strategic decision to reduce other affinity business and limit non-standard writings to fewer geographic areas. On November 30, 2006, the Company sold Omni and exited the non-standard auto business. Refer to Note 20 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion. The earned premium growth in AARP and Agency was primarily due to new business written premium outpacing non-renewals over the last six months of 2005 and the full year of 2006 and to earned pricing increases in homeowners for both AARP and Agency. Auto earned premium grew $64, or 2% primarily from new business outpacing non-renewals in both AARP and Agency over the last six months of 2005 and the year ended December 31, 2006, partially offset by a decline in other auto business. Before considering the decline in other auto business, auto earned premium grew $154, or 6%. Homeowners earned premium grew $86, or 10%, primarily due to new business outpacing non-renewals in both AARP and Agency business over the last six months of 2005 and the year ended December 31, 2006 and due to earned pricing increases. Consistent with the growth in earned premium, the number of policies in force has increased in auto and homeowners. The growth in policies in force does not correspond directly with the growth in earned premiums due to the effect of earned pricing changes and because policy in force counts are as of a point in time rather than over a period of time. Auto new business written premium increased by $43, or 10%, to $469 in 2006. The increase in new business written premium was primarily due to an increase in AARP and Agency new business, partially offset by a decrease in other new business. Growth in new business was particularly strong in AARP with a growth rate of 20% in 2006. Homeowners new business written premium increased by $30, or 23%, to $161 in 2006. The increase in homeowners new business written premium was due to an increase in both AARP and Agency new business. Premium renewal retention in 2006 for auto of 87% and for homeowners of 94% remained flat from the prior year. For auto, overall premium renewal retention was flat, despite a decrease in retention for Agency auto. For homeowners, an increase in retention of AARP business was offset by a decrease in retention of Agency business. Premium renewal retention for Agency auto decreased due to a shift to more six month policies that have a lower retention rate. The trend in earned pricing during 2006 was a reflection of the written pricing changes in the last six months of 2005 and the year ended December 31, 2006. Auto written pricing decreases are driven by an extended period of favorable results factoring into the rate setting process. Homeowners written pricing continues to increase moderately due to insurance to value increases. Year ended December 31, 2005 compared to the year ended December 31, 2004 Earned premiums increased $165, or 5%, due primarily to earned premium growth in both AARP and Agency, partially offset by a reduction in other earned premium. Other earned premium consists of premium earned on non-standard auto business written by Omni and on business written through affinity partners other than AARP. AARP earned premium grew $150, or 7%, reflecting growth in the size of the AARP target market and the effect of direct marketing programs to increase premium writings, particularly in auto. Agency earned premium grew $90, or 10%, as a result of continued growth of the Dimensions class plans first introduced in 2004. Dimensions, which had been rolled out to 41 states for auto and 37 states for homeowners as of December 31, 2005, allows Personal Lines to write a broader class of risks. Other earned premium decreased by $75, or 19%, primarily because of a strategic decision by management to focus on more profitable non-standard auto business. The earned premium growth in AARP and Agency during 2005 was primarily due to new business written premium outpacing non-renewals for auto business in 2004 and 2005 and to earned pricing increases in homeowners business. Auto earned premium grew $106, or 4%, primarily from growth in AARP and Agency, offset by a decline in other earned premiums. Before considering the decline in other earned premium, auto earned premium grew $240, or 8%. Homeowners earned premium grew $59, or 7%, due to growth in AARP and Agency business, partially offset by a decline in the Affinity business included within other 103 Table of Contents earned premiums. Consistent with the growth in earned premium, the number of policies in force has increased in auto and homeowners. The growth in policies in force does not correspond directly with the growth in earned premiums due to the effect of earned pricing changes and because policy in force counts are as of a point in time rather than over a period of time. Auto new business written premium decreased by $43, or 9%, to $426 in 2005, due primarily to a $52 decline in Omni new business and, to a lesser extent, a decline in Agency and Other Affinity new business, partially offset by an increase in AARP new business. Homeowners new business written premium increased by $16, or 14%, to $131 in 2005, primarily due to an increase in Agency new business written premium. Premium renewal retention decreased in 2005 for both auto and for homeowners, from 89% to 87% for auto, and from 100% to 94% for homeowners. Premium renewal retention for automobile decreased primarily due to lower written pricing increases and a decrease in retention in Agency business, partially offset by an increase in retention to AARP business. Premium renewal retention for homeowners decreased primarily due to a decrease in retention of Agency business and lower written pricing increases. The moderation in earned pricing increases during 2005 is a reflection of written pricing changes in the last six months of 2004 and the year ended December 31, 2005. The written pricing declines are reflective of the company response in different states and different auto segments to the current levels of price adequacy. Written pricing for homeowners has increased primarily due to increased insurance to value. 2006 2005 2004 Underwriting Summary Written premiums $ 3,877 $ 3,676 $ 3,557 Change in unearned premium reserve 117 66 112 Earned premiums 3,760 3,610 3,445 Losses and loss adjustment expenses Current year 2,516 2,389 2,509 Prior year (38 ) (95 ) 3 Total losses and loss adjustment expenses 2,478 2,294 2,512 Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs 622 581 530 Insurance operating costs and expenses 231 275 265 Underwriting results $ 429 $ 460 $ 138 Loss and loss adjustment expense ratio Current year 66.9 66.2 72.8 Prior year (1.0 ) (2.6 ) 0.1 Total loss and loss adjustment expense ratio 65.9 63.6 72.9 Expense ratio 22.7 23.7 23.1 Combined ratio 88.6 87.3 96.0 Catastrophe ratio Current year 3.2 2.7 7.7 Prior year (0.4 ) 0.2 (0.3 ) Total catastrophe ratio 2.8 2.9 7.4 Combined ratio before catastrophes 85.8 84.4 88.6 Combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development 86.4 87.2 88.2 Other revenues [1] $ 135 $ 121 $ 123 [1] Represents servicing revenue 2006 2005 2004 Current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio Current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes 63.8 63.5 65.1 Current accident year catastrophe ratio 3.2 2.7 7.7 Current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio 66.9 66.2 72.8 Combined Ratios Automobile 93.6 90.7 95.7 Homeowners 74.0 76.6 96.8 Total 88.6 87.3 96.0 104 Table of Contents Underwriting Results and Ratios Year ended December 31, 2006 compared to the year ended December 31, 2005 Underwriting results decreased by $31, or 7%, with a corresponding 1.3 point increase in the combined ratio, to 88.6. The net decrease in underwriting results was principally driven by the following factors: Decrease in net favorable prior accident year development $ (57 ) Higher current accident year catastrophe losses (22 ) Increase in current accident year underwriting results before catastrophes 48 Decrease in underwriting results from 2005 to 2006 $ (31 ) Decrease in net favorable prior accident year development Net favorable prior accident year reserve development of $38 in 2006 included a $53 reduction in auto liability reserves and a $23 reduction in hurricane catastrophe reserves, including $10 related to Hurricane Katrina in 2005 and $7 related to Hurricane Charley in 2004, partially offset by a $30 increase in reserves for personal auto liability claims due to an increase in estimated severity on claims where the company is exposed to losses in excess of policy limits. The $53 reduction in auto liability reserves in 2006 included a $31 reduction in reserves for auto liability claims related to accident year 2005 as a result of better than expected frequency trends and a $22 reduction of reserves for AARP and other affinity auto liability claims related to accident years 2003 to 2005 as a result of better than expected severity trends. Net favorable prior accident year reserve development of $95 in 2005 included a $95 reduction in reserves for allocated loss adjustment expenses. Higher current accident year catastrophe losses Despite lower hurricane losses in 2006, current accident year catastrophe losses increased by $22, from $98 in 2005 to $120 in 2006. Catastrophe losses increased principally due to losses in 2006 from tornados and hail storms in the Midwest and windstorms in Texas and on the East coast. Catastrophe losses in 2005 included $51 of losses from Hurricanes Katrina, Rita and Wilma. Increase in current accident year underwriting results before catastrophes The $48 improvement in current accident year underwriting results before catastrophes was primarily due to: The catastrophe treaty reinstatement premium that was recorded as a reduction of earned premium in 2005 $ 31 Excluding catastrophe treaty reinstatement premium A $119 increase in earned premium at a combined ratio less than 100.0 16 A slight improvement in the combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development 1 Increase in current accident year underwriting results before catastrophes from 2005 to 2006 $ 48 The combined ratio before catastrophes and prior year development decreased by 0.8 points, to 86.4, due to the effect of $31 of catastrophe treaty reinstatement premiums recorded as a reduction of earned premium in 2005. Before the effect of catastrophe treaty reinstatement premium, the combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development was relatively flat, improving current accident year underwriting results before catastrophes by only $1. The 0.8 point decrease in the combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development was primarily driven by a 1.0 point decrease in the expense ratio, to 22.7, partially offset by a 0.3 point increase in the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes, from 63.5 to 63.8. The 1.0 point improvement in the expense ratio was primarily due to the impact in 2006 and 2005 of changes in the expected assessments from Citizens. The year ended December 31, 2006 benefited from a $19 reduction of estimated Citizens assessments related to the 2005 Florida hurricanes whereas the year ended December 31, 2005 included a charge of $30 for assessments related to the 2004 Florida hurricanes. The 0.3 point increase in the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes was principally due to an increase in non-catastrophe property loss costs for homeowners, primarily driven by an increase in claim severity, and an increase in the loss and loss adjustment expense ratio for auto liability claims, partially due to a shift to more Dimensions product business within Agency. Partially offsetting the increase in the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes was the effect of catastrophe treaty reinstatement premiums recorded as a reduction of earned premium in 2005. 105 Table of Contents Year ended December 31, 2005 compared to the year ended December 31, 2004 Underwriting results increased by $322, with a corresponding 8.7 point decrease in the combined ratio, from 96.0 to 87.3. The net increase in underwriting results was principally driven by the following factors: Lower current accident year catastrophe losses $ 166 Change to net favorable prior accident year development of $95 in 2005 98 Increase in current accident year underwriting results before catastrophes 58 Increase in underwriting results from 2004 to 2005 $ 322 Lower current accident year catastrophe losses Current accident year catastrophe losses decreased by $166, from $264 in 2004 to $98 in 2005. Catastrophe losses in 2005 for Hurricanes Katrina, Rita and Wilma were $51 compared to catastrophe losses in 2004 for hurricanes Charley, Frances, Ivan and Jeanne of $215. Change to net favorable prior accident year development There was a change from $3 of net unfavorable prior accident year reserve development in 2004 to $95 of net favorable prior accident year reserve development in 2005. Net favorable reserve development of $95 in 2005 represented a $95 reduction in prior accident year reserves for allocated loss adjustment expenses, predominantly related to auto liability claims. Increase in current accident year underwriting results before catastrophes The $58 improvement in current accident year underwriting results before catastrophes was primarily due to: An increase in catastrophe treaty reinstatement premium recorded as a reduction of earned premium $ (24 ) Excluding catastrophe treaty reinstatement premium: A decrease in the combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development 58 A $189 increase in earned premium at a combined ratio less than 100.0 24 Increase in current accident year underwriting results before catastrophes from 2004 to 2005 $ 58 Before reinstatement premium, a lower combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development improved current accident year underwriting results before catastrophes by $58. The 1.0 point decrease in the combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development, to 87.2, was primarily driven by a 1.6 point decrease in the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes, partially offset by a 0.6 point increase in the expense ratio. The 1.6 point decrease in the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes was primarily due to lower current accident year loss costs for auto liability claims and earned pricing increases for homeowners business slightly outpacing increases in non-catastrophe property loss costs, partially offset by the effect on the ratio of an increase in catastrophe treaty reinstatement premium. The lower current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio for auto liability claims was consistent with the favorable prior accident year development on auto liability allocated loss adjustment expense reserves recognized in 2005. Within homeowners, an increase in loss costs was due entirely to increasing claim severity. The expense ratio increased by 0.6 points, to 23.7, primarily due to $31 of hurricane-related assessments in 2005. Outlook Management expects the Personal Lines segment to deliver 4% to 7% written premium growth in 2007, compared to written premium growth of 5% in 2006. Written premium growth of 3% to 6% in auto and 7% to 10% in homeowners is expected to come from growth in both AARP and Agency. For AARP business, management expects to achieve its targeted written premium growth primarily through an increase in marketing to AARP members. In addition to marketing through mail, magazines and other traditional channels, the Company plans to attract new customers by continuing to help AARP build its membership, using internet advertisements and placing more direct response television advertisements. For the Agency business, management expects to increase written premium by further enhancing the Dimensions product and increasing the number of appointed agents. Throughout 2007, the focus will be to successfully engage new and recently appointed agents. The Company sold its Omni non-standard auto business on November 30, 2006 and because Omni accounted for 3% of written premium in 2006, Personal Lines written premium growth will be moderated by the sale of this business. Strong underwriting profitability within the past couple of years has intensified the level of competition, putting downward pressure on rates. For auto, written pricing in 2006 was down 1% and, for homeowners, written pricing increases in 2006 of 5% were lower than they had been in 2005. Non-catastrophe loss costs in homeowners increased in 2006, driven largely by an increase in claim severity. Management expects claim severity to increase again in 2007 and claim frequency to be slightly negative. While earned pricing and 106 Table of Contents loss cost trends are expected to be less favorable in 2007, underwriting results in 2007 will benefit from the sale of Omni which generated an underwriting loss of $52 in 2006. The Company expects a 2007 combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development in the range of 84.5 to 87.5. The combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development was 86.4 in 2006. To summarize, management outlook in Personal Lines for the 2007 full year is: Written premium growth of 4% to 7%, including growth of 3% to 6% in auto and 7% to 10% in homeowners A combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development of 84.5 to 87.5 SPECIALTY COMMERCIAL Specialty Commercial offers a variety of customized insurance products and risk management services. The segment provides standard commercial insurance products including workers compensation, automobile and liability coverages to large-sized companies. Specialty Commercial also provides professional liability, fidelity and surety, specialty casualty and livestock coverages, as well as core property and excess and surplus lines coverages not normally written by standard lines insurers. Specialty Commercial provides other insurance products and services primarily to captive insurance companies, pools and self-insurance groups. In addition, Specialty Commercial provides third-party administrator services for claims administration, integrated benefits, loss control and performance measurement through Specialty Risk Services. 2006 2005 2004 Written Premiums [1] Property $ 212 $ 211 $ 443 Casualty 570 815 743 Professional liability, fidelity and surety 697 613 539 Other 117 167 115 Total $ 1,596 $ 1,806 $ 1,840 Earned Premiums [1] Property $ 213 $ 245 $ 461 Casualty 567 787 635 Professional liability, fidelity and surety 650 555 523 Other 120 170 107 Total $ 1,550 $ 1,757 $ 1,726 [1] The difference between written premiums and earned premiums is attributable to the change in unearned premium reserve. Earned Premiums Year ended December 31, 2006 compared to the year ended December 31, 2005 Earned premiums for the Specialty Commercial segment decreased by $207, or 12%, primarily due to decreases in casualty, property and other earned premiums, partially offset by an increase in professional liability, fidelity and surety earned premiums and the effect of $26 of catastrophe treaty reinstatement premium payable to reinsurers recorded as a reduction of earned premium in 2005. Property earned premium decreased by $32, or 13%, primarily due to a decrease in new business and renewals in the latter half of 2005 and the full year of 2006 as well as the effect of an increase in reinsurance costs for 2006 treaties and additional catastrophe reinsurance purchased in the fourth quarter of 2005. Partially offsetting the decrease in earned premiums was $34 of catastrophe treaty reinstatement premiums payable to reinsurers recorded as a reduction of earned premium in 2005 and double digit earned pricing increases during 2006. The reduction in new business and renewals reflects a decision to reduce catastrophe loss exposures in certain geographic areas and a determination that, despite rate increases, rates on some business opportunities were not adequate. Property business has experienced significant rate increases throughout 2006, reflecting a hardening of the market after the 2005 hurricanes. Casualty earned premiums decreased by $220, or 28%, primarily because of the non-renewal of a single captive insurance program and a decline in new business written premium growth. Partially offsetting the decrease was an increase in premium retention and the effect of renewing a single large deductible policy as a retrospectively rated policy which bears a higher premium. The single captive insurance program accounted for earned premium of $241 for the year ended December 31, 2005. Professional liability, fidelity and surety earned premium grew $95, or 17%, due primarily to a decrease in the portion of risks ceded to outside reinsurers, new business growth in commercial and contract surety business, earned pricing increases in contract surety business and new business growth in middle market and small commercial professional liability business, partially offset by earned pricing decreases in professional liability. The growth in commercial and contract surety was primarily driven by an increase in the number of fidelity and surety bonds issued to existing accounts. Within the other category, earned premium decreased by $50, or 29%. The other category of earned premiums includes premiums assumed and ceded under inter-segment arrangements and co-participations. Under an inter-segment arrangement, beginning in the first quarter of 2006, the Company allocated more of the premiums ceded under the principal property catastrophe 107 Table of Contents reinsurance program to Specialty Commercial and less to Business Insurance and Personal Lines. In addition, beginning in the third quarter of 2006, the Company reduced the premiums assumed by Specialty Commercial under inter-segment arrangements covering certain liability claims. Year ended December 31, 2005 compared to the year ended December 31, 2004 Earned premiums for the Specialty Commercial segment increased by $31, or 2%, due to an increase in casualty, professional liability, fidelity and surety and other earned premiums, partially offset by a decrease in property earned premiums. Property earned premium decreased $216, or 47%, primarily because of a decline in new business and a decrease of $127 due to the decision made in the fourth quarter of 2004 to exit the multi-peril crop insurance ( MPCI ) business, partially offset by an increase in premium renewal retention. Also reducing earned premium was a $22 increase in reinstatement premiums paid to reinstate reinsurance treaty limits as a result of losses ceded from third and fourth quarter hurricanes of 2005 compared to reinstatement premiums paid in 2004 as a result of losses ceded from the third quarter hurricanes of 2004. Casualty earned premiums grew $152, or 24%, primarily because earned premium in 2004 included a $90 decrease in earned premiums under retrospectively-rated policies. The remaining growth of $62 was largely attributable to the effect of earned pricing increases, partially offset by a decrease in new business growth. In 2005 and 2004, a single captive insurance program accounted for earned premium of $241 and $226, respectively. Professional liability, fidelity and surety earned premium grew $32, or 6%, due to a decrease in the portion of risks ceded to outside reinsurers, new business growth in commercial and contract surety business, an increase in earned pricing for fidelity and surety business, and a decrease in the price of fidelity and surety reinsurance, partially offset by earned pricing decreases in professional liability. Within the other category, earned premium increased by $63, or 59%, primarily due to increased premiums on inter-segment reinsurance programs. Underwriting Summary 2006 2005 2004 Written premiums $ 1,596 $ 1,806 $ 1,840 Change in unearned premium reserve 46 49 114 Earned premiums 1,550 1,757 1,726 Losses and loss adjustment expenses Current year 1,063 1,377 1,345 Prior year 35 109 69 Total losses and loss adjustment expenses 1,098 1,486 1,414 Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs 300 281 257 Insurance operating costs and expenses 88 155 108 Underwriting results $ 64 $ (165 ) $ (53 ) Loss and loss adjustment expense ratio Current year 68.5 78.4 77.9 Prior year 2.3 6.2 4.0 Total loss and loss adjustment expense ratio 70.8 84.6 81.9 Expense ratio 25.4 24.3 21.1 Policyholder dividend ratio (0.3 ) 0.5 0.1 Combined ratio 95.9 109.4 103.1 Catastrophe ratio Current year 0.6 9.3 6.3 Prior year (2.4 ) 0.1 (6.7 ) Total catastrophe ratio (1.9 ) 9.5 (0.4 ) Combined ratio before catastrophes 97.8 99.9 103.5 Combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development 93.0 93.8 92.8 Other revenues [1] $ 338 $ 342 $ 314 [1] Represents servicing revenue Current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio Current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio before catastrophes 67.9 69.0 71.6 Current accident year catastrophe ratio 0.6 9.3 6.3 Current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio 68.5 78.4 77.9 108 Table of Contents Underwriting Results and Ratios Year ended December 31, 2006 compared to the year ended December 31, 2005 Underwriting results increased by $229, with a corresponding 13.5 point decrease in the combined ratio, to 95.9. The increase in underwriting results was principally driven by the following factors: Decrease in current accident year catastrophe losses $ 156 Decrease in net unfavorable prior accident year development 74 Decrease in current accident year underwriting results before catastrophes (1 ) Increase in underwriting results from 2005 to 2006 $ 229 Decrease in current accident year catastrophe losses Current accident year catastrophe losses decreased from by $156, $164 in 2005 to $8 in 2006. Catastrophe losses in 2005 included $145 of losses for hurricanes Katrina, Rita and Wilma. Decrease in net unfavorable prior accident year development Net unfavorable prior accident year reserve development of $35 in 2006 included a $45 strengthening of reserves for construction defects claims on casualty business for accident years 1997 and prior and a $20 strengthening of allocated loss adjustment expense reserves on workers compensation policies for claim payments expected to emerge after 20 years of development, partially offset by a $35 reduction in catastrophe reserves related to the 2005 hurricanes. The reduction in catastrophe reserves included a $28 reduction in net losses related to hurricane Katrina, despite a $24 increase in the gross loss estimate for hurricane Katrina. The decrease in net catastrophe loss reserves was primarily because hurricane Katrina losses on specialty property business were reimbursable under a specialty property reinsurance treaty covering national account business as well as under the Company principal property catastrophe reinsurance program. Under the provisions of an inter-segment reinsurance arrangement, a portion of the recoveries from the Company principal property catastrophe reinsurance program related to the reserve strengthening were allocated to Specialty Commercial. Net unfavorable prior accident year reserve development of $109 in 2005 included a $70 strengthening of workers compensation reserves for claim payments expected to emerge after 20 years of development and a $20 strengthening of reserves for large deductible workers compensation policies related to accident years 1999 to 2001. Reserve development in 2005 also included a release of reserves for directors and officers insurance related to accident years 2003 and 2004 and strengthening of prior accident year reserves for contracts that provide auto financing gap coverage and auto lease residual value coverage; the release and offsetting strengthening were each approximately $80. Decrease in current accident year underwriting results before catastrophes Decrease in current accident year underwriting results before catastrophes losses and catastrophe treaty reinstatement premium $ (27 ) Catastrophe treaty reinstatement premium recorded as a reduction of earned premium in 2005 26 Decrease in current accident year underwriting results before catastrophes from 2005 to 2006 $ (1 ) Before considering the $26 decrease in catastrophe treaty reinstatement premium, current accident year underwriting results before catastrophes for Specialty Commercial decreased by $27. Current accident year underwriting results before catastrophes for casualty decreased, primarily due to a higher loss and loss adjustment expense ratio. Before considering the decrease in catastrophe treaty reinstatement premium, current accident year underwriting results before catastrophes for property also decreased, primarily due to a decrease in earned premium, partially offset by the effects of lower non-catastrophe property loss costs. For professional liability, fidelity and surety business, current accident year underwriting results before catastrophes were relatively flat as an improvement in fidelity and surety was offset by a decrease in professional liability. For professional liability business, the effect of a higher loss and loss adjustment expense ratio and lower ceding commissions was partially offset by the effect of earned premium growth. Also contributing to the decrease in Specialty Commercial underwriting results was an increase in the allocation to Specialty Commercial of premiums ceded under the Company principal property catastrophe reinsurance program. 109 Table of Contents Year ended December 31, 2005 compared to the year ended December 31, 2004 Underwriting results decreased by $112, with a corresponding 6.3 point increase in the combined ratio, to 109.4. The net decrease in underwriting results was principally driven by the following factors: Increase in current accident year catastrophe losses $ (53 ) Increase in net unfavorable prior accident year development (40 ) Decrease in current accident year underwriting results before catastrophes (19 ) Decrease in underwriting results from 2004 to 2005 $ (112 ) Increase in current accident year catastrophe losses Current accident year catastrophe losses increased by $53, from $111 in 2004 to $164 in 2005. Catastrophe losses in 2005 for hurricanes Katrina, Rita and Wilma were $145 compared to catastrophe losses in 2004 for hurricanes Charley, Frances, Ivan and Jeanne of $81. Catastrophe losses in 2005 and 2004 include $70 and $19, respectively, of catastrophe losses assumed under inter-segment reinsurance programs. Increase in net unfavorable prior accident year development Net unfavorable prior accident year reserve development increased by $40, from $69 in 2004, to $109 in 2005. Net unfavorable prior accident year reserve development of $109 in 2005 included a $70 strengthening of workers compensation reserves for claim payments expected to emerge after 20 years of development and a $20 strengthening of reserves for large deductible workers compensation policies related to accident years 1999 to 2001. Reserve development in 2005 also included a release of reserves for directors and officers insurance related to accident years 2003 and 2004 and strengthening of prior accident year reserves for contracts that provide auto financing gap coverage and auto lease residual value coverage; the release and offsetting strengthening were each approximately $80. Net unfavorable prior accident year reserve development of $69 in 2004 included $167 of reserve strengthening for construction defect claims, a release of $116 in September 11 reserves and strengthening in large deductible workers compensation reserves and a release in other liability reserves, each approximately $150. Decrease in current accident year underwriting results before catastrophes The ($19) decrease in current accident year underwriting results before catastrophes was primarily due to: Effect of lower current accident year underwriting results in property, partially offset by improvement in professional liability $ (87 ) Increase in catastrophe treaty reinstatement premium recorded as a reduction of earned premium (22 ) Decrease in earned premiums under retrospectively rated policies in 2004 90 Decrease in current accident year underwriting results before catastrophes from 2004 to 2005 $ (19 ) Contributing to the lower current accident year underwriting results in property were higher non-catastrophe losses and a reduction in profit commissions due to increased catastrophe losses. Contributing to the improvement in current accident year underwriting results for professional liability was a reduction in the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratio, partially offset by a reduction in ceding commissions. Outlook In 2007, the Company expects written premium growth of 3% to 6%. Property written premium was relatively flat in 2006 as the effect of significant direct written pricing increases offset by a decline in new business growth, lower written premium renewal retention and higher reinsurance costs. Contributing to the higher reinsurance costs in 2006 was the cost of second event coverage following the 2005 hurricanes which was fully expensed by June 30, 2006. The Company expects that rate increases and new business growth will result in a written premium increase in property business in 2007, although the level of property business written in 2007 will largely depend on how much rates continue to increase to reflect higher reinsurance costs. While casualty written premium declined during 2006 due largely to the non-renewal of a single captive insurance program, management expects a modest increase in casualty written premium in 2007. To grow specialty casualty business, the Company will focus on increasing its share of business with larger brokers and will continue to improve sales execution at regional offices. Within professional liability, fidelity and surety, management expects growth in professional liability and fidelity written premium, partially offset by a decline in surety bond written premium. Despite declining written pricing, management expects to grow professional liability written premium in 2007 by, among other things, expanding sales to small and middle market companies and larger private companies and writing more public employment practices liability insurance. Written premium growth could be lower than planned in any one or all of the Specialty Commercial businesses if written pricing is less favorable than anticipated and management determines that new and renewal business is not adequately priced. 110 Table of Contents During 2006, written pricing decreased in casualty and professional liability and increased in property as well as in fidelity and surety. In the latter half of 2006, competition intensified for professional liability business, particularly for directors and officers insurance coverage. A lower frequency of class action cases in the past couple of years has put downward pressure on rates and this trend could reduce the growth rate of the Company professional liability business going forward. During 2007, the Company expects a lower non-catastrophe loss and loss adjustment expense ratio in specialty property due to the growth in earned pricing. Given the anticipated trends in pricing and loss costs in Specialty Commercial, management expects a combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development in the range of 92.0 to 95.0 for 2007. The combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development was 93.0 in 2006. To summarize, management outlook in Specialty Commercial for the 2007 full year is: Written premium growth of 3% to 6% A combined ratio before catastrophes and prior accident year development of 92.0 to 95.0 OTHER OPERATIONS (INCLUDING ASBESTOS AND ENVIRONMENTAL CLAIMS) Operating Summary 2006 2005 2004 Written premiums $ 4 $ 4 $ (10 ) Change in unearned premium reserve (1 ) (34 ) Earned premiums 5 4 24 Losses and loss adjustment expenses Current year 36 Prior year 360 212 409 Total losses and loss adjustment expenses 360 212 445 Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs (3 ) 5 Insurance operating costs and expenses 11 21 22 Underwriting results (366 ) (226 ) (448 ) Net investment income 261 283 345 Net realized capital gains 26 25 35 Other expense (1 ) (1 ) (37 ) Income tax benefit (expense) 45 (10 ) 60 Net income (loss) $ (35 ) $ 71 $ (45 ) The Other Operations segment includes operations that are under a single management structure, Heritage Holdings, which is responsible for two related activities. The first activity is the management of certain subsidiaries and operations of the Company that have discontinued writing new business. The second is the management of claims (and the associated reserves) related to asbestos, environmental and other exposures. The Other Operations book of business contains policies written from approximately the 1940s to 2003. The Company experience has been that this book of runoff business has, over time, produced significantly higher claims and losses than were contemplated at inception. Year ended December 31, 2006 compared to the year ended December 31, 2005 Other Operations reported a net loss of $35 in 2006 compared to net income of $71 in 2005, driven by the following: A $140 decrease in underwriting results, primarily due to a $148 increase in prior year loss development. Reserve development in 2006 included a $243 reduction in net reinsurance recoverables as a result of the agreement with Equitas and the Company evaluation of the reinsurance recoverables and allowance for uncollectible reinsurance associated with older, long-term casualty liabilities reported in the Other Operations segment, $43 of environmental reserve strengthening, and $12 of reserve strengthening for assumed reinsurance. In 2005, reserve development included $85 of reserve strengthening for assumed reinsurance, $37 of environmental reserve strengthening, and a $20 increase in the allowance for uncollectible reinsurance. A $22 decrease in net investment income, primarily as a result of a decrease in invested assets resulting from net loss and loss adjustment expenses paid. Other Operations net investment income includes income earned on the separate portfolios of Heritage Holdings, and its subsidiaries, and on the Hartford Fire invested asset portfolio, which is allocated between Ongoing Operations and Other Operations. The Company attributes capital and invested assets to each segment using an internally developed risk-based capital attribution methodology. A change from an income tax expense of $10 in 2005 to an income tax benefit of $45 in 2006, as a result of a pre-tax loss in 2006. 111 Table of Contents Year ended December 31, 2005 compared to the year ended December 31, 2004 Other Operations reported net income of $71 in 2005 compared to a net loss of $45 in 2004, driven by the following: A $222 increase in underwriting results, primarily due to a $197 decrease in prior year loss development. Reserve development in 2005 included $85 of reserve strengthening for assumed reinsurance, $37 of environmental reserve strengthening, and a $20 increase in the allowance for uncollectible reinsurance. In 2004, reserve development included a $181 provision for the reinsurance recoverable asset associated with older, long-term casualty liabilities, $170 of reserve strengthening for assumed reinsurance, and $75 of environmental reserve strengthening, which was partially offset by a $97 release of September 11 reserves. A $62 decrease in net investment income, primarily as a result of a decrease in invested assets resulting from net losses and loss adjustment expenses paid. A change from an income tax benefit of $60 in 2004 to an income tax expense of $10 in 2005, as a result of pre-tax income in 2005. Asbestos and Environmental Claims The Company continues to receive asbestos and environmental claims. Asbestos claims relate primarily to bodily injuries asserted by people who came in contact with asbestos or products containing asbestos. Environmental claims relate primarily to pollution and related clean-up costs. The Company wrote several different categories of insurance contracts that may cover asbestos and environmental claims. First, the Company wrote primary policies providing the first layer of coverage in an insured liability program. Second, the Company wrote excess policies providing higher layers of coverage for losses that exhaust the limits of underlying coverage. Third, the Company acted as a reinsurer assuming a portion of those risks assumed by other insurers writing primary, excess and reinsurance coverages. Fourth, subsidiaries of the Company participated in the London Market, writing both direct insurance and assumed reinsurance business. With regard to both environmental and particularly asbestos claims, significant uncertainty limits the ability of insurers and reinsurers to estimate the ultimate reserves necessary for unpaid losses and related expenses. Traditional actuarial reserving techniques cannot reasonably estimate the ultimate cost of these claims, particularly during periods where theories of law are in flux. The degree of variability of reserve estimates for these exposures is significantly greater than for other more traditional exposures. In particular, the Company believes there is a high degree of uncertainty inherent in the estimation of asbestos loss reserves. In the case of the reserves for asbestos exposures, factors contributing to the high degree of uncertainty include inadequate loss development patterns, plaintiffs expanding theories of liability, the risks inherent in major litigation, and inconsistent emerging legal doctrines. Furthermore, over time, insurers, including the Company, have experienced significant changes in the rate at which asbestos claims are brought, the claims experience of particular insureds, and the value of claims, making predictions of future exposure from past experience uncertain. Plaintiffs and insureds also have sought to use bankruptcy proceedings, including pre-packaged bankruptcies, to accelerate and increase loss payments by insurers. In addition, some policyholders have asserted new classes of claims for coverages to which an aggregate limit of liability may not apply. Further uncertainties include insolvencies of other carriers and unanticipated developments pertaining to the Company ability to recover reinsurance for asbestos and environmental claims. Management believes these issues are not likely to be resolved in the near future. In the case of the reserves for environmental exposures, factors contributing to the high degree of uncertainty include expanding theories of liability and damages; the risks inherent in major litigation; inconsistent decisions concerning the existence and scope of coverage for environmental claims; and uncertainty as to the monetary amount being sought by the claimant from the insured. It is also not possible to predict changes in the legal and legislative environment and their effect on the future development of asbestos and environmental claims. It is unknown whether potential Federal asbestos-related legislation will be enacted or what its effect would be on the Company aggregate asbestos liabilities. The reporting pattern for assumed reinsurance claims, including those related to asbestos and environmental claims, is much longer than for direct claims. In many instances, it takes months or years to determine that the policyholder own obligations have been met and how the reinsurance in question may apply to such claims. The delay in reporting reinsurance claims and exposures adds to the uncertainty of estimating the related reserves. Given the factors described above, the Company believes the actuarial tools and other techniques it employs to estimate the ultimate cost of claims for more traditional kinds of insurance exposure are less precise in estimating reserves for its asbestos and environmental exposures. For this reason, the Company relies on exposure-based analysis to estimate the ultimate costs of these claims and regularly evaluates new information in assessing its potential asbestos and environmental exposures. 112 Table of Contents Reserve Activity Reserves and reserve activity in the Other Operations segment are categorized and reported as asbestos, environmental, or all other . The all other category of reserves covers a wide range of insurance and assumed reinsurance coverages, including, but not limited to, potential liability for construction defects, lead paint, silica, pharmaceutical products, molestation and other long-tail liabilities. In addition, within the all other category of reserves, Other Operations records its allowance for future reinsurer insolvencies and disputes that might affect reinsurance collectibility associated with asbestos, environmental, and other claims recoverable from reinsurers. The following table presents reserve activity, inclusive of estimates for both reported and incurred but not reported claims, net of reinsurance, for Other Operations, categorized by asbestos, environmental and all other claims, for the years ended December 31, 2006, 2005 and 2004. Other Operations Losses and Loss Adjustment Expenses Asbestos Environmental All Other [1] [5] Total 2006 Beginning liability net [2] [3] $ 2,291 $ 360 $ 2,240 $ 4,891 Losses and loss adjustment expenses incurred 314 62 (16 ) 360 Losses and loss adjustment expenses paid (363 ) (106 ) (366 ) (835 ) Ending liability net [2] [3] $ 2,242 [4] $ 316 $ 1,858 $ 4,416 2005 Beginning liability net [2] [3] $ 2,471 $ 385 $ 2,514 $ 5,370 Losses and loss adjustment expenses incurred 29 52 131 212 Losses and loss adjustment expenses paid (209 ) (77 ) (405 ) (691 ) Ending liability net [2] [3] $ 2,291 $ 360 $ 2,240 $ 4,891 2004 Beginning liability net [2] [3] $ 3,783 $ 400 $ 2,392 $ 6,575 Losses and loss adjustment expenses incurred 217 78 150 445 Losses and loss adjustment expenses paid [6] (1,199 ) (83 ) (368 ) (1,650 ) Reclassification of allowance for uncollectible reinsurance (330 ) (10 ) 340 Ending liability net [2] [3] $ 2,471 $ 385 $ 2,514 $ 5,370 [1] All Other also includes unallocated loss adjustment expense reserves and the allowance for uncollectible reinsurance. [2] Excludes asbestos and environmental net liabilities reported in Ongoing Operations of $9 and $6, respectively, as of December 31, 2006, $10 and $6, respectively, as of December 31, 2005, and $13 and $9, respectively, as of December 31, 2004. Total net losses and loss adjustment expenses incurred in Ongoing Operations for the years ended December 31, 2006, 2005 and 2004 includes $11, $11 and $13, respectively, related to asbestos and environmental claims. Total net losses and loss adjustment expenses paid in Ongoing Operations for the years ended December 31, 2006, 2005 and 2004 includes $12, $17 and $11, respectively, related to asbestos and environmental claims. [3] Gross of reinsurance, asbestos and environmental reserves, including liabilities in Ongoing Operations, were $3,242 and $362, respectively, as of December 31, 2006, $3,845 and $432, respectively, as of December 31, 2005, and $4,322 and $501, respectively, as of December 31, 2004. [4] The one year and average three year net paid amounts for asbestos claims, including Ongoing Operations, were $368 and $595, respectively, resulting in a one year net survival ratio of 6.1 and a three year net survival ratio of 3.8 (9.0 excluding the MacArthur payments). Net survival ratio is the quotient of the net carried reserves divided by the average annual payment amount and is an indication of the number of years that the net carried reserve would last (i.e. survive) if the future annual claim payments were consistent with the calculated historical average. [5] The Company includes its allowance for uncollectible reinsurance in the All Other category of reserves. When the Company commutes a ceded reinsurance contract or settles a ceded reinsurance dispute, the portion of the allowance for uncollectible reinsurance attributable to that commutation or settlement, if any, is reclassified to the appropriate cause of loss. [6] Asbestos payments include payments pursuant to the MacArthur settlement. The Company has been evaluating and closely monitoring assumed reinsurance reserves in Other Operations. With the transfer of certain assumed reinsurance business into Other Operations, the segment has exposure related to more recent assumed casualty reinsurance reserves, particularly for the underwriting years 1997 through 2001. Assumed reinsurance exposures are inherently less predictable than direct insurance exposures because the Company may not receive notice of a reinsurance claim until the underlying direct insurance claim is mature. This causes a delay in the receipt of information from the ceding companies. In recent years, the Company has seen an increase in reported losses above previous expectations and this increase in reported losses contributed to reserve re-estimates. As a result of the unfavorable trends observed in assumed casualty reinsurance, for the years ended December 31, 2005 and December 31, 2004, the Company booked unfavorable reserve development of $85 and $170, respectively, related to assumed reinsurance. In the second quarter 2006, the Company completed an updated evaluation of its assumed reinsurance reserves. As a result, the Company increased its domestic assumed reinsurance reserves by $12, primarily due to a reduction in amounts retroceded. In connection with the assumed reinsurance evaluation, the Company also recognized $8 of profit sharing commission income based on favorable loss performance of certain retroceded contracts. In the fourth quarter 2006, the Company completed an updated evaluation of its HartRe 113 Table of Contents assumed reinsurance reserves. The evaluation indicated no change in the Company assumed reinsurance reserves. The Company currently expects to perform a review of its HartRe assumed reinsurance liabilities annually. During the third quarters of 2006, 2005 and 2004, the Company completed its annual environmental reserve evaluations. In each of these evaluations, the Company reviewed all of its domestic direct and assumed reinsurance accounts exposed to environmental liability. The Company also examined its London Market exposures for both direct insurance and assumed reinsurance. In all three years, the Company found estimates for individual cases changed based upon the particular circumstances of each account, although the reviews found no underlying cause or change in the claim environment. The net effect of these changes resulted in $43, $37 and $75 increases in net environmental liabilities in 2006, 2005 and 2004, respectively. The Company currently expects to continue to perform an evaluation of its environmental liabilities annually. The Company divides its gross environmental exposure into Direct, which is subdivided further as: Accounts with future exposure greater than $2.5, Accounts with future exposure less than $2.5, and Other direct; Assumed Reinsurance; and London Market. The unallocated amounts in the Other direct category include an estimate of the necessary reserves for environmental claims related to direct insureds who have not previously tendered environmental claims to the Company. An account may move between categories from one evaluation to the next. For example, an account with future expected exposure of greater than $2.5 in one evaluation may be reevaluated due to changing conditions and re-categorized as less than $2.5 in a subsequent evaluation or vice versa. The following table displays gross environmental reserves and other statistics by category as of December 31, 2006. Summary of Gross Environmental Reserves As of December 31, 2006 % of Number of Total Environmental 3 Year Gross Accounts [2] Reserves Reserves Survival Ratio [4] Gross Environmental Reserves as of September 30, 2006 [1] Accounts with future exposure > $2.5 14 $ 95 25 % Accounts with future exposure < $2.5 524 111 29 % Other direct [3] 25 6 % Total Direct 538 231 60 % 3.3 Assumed Reinsurance 100 26 % 3.2 London Market 56 14 % 3.8 Total gross environmental reserves as of September 30, 2006 [1] $ 387 100 % 3.3 Gross paid loss activity for the fourth quarter 2006 (25 ) Gross incurred loss activity for the fourth quarter 2006 Total gross environmental reserves as of December 31, 2006 $ 362 3.3 [1] Gross Environmental Reserves based on the third quarter 2006 environmental reserve study. [2] Number of accounts established as of June 2006. [3] Includes unallocated IBNR. [4] The one year gross paid amount for total environmental claims is $112, resulting in a one year gross survival ratio of 3.2. During the second quarters of 2006, 2005 and 2004, the Company completed its annual evaluations of the reinsurance recoverables and allowance for uncollectible reinsurance associated with older, long-term casualty liabilities reported in the Other Operations segment. In the second quarter of 2006, the Company entered into an agreement with Equitas and all Lloyd syndicates reinsured by Equitas (collectively, Equitas ) that resolved, with minor exception, all of the Company ceded and assumed domestic reinsurance exposures with Equitas, including all of the Company reinsurance recoveries from Equitas under the Blanket Casualty Treaty (BCT). As a result of the settlement with Equitas and the 2006 reinsurance recoverable evaluation, the Company reduced its net reinsurance recoverable by $243. As a result of the evaluation in the second quarter of 2005, the Company increased its allowance for uncollectible reinsurance by $20 to reflect deterioration in the credit ratings of certain reinsurers and the Company opinion as to the ability of certain reinsurers to pay claims in the future. As a result of the evaluation in the second quarter of 2004, the Company reduced its net reinsurance recoverable by $181, which was comprised of a $126 reduction of ceded amounts and a $55 increase in the allowance for uncollectible reinsurance. In 2004, the Company also consolidated within the all other category its allowance for reinsurer credit quality and disputes that might affect reinsurance coverage associated with Other Operations into a single allowance. In conducting these evaluations of reinsurance recoverables, the Company used its most recent detailed evaluations of ceded liabilities reported in the segment, including its estimate of future claims, the reinsurance arrangements currently in place and the years of potential reinsurance available. The Company also analyzed the overall credit quality of the Company reinsurers, recent trends in arbitration and litigation outcomes in disputes between cedants and reinsurers, and recent developments in commutation activity between reinsurers and cedants. In 2006, the Company also considered the effect of the Equitas settlement on the collectibility of amounts due from other upper-layer reinsurers under the BCT. The allowance for uncollectible reinsurance reflects management best estimate of reinsurance cessions that may be uncollectible in the future due to reinsurers unwillingness or inability to pay. 114 Table of Contents As of December 31, 2006, the allowance for uncollectible reinsurance for Other Operations totals $294. The Company currently expects to perform its regular comprehensive review of Other Operations reinsurance recoverables annually. Uncertainties regarding the factors that affect the allowance for uncollectible reinsurance could cause the Company to change its estimates, and the effect of these changes could be material to the Company consolidated results of operations or cash flows. During the second quarters of 2006 and 2005, the Company completed its annual asbestos reserve evaluations. As part of these evaluations, the Company reviewed all of its open direct domestic insurance accounts exposed to asbestos liability as well as assumed reinsurance. The Company also examined its London Market exposures for both direct insurance and assumed reinsurance. These evaluations resulted in no addition to the Company gross and net asbestos reserves. During the first quarter of 2004, the Company completed an updated gross asbestos reserve evaluation. As part of this evaluation, the Company also reviewed all of its open direct domestic insurance accounts exposed to asbestos liability as well as assumed reinsurance accounts and certain closed accounts. The Company also examined its London Market exposures for both direct insurance and assumed reinsurance. The evaluation indicated no change in the overall gross asbestos reserves. The Company currently expects to continue to perform an evaluation of its asbestos liabilities annually. On December 19, 2003, Hartford Accident and Indemnity Co. ( Hartford A&I ) entered into a settlement agreement with MacArthur Co. and its subsidiary, Western MacArthur Co. Under the settlement agreement, during the first quarter of 2004, Hartford A&I paid $1.15 billion into an escrow account owned by Hartford A&I. The funds were held in the escrow account until conditions precedent to the settlement occurred. On April 22, 2004, the funds were disbursed from the escrow account into a trust established for the benefit of present and future asbestos claimants pursuant to the bankruptcy plan. The settlement payments were accounted for as a reduction in unpaid loss and loss adjustment expenses during the first quarter of 2004. The Company divides its gross asbestos exposures into Direct, Assumed Reinsurance and London Market. The Company further divides its direct asbestos exposures into the following categories: Major Asbestos Defendants (the Top 70 accounts in Tillinghast published Tiers 1 and 2 and Wellington accounts), which are subdivided further as: Structured Settlements, Wellington, Other Major Asbestos Defendants; Accounts with Future Expected Exposures greater than $2.5, Accounts with Future Expected Exposures less than $2.5 and Unallocated. Structured Settlements are those accounts where the Company has reached an agreement with the insured as to the amount and timing of the claim payments to be made to the insured. The Wellington subcategory includes insureds that entered into the Wellington Agreement dated June 19, 1985. The Wellington Agreement provided terms and conditions for how the signatory asbestos producers would access their coverage from the signatory insurers. The Other Major Asbestos Defendants subcategory represents insureds included in Tiers 1 and 2, as defined by Tillinghast, that are not Wellington signatories and have not entered into structured settlements with The Hartford. The Tier 1 and 2 classifications are meant to capture the insureds for which there is expected to be significant exposure to asbestos claims. The Unallocated category includes an estimate of the reserves necessary for asbestos claims related to direct insureds that have not previously tendered asbestos claims to the Company and exposures related to liability claims that may not be subject to an aggregate limit under the applicable policies. An account may move between categories from one evaluation to the next. For example, an account with future expected exposure of greater than $2.5 in one evaluation may be reevaluated due to changing conditions and recategorized as less than $2.5 in a subsequent evaluation or vice versa. 115 Table of Contents The following table displays gross asbestos reserves and other statistics by policyholder category as of December 31, 2006 Summary of Gross Asbestos Reserves As of December 31, 2006 % of All Time Number of All Time Total Asbestos Ultimate 3 Year Gross Survival Accounts [2] Paid [3] Reserves Reserves [3] Ratio [4] [5] Gross Asbestos Reserves as of June 30, 2006 [1] Major asbestos defendants [6] Structured settlements (includes 4 Wellington accounts) 7 $ 386 $ 418 12 % $ 804 6.9 Wellington (direct only) 29 692 130 4 % 822 5.3 Other major asbestos defendants 29 459 154 4 % 613 2.4 No known policies (includes 3 Wellington accounts) 5 Accounts with future exposure > $2.5 88 663 959 27 % 1,622 7.5 Accounts with future exposure < $2.5 1,015 198 129 4 % 327 3.8 Unallocated [7] 1,418 696 20 % 2,114 Total Direct $ 3,816 $ 2,486 71 % $ 6,302 3.4 Assumed Reinsurance 833 647 19 % 1,480 6.7 London Market 495 358 10 % 853 7.1 Total as of June 30, 2006 [1] $ 5,144 $ 3,491 100 % $ 8,635 4.0 Gross paid loss activity for the third quarter and fourth quarter 2006 257 (257 ) Gross incurred loss activity for the third quarter and fourth quarter 2006 8 8 Total as of December 31, 2006 $ 5,401 3,242 8,643 3.6 Total as of December 31, 2006 excluding MacArthur Settlement [8] $ 4,251 6.3 [1] Gross Asbestos Reserves based on the second quarter 2006 asbestos reserve study. [2] An account may move between categories from one evaluation to the next. Reclassifications were made as a result of the reserve evaluation completed in the second quarter of 2006. [3] All Time Paid represents the total payments with respect to the indicated claim type that have already been made by the Company as of the indicated balance sheet date. All Time Ultimate represents the Company estimate, as of the indicated balance sheet date, of the total payments that are ultimately expected to be made to fully settle the indicated payment type. The amount is the sum of the amounts already paid (e.g. All Time Paid ) and the estimated future payments (e.g. the amount shown in the column labeled Total Reserves ). [4] Survival ratio is a commonly used industry ratio for comparing reserve levels between companies. While the method is commonly used, it is not a predictive technique. Survival ratios may vary over time for numerous reasons such as large payments due to the final resolution of certain asbestos liabilities, or reserve re-estimates. The survival ratio presented in the above table is computed by dividing the recorded reserves by the average of the past three years of payments. The ratio is the calculated number of years the recorded reserves would survive if future annual payments were equal to the average annual payments for the past three years. The 3-year gross survival ratio as December 31, 2006 is computed based on total paid losses of $2.7 billion for the period from January 1, 2004 to December 31, 2006. [5] As of December 31, 2006, the one year gross paid amount for total asbestos claims is $616, resulting in a one year gross survival ratio of 5.3. [6] Includes 28 open accounts at June 30, 2006. Included 32 open accounts at June 30, 2005. [7] Includes closed accounts (exclusive of Major Asbestos Defendants) and unallocated IBNR. [8] Excludes the $1.15 billion in payments for the MacArthur settlement in the first quarter of 2004. A number of factors affect the variability of estimates for asbestos and environmental reserves including assumptions with respect to the frequency of claims, the average severity of those claims settled with payment, the dismissal rate of claims with no payment and the expense to indemnity ratio. The uncertainty with respect to the underlying reserve assumptions for asbestos and environmental adds a greater degree of variability to these reserve estimates than reserve estimates for more traditional exposures. While this variability is reflected in part in the size of the range of reserves developed by the Company, that range may still not be indicative of the potential variance between the ultimate outcome and the recorded reserves. The recorded net reserves as of December 31, 2006 of $2.57 billion ($2.25 billion and $322 for asbestos and environmental, respectively) is within an estimated range, unadjusted for covariance, of $1.99 billion to $3.05 billion. The process of estimating asbestos and environmental reserves remains subject to a wide variety of uncertainties, which are detailed in the Critical Accounting Estimates Property & Casualty Reserves, Net of Reinsurance section of Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations. Due to these uncertainties, further developments could cause the Company to change its estimates and ranges of its asbestos and environmental reserves, and the effect of these changes could be material to the Company consolidated operating results, financial condition and liquidity. 116 Table of Contents For Paid and Incurred Losses and Loss Adjustment Expenses Reporting, the Company classifies its asbestos and environmental reserves into three categories: Direct insurance, Assumed reinsurance and London Market. Direct insurance includes primary and excess coverage. Assumed reinsurance includes both treaty reinsurance (covering broad categories of claims or blocks of business) and facultative reinsurance (covering specific risks or individual policies of primary or excess insurance companies). London Market business includes the business written by one or more of the Company subsidiaries in the United Kingdom, which are no longer active in the insurance or reinsurance business. Such business includes both direct insurance and assumed reinsurance. Of the three categories of claims (Direct, Assumed reinsurance and London Market), direct policies tend to have the greatest factual development from which to estimate the Company exposures. Assumed reinsurance exposures are inherently less predictable than direct insurance exposures because the Company may not receive notice of a reinsurance claim until the underlying direct insurance claim is mature. This causes a delay in the receipt of information at the reinsurer level and adds to the uncertainty of estimating related reserves. London Market exposures are the most uncertain of the three categories of claims. As a participant in the London Market (comprised of both Lloyd of London and London Market companies), certain subsidiaries of the Company wrote business on a subscription basis, with those subsidiaries involvement being limited to a relatively small percentage of a total contract placement. Claims are reported, via a broker, to the lead underwriter and, once agreed to, are presented to the following markets for concurrence. This reporting and claim agreement process makes estimating liabilities for this business the most uncertain of the three categories of claims. The following table sets forth, for the years ended December 31, 2006, 2005 and 2004, paid and incurred loss activity by the three categories of claims for asbestos and environmental. Paid and Incurred Losses and Loss Adjustment Expenses ( LAE ) Development Asbestos and Environmental Asbestos [1] Environmental [1] Paid Incurred Paid Incurred Losses & LAE Losses & LAE Losses & LAE Losses & LAE 2006 Gross Direct $ 346 $ 5 $ 45 $ 57 Assumed Domestic 199 4 50 (25 ) London Market 66 9 3 Total 611 9 104 35 Ceded (248 ) 305 2 27 Net $ 363 $ 314 $ 106 $ 62 2005 Gross Direct $ 349 $ 10 $ 50 $ 14 Assumed Domestic 70 (4 ) 21 London Market 61 9 Total 480 6 80 14 Ceded (271 ) 23 (3 ) 38 Net $ 209 $ 29 $ 77 $ 52 2004 Gross Direct [2] $ 1,487 $ (18 ) $ 79 $ 75 Assumed Domestic 66 30 19 London Market 22 19 Total 1,575 12 117 75 Ceded (376 ) 205 (34 ) 3 Net $ 1,199 $ 217 $ 83 $ 78 [1] Excludes asbestos and environmental paid and incurred losses and LAE reported in Ongoing Operations. Total gross losses and loss adjustment expenses paid in Ongoing Operations for the twelve months ended December 31, 2006, 2005, and 2004 includes $12, $23 and $11, respectively, related to asbestos and environmental claims. Total gross losses and loss adjustment expenses incurred in Ongoing Operations for the twelve months ended December 31, 2006, 2005, and 2004 includes $10, $17 and $14, respectively, related to asbestos and environmental claims. [2] Reflects payments pursuant to the MacArthur settlement of $1.15 billion. Consistent with the Company long-standing reserving practices, the Company will continue to review and monitor its reserves in the Other Operations segment regularly and, where future developments indicate, make appropriate adjustments to the reserves. For a discussion of the Company reserving practices, please see the Critical Accounting Estimates Property & Casualty Reserves, Net of Reinsurance section of Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations. The loss reserving assumptions, drawn from both industry data and the Company experience, have been applied over time to all of this business and 117 Table of Contents have resulted in reserve strengthening or reserve releases at various times over the past decade. The Company believes that its current asbestos and environmental reserves are reasonable and appropriate. However, analyses of future developments could cause the Company to change its estimates and ranges of its asbestos and environmental reserves, and the effect of these changes could be material to the Company consolidated operating results, financial condition and liquidity. Outlook The Other Operations segment will continue to manage the discontinued operations of the Company as well as claims (and associated reserves) related to asbestos, environmental and other exposures. The Company will continue to review various components of all of its reserves on a regular basis. The Company expects to perform its regular reviews of asbestos liabilities in the second quarter of 2007, Other Operations reinsurance recoverables and the allowance for uncollectible reinsurance in the second quarter 2007, and environmental liabilities in the third quarter of 2007. If there are significant developments that affect particular exposures, reinsurance arrangements or the financial condition of particular reinsurers, the Company will make adjustments to its reserves, or the portion of liabilities it expects to cede to reinsurers. INVESTMENTS General The Hartford investment portfolios are primarily divided between Life and Property & Casualty. The investment portfolios of Life and Property & Casualty are managed by Hartford Investment Management Company ( HIMCO ), a wholly-owned subsidiary of The Hartford. HIMCO manages the portfolios to maximize economic value, while attempting to generate the income necessary to support the Company various product obligations, within internally established objectives, guidelines and risk tolerances. The portfolio objectives and guidelines are developed based upon the asset/liability profile, including duration, convexity and other characteristics within specified risk tolerances. The risk tolerances considered include, for example, asset and credit issuer allocation limits, maximum portfolio below investment grade ( BIG ) holdings and foreign currency exposure. The Company attempts to minimize adverse impacts to the portfolio and the Company results of operations due to changes in economic conditions through asset allocation limits, asset/liability duration matching and through the use of derivatives. For a further discussion of how the investment portfolio credit and market risks are assessed and managed, see the Investment Credit Risk and Capital Markets Risk Management sections of the MD&A. HIMCO security selection process is a multi-dimensional approach that combines independent internal credit research along with a macro-economic outlook of technical trends (e.g., interest rates, slope of the yield curve and credit spreads) and market pricing to identify valuation inefficiencies and relative value buying and selling opportunities. Security selection and monitoring are performed by asset class specialists working within dedicated portfolio management teams. HIMCO portfolio managers may sell securities (except those securities in an unrealized loss position for which the Company has indicated its intent and ability to hold until the price recovers) due to portfolio guidelines or market technicals or trends. For example, the Company may sell securities to manage risk, capture market valuation inefficiencies or relative value opportunities, to remain compliant with internal asset/liability duration matching guidelines, or to modify a portfolio duration to capitalize on interest rate levels or the yield curve slope. HIMCO believes that advantageously buying and selling securities within a disciplined framework, provides the greatest economic value for the Company over the long-term. Return on general account invested assets is an important element of The Hartford financial results. Significant fluctuations in the fixed income or equity markets could weaken the Company financial condition or its results of operations. Additionally, changes in market interest rates may impact the period of time over which certain investments, such as mortgage-backed securities ( MBS ), are repaid and whether certain investments are called by the issuers. Such changes may, in turn, impact the yield on these investments and also may result in re-investment of funds received from calls and prepayments at rates below the average portfolio yield. Net investment income and net realized capital gains (losses) accounted for approximately 24%, 30% and 23% of the Company consolidated revenues for the years ended December 31, 2006, 2005 and 2004, respectively. The decrease in the percentage of consolidated revenues for 2006, as compared to the prior year, is primarily due to a smaller increase in the value of equity securities held for trading. Fluctuations in interest rates affect the Company return on, and the fair value of, fixed maturity investments, which comprised approximately 68% and 72% of the fair value of its invested assets as of December 31, 2006 and 2005, respectively. Other events beyond the Company control could also adversely impact the fair value of these investments. Specifically, a downgrade of an issuer credit rating or default of payment by an issuer could reduce the Company investment return. 118 Table of Contents The Company invests in private placement securities, mortgage loans and limited partnership arrangements in order to further diversify its investment portfolio. These investment types comprised approximately 21% and 18% of the fair value of its invested assets as of December 31, 2006 and 2005, respectively. These security types are typically less liquid than direct investments in publicly traded fixed income or equity investments. However, generally these securities have higher yields to compensate for the liquidity risk. A decrease in the fair value of any investment that is deemed other-than-temporary would result in the Company recognition of a net realized capital loss in its financial results prior to the actual sale of the investment. Following the recognition of the other-than-temporary impairment for fixed maturities, the company amortizes the new cost basis to par or to estimated future value over the remaining life of the security based on future estimated cash flows. For a further discussion of the evaluation of other-than-temporary impairments, see the Critical Accounting Estimates section of the MD&A under Evaluation of Other-Than-Temporary Impairments on Available-for-Sale Securities . Valuation of Investments and Derivative Instruments The Hartford investments in fixed maturities, which include bonds, redeemable preferred stock and commercial paper; and certain equity securities, which include common and non-redeemable preferred stocks, are classified as available-for-sale and accordingly, are carried at fair value with the after-tax difference from cost or amortized cost, as adjusted for the effect of deducting the life and pension policyholders share of the immediate participation guaranteed contracts; and certain life and annuity deferred policy acquisition costs and reserve adjustments, reflected in stockholders equity as a component of AOCI. The equity investments associated with the variable annuity products offered in Japan are recorded at fair value and are classified as trading with changes in fair value recorded in net investment income. Policy loans are carried at outstanding balance, which approximates fair value. Mortgage loans on real estate are recorded at the outstanding principal balance adjusted for amortization of premiums or discounts and net of valuation allowances, if any. Other investments primarily consist of derivatives, and limited partnership interests and proportionate share limited liability companies (collectively limited partnerships ). Limited partnerships are reported at their carrying value with the change in carrying value accounted for under the equity method and accordingly the Company share of earnings are included in net investment income. Derivatives are carried at fair value. Valuation of Fixed Maturities The fair value for fixed maturity securities is largely determined by one of three primary pricing methods: independent third party pricing service market quotations, independent broker quotations or pricing matrices, which use market data provided by external sources. With the exception of short-term securities for which amortized cost is predominantly used to approximate fair value, security pricing is applied using a hierarchy or waterfall approach whereby prices are first sought from independent pricing services with the remaining unpriced securities submitted to brokers for prices or lastly priced via a pricing matrix. Prices from independent pricing services are often unavailable for securities that are rarely traded or are traded only in privately negotiated transactions. As a result, certain of the Company ABS and commercial mortgage-backed securities ( CMBS ) are priced via broker quotations. A pricing matrix is used to price securities for which the Company is unable to obtain either a price from an independent third party service or an independent broker quotation. The pricing matrix begins with current treasury rates and uses credit spreads and issuer-specific yield adjustments received from an independent third party source to determine the market price for the security. The credit spreads, as assigned by a nationally recognized rating agency, incorporate the issuer credit rating and a risk premium, if warranted, due to the issuer industry and the security time to maturity. The issuer-specific yield adjustments, which can be positive or negative, are updated twice annually, as of June 30 and December 31, by an independent third party source and are intended to adjust security prices for issuer-specific factors. The matrix-priced securities at December 31, 2006 and 2005, primarily consisted of non-144A private placements and have an average duration of 5.1 and 5.0 years, respectively. The following table presents the fair value of fixed maturity securities by pricing source as of December 31, 2006 and 2005. 2006 2005 Percentage Percentage of Total of Total Fair Value Fair Value Fair Value Fair Value Priced via independent market quotations $ 69,023 85.5 % $ 65,986 86.3 % Priced via broker quotations 4,309 5.3 % 2,728 3.6 % Priced via matrices 5,605 6.9 % 5,452 7.1 % Priced via other methods 137 0.2 % 211 0.3 % Short-term investments [1] 1,681 2.1 % 2,063 2.7 % Total $ 80,755 100.0 % $ 76,440 100.0 % [1] Short-term investments are primarily valued at amortized cost, which approximates fair value. The fair value of a financial instrument is the amount at which the instrument could be exchanged in a current transaction between knowledgeable, unrelated willing parties. As such, the estimated fair value of a financial instrument may differ significantly from the amount that could be realized if the security was sold immediately. 119 Table of Contents Valuation of Derivative Instruments Derivative instruments are reported at fair value based upon either pricing valuation models, which utilize market data inputs or independent broker quotations. As of December 31, 2006 and 2005, approximately 84% and 81% of derivatives, respectively, based upon notional values, were priced via valuation models, while the remaining 16% and 19% of derivatives, respectively, were priced via broker quotations. These percentages exclude the GMWB rider and the associated reinsurance contracts, which are discussed in the Critical Accounting Estimates section of the MD&A under Valuation of Guaranteed Minimum Withdrawal Benefit Derivatives . Life The primary investment objective of Life general account is to maximize economic value consistent with acceptable risk parameters, including the management of the interest rate sensitivity of invested assets, while generating sufficient after-tax income to support policyholder and corporate obligations, as discussed in the Capital Markets Risk Management section of the MD&A under Market Risk Life . The following table identifies the invested assets by type held in the general account as of December 31, 2006 and 2005. Composition of Invested Assets 2006 2005 Amount Percent Amount Percent Fixed maturities, available-for-sale, at fair value $ 53,173 59.4 % $ 50,812 63.7 % Equity securities, available-for-sale, at fair value 811 0.9 % 800 1.0 % Equity securities held for trading, at fair value 29,393 32.9 % 24,034 30.1 % Policy loans, at outstanding balance 2,051 2.3 % 2,016 2.5 % Mortgage loans, at amortized cost 2,909 3.3 % 1,513 1.9 % Limited partnerships 794 0.9 % 431 0.6 % Other investments 283 0.3 % 178 0.2 % Total investments $ 89,414 100.0 % $ 79,784 100.0 % Fixed maturity investments increased $2.4 billion, or 5%, since December 31, 2005, primarily as the result of positive operating cash flows, product sales and an increase in the collateral held from increased securities lending activities, offset by an increase in interest rates. Equity securities held for trading increased $5.4 billion, or 22%, since December 31, 2005, due to positive cash flow primarily generated from sales and deposits related to variable annuity products sold in Japan and positive performance of the underlying investment funds supporting the Japanese variable annuity product. Mortgage loans increased $1.4 billion, or 92%, since December 31, 2005, as a result of a decision to continue to increase Life investment in this asset class primarily due to its attractive yields and diversification opportunities. Limited partnerships increased by $363 or 84% during 2006. HIMCO believes investing in limited partnerships provides an opportunity to diversify its portfolio and earn above average returns over the long-term. However, significant price volatility can exist quarter to quarter. Prior to investing, HIMCO performs an extensive due diligence process which attempts to identify funds that have above average return potential and managers with proven track records for results, many of which utilize sophisticated risk management techniques. Due to capital requirements, HIMCO closely monitors the impact of these investments in relationship to the overall investment portfolio and the consolidated balance sheet. HIMCO does not expect investments in limited partnerships to exceed 3% of the fair value of Life investment portfolio excluding trading securities. The following table summarizes Life limited partnerships as of December 31, 2006 and 2005. Composition of Limited Partnerships 2006 2005 Amount Percent Amount Percent Hedge funds [1] $ 427 53.8 % $ 127 29.5 % Private equity funds [2] 211 26.6 % 179 41.5 % Mortgage and real estate funds [3] 46 5.8 % 6 1.4 % Mezzanine debt funds [4] 110 13.8 % 119 27.6 % Total $ 794 100.0 % $ 431 100.0 % [1] Hedge funds include investments in funds of funds as well as direct funds. The hedge funds of funds invest in approximately 40 to 90 different hedge funds within a variety of investment styles. Examples of hedge fund strategies include long/short equity or credit, event driven strategies and structured credit. [2] Private equity funds consist of investments in funds whose assets typically consist of a diversified pool of investments in small non-public businesses with high growth potential. [3] Mortgage and real estate funds consist of investments in funds whose assets consist of mortgage loans, participations in mortgage loans, mezzanine loans or other notes which may be below investment grade credit quality as well as equity real estate. 120 Table of Contents [4] Mezzanine debt funds consist of investments in funds whose assets consist of subordinated debt that often times incorporates equity-based options such as warrants and a limited amount of direct equity investments. Investment Results The following table summarizes Life investment results. (Before-tax) 2006 2005 2004 Net investment income excluding income on policy loans and equity securities held for trading $ 3,042 $ 2,854 $ 2,690 Equity securities held for trading [1] 1,824 3,847 799 Policy loan income 142 144 186 Net investment income total $ 5,008 $ 6,845 $ 3,675 Yield on average invested assets [2] 5.8 % 5.7 % 5.8 % Gross gains on sale $ 215 $ 346 $ 359 Gross losses on sale (257 ) (254 ) (147 ) Impairments Credit related (10 ) (32 ) (16 ) Other (66 ) (5 ) (9 ) Total impairments (76 ) (37 ) (25 ) Japanese fixed annuity contract hedges, net [3] (17 ) (36 ) 3 Periodic net coupon settlements on credit derivatives/Japan (48 ) (32 ) 8 GMWB derivatives, net (26 ) (46 ) 8 Other, net [4] (51 ) 34 (42 ) Net realized capital gains (losses), before-tax $ (260 ) $ (25 ) $ 164 [1] Represents dividend income and the change in value of equity securities held for trading. [2] Represents annualized net investment income (excluding income related to equity securities held for trading) divided by the monthly weighted average invested assets at cost or amortized cost, as applicable, excluding equity securities held for trading, the collateral received associated with securities lending programs and consolidated variable interest entity minority interests. [3] Relates to the Japanese fixed annuity product (product and related derivative hedging instruments excluding periodic net coupon settlements). [4] Primarily consists of changes in fair value on non-qualifying derivatives, changes in fair value of certain derivatives in fair value hedge relationships and hedge ineffectiveness on qualifying derivative instruments. Year ended December 31, 2006 compared to the year ended December 31, 2005 Net investment income, excluding equity securities held for trading and policy loans, increased $188, or 7%, compared to the prior year period. The increase in net investment income was primarily due to income earned on a higher average invested assets base, an increase in interest rates and a change in asset mix (i.e., greater investment in mortgage loans and limited partnerships). The increase in the average invested assets base, as compared to the prior year, was primarily due to positive operating cash flows, investment contract sales such as retail and institutional notes, and universal life-type product sales. Net investment income on equity securities held for trading for the year ended December 31, 2006, can be primarily attributed to an increase in the value of the underlying investment funds supporting the Japanese variable annuity product generated by positive market performance. For 2006, the yield on average invested assets increased slightly over the prior year. An increase in the yield on fixed maturities was offset by a decrease in the yield on limited partnerships. Based upon current market forward interest rate expectations, Life expects the average portfolio yield to remain consistent with 2006 levels in 2007. A higher yield is expected from changes in asset and quality mix offset by moderating partnership income. Total net realized capital losses were higher in 2006 compared to 2005 primarily as a result of a higher interest rate environment. The components that drove the increase in net losses during the year ended December 31, 2006 included net losses on sales of fixed maturity securities, other-than-temporary impairments, periodic net coupon settlements and losses in Other, net, partially offset by a decrease in losses associated with GMWB derivatives and losses associated with the Japanese fixed annuity contract hedges. The circumstances giving rise to these components are as follows: The net losses on fixed maturity sales for the year ended December 31, 2006, were primarily the result of rising interest rates from the date of security purchase and, to a lesser extent, credit spread widening on certain issuers that were sold. For further discussion of gross gains and losses, see below. See the Other-Than-Temporary Impairments section that follows for information on impairment losses. The periodic net coupon settlements on credit derivatives and the Japan fixed annuity cross currency swaps include the net periodic income/expense or coupon associated with the swap contracts. The net losses for the years ended December 31, 2006 and 2005, 121 Table of Contents were primarily associated with the Japan fixed annuity cross currency swaps and resulted from the interest rate differential between U.S. and Japanese interest rates. The increase in net losses in 2006 was primarily due to higher U.S. interest rates. Other, net losses were primarily driven from the change in value of non-qualifying derivatives due to fluctuations in interest rates and foreign currency exchange rates. These losses were partially offset by a before-tax benefit of $25 received from the WorldCom security settlement. A reduction in losses in 2006 compared to 2005, associated with the GMWB derivatives were primarily driven by a more significant impact from liability model refinements and assumption updates in 2005 as compared to 2006. For further discussion of the GMWB rider valuation assumption, see the Capital Markets Risk Management section of the MD&A under Market Risk-Life . The Japanese fixed annuity contract hedges net amount consists of the foreign currency transaction remeasurements associated with the Yen denominated fixed annuity contracts offered in Japan and the corresponding offsetting cross currency swaps. Although the Japanese fixed annuity contracts are economically hedged, the net realized capital gains and losses result from the mixed attribute accounting model, which requires fixed annuity liabilities to be recorded at cost and remeasured only for foreign currency exchange rates but the associated derivatives to be reported at fair value. The net realized capital losses for the year ended December 31, 2006, resulted primarily from rising Japan interest rates while net realized capital losses for the year ended December 31, 2005, resulted from declining U.S. interest rates and rising Japan interest rates. The decrease in loss from 2005 to 2006 is primarily due to the hedging instruments used to manage the yen currency risk. Throughout 2006, the Company used pay variable U.S. dollar receive fixed yen, zero coupon currency swap while during the first half of 2005, the Company used pay fixed U.S. dollar receive fixed yen, zero coupon currency swap. This resulted in higher losses in 2005 as a result of declining U.S. interest rates. For additional discussion of the Japanese fixed annuity contract hedges see the Capital Markets Risk Management section of the MD&A under Market Risk-Life and Note 4 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Gross gains on sales for the year ended December 31, 2006, were primarily within fixed maturities and were concentrated in U.S. government, corporate and foreign government securities. Certain sales were made to reposition the portfolio to a shorter duration due to the flatness of the yield curve and the lack of market compensation for longer duration assets. Also, certain sales were made as the Company continues to increase investments in mortgage loans and limited partnerships. The gains on sales were primarily the result of changes in interest rates and foreign currency exchange from the date of security purchase. Gross losses on sales for the year ended December 31, 2006, were primarily within fixed maturities and were concentrated in the corporate and commercial mortgage-backed securities ( CMBS ) sectors with no single security sold at a loss in excess of $6, and an average loss as a percentage of the fixed maturity amortized cost of less than 3%, which, under the Company impairment policy was deemed to be depressed only to a minor extent. Year ended December 31, 2005 compared to the year ended December 31, 2004 Net investment income, excluding income on policy loans and equity securities held for trading, increased $164, or 6%, compared to the prior year. The increase in net investment income was primarily due to income earned on a higher average invested assets base as well as higher partnership income. The increase in the average invested assets base, as compared to the prior year, was primarily due to positive operating cash flows, investment contract sales such as retail and institutional notes, and universal life-type product sales such as individual fixed annuity products sold in Japan. The higher partnership income was due to certain of the Company partnerships reporting higher market values and the result of certain partnerships liquidating their underlying investment holdings in the favorable market environment. Net investment income on equity securities held for trading for the year ended December 31, 2005, can be primarily attributed to an increase in the value of the underlying investment funds supporting the Japanese variable annuity product generated by positive market performance. The change in net investment income as compared to the prior year is primarily due to the performance of the underlying funds on a higher asset base. For 2005, the yield on average invested assets was relatively consistent with the prior year. An increase in yield as a result of higher partnership income was offset by a reduction in yield due to lower policy loan income. Net realized capital losses were recognized for 2005 compared to net realized capital gains for 2004 primarily as a result of an increased interest rate environment. The significant components driving the changes in net realized capital gain and loss amounts between 2005 and 2004 include lower net gains on the sale of fixed maturity securities and losses associated with GMWB derivatives, Japanese fixed annuity contract hedges and periodic net coupon settlements. These losses were offset in part by gains in Other, net which was primarily related to changes in the value of non-qualifying foreign currency swaps. The circumstances giving rise to the changes in these components are as follows: The lower net gains on fixed maturity sales in 2005 were primarily the result of rising interest rates and losses associated with a major automotive manufacturer. See additional discussion of the gross gains and losses on sales below. 122 Table of Contents Higher net realized capital losses in 2005 resulted from rising Japanese interest rates, and in the first half of the year, a decrease in U.S. interest rates. For additional discussion of the Japanese fixed annuity contract hedges see the Capital Markets Risk Management section of the MD&A under Market Risk-Life and Note 4 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. The increase in net realized losses associated with the GMWB derivatives were primarily driven by the impact of liability model assumption updates in 2005. For further discussion of the GMWB rider valuation assumption, see the Capital Markets Risk Management section of the MD&A under Market Risk-Life . The periodic net coupon settlements on credit derivatives and the Japan fixed annuity cross currency swaps includes the net periodic income/expense or coupon associated with the swap contracts. The net loss for 2005 is associated with the Japan fixed annuity cross currency swaps and results from the interest rate differential between U.S. and Japanese interest rates. The Japanese fixed annuity product was first offered by the Company in the fourth quarter 2004. The adverse change in 2005 in comparison to 2004 primarily resulted from a full year of the Japanese fixed annuity product swap accruals in 2005. In 2005, gross gains were primarily within fixed maturities and included corporate, foreign government securities and CMBS. Corporate securities were sold primarily to reduce the Company exposure to certain lower credit quality issuers. The sale proceeds were primarily re-invested into higher credit quality securities. The gains on sales of corporate securities were primarily the result of credit spread tightening since the date of purchase. Foreign securities were sold primarily to reduce the foreign currency exposure in the portfolio due to the expected near term volatility in foreign exchange rates and to capture gains resulting from credit spread tightening since the date of purchase. The CMBS sales resulted from a decision to divest securities that were backed by a single asset due to the then scheduled expiration of the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act at the end of 2005, which was subsequently extended, in modified form, through the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act of 2005, through the end of 2007. Gains on these sales were realized as a result of an improved credit environment and interest rate declines from the date of purchase. In 2005, gross losses on sales were primarily within the corporate sector. Gross losses for 2005 included $27 of losses on sales of securities related to a major automotive manufacturer, that primarily occurred during the second quarter. Sales related to actions taken to reduce issuer exposure in light of a downward adjustment in earnings and cash flows of the issuer primarily due to sluggish sales, rising employee and retiree benefit costs and an increased debt service interest burden, and to reposition the portfolio into higher quality securities. For 2005, excluding sales related to the automotive manufacturer noted above, there was no single security sold at a loss in excess of $6 and the average loss as a percentage of the fixed maturity amortized cost was less than 2%, which under the Company impairment policy was deemed to be depressed only to a minor extent. Separate Account Products Separate account products are those for which a separate investment and liability account is maintained on behalf of the policyholder. The Company separate accounts reflect accounts wherein the policyholder assumes substantially all the risk and reward. Investment objectives for separate accounts, which consist of the participants account balances, vary by fund account type, as outlined in the applicable fund prospectus or separate account plan of operations. Separate account products include variable annuities (except those sold in Japan), variable universal life insurance contracts and variable corporate owned life insurance. The assets and liabilities associated with variable annuity products sold in Japan do not meet the criteria to be recognized as a separate account because the assets are not legally insulated from the Company. Therefore, these assets are included with the Company general account assets. As of December 31, 2006 and 2005, the Company separate accounts totaled $180.5 billion and $150.9 billion, respectively. Property & Casualty The primary investment objective for Property & Casualty Ongoing Operations segment is to maximize economic value while generating sufficient after-tax income to meet policyholder and corporate obligations. For Property & Casualty Other Operations segment, the investment objective is to ensure the full and timely payment of all liabilities. Property & Casualty investment strategies are developed based on a variety of factors including business needs, regulatory requirements and tax considerations. The following table identifies the invested assets by type held as of December 31, 2006 and 2005. Composition of Invested Assets 2006 2005 Amount Percent Amount Percent Fixed maturities, available-for-sale, at fair value $ 27,178 92.8 % $ 25,330 94.3 % Equity securities, available-for-sale, at fair value 873 3.0 % 661 2.5 % Mortgage loans, at amortized cost 409 1.4 % 220 0.8 % Limited partnerships 450 1.5 % 237 0.9 % Other investments 390 1.3 % 405 1.5 % Total investments $ 29,300 100.0 % $ 26,853 100.0 % 123 Table of Contents Fixed maturity investments increased $1.8 billion, or 7%, since December 31, 2005, primarily as the result of positive operating cash flows and an increase in the collateral held from increased securities lending activities offset by an increase in interest rates. Mortgage loans increased $189, or 86%, since December 31, 2005, as a result of a decision to continue to increase Property & Casualty investment in this asset class primarily due to its attractive yields and diversification opportunities. Limited partnerships increased by $213, or 90%, during 2006. HIMCO believes investing in limited partnerships provides an opportunity to diversify its portfolio and earn above average returns over the long-term. However, significant price volatility can exist quarter to quarter. Prior to investing, HIMCO performs an extensive due diligence process which attempts to identify funds that have above average return potential and managers with proven track records for results, many of which utilize sophisticated risk management techniques. Due to capital requirements, HIMCO closely monitors the impact of these investments in relationship to the investment portfolio and the overall consolidated balance sheet. HIMCO does not expect investments in limited partnerships to exceed 3% of the fair value of Property & Casualty investment portfolio. The following table summarizes Property & Casualty limited partnerships as of December 31, 2006 and 2005. Composition of Limited Partnerships 2006 2005 Amount Percent Amount Percent Hedge funds [1] $ 170 37.8 % $ 42 17.7 % Private equity funds [2] 109 24.2 % 100 42.2 % Mortgage and real estate funds [3] 80 17.8 % 37 15.6 % Mezzanine debt funds [4] 91 20.2 % 58 24.5 % Total $ 450 100.0 % $ 237 100.0 % [1] Hedge funds include investments in funds of funds as well as direct funds. The hedge funds of funds invest in approximately 40 to 90 different hedge funds within a variety of investment styles. In addition, Other Investments includes $384 of hedge funds based investments which are not limited partnerships and therefore, not included in the table above. Examples of hedge fund strategies include long/short equity or credit, event driven strategies and structured credit. [2] Private equity funds consist of investments in funds whose assets typically consist of a diversified pool of investments in small non-public businesses with high growth potential. [3] Mortgage and real estate funds consist of investments in funds whose assets consist of mortgage loans, participations in mortgage loans, mezzanine loans or other notes which may be below investment grade credit quality as well as equity real estate. [4] Mezzanine debt funds consist of investments in funds whose assets consist of subordinated debt that often times incorporates equity-based options such as warrants and a limited amount of direct equity investments. Investment Results The following table below summarizes Property & Casualty investment results. (Before-tax) 2006 2005 2004 Net investment income, before-tax $ 1,486 $ 1,365 $ 1,248 Net investment income, after-tax [1] $ 1,107 $ 1,016 $ 932 Yield on average invested assets, before-tax [2] 5.5 % 5.5 % 5.4 % Yield on average invested assets, after-tax [1] [2] 4.1 % 4.1 % 4.1 % Gross gains on sale $ 205 $ 163 $ 210 Gross losses on sale (164 ) (110 ) (83 ) Impairments Credit related (9 ) (8 ) Other (45 ) (1 ) (5 ) Total impairments (45 ) (10 ) (13 ) Periodic net coupon settlements on credit derivatives 4 9 Other, net [3] 9 1 10 Net realized capital gains, before-tax $ 9 $ 44 $ 133 [1] Due to significant holdings in tax-exempt investments, after-tax net investment income and yield are also included. [2] Represents annualized net investment income divided by the monthly weighted average invested assets at cost or amortized cost, as applicable, excluding the collateral received associated with securities lending programs. [3] Primarily consists of changes in fair value on non-qualifying derivatives and hedge ineffectiveness on qualifying derivatives. Year ended December 31, 2006 compared to the year ended December 31, 2005 Before-tax net investment income increased $121, or 9%, and after-tax net investment income increased $91, or 9%, compared to the prior year. The increase in net investment income was primarily due to income earned on a higher average invested assets base, an increase in interest rates and a change in asset mix (i.e., greater investment in mortgage loans and limited partnerships). The increase in the average invested assets base, as compared to the prior year, can be attributed to positive operating cash flows. 124 Table of Contents For 2006, the yield on average invested assets was consistent with the prior year. An increase in the yield on fixed maturities was offset by a decrease in the yield on limited partnerships. Based upon current market forward interest rate expectancy, Property & Casualty expects the average portfolio yield to remain consistent with 2006 levels in 2007. A higher yield is expected from changes in asset and quality mix offset by moderating partnership income. The decrease in net realized capital gains was primarily due to an increase in other-than-temporary impairments and losses on the sale of fixed maturity investments. For further discussion of gross gains and losses on fixed maturity investments and other-than-temporary impairments, see below. Gross gains on the sale of fixed maturities for the year ended December 31, 2006 were concentrated in the corporate, foreign government and municipal sectors. Certain sales were made to reposition the portfolio to a shorter duration due to the flatness of the yield curve and the lack of market compensation for longer duration assets. Also, certain sales were made as the Company continues to reposition the portfolio to higher quality fixed maturity investments and increase investments in mortgage loans and limited partnerships. The gains on sales were primarily the result of changes in interest rates from the date of purchase. Gross losses on the sale of fixed maturities for the year ended December 31, 2006 were concentrated in the corporate and CMBS sectors with no single security sold at a loss in excess of $4, and an average loss as a percentage of the fixed maturity amortized cost of less than 3%, which, under the Company impairment policy was deemed to be depressed only to a minor extent. Year ended December 31, 2005 compared to the year ended December 31, 2004 Before-tax net investment income increased $117, or 9%, and after-tax net investment income increased $84, or 9%, compared to the prior year. The increases in net investment income were primarily due to income earned on a higher average invested assets base as well as higher partnership income. The increase in the average invested assets base, as compared to the prior year, was primarily due to positive operating cash flows. The higher partnership income was due to certain of the Company partnerships reporting higher market values and the result of certain partnerships liquidating their underlying investment holdings in the favorable market environment. In 2005, the yield on average invested assets increased from the prior year as a result of higher partnership income. Excluding partnership income, the yield on average invested assets for 2005 was relatively consistent with the prior year. Net realized capital gains before-tax for 2005 decreased $89 as compared to the prior year primarily due to lower net realized gains on fixed maturity securities, lower periodic net coupon settlements on credit derivatives, as well as net losses on non-qualifying derivatives in 2005 compared to net gains in 2004. Gross gains on the sale of fixed maturities for the year ended December 31, 2005, were concentrated in the corporate and foreign government sectors and were the result of decisions to reposition the portfolio due to credit spread tightening in certain sectors and changes in foreign currency exchange rates. Certain lower quality corporate securities that had appreciated in value as a result of an improved corporate credit environment were sold to reposition the corporate holdings into higher quality securities. Foreign securities were sold to reduce the foreign currency exposure in the portfolio due to the expected near term volatility in foreign exchange rates. Also, certain foreign government securities appreciated in price and were sold to reposition the portfolio into higher credit quality securities. Gross losses on the sale of fixed maturities for the year ended December 31, 2005, were primarily within corporate and foreign government securities. Included in the corporate gross losses were losses on sales of securities related to a major automotive manufacturer of $10, before-tax, that primarily occurred during the second quarter. Sales related to actions taken to reduce issuer exposure in light of a downward adjustment in earnings and cash flow guidance primarily due to sluggish sales, rising employee and retiree benefit costs and an increased debt service interest burden, and to reposition the portfolio into higher quality securities. For the year ended December 31, 2005, excluding sales related to the automotive manufacturer noted above, there was no single security sold at a loss in excess of $3, and the average loss as a percentage of the fixed maturity amortized cost was less than 2%, which under the Company impairment policy was deemed to be depressed only to a minor extent. Corporate The investment objective of Corporate is to raise capital through financing activities to support the Life and Property & Casualty operations of the Company and to maintain sufficient funds to support the cost of those financing activities including the payment of interest for The Hartford Financial Services Group, Inc. ( HFSG ) issued debt and dividends to shareholders of The Hartford common stock. As of December 31, 2006 and 2005, Corporate held $404 and $298, respectively, of fixed maturity investments. In addition, Corporate held $55 and $0 of equity securities as of December 31, 2006 and 2005, respectively. 125 Table of Contents Variable Interest Entities ( VIE ) In the normal course of business, the Company becomes involved with variable interest entities primarily as a collateral manager and through normal investment activities. The Company involvement includes providing investment management and administrative services, and holding ownership or other investment interests in the entities. The following table summarizes the total assets, liabilities and maximum exposure to loss relating to VIEs for which the Company has concluded it is the primary beneficiary. Accordingly, the results of operations and financial position of these VIEs are included along with the corresponding minority interest liabilities in the accompanying consolidated financial statements. December 31, 2006 December 31, 2005 Maximum Maximum Total Exposure to Total Exposure to Assets Liability [4] Loss[2][3] Assets Liability [4] Loss [2] [3] Collaterized debt obligations ( CDOs ) and other funds [1] [2] $ 296 $ 99 $ 197 $ 77 $ 42 $ 35 Limited partnerships [3] 103 5 98 Total [5] $ 399 $ 104 $ 295 $ 77 $ 42 $ 35 [1] The Company provides collateral management services and earns a fee associated with these structures. [2] The maximum exposure to loss is the Company co-investment in these structures. [3] The maximum exposure to loss is equal to the carrying value of the investment plus any unfunded commitments. [4] Creditors have no recourse against the Company in the event of default by the VIE. [5] As of December 31, 2006 and 2005, the Company had relationships with four and two VIEs, respectively, where the Company was the primary beneficiary. In addition to the VIEs described above, as of December 31, 2006 and 2005, the Company held variable interest in three CDOs that are managed by HIMCO where the Company is not the primary beneficiary. As a result, these are not consolidated by the Company. These investments have been held by the Company for a period of one to three years. The Company maximum exposure to loss from the non-consolidated CDOs (consisting of the Company investments) was approximately $20 and $21 as of December 31, 2006 and 2005, respectively. Other-Than-Temporary Impairments The Company has a security monitoring process overseen by a committee of investment and accounting professionals that, on a quarterly basis, identifies securities that could potentially be other-than-temporarily impaired. When a security is deemed to be other-than-temporarily impaired, its cost or amortized cost is written down to current market value and a realized loss is recorded in the Company consolidated statements of operations. For fixed maturities, the company amortizes the new cost basis to par or to estimated future value over the remaining life of the security based on future estimated cash flows. For further discussion regarding the Company other-than-temporary impairment policy, see Evaluation of Other-Than-Temporary Impairments on Available-for-Sale Securities included in the Critical Accounting Estimates section of the MD&A and Note 1 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. The Company categorizes impairments as credit related and other. If the Company determines that it is not likely to receive interest or principal amounts based upon the initial expectations of the security or due in accordance with the contractual terms of the security, the impairment is characterized as credit related. The Company may also characterize an impairment as credit related if substantially all of the depression in security value is related to issuer credit spread widening. Company management uses average credit related impairment amounts within Life and Property & Casualty product pricing assumptions. The other-than-temporary impairments recorded in Other are primarily related to securities that had declined in value and for which the Company was uncertain of its intent to retain the investment for a period of time sufficient to allow recovery to cost or amortized cost. 126 Table of Contents The following table identifies the Company other-than-temporary impairments by type. 2006 2005 2004 ABS $ 8 $ 5 $ 13 Commercial mortgages 3 CMBS/Collateralized mortgage obligations ( CMOs ) 2 1 3 Corporate 103 32 5 Equity 8 9 12 MBS interest only securities 2 Total other-than-temporary impairments $ 121 $ 47 $ 38 Credit related $ 10 $ 41 $ 24 Other 111 6 14 Total other-than-temporary impairments $ 121 $ 47 $ 38 The following discussion provides an analysis of significant other-than-temporary impairments recognized during 2006, 2005 and 2004, the related circumstances giving rise to the other-than-temporary impairments and the potential impact such circumstances may have on other material investments held. 2006 The increase in other-than-temporary impairments during 2006 in comparison to 2005 and 2004 levels is primarily due to the decline in market value of certain issuers that may be adversely impacted by recapitalizations, pushing the Company interests lower in the repayment priority (i.e., leveraged buy-outs) or issuers using capital that would not benefit the company debt holders position (e.g., share repurchase programs) as well as an increase in interest rates from the date of security purchase. During 2006, other-than-temporary impairments were primarily recorded on corporate fixed maturities, ABS and equity securities. Approximately $27 of other-than-temporary impairments were recorded on various corporate fixed maturities within the technology and communications sector, and approximately $19 relating to various companies within the consumer cyclical sector. Approximately $17 of other-than-temporary impairments were recorded on corporate fixed maturities within the utilities sector, of which $16 related to a single issuer. There were no other significant other-than-temporary impairments (i.e., $15 or greater) recorded on any single security or issuer. The ABS other-than-temporary impairments related primarily to investments backed by aircraft lease receivables. Impairments resulted from higher than expected maintenance expenses. Future other-than-temporary impairment levels will depend primarily on economic fundamentals, political stability, issuer and/or collateral performance and future movements in interest rates. If interest rates continue to increase during 2007 or credit spreads widen, other-than-temporary impairments for 2007 would likely be higher than the 2006 levels. For further discussion of risk factors associated with portfolio sectors with significant unrealized loss positions, see the risk factor commentary under the Consolidated Total Available-for-Sale Securities with Unrealized Loss Greater than Six Months by Type table in the Investment Credit Risk section that follows. 2005 During 2005 there were no significant other-than-temporary impairments (i.e., $15 or greater) recorded on any single security or issuer. Other-than-temporary impairments recorded on ABS primarily related to deterioration of the underlying collateral supporting several securities and included $3 recorded on aircraft lease receivables related to one major U.S. carrier. These receivables are secured by certain older aircraft that recently experienced a significant decline in value. Other-than-temporary impairments recorded on equity securities primarily related to variable rate perpetual preferred securities issued by one highly-rated financial services company. These securities had sustained a decline in market value for an extended period of time as a result of issuer credit spread widening. The circumstances giving rise to the decline in value of these corporate securities since the date of purchase and potential impact on other material holdings of these issuers are as follows: Approximately $15 of other-than-temporary impairments recorded on corporate securities related to three Canadian paper companies. These companies operations have recently suffered from high energy prices and falling demand, in part due to the appreciation of the Canadian dollar in comparison to the U.S. dollar. These investments continue to perform in accordance with the contractual terms of the securities. As of December 31, 2005, the Company held approximately $96 of securities issued by these three companies in a total net unrealized loss position of $5. Substantially all of the securities in an unrealized loss position, as of December 31, 2005, were depressed only to a minor extent and, as a result, the unrealized losses were deemed to be temporary in nature. Also included in the corporate securities other-than-temporary impairment amount for 2005 was $9 recorded on securities related to two major automotive manufacturers. The market values of these securities had fallen due to a downward adjustment in earnings and cash flow guidance primarily due to sluggish sales, rising employee and retiree benefit costs and an increased debt 127 Table of Contents service burden. Through 2005, these investments performed in accordance with the contractual terms of the securities. As of December 31, 2005, the Company held approximately $137 of securities issued by these two companies in a total net unrealized loss position of $7. Substantially all of the securities in an unrealized loss position, as of December 31, 2005, were depressed only to a minor extent and, as a result, the unrealized losses were deemed to be temporary in nature. 2004 During 2004, there were no significant other-than-temporary impairments (i.e., $15 or greater) recorded on any single security or issuer. In aggregate, other-than-temporary impairments recorded on ABS primarily related to the decline in market values of certain previously impaired securities. Other-than-temporary impairments recorded on equity securities primarily related to variable rate perpetual preferred securities issued by two highly rated financial services companies. These securities are variable rate securities with unique structural interest rate reset characteristics that have sustained a decline in market value for an extended period of time primarily as a result of the increase in short-term interest rates after the security interest rate reset period. As of December 31, 2004, the Company did not hold other perpetual preferred securities in an unrealized loss position with similar interest rate reset characteristics. INVESTMENT CREDIT RISK The Company has established investment credit policies that focus on the credit quality of obligors and counterparties, limit credit concentrations, encourage diversification and require frequent creditworthiness reviews. Investment activity, including setting of policy and defining acceptable risk levels, is subject to regular review and approval by senior management and by The Hartford Board of Directors. The Company invests primarily in securities which are rated investment grade and has established exposure limits, diversification standards and review procedures for all credit risks including borrower, issuer and counterparty. Creditworthiness of specific obligors is determined by consideration of external determinants of creditworthiness, typically ratings assigned by nationally recognized ratings agencies and is supplemented by an internal credit evaluation. Obligor, asset sector and industry concentrations are subject to established Company limits and are monitored on a regular basis. The Company is not exposed to any credit concentration risk of a single issuer greater than 10% of the Company stockholders equity other than U.S. government and certain U.S. government agencies. For further discussion of concentration of credit risk, see the Concentration of Credit Risk section in Note 4 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Derivative Instruments The Company derivative counterparty exposure policy establishes market-based credit limits, favors long-term financial stability and creditworthiness and typically requires credit enhancement/credit risk reducing agreements. Credit risk is measured as the amount owed to the Company based on current market conditions and potential payment obligations between the Company and its counterparties. Credit exposures are generally quantified daily, netted by counterparty for each legal entity of the Company, and collateral is pledged to and held by, or on behalf of, the Company to the extent the current value of derivatives exceeds the exposure policy thresholds which do not exceed $10. The Company also minimizes the credit risk in derivative instruments by entering into transactions with high quality counterparties rated A1/A or better, which are monitored by the Company internal compliance unit and reviewed frequently by senior management. In addition, the compliance unit monitors counterparty credit exposure on a monthly basis to ensure compliance with Company policies and statutory limitations. The Company also maintains a policy of requiring that derivative contracts, other than exchange traded contracts, currency forward contracts, and certain embedded derivatives, be governed by an International Swaps and Derivatives Association Master Agreement which is structured by legal entity and by counterparty and permits right of offset. To date, the Company has not incurred any losses on derivative instruments due to counterparty nonperformance. In addition to counterparty credit risk, the Company periodically enters into swap agreements in which the Company assumes credit exposure from or reduces credit exposure to a single entity, referenced index, or asset pool. Summaries of these derivatives are as follows: Total return swaps and credit spreadlocks involve the periodic exchange of payments with other parties, at specified intervals, calculated using the agreed upon index and notional principal amounts. Generally, no cash or principal payments are exchanged at the inception of the contract. Typically, at the time a swap is entered into, the cash flow streams exchanged by the counterparties are equal in value. As of December 31, 2006 and 2005, the notional value of total return swaps and credit spreadlocks, which exposed the Company to credit risk, totaled $2.7 billion and $1.9 billion, respectively, and the fair value totaled $1 and $5, respectively. Credit default swaps involve a transfer of credit risk of one or many referenced entities from one party to another in exchange for periodic payments. One party to the contract will make a payment based on an agreed upon rate and a notional amount. The second party, who assumes credit exposure, will typically make a payment when there is a credit event and such payment will be 128 Table of Contents equal to the notional value of the swap contract less the value of the referenced security issuer debt obligation. A credit event is generally defined as default on contractually obligated interest or principal payments or bankruptcy. Certain credit default swaps require an upfront premium to be paid at inception of the contract. During 2006, the Company began using credit default swaps to replicate residual CDO interests. These transactions involve the receipt of cash upon entering into the transaction as well as coupon payments throughout the life of the contract. The upfront cash receipts for positions at December 31, 2006, totaled $201, which represents the original liability value of the credit default swaps. For credit default swaps in which the Company is exposed to credit risk, as of December 31, 2006 and 2005, the notional value totaled $1.8 billion and $700, respectively, and the fair value totaled $(184) and $(4), respectively. As of December 31, 2006, the average S&P rating for these referenced security issuer debt obligations is BBB+. For credit default swaps in which the Company has reduced its credit exposure, as of December 31, 2006 and 2005, the notional value totaled $3.1 billion and $254, respectively, and the fair value totaled $(11) and $2, respectively. As of December 31, 2006, the average S&P rating for these referenced security issuers debt obligations is BBB. The increase in notional value of risk reducing credit default swaps since December 31, 2005, primarily related to negative basis trades. These trades involve the purchase of a cash bond along with credit protection on the issuer through a credit default swap in order to lock in a positive spread to LIBOR. Fixed Maturities The following table identifies fixed maturity securities by type on a consolidated basis as of December 31, 2006 and 2005. Consolidated Fixed Maturities by Type 2006 2005 Percent Percent of Total of Total Amortized Unrealized Unrealized Fair Fair Amortized Unrealized Unrealized Fair Fair Cost Gains Losses Value Value Cost Gains Losses Value Value ABS $ 7,924 $ 54 $ (53 ) $ 7,925 9.8 % $ 7,907 $ 60 $ (89 ) $ 7,878 10.3 % CMBS 16,579 232 (145 ) 16,666 20.6 % 12,930 234 (162 ) 13,002 17.0 % Collateralized mortgage obligations ( CMOs ) 1,300 17 (9 ) 1,308 1.6 % 993 3 (6 ) 990 1.3 % Corporate Basic industry 2,801 83 (32 ) 2,852 3.6 % 3,086 107 (49 ) 3,144 4.1 % Capital goods 2,568 111 (20 ) 2,659 3.3 % 2,308 103 (28 ) 2,383 3.1 % Consumer cyclical 3,279 94 (34 ) 3,339 4.1 % 2,910 91 (56 ) 2,945 3.8 % Consumer non-cyclical 3,465 84 (47 ) 3,502 4.4 % 3,164 139 (37 ) 3,266 4.3 % Energy 1,779 73 (21 ) 1,831 2.3 % 1,545 118 (12 ) 1,651 2.2 % Financial services 10,276 307 (78 ) 10,505 13.1 % 9,413 350 (84 ) 9,679 12.7 % Technology and communications 4,136 191 (44 ) 4,283 5.3 % 4,256 239 (58 ) 4,437 5.8 % Transportation 730 17 (10 ) 737 0.9 % 850 33 (9 ) 874 1.1 % Utilities 4,588 195 (66 ) 4,717 5.8 % 4,043 182 (44 ) 4,181 5.5 % Other 1,447 38 (19 ) 1,466 1.8 % 1,444 33 (19 ) 1,458 1.9 % Government/Government agencies Foreign 1,213 87 (6 ) 1,294 1.6 % 1,378 96 (7 ) 1,467 1.9 % United States 848 5 (7 ) 846 1.0 % 877 27 (6 ) 898 1.2 % MBS agency 2,742 5 (45 ) 2,702 3.3 % 3,914 7 (60 ) 3,861 5.0 % Municipal Taxable 1,342 25 (23 ) 1,344 1.7 % 1,155 52 (8 ) 1,199 1.6 % Tax-exempt 10,555 511 (4 ) 11,062 13.7 % 10,486 549 (16 ) 11,019 14.4 % Redeemable preferred stock 36 36 44 1 45 0.1 % Short-term 1,681 1,681 2.1 % 2,063 2,063 2.7 % Total fixed maturities $ 79,289 $ 2,129 $ (663 ) $ 80,755 100.0 % $ 74,766 $ 2,424 $ (750 ) $ 76,440 100.0 % The Company fixed maturity net unrealized gains decreased $208 from December 31, 2005 to December 31, 2006. The decrease was primarily due to an increase in interest rates and decline in the U.S. dollar in comparison to foreign denominated currencies, partially offset by credit spread compression and other-than-temporary impairments taken during the year. Gross unrealized gains and losses were also reduced by securities sold in a gain or loss position, respectively. For further discussion of risk factors associated with sectors with significant unrealized loss positions, see the sector risk factor commentary under the Consolidated Total Available-for-Sale Securities with Unrealized Loss Greater than Six Months by Type table in this section of the MD&A. 129 Table of Contents Securities that have characteristics of fixed maturities and equity securities are a type of hybrid security. Hybrid securities that have a preponderance of economic attributes more akin to fixed maturities such as a stated interest rate, a mandatory redemption date or a punitive interest rate step-up feature which would compel the issuer to redeem the security at a specified call date, except in remote circumstances, are included within fixed maturities. Accordingly, the fair value of hybrid securities included in the tables above at December 31, 2006 and 2005 are $3.5 billion and $3.6 billion, respectively. As of December 31, 2006, investment sector allocations as a percentage of total fixed maturities have not significantly changed since December 31, 2005, with the exception of CMBS and MBS. Throughout 2006, the Company increased its allocation to CMBS due to the securities attractive spread levels, underlying asset diversification and quality and increased participation in securities lending. The decrease in MBS is primarily related to an increase in dollar-roll activity. MBS dollar-roll transactions involve the sale and simultaneous agreement to repurchase a pool of underlying mortgage-backed securities at a future date. The forward purchase agreement is accounted for as a derivative until the repurchase of the MBS is settled, and accordingly, the rolled out securities are not included in the Consolidated Fixed Maturities by Type table above. As of December 31, 2006, 25% of the fixed maturities were invested in private placement securities, including 18% in Rule 144A offerings to qualified institutional buyers. Private placement securities are generally less liquid than public securities. Most of the private placement securities are rated by nationally recognized ratings agencies. At the January 2007 Federal Open Market Committee ( FOMC ) meeting, the Federal Reserve maintained the target federal funds rate at 5.25%. The FOMC stated that inflation risks have improved modestly in recent months and inflation pressure was likely to moderate overtime, but maintained the view that upside risk remains. An increase in future interest rates may result in lower fixed maturity valuations, an increase in gross unrealized losses and a decrease in gross unrealized gains. The following table identifies fixed maturities by credit quality on a consolidated basis as of December 31, 2006 and 2005. The ratings referenced below are based on the ratings of a nationally recognized rating organization or, if not rated, assigned based on the Company internal analysis of such securities. The Company held no issuer of a BIG security with a fair value in excess of 4% of the total fair value for BIG securities as of December 31, 2006 and 2005. Consolidated Fixed Maturities by Credit Quality 2006 2005 Percent of Percent of Amortized Total Fair Amortized Total Fair Cost Fair Value Value Cost Fair Value Value AAA $ 23,216 $ 23,629 29.2 % $ 19,414 $ 19,837 26.0 % AA 10,107 10,298 12.8 % 9,901 10,143 13.3 % A 17,696 18,251 22.6 % 18,232 18,914 24.7 % BBB 17,402 17,655 21.9 % 16,560 16,892 22.1 % United States Government/Government agencies 5,529 5,507 6.8 % 5,720 5,686 7.4 % BB & below 3,658 3,734 4.6 % 2,876 2,905 3.8 % Short-term 1,681 1,681 2.1 % 2,063 2,063 2.7 % Total fixed maturities $ 79,289 $ 80,755 100.0 % $ 74,766 $ 76,440 100.0 % The following table presents the Company unrealized loss aging for total fixed maturity and equity securities classified as available-for-sale on a consolidated basis, as of December 31, 2006 and 2005, by length of time the security was in an unrealized loss position. Consolidated Unrealized Loss Aging of Total Available-for-Sale Securities 2006 2005 Amortized Fair Unrealized Amortized Fair Unrealized Cost Value Loss Cost Value Loss Three months or less $ 12,601 $ 12,500 $ (101 ) $ 17,986 $ 17,704 $ (282 ) Greater than three months to six months 1,261 1,242 (19 ) 5,143 5,013 (130 ) Greater than six months to nine months 1,239 1,210 (29 ) 1,061 1,036 (25 ) Greater than nine months to twelve months 1,992 1,959 (33 ) 3,001 2,907 (94 ) Greater than twelve months 15,402 14,911 (491 ) 5,053 4,826 (227 ) Total $ 32,495 $ 31,822 $ (673 ) $ 32,244 $ 31,486 $ (758 ) The decrease in the unrealized loss amount since December 31, 2005, is primarily the result of asset sales, credit spread compression and other-than-temporary impairments recorded in 2006, offset in part by an increase in interest rates. For further discussion, see the economic commentary under the Consolidated Fixed Maturities by Type table in this section of the MD&A. 130 Table of Contents As a percentage of amortized cost, the average security unrealized loss at December 31, 2006, and December 31, 2005, was less than 3%. As of December 31, 2006, and December 31, 2005, fixed maturities represented $663, or 99%, and $750, or 99%, respectively, of the Company total unrealized loss associated with securities classified as available-for-sale. Other-than-temporary impairments for certain ABS and CMBS are recognized if the fair value of the security, as determined by external pricing sources, is less than its carrying amount and there has been a decrease in the present value of the expected cash flows since the last reporting period. There were no ABS or CMBS included in the table above, as of December 31, 2006 and 2005, for which management best estimate of future cash flows adversely changed during the reporting period for which an impairment has not been recorded. For further discussion of the other-than-temporary impairments criteria, see Evaluation of Other-Than-Temporary Impairments on Available-for-Sale Securities included in the Critical Accounting Estimates section of the MD&A and Note 1 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. The Company held no securities of a single issuer that were at an unrealized loss position in excess of 5% and 6%, respectively, of the total unrealized loss amount as of December 31, 2006 and 2005. The total securities classified as available-for-sale in an unrealized loss position for longer than six months by type as of December 31, 2006 and 2005 are presented in the following table. Consolidated Total Available-for-Sale Securities with Unrealized Loss Greater Than Six Months by Type 2006 2005 Percent of Percent of Total Total Amortized Fair Unrealized Unrealized Amortized Fair Unrealized Unrealized Cost Value Loss Loss Cost Value Loss Loss ABS Aircraft lease receivables $ 107 $ 79 $ (28 ) 5.1 % $ 204 $ 152 $ (52 ) 15.0 % CDOs 133 129 (4 ) 0.7 % 25 24 (1 ) 0.3 % Credit card receivables 150 148 (2 ) 0.4 % 162 160 (2 ) 0.6 % Other ABS 777 760 (17 ) 3.1 % 727 713 (14 ) 4.0 % CMBS 4,694 4,575 (119 ) 21.5 % 1,961 1,902 (59 ) 17.1 % Corporate Basic industry 859 834 (25 ) 4.5 % 501 480 (21 ) 6.1 % Consumer cyclical 752 724 (28 ) 5.1 % 459 434 (25 ) 7.2 % Consumer non-cyclical 1,106 1,068 (38 ) 6.9 % 418 401 (17 ) 4.9 % Financial services 2,749 2,689 (60 ) 10.8 % 1,847 1,796 (51 ) 14.7 % Technology and communications 912 877 (35 ) 6.3 % 481 458 (23 ) 6.7 % Transportation 225 216 (9 ) 1.6 % 40 39 (1 ) 0.3 % Utilities 1,384 1,331 (53 ) 9.6 % 246 235 (11 ) 3.2 % Other 1,454 1,404 (50 ) 9.0 % 553 526 (27 ) 7.8 % Other securities 3,331 3,246 (85 ) 15.4 % 1,491 1,449 (42 ) 12.1 % Total $ 18,633 $ 18,080 $ (553 ) 100.0 % $ 9,115 $ 8,769 $ (346 ) 100.0 % The increase in total unrealized losses greater than six months since December 31, 2005, was primarily driven by an increase in interest rates offset in part by asset sales and other-than-temporary impairments. With the exception of certain ABS security types, the majority of the securities in an unrealized loss position for six months or more as of December 31, 2006, were depressed primarily due to interest rate changes from the date of purchase. The sectors with the most significant concentration of unrealized losses were CMBS and corporate fixed maturities, most significantly within the financial services and utilities sectors. Also, ABS supported by aircraft lease receivables, although improving, continues to be a sector within the Company portfolios that contains the most significant concentration of credit risk. The Company current view of risk factors relative to these fixed maturity types is as follows: CMBS As of December 31, 2006, the Company held approximately 600 different securities that were in an unrealized loss position for greater than six months. The unrealized loss was primarily the result of an increase in interest rates from the security purchase date. Substantially all of these securities are investment grade securities priced at, or greater than, 90% of amortized cost as of December 31, 2006. Additional changes in fair value of these securities are primarily dependent on future changes in interest rates. Financial services As of December 31, 2006, the Company held approximately 220 different securities in the financial services sector that were in an unrealized loss position for greater than six months. Substantially all of these securities are investment grade securities priced at, or greater than, 90% of amortized cost as of December 31, 2006. These positions are a mixture of fixed and variable rate securities with extended maturity dates, which have been adversely impacted by changes in interest rates after the purchase date. Additional changes in fair value of these securities are primarily dependent on future changes in general market conditions, including interest rates and credit spread movements. 131 Table of Contents Utilities As of December 31, 2006, the Company held approximately 140 different securities that were in an unrealized loss position for six months or more. Most of these securities are fixed rate, investment grade securities with extended maturity dates, which have been adversely impacted by changes in interest rates after the purchase date. Additional changes in fair value of these securities are primarily dependent on future changes in general market conditions, including interest rates and credit spread movements. Aircraft lease receivables The Company holdings are asset-backed securities secured by leases to airlines primarily outside of the United States. Based on the current and expected future collateral values of the underlying aircraft, a recent improvement in lease rates and an overall increase in worldwide travel, the Company expects to recover the full amortized cost of these investments. However, future price recovery will depend on continued improvement in economic fundamentals, political stability, airline operating performance and collateral value. As part of the Company ongoing security monitoring process by a committee of investment and accounting professionals, the Company has reviewed its investment portfolio and concluded that there were no additional other-than-temporary impairments as of December 31, 2006 and 2005. Due to the issuers continued satisfaction of the securities obligations in accordance with their contractual terms and the expectation that they will continue to do so, management intent and ability to hold these securities to recovery, as well as the evaluation of the fundamentals of the issuers financial condition and other objective evidence, the Company believes that the prices of the securities in the sectors identified above were temporarily depressed. The evaluation for other-than-temporary impairments is a quantitative and qualitative process, which is subject to risks and uncertainties in the determination of whether declines in the fair value of investments are other-than-temporary. The risks and uncertainties include changes in general economic conditions, the issuer financial condition or near term recovery prospects and the effects of changes in interest rates. In addition, for securitized financial assets with contractual cash flows (e.g., ABS and CMBS), projections of expected future cash flows may change based upon new information regarding the performance of the underlying collateral. As of December 31, 2006 and 2005, management expectation of the discounted future cash flows on these securities was in excess of the associated securities amortized cost. For a further discussion, see Evaluation of Other-Than-Temporary Impairments on Available-for-Sale Securities included in the Critical Accounting Estimates section of the MD&A and Note 1 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. CAPITAL MARKETS RISK MANAGEMENT The Hartford has a disciplined approach to managing risks associated with its capital markets and asset/liability management activities. Investment portfolio management is organized to focus investment management expertise on the specific classes of investments, while asset/liability management is the responsibility of a dedicated risk management unit supporting Life and Property & Casualty operations. Derivative instruments are utilized in compliance with established Company policy and regulatory requirements and are monitored internally and reviewed by senior management. Market Risk The Hartford is exposed to market risk, primarily relating to the market price and/or cash flow variability associated with changes in interest rates, equity prices or foreign currency exchange rates. Interest Rate Risk The Company exposure to interest rate risk relates to the market price and/or cash flow variability associated with the changes in market interest rates. The Company manages its exposure to interest rate risk through asset allocation limits, asset/liability duration matching and through the use of derivatives. The Company analyzes interest rate risk using various models including parametric models and cash flow simulation of the liabilities and the supporting investments, including derivative instruments under various market scenarios. Measures the Company uses to quantify its exposure to interest rate risk inherent in its invested assets and interest rate sensitive liabilities include duration and key rate duration. Duration is the weighted average term-to-maturity of a security cash flows, and is used to approximate the percentage change in the price of a security for a 100 basis point change in market interest rates. For example, a duration of 5 means the price of the security will change by approximately 5% for a 1% change in interest rates. The key rate duration analysis considers the expected future cash flows of assets and liabilities assuming non-parallel interest rate movements. To calculate duration, projections of asset and liability cash flows are discounted to a present value using interest rate assumptions. These cash flows are then revalued at alternative interest rate levels to determine the percentage change in fair value due to an incremental change in rates. Cash flows from corporate obligations are assumed to be consistent with the contractual payment streams on a yield to worst basis. The primary assumptions used in calculating cash flow projections include expected asset payment streams taking into account prepayment speeds, issuer call options and contract holder behavior. ABS, CMOs, MBS and mortgage loans are modeled based on estimates of the rate of future prepayments of principal over the remaining life of the securities. These estimates are developed using prepayment speeds provided in broker consensus data. Such estimates are derived from prepayment speeds previously 132 Table of Contents experienced at the interest rate levels projected for the underlying collateral. Actual prepayment experience may vary from these estimates. The Company is also exposed to interest rate risk based upon the discount rate assumption associated with the Company pension and other postretirement benefit obligations. The discount rate assumption is based upon an interest rate yield curve comprised of bonds rated Aa or higher with maturities primarily between zero and thirty years. For further discussion of interest rate risk associated with the benefit obligations, see the Critical Accounting Estimates section of the MD&A under Pension and Other Postretirement Benefit Obligations and Note 17 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. The Company believes that an increase in interest rates from the current levels is generally a favorable development for the Company. Rate increases are expected to provide additional net investment income, increase sales of fixed rate Life investment products, reduce the cost of the GMWB hedging program, limit the potential risk of margin erosion due to minimum guaranteed crediting rates in certain Life products and, if sustained, could reduce the Company prospective pension expense. Conversely, a rise in interest rates will reduce the net unrealized gain position of the investment portfolio, increase interest expense on the Company variable rate debt obligations and, if long-term interest rates rise dramatically within a six to twelve month time period, certain Life businesses may be exposed to disintermediation risk. Disintermediation risk refers to the risk that policyholders will surrender their contracts in a rising interest rate environment requiring the Company to liquidate assets in an unrealized loss position. In conjunction with the interest rate risk measurement and management techniques, certain of Life fixed income product offerings have market value adjustment provisions at contract surrender. Since the Company matches, and actively manages its assets and liabilities, an interest environment with an inverted yield curve (i.e. short-term interest rates are higher than intermediate-term or long-term interest rates) does not significantly impact the Company profits or operations. As noted above, the absolute level of interest rates is more significant than the shape of the yield curve. Equity Risk The Company does not have significant equity risk exposure from invested assets. The Company primary exposure to equity risk relates to the potential for lower earnings associated with certain of the Life businesses such as variable annuities where fee income is earned based upon the fair value of the assets under management. In addition, Life offers certain guaranteed benefits, primarily associated with variable annuity products, which increases the Company potential benefit exposure as the equity markets decline. For a further discussion, see Life Equity Risk in this section of the MD&A. The Company is also subject to equity risk based upon the assets that support its pension plans. The asset allocation mix is reviewed on a periodic basis. In order to minimize risk, the pension plans maintain a listing of permissible and prohibited investments. In addition, the pension plans have certain concentration limits and investment quality requirements imposed on permissible investment options. For further discussion of equity risk associated with the pension plans, see the Critical Accounting Estimates section of the MD&A under Pension and Other Postretirement Benefit Obligations and Note 17 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Foreign Currency Exchange Risk The Company foreign currency exchange risk is related to non U.S. dollar denominated investments, which primarily consist of fixed maturity investments, the investment in and net income of the Japanese Life operation, and non-U.S. dollar denominated liability contracts, including its GMDB and GMIB benefits associated with its Japanese variable annuities, and a yen denominated individual fixed annuity product. A significant portion of the Company foreign currency exposure is mitigated through the use of derivatives. Derivative Instruments The Hartford utilizes a variety of derivative instruments, including swaps, caps, floors, forwards, futures and options, in compliance with Company policy and regulatory requirements to mitigate interest rate, equity market or foreign currency exchange rate risk or volatility. Interest rate swaps and volatility swaps involve the periodic exchange of cash flows with other parties, at specified intervals, calculated using agreed upon rates or other financial variables and notional principal amounts. Generally, no cash or principal payments are exchanged at the inception of the contract. Typically, at the time a swap is entered into, the cash flow streams exchanged by the counterparties are equal in value. Interest rate cap and floor contracts entitle the purchaser to receive from the issuer at specified dates, the amount, if any, by which a specified market rate exceeds the cap strike interest rate or falls below the floor strike interest rate, applied to a notional principal amount. A premium payment is made by the purchaser of the contract at its inception and no principal payments are exchanged. Forward contracts are customized commitments to either purchase or sell designated financial instruments, at a future date, for a specified price and may be settled in cash or through delivery of the underlying instrument. 133 Table of Contents Financial futures are standardized commitments to either purchase or sell designated financial instruments, at a future date, for a specified price and may be settled in cash or through delivery of the underlying instrument. Futures contracts trade on organized exchanges. Margin requirements for futures are met by pledging securities, and changes in the futures contract values are settled daily in cash. Option contracts grant the purchaser, for a premium payment, the right to either purchase from or sell to the issuer a financial instrument at a specified price, within a specified period or on a stated date. Foreign currency swaps exchange an initial principal amount in two currencies, agreeing to re-exchange the currencies at a future date, at an agreed upon exchange rate. There may also be a periodic exchange of payments at specified intervals calculated using the agreed upon rates and exchanged principal amounts. Derivative activities are monitored by an internal compliance unit and reviewed frequently by senior management. The notional amounts of derivative contracts represent the basis upon which pay or receive amounts are calculated and are not reflective of credit risk. Notional amounts pertaining to derivative instruments used in the management of market risk at December 31, 2006 and 2005, were $78.2 billion and $62.9 billion, respectively. The increase in the derivative notional amount during 2006 was primarily due to the derivatives associated with the GMWB product feature. For further information, see Note 4 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. The following discussions focus on the key market risk exposures within Life and Property & Casualty portfolios. Life Life is responsible for maximizing economic value within acceptable risk parameters, including the management of the interest rate sensitivity of invested assets , while generating sufficient after-tax income to support policyholder and corporate obligations. Life fixed maturity portfolios and certain investment contracts and insurance product liabilities have material market exposure to interest rate risk. In addition, Life operations are significantly influenced by changes in the equity markets. Life profitability depends largely on the amount of assets under management, which is primarily driven by the level of sales, equity market appreciation and depreciation and the persistency of the in-force block of business. Life foreign currency exposure is primarily related to non-U.S. dollar denominated fixed income securities, non-U.S. dollar denominated liability contracts, the investment in and net income of the Japanese Life operation and certain foreign currency based individual fixed annuity contracts, and its GMDB and GMIB benefits associated with its Japanese variable annuities. Interest Rate Risk Life exposure to interest rate risk relates to the market price and/or cash flow variability associated with changes in market interest rates. Changes in interest rates can potentially impact Life profitability. In certain scenarios where interest rates are volatile, Life could be exposed to disintermediation risk and a reduction in net interest rate spread or profit margins. The investments and liabilities primarily associated with interest rate risk are included in the following discussion. Certain product liabilities, including those containing GMWB or GMDB, expose the Company to interest rate risk but also have significant equity risk. These liabilities are discussed as part of the Equity Risk section below. Fixed Maturity Investments Life investment portfolios primarily consist of investment grade fixed maturity securities, including corporate bonds, ABS, CMBS, tax-exempt municipal securities and CMOs. The fair value of Life fixed maturities was $53.2 billion and $50.8 billion at December 31, 2006 and 2005, respectively. The fair value of Life fixed maturities and other invested assets fluctuates depending on the interest rate environment and other general economic conditions. During periods of declining interest rates, paydowns on MBS and CMOs increase as the underlying mortgages are prepaid. During such periods, the Company generally will not be able to re-invest the proceeds of any such prepayments at comparable yields. Conversely, during periods of rising interest rates, the rate of prepayments generally declines, exposing the Company to the possibility of asset/liability cash flow and yield mismatch. The weighted average duration of the fixed maturity portfolio was approximately 5.1 and 5.3 years as of December 31, 2006 and 2005, respectively. Liabilities Life investment contracts and certain insurance product liabilities, other than non-guaranteed separate accounts, include asset accumulation vehicles such as fixed annuities, guaranteed investment contracts, other investment and universal life-type contracts and certain insurance products such as long-term disability. Asset accumulation vehicles primarily require a fixed rate payment, often for a specified period of time. Product examples include fixed rate annuities with a market value adjustment feature and fixed rate guaranteed investment contracts. The duration of these contracts generally range from less than one year to ten years. In addition, certain products such as universal life contracts and the 134 Table of Contents general account portion of Life variable annuity products, credit interest to policyholders subject to market conditions and minimum interest rate guarantees. The duration of these products is short-term to intermediate-term. While interest rate risk associated with many of these products has been reduced through the use of market value adjustment features and surrender charges, the primary risk associated with these products is that the spread between investment return and credited rate may not be sufficient to earn targeted returns. The Company also manages the risk of certain insurance liabilities similarly to investment type products due to the relative predictability of the aggregate cash flow payment streams. Products in this category may contain significant actuarial (including mortality and morbidity) pricing and cash flow risks. Product examples include structured settlement contracts, on-benefit annuities (i.e., the annuitant is currently receiving benefits thereon) and short-term and long-term disability contracts. The cash outflows associated with these policy liabilities are not interest rate sensitive but do vary based on the timing and amount of benefit payments. The primary risks associated with these products are that the benefits will exceed expected actuarial pricing and/or that the actual timing of the cash flows will differ from those anticipated, resulting in an investment return lower than that assumed in pricing. Average contract duration can range from less than one year to typically up to fifteen years. Derivatives Life utilizes a variety of derivative instruments to mitigate interest rate risk. Interest rate swaps are primarily used to convert interest receipts or payments to a fixed or variable rate. The use of such swaps enables the Company to customize contract terms and conditions to customer objectives and satisfies the operation asset/liability duration matching policy. Occasionally, swaps are also used to hedge the variability in the cash flow of a forecasted purchase or sale due to changes in interest rates. Interest rate caps and floors, swaptions and option contracts are primarily used to hedge against the risk of liability contract holder disintermediation in a rising interest rate environment, and to offset the changes in fair value of corresponding derivatives embedded in certain of the Company fixed maturity investments. Interest rate caps are also used to manage the duration risk in certain portfolios. At December 31, 2006 and 2005, notional amounts pertaining to derivatives utilized to manage interest rate risk totaled $15.6 billion and $10.6 billion, respectively ($11.4 billion and $7.5 billion, respectively, related to investments and $4.2 billion and $3.1 billion, respectively, related to life liabilities). The fair value of these derivatives was $(42) and $(22) as of December 31, 2006 and 2005, respectively. Calculated Interest Rate Sensitivity The after-tax change in the net economic value of investment contracts (e.g., guaranteed investment contracts) and certain insurance product liabilities (e.g., short-term and long-term disability contracts), for which the payment rates are fixed at contract issuance and the investment experience is substantially absorbed by Life, are included in the following table along with the corresponding invested assets. Also included in this analysis are the interest rate sensitive derivatives used by Life to hedge its exposure to interest rate risk. Certain financial instruments, such as limited partnerships, have been omitted from the analysis due to the fact that the investments are accounted for under the equity method and generally lack sensitivity to interest rate changes. Separate account assets and liabilities and equity securities held for trading and the corresponding liabilities associated with the variable annuity products sold in Japan are excluded from the analysis because gains and losses in separate accounts accrue to policyholders. The calculation of the estimated hypothetical change in net economic value below assumes a 100 basis point upward and downward parallel shift in the yield curve. Change in Net Economic Value As of December 31, 2006 2005 Basis point shift - 100 + 100 - 100 + 100 Amount $ 1 $ (33 ) $ (48 ) $ 10 The fixed liabilities included above represented approximately 46% and 45% of Life general account liabilities as of December 31, 2006 and 2005, respectively. The assets supporting the fixed liabilities are monitored and managed within rigorous duration guidelines using scenario simulation techniques, and are evaluated on an annual basis, in compliance with regulatory requirements. 135 Table of Contents The after-tax change in fair value of the invested asset portfolios that support certain universal life-type contracts and other insurance contracts are shown in the following table. The cash flows associated with these liabilities are less predictable than fixed liabilities. The Company identifies the most appropriate investment strategy based upon the expected policyholder behavior and liability crediting needs. The calculation of the estimated hypothetical change in fair value below assumes a 100 basis point upward and downward parallel shift in the yield curve. Change in Fair Value As of December 31, 2006 2005 Basis point shift - 100 + 100 - 100 + 100 Amount $ 422 $ (415 ) $ 471 $ (451 ) The selection of the 100 basis point parallel shift in the yield curve was made only as an illustration of the potential hypothetical impact of such an event and should not be construed as a prediction of future market events. Actual results could differ materially from those illustrated above due to the nature of the estimates and assumptions used in the above analysis. The Company sensitivity analysis calculation assumes that the composition of invested assets and liabilities remain materially consistent throughout the year and that the current relationship between short-term and long-term interest rates will remain constant over time. As a result, these calculations may not fully capture the impact of portfolio re-allocations, significant product sales or non-parallel changes in interest rates. Equity Risk The Company operations are significantly influenced by changes in the equity markets, primarily in the U.S., but increasingly in Japan and other global markets. The Company profitability in its investment products businesses depends largely on the amount of assets under management, which is primarily driven by the level of sales, equity market appreciation and depreciation and the persistency of the in-force block of business. Prolonged and precipitous declines in the equity markets can have a significant effect on the Company operations, as sales of variable products may decline and surrender activity may increase, as customer sentiment towards the equity market turns negative. Lower assets under management will have a negative effect on the Company financial results, primarily due to lower fee income related to the Retail, Retirement Plans, Institutional and International and, to a lesser extent, the Individual Life segment, where a heavy concentration of equity linked products are administered and sold. Furthermore, the Company may experience a reduction in profit margins if a significant portion of the assets held in the U.S. variable annuity separate accounts move to the general account and the Company is unable to earn an acceptable investment spread, particularly in light of the low to moderate interest rate environment and the presence of contractually guaranteed minimum interest credited rates, which for the most part are at a 3% rate. In addition, immediate and significant declines in one or more equity markets may also decrease the Company expectations of future gross profits in one or more product lines, which are utilized to determine the amount of DAC to be amortized in reporting product profitability in a given financial statement period. A significant decrease in the Company future estimated gross profits would require the Company to accelerate the amount of DAC amortization in a given period, which could potentially cause a material adverse deviation in that period net income. Although an acceleration of DAC amortization would have a negative effect on the Company earnings, it would not affect the Company cash flow or liquidity position. The Company statutory financial results also have exposure to equity market volatility due to the issuance of variable annuity contracts with guarantees. Specifically, in scenarios where equity markets decline substantially, we would expect significant increases in the amount of statutory surplus the Company would have to devote to maintain targeted rating agency and regulatory risk based capital ( RBC ) ratios (via the C3 Phase II methodology) and other similar solvency margin ratios. Various actions have been taken to partially mitigate this risk including the use of guaranteed benefit reinsurance, dynamic hedging programs of U.S. GMWB s, and other statutory reserve hedges. The Company sells variable annuity contracts that offer one or more benefit guarantees, the value of which generally increases with declines in equity markets. As is described in more detail below, the Company manages the equity market risks embedded in these guarantees through reinsurance, product design and hedging programs. The Company believes its ability to manage equity market risks by these means gives it a competitive advantage; and, in particular, its ability to create innovative product designs that allow the Company to meet identified customer needs while generating manageable amounts of equity market risk. The Company relative sales and variable annuity market share in the U.S. have generally increased during periods when it has recently introduced new products to the market. In contrast, the Company relative sales and market share have generally decreased when competitors introduce products that cause an issuer to assume larger amounts of equity and other market risk than the Company is confident it can prudently manage. The Company believes its long-term success in the variable annuity market will continue to be aided by successful innovation that allows the Company to offer attractive product features in tandem with prudent equity market risk management. In the absence of this innovation, the Company market share in one or more of its markets could decline. In recent years, the Company has experienced lower levels of U.S. variable annuity sales as competitors continue to introduce new equity guarantees of increasing risk and complexity. New product development is an ongoing process that the Company expects to use to combat competitive sales 136 Table of Contents pressure. Depending on the degree of consumer receptivity and competitor reaction to continuing changes in the Company product offerings, the Company future level of sales will continue to be subject to uncertainty. The accounting for various benefit guarantees offered with variable annuity contracts can be significantly different. Those accounted for under SFAS No. 133 (such as GMWBs) are subject to significant fluctuation in value, which is reflected in net income, due to changes in interest rates, equity markets and equity market volatility as use of those capital market rates are required in determining the liability fair value at each reporting date. Benefit guarantee liabilities accounted for under SOP 03-1 (such as GMIBs and GMDBs) may also change in value; however, absent an unlocking event, the change in value is not immediately reflected in net income. Under SOP 03-1, the income statement reflects the current period increase in the liability due to the deferral of a percentage of current period revenues. The percentage is determined by dividing the present value of claims by the present value of revenues using best estimate assumptions over a range of market scenarios. Current period revenues are impacted by actual increases or decreases in account value. Claims recorded against the liability have no immediate impact on the income statement unless those claims exceed the liability. As a result of these significant accounting differences the liability for guarantees recorded under SOP 03-1 may be significantly different if it was recorded under SFAS No. 133 and vice versa. In addition, the conditions in the capital markets in Japan vs. those in the U.S. are sufficiently different that if the Company GMWB product currently offered in the U.S. were offered in Japan, the capital market conditions in Japan would have a significant impact on the valuation of the GMWB, irrespective of the accounting model. The same would hold true if the Company GMIB product currently offered in Japan were to be offered in the U.S. Capital market conditions in the U.S. would have a significant impact on the valuation of the GMIB. Many benefit guarantees meet the definition of an embedded derivative, under SFAS No. 133 (GMWB), and as such are recorded at fair value with changes in fair value recorded in net income. However, certain contract features that define how the contract holder can access the value of the guaranteed benefit change the accounting from SFAS No. 133 to SOP 03-1. For contracts where the contract holder can only obtain the value of the guaranteed benefit upon the occurrence of an insurable event such as death (GMDB) or by making a significant initial net investment (GMIB), such as when one invests in an annuity, the accounting for the benefit is prescribed by SOP 03-1. In the U.S., the Company sells variable annuity contracts that offer various guaranteed death benefits. The Company maintains a liability, under SOP 03-1, for the death benefit costs of $475 as of December 31, 2006. Declines in the equity market may increase the Company net exposure to death benefits under these contracts. The majority of the contracts with the guaranteed death benefit feature are sold by the Retail Products Group segment. For certain guaranteed death benefits, the Company pays the greater of (1) the account value at death, (2) the sum of all premium payments less prior withdrawals; or (3) the maximum anniversary value of the contract, plus any premium payments since the contract anniversary, minus any withdrawals following the contract anniversary. For certain guaranteed death benefits sold with variable annuity contracts beginning in June 2003, the Company pays the greater of (1) the account value at death, or (2) the maximum anniversary value; not to exceed the account value plus the greater of (a) 25% of premium payments, or (b) 25% of the maximum anniversary value of the contract. The Company currently reinsures a significant portion of these death benefit guarantees associated with its in-force block of business. Under certain of these reinsurance agreements, the reinsurers exposure is subject to an annual cap. The Company total gross exposure (i.e., before reinsurance) to these U.S. guaranteed death benefits as of December 31, 2006 is $5.0 billion. Due to the fact that 83% of this amount is reinsured, the Company net exposure is $824. This amount is often referred to as the retained net amount at risk. However, the Company will incur these guaranteed death benefit payments in the future only if the policyholder has an in-the-money guaranteed death benefit at their time of death. In Japan, the Company offers certain variable annuity products with both a guaranteed death benefit and a guaranteed income benefit. The Company maintains a liability for these death and income benefits, under SOP 03-1, of $35 as of December 31, 2006. Declines in equity markets as well as a strengthening of the Japanese Yen in comparison to the U.S. dollar may increase the Company exposure to these guaranteed benefits. This increased exposure may be significant in extreme market scenarios. For the guaranteed death benefits, the Company pays the greater of account value at death or a guaranteed death benefit which, depending on the contract, may be based upon the premium paid and/or the maximum anniversary value established no later than age 80, as adjusted for withdrawals under the terms of the contract. The guaranteed income benefit guarantees to return the contract holder initial investment, adjusted for any earnings or liquidity withdrawals, through periodic payments that commence at the end of a minimum deferral period of 10, 15 or 20 years as elected by the contract holder. In 2006, the Company entered into an indemnity reinsurance agreement with an unrelated party. Under this agreement, the reinsurer will reimburse the Company for death benefit claims, up to an annual cap, incurred for certain death benefit guarantees associated with an in-force block of variable annuity products offered in Japan with an account value of $2.5 billion as of December 31, 2006. The Company total gross exposure (i.e. before reinsurance) to these guaranteed death benefits and income benefits offered in Japan as of December 31, 2006 is $54. Due to the fact that 65% of this amount is reinsured, the Company net exposure is $19. This amount is often referred to as the retained net amount at risk. However, the Company will incur these guaranteed death or income benefits in the future only if the contract holder has an in-the-money guaranteed benefit at either the time of their death or if the account value is insufficient to fund the guaranteed living benefits. 137 Table of Contents The majority of the Company recent U.S. variable annuities are sold with a GMWB living benefit rider, which, as described above, is accounted for under SFAS No. 133. Declines in the equity market may increase the Company exposure to benefits under the GMWB contracts. For all contracts in effect through July 6, 2003, the Company entered into a reinsurance arrangement to offset its exposure to the GMWB for the remaining lives of those contracts. Substantially all of the Company reinsurance capacity was utilized as of the third quarter of 2003. The remaining capacity was exhausted during the first quarter of 2004. Substantially all U.S. GMWB riders sold since July 2003, are not covered by reinsurance. These unreinsured contracts generate volatility in net income each quarter as the underlying embedded derivative liabilities are recorded at fair value each reporting period, resulting in the recognition of net realized capital gains or losses in response to changes in certain critical factors including capital market conditions and policyholder behavior. In order to minimize the volatility associated with the unreinsured GMWB liabilities, the Company established an alternative risk management strategy. During the third quarter of 2003, the Company began hedging its unreinsured GMWB exposure using interest rate futures, and swaps Standard and Poor ( S&P ) 500 and NASDAQ index put options and futures contracts. During the first quarter of 2004, the Company entered into Europe, Australasia and Far East ( EAFE ) Index swaps to hedge GMWB exposure to international equity markets. The hedging program involves a detailed monitoring of policyholder behavior and capital markets conditions on a daily basis and rebalancing of the hedge position as needed. While the Company actively manages this hedge position, hedge ineffectiveness may result due to factors including, but not limited to, policyholder behavior, capital markets dislocation or discontinuity and divergence between the performance of the underlying funds and the hedging indices. The net effect of the change in value of the embedded derivative net of the results of the hedging program for the years ended December 31, 2006 and 2005, was a (loss) of $(26) and $(46), respectively, before deferred policy acquisition costs and tax effects. As of December 31, 2006, the notional and fair value related to the embedded derivatives, the hedging strategy, and reinsurance was $53.3 billion and $377, respectively. As of December 31, 2005, the notional and fair value related to the embedded derivatives, the hedging strategy, and reinsurance was $45.5 billion and $166, respectively. The Company employs additional strategies to manage equity market risk in addition to the derivative and reinsurance strategy described above that economically hedges the fair value of the U.S. GMWB rider. Notably, the Company purchases one and two year S&P 500 Index put option contracts to economically hedge certain other liabilities that could increase if the equity markets decline. As of December 31, 2006 and 2005, the notional value related to this strategy was $2.2 billion and $1.1 billion, respectively, while the fair value related to this strategy was $29 and $14, respectively. Because this strategy is intended to partially hedge certain equity-market sensitive liabilities calculated under statutory accounting (see Capital Resources and Liquidity), changes in the value of the put options may not be closely aligned to changes in liabilities determined in accordance with Generally Accepted Accounting Principles ( GAAP ), causing volatility in GAAP net income. The Company continually seeks to improve its equity risk management strategies. The Company has made considerable investment in analyzing current and potential future market risk exposures arising from a number of factors, including but not limited to, product guarantees (GMDB, GMWB and GMIB), equity market and interest rate risks (in both the U.S. and Japan) and foreign currency exchange rates. The Company evaluates these risks individually and, increasingly, in the aggregate to determine the risk profiles of all of its products and to judge their potential impacts on GAAP net income, statutory capital volatility and other metrics. Utilizing this and future analysis, the Company expects to evolve its risk management strategies over time, modifying its reinsurance, hedging and product design strategies to optimally mitigate its aggregate exposures to market-driven changes in GAAP equity, statutory capital and other economic metrics. Because these strategies could target an optimal reduction of a combination of exposures rather than targeting a single one, it is possible that volatility of GAAP net income would increase, particularly if the Company places an increased relative weight on protection of statutory surplus in future strategies. Foreign Currency Exchange Risk Life exposure to foreign currency exchange risk exists with respect to non-U.S. dollar denominated investments, Life investment in foreign operations, primarily Japan, and non-U.S. dollar denominated liability contracts, including the yen based individual fixed annuity product and its GMDB and GMIB benefits associated with its Japanese variable annuities. A significant portion of the Company foreign fixed maturity currency exposure is mitigated through the use of derivatives. Fixed Maturity Investments The risk associated with the non-U.S. dollar denominated fixed maturities relates to potential decreases in value and income resulting from unfavorable changes in foreign exchange rates. The fair value of the non-U.S. dollar denominated fixed maturities, which are primarily denominated in euro, sterling, yen and Canadian dollars, at December 31, 2006 and 2005, were approximately $1.9 billion. In order to manage its currency exposures, Life enters into foreign currency swaps and forwards to hedge the variability in cash flows associated with certain foreign denominated fixed maturities. These foreign currency swap agreements are structured to match the foreign currency cash flows of the hedged foreign denominated securities. At December 31, 2006 and 2005, the derivatives used to hedge currency exchange risk related to non-U.S. dollar denominated fixed maturities had a total notional value of $1.6 billion and $2.0 billion, respectively, and total fair value of $(336) and $(232), respectively. 138 Table of Contents Liabilities In 2006, Life began issuing non-U.S. dollar denominated funding agreement liability contracts. The Company hedges the foreign currency risk associated with these liability contracts with currency rate swaps. At December 31, 2006, the derivatives used to hedge foreign currency exchange risk related to foreign denominated liability contracts had a total notional value of $585 and a total fair value of $(11). The yen based fixed annuity product is written by Hartford Life Insurance K.K. ( HLIKK ), a wholly-owned Japanese subsidiary of Hartford Life, Inc. ( HLI ), and subsequently reinsured to Hartford Life Insurance Company, a U.S. dollar based wholly-owned indirect subsidiary of HLI. The underlying investment involves investing in U.S. securities markets, which offer favorable credit spreads. The yen denominated fixed annuity product ( yen fixed annuities ) is recorded in the consolidated balance sheets with invested assets denominated in dollars while policyholder liabilities are denominated in yen and converted to U.S. dollars based upon the December 31, yen to U.S. dollar spot rate. The difference between U.S. dollar denominated investments and yen denominated liabilities exposes the Company to currency risk. The Company manages this currency risk associated with the yen fixed annuities primarily with pay variable U.S. dollar and receive fixed yen currency swaps. As of December 31, 2006 and 2005, the notional value and fair value of the currency swaps were $1.9 billion and $1.7 billion, respectively, and $(225) and $(179), respectively. Although economically an effective hedge, a divergence between the yen denominated fixed annuity product liability and the currency swaps exists primarily due to the difference in the basis of accounting between the liability and the derivative instruments (i.e. historical cost versus fair value). The yen denominated fixed annuity product liabilities are recorded on a historical cost basis and are only adjusted for changes in foreign spot rates and accrued income. The currency swaps are recorded at fair value, incorporating changes in value due to changes in forward foreign exchange rates, interest rates and accrued income. An after-tax net gain (loss) of $(11) and $(23) for the years ended December 31, 2006 and 2005, respectively, which includes the changes in value of the currency swaps, excluding net periodic coupon settlements, and the yen fixed annuity contract remeasurement, was recorded in net realized capital gains and losses. Based on the fair values of Life non-U.S. dollar denominated investments and derivative instruments (including its yen based individual fixed annuity product) as of December 31, 2006 and 2005, management estimates that a 10% unfavorable change in exchange rates would decrease the fair values by an after-tax total of $3 and $6, respectively. The estimated impact was based upon a 10% change in December 31 spot rates. The selection of the 10% unfavorable change was made only for illustration of the potential hypothetical impact of such an event and should not be construed as a prediction of future market events. Actual results could differ materially from those illustrated above due to the nature of the estimates and assumptions used in the above analysis. Property & Casualty Property & Casualty attempts to maximize economic value while generating appropriate after-tax income and sufficient liquidity to meet policyholder and corporate obligations. Property & Casualty investment portfolio has material exposure to interest rates. The Company continually monitors these exposures and makes portfolio adjustments to manage these risks within established limits. Interest Rate Risk The primary exposure to interest rate risk in Property & Casualty relates to its fixed maturity securities, including corporate bonds, ABS, municipal bonds, CMBS and CMOs. The fair value of these investments was $27.2 billion and $25.3 billion at December 31, 2006 and 2005, respectively. The fair value of these and Property & Casualty other invested assets fluctuates depending on the interest rate environment and other general economic conditions. During periods of declining interest rates, embedded call features within securities are exercised with greater frequency and paydowns on MBS and CMOs increase as the underlying mortgages are prepaid. During such periods, the Company generally will not be able to re-invest the proceeds of any such prepayments at comparable yields. Conversely, during periods of rising interest rates, the rate of prepayments generally declines. A variety of derivative instruments, primarily swaps, are used to manage interest rate risk and had a total notional amount as of December 31, 2006 and 2005 of $2.1 billion and $1.5 billion, respectively, and fair value of $(4) and $(9), respectively. One of the measures Property & Casualty uses to quantify its exposure to interest rate risk inherent in its invested assets is duration. The weighted average duration of the fixed maturity portfolio was 4.5 and 4.6 years as of December 31, 2006 and 2005, respectively. Calculated Interest Rate Sensitivity The following table provides an analysis showing the estimated after-tax change in the fair value of Property & Casualty fixed income investments and related derivatives, assuming 100 basis point upward and downward parallel shifts in the yield curve as of December 31, 2006 and 2005. Certain financial instruments, such as limited partnerships, have been omitted from the analysis due to the fact that the investments are accounted for under the equity method and generally lack sensitivity to interest rate changes. Change in Fair Value As of December 31, 2006 2005 Basis point shift - 100 + 100 - 100 + 100 Amount $ 857 $ (829 ) $ 861 $ (760 ) 139 Table of Contents The selection of the 100 basis point parallel shift in the yield curve was made only as an illustration of the potential hypothetical impact of such an event and should not be construed as a prediction of future market events. Actual results could differ materially from those illustrated above due to the nature of the estimates and assumptions used in the above analysis. The Company sensitivity analysis calculation assumes that the composition of invested assets remains materially consistent throughout the year and that the current relationship between short-term and long-term interest rates will remain constant over time. As a result, these calculations may not fully capture the impact of portfolio re-allocations or non-parallel changes in interest rates. Foreign Currency Exchange Risk Foreign currency exchange risk exists with respect to investments in non-U.S. dollar denominated fixed maturities, primarily euro, sterling and Canadian dollar denominated securities. The risk associated with these securities relates to potential decreases in value resulting from unfavorable changes in foreign exchange rates. The fair value of these fixed maturity securities at December 31, 2006 and 2005 was $1.0 billion and $1.1 billion, respectively. In order to manage its currency exposures, Property & Casualty enters into foreign currency swaps and forward contracts to hedge the variability in cash flow associated with certain foreign denominated securities. These foreign currency swap agreements are structured to match the foreign currency cash flows of the hedged foreign denominated securities. At December 31, 2006 and 2005, the derivatives used to hedge currency exchange risk had a total notional value of $805 and $515, respectively, and total fair value of $(45) and $(19), respectively. Based on the fair values of Property & Casualty non-U.S. dollar denominated securities and derivative instruments as of December 31, 2006 and 2005, management estimates that a 10% unfavorable change in exchange rates would decrease the fair values by an after-tax total of approximately $34 and $50, respectively. The estimated impact was based upon a 10% change in December 31 spot rates. The selection of the 10% unfavorable change was made only for illustration of the potential hypothetical impact of such an event and should not be construed as a prediction of future market events. Actual results could differ materially from those illustrated above due to the nature of the estimates and assumptions used in the above analysis. CAPITAL RESOURCES AND LIQUIDITY Capital resources and liquidity represent the overall financial strength of The Hartford and its ability to generate strong cash flows from each of the business segments, borrow funds at competitive rates and raise new capital to meet operating and growth needs. Liquidity Requirements The liquidity requirements of The Hartford have been and will continue to be met by funds from operations as well as the issuance of commercial paper, common stock, debt or other capital securities and borrowings from its credit facilities. Current and expected patterns of claim frequency and severity may change from period to period but continue to be within historical norms and, therefore, the Company current liquidity position is considered to be sufficient to meet anticipated demands. However, if an unanticipated demand were placed on the Company it is likely that the Company would either sell certain of its investments to fund claims which could result in larger than usual realized capital gains and losses or the Company would enter the capital markets to raise further funds to provide the requisite liquidity. For a discussion and tabular presentation of the Company current contractual obligations by period including those related to its Life and Property & Casualty insurance refer to the Off-Balance Sheet and Aggregate Contractual Obligations section below. The Hartford endeavors to maintain a capital structure that provides financial and operational flexibility to its insurance subsidiaries, ratings that support its competitive position in the financial services marketplace (see the Ratings section below for further discussion), and strong shareholder returns. As a result, the Company may from time to time raise capital from the issuance of stock, debt or other capital securities. The issuance of common stock, debt or other capital securities could result in the dilution of shareholder interests or reduced net income due to additional interest expense. The Company Japanese life insurance operations are conducted through Hartford Life Insurance K.K. ( HLIKK ), which, prior to September 1, 2005, was a wholly owned subsidiary of Hartford Life and Accident Insurance Company ( HLA ), one of the Company principal statutorily regulated operating subsidiaries. Prior to September 1, 2005, the Company funded the capital needs of its Japanese operations through investments in the common stock of HLIKK by HLA. This arrangement generally allowed a good portion of the Company investment in its Japanese operations to be included as part of the aggregate statutory capital (for the purposes of regulatory and rating agency capital adequacy measures) of HLA. On September 1, 2005, the stock of HLIKK was transferred from HLA to Hartford Life, Inc. The transfer of the stock was treated as a return of capital for GAAP and statutory accounting purposes for the respective entities. This transaction had no effect on the Company consolidated GAAP financial statements. For Statutory, the primary financial effect of the transaction was to reduce the statutory capital of HLA by the amount of the carrying value of HLIKK, which was $963 as of September 1, 2005. In addition, for certain capital adequacy ratios, a corresponding reduction in required capital occurred, which resulted in an improved capital adequacy 140 Table of Contents ratio. However, as previously disclosed, this action could potentially reduce certain other capital adequacy ratios employed by regulators and rating agencies to assess the capital growth of The Hartford life insurance operations. At the current time, taking into consideration the effects of the transaction, the Company believes it has sufficient capital resources to maintain capital solvency ratios consistent with all of its objectives. The Company Board of Directors has authorized the repurchase of outstanding shares of its common stock and equity units from time to time, in an aggregate amount not to exceed $2 billion. On October 19, 2006, the Company announced that it intends to repurchase up to $300 of its common stock over the two to six months following its announcement, under such share repurchase program. On December 11, 2006, the Company announced that it intends to repurchase an additional $500 of its common stock under the existing share repurchase program. Through February 16, 2007, The Hartford had repurchased approximately $363 (3.8 million shares) under this program. HFSG and HLI are holding companies which rely upon operating cash flow in the form of dividends from their subsidiaries, which enable them to service debt, pay dividends, and pay certain business expenses. Dividends to the Company from its insurance subsidiaries are restricted. The payment of dividends by Connecticut-domiciled insurers is limited under the insurance holding company laws of Connecticut. These laws require notice to and approval by the state insurance commissioner for the declaration or payment of any dividend, which, together with other dividends or distributions made within the preceding twelve months, exceeds the greater of (i) 10% of the insurer policyholder surplus as of December 31 of the preceding year or (ii) net income (or net gain from operations, if such company is a life insurance company) for the twelve-month period ending on the thirty-first day of December last preceding, in each case determined under statutory insurance accounting principles. In addition, if any dividend of a Connecticut-domiciled insurer exceeds the insurer earned surplus, it requires the prior approval of the Connecticut Insurance Commissioner. The insurance holding company laws of the other jurisdictions in which The Hartford insurance subsidiaries are incorporated (or deemed commercially domiciled) generally contain similar (although in certain instances somewhat more restrictive) limitations on the payment of dividends. Dividends paid to HFSG by its insurance subsidiaries are further dependent on cash requirements of HLI and other factors. The Company property-casualty insurance subsidiaries are permitted to pay up to a maximum of approximately $1.5 billion in dividends to HFSG in 2007 without prior approval from the applicable insurance commissioner. The Company life insurance subsidiaries are permitted to pay up to a maximum of approximately $620 in dividends to HLI in 2007 without prior approval from the applicable insurance commissioner. The aggregate of these amounts, net of amounts required by HLI, is the maximum the insurance subsidiaries could pay to HFSG in 2007. In 2006, HFSG and HLI received a combined total of $609 from their insurance subsidiaries. The principal sources of operating funds are premium, fees and investment income, while investing cash flows originate from maturities and sales of invested assets. The primary uses of funds are to pay claims, policy benefits, operating expenses and commissions and to purchase new investments. In addition, The Hartford has a policy of carrying a significant short-term investment position and does not anticipate selling intermediate- and long-term fixed maturity investments to meet any liquidity needs. (For a discussion of the Company investment objectives and strategies, see the Investments and Capital Markets Risk Management sections.) Sources of Liquidity Shelf Registrations On December 3, 2003, The Hartford shelf registration statement (Registration No. 333-108067) for the potential offering and sale of debt and equity securities in an aggregate amount of up to $3.0 billion was declared effective by the Securities and Exchange Commission. The Registration Statement allows for the following types of securities to be offered: (i) debt securities, preferred stock, common stock, depositary shares, warrants, stock purchase contracts, stock purchase units and junior subordinated deferrable interest debentures of the Company, and (ii) preferred securities of any of one or more capital trusts organized by The Hartford ( The Hartford Trusts ). The Company may enter into guarantees with respect to the preferred securities of any of The Hartford Trusts. As of December 31, 2006, the Company had $1.4 billion remaining under the shelf registration. Contingent Capital Facility On February 12, 2007, The Hartford entered into a put option agreement (the Put Option Agreement ) with Glen Meadow ABC Trust, a Delaware statutory trust (the ABC Trust ), and LaSalle Bank National Association, as put option calculation agent. The Put Option Agreement provides The Hartford with the right to require the ABC Trust, at any time and from time to time, to purchase The Hartford junior subordinated notes (the Notes ) in a maximum aggregate principal amount not to exceed $500. Under the Put Option Agreement, The Hartford will pay the ABC Trust premiums on a periodic basis, calculated with respect to the aggregate principal amount of Notes that The Hartford had the right to put to the ABC Trust for such period. The Hartford has agreed to reimburse the ABC Trust for certain fees and ordinary expenses. 141 Table of Contents Commercial Paper, Revolving Credit Facility and Line of Credit The table below details the Company short-term debt programs and the applicable balances outstanding. Maximum Available As of Outstanding As of December 31, December 31, Description Effective Date Expiration Date 2006 2005 2006 2005 Commercial Paper The Hartford 11/10/86 N/A $ 2,000 $ 2,000 $ 299 $ 471 HLI [1] 2/7/97 N/A 250 250 Total commercial paper 2,250 2,250 299 471 Revolving Credit Facility 5-year revolving credit facility 9/7/05 9/7/10 1,600 1,600 Line of Credit Life Japan Operations [2] 9/18/02 1/4/08 42 17 Total Commercial Paper, Revolving Credit Facility and Line of Credit $ 3,892 $ 3,867 $ 299 $ 471 [1] In January 2007, the commercial paper program of HLI was terminated. [2] As of December 31, 2006 and 2005, the Company Japanese operation line of credit in yen was 5 billion and 2 billion, respectively. The revolving credit facility provides for up to $1.6 billion of unsecured credit. Of the total availability under the revolving credit facility, up to $100 is available to support letters of credit issued on behalf of The Hartford or other subsidiaries of The Hartford. Under the revolving credit facility, the Company must maintain a minimum level of consolidated statutory surplus. In addition, the Company must not exceed a maximum ratio of debt to capitalization. Quarterly, the Company certifies compliance with the financial covenants for the syndicate of participating financial institutions. As of December 31, 2006, the Company was in compliance with all such covenants. Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements and Aggregate Contractual Obligations The Company does not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that are reasonably likely to have a material effect on the financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, or capital resources of the Company, except for the contingent capital facility described above and the following: The Company has unfunded commitments to purchase investments in limited partnerships, mortgage and construction loans of about $1.4 billion as disclosed in Note 12 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 142 Table of Contents The following table identifies the Company aggregate contractual obligations as of December 31, 2006 due by payment period: Payments due by period Less than 1 More than 5 Total Year 1-3 years 3-5 years years Property and casualty obligations [1] $ 22,596 $ 5,936 $ 6,001 $ 3,098 $ 7,561 Life, annuity and disability obligations [2] 408,700 25,478 54,750 56,064 272,408 Operating lease obligations 524 169 221 110 24 Long-term debt obligations [3] 6,902 528 1,746 1,077 3,551 Consumer notes [4] 289 14 255 20 Purchase obligations [5] 1,872 1,740 83 24 25 Other long-term liabilities reflected on the balance sheet [6], [7] 2,364 2,322 42 Total [8] $ 443,247 $ 36,187 $ 63,056 $ 60,393 $ 283,611 [1] The following points are significant to understanding the cash flows estimated for obligations under property and casualty contracts: Reserves for Property & Casualty unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses include case reserves for reported claims and reserves for claims incurred but not reported (IBNR). While payments due on claim reserves are considered contractual obligations because they relate to insurance policies issued by the Company, the ultimate amount to be paid to settle both case reserves and IBNR is an estimate, subject to significant uncertainty. The actual amount to be paid is not finally determined until the Company reaches a settlement with the claimant. Final claim settlements may vary significantly from the present estimates, particularly since many claims will not be settled until well into the future. In estimating the timing of future payments by year, the Company has assumed that its historical payment patterns will continue. However, the actual timing of future payments could vary materially from these estimates due to, among other things, changes in claim reporting and payment patterns and large unanticipated settlements. In particular, there is significant uncertainty over the claim payment patterns of asbestos and environmental claims. Also, estimated payments in 2007 do not include payments that will be made on claims incurred in 2007 on policies that were in force as of December 31, 2006. In addition, the table does not include future cash flows related to the receipt of premiums that may be used, in part, to fund loss payments. Under generally accepted accounting principles, the Company is only permitted to discount reserves for losses and loss adjustment expenses in cases where the payment pattern and ultimate loss costs are fixed and determinable on an individual claim basis. For the Company, these include claim settlements with permanently disabled claimants and certain structured settlement contracts that fund loss runoffs for unrelated parties. As of December 31, 2006, the total property and casualty reserves in the above table are gross of a reserve discount of $605. [2] Estimated life, annuity and disability obligations include death and disability claims, policy surrenders, policyholder dividends and trail commissions offset by expected future deposits and premiums on in-force contracts. Estimated contractual policyholder obligations are based on mortality, morbidity and lapse assumptions comparable with Life historical experience, modified for recent observed trends. Life has also assumed market growth and interest crediting consistent with assumptions used in amortizing deferred acquisition costs. In contrast to this table, the majority of Life obligations are recorded on the balance sheet at the current account values and do not incorporate an expectation of future market growth, interest crediting, or future deposits. Therefore, the estimated contractual policyholder obligations presented in this table significantly exceed the liabilities recorded in reserve for future policy benefits and unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses, other policyholder funds and benefits payable and separate account liabilities. Due to the significance of the assumptions used, the amounts presented could materially differ from actual results. As separate account obligations are legally insulated from general account obligations, the separate account obligations will be fully funded by cash flows from separate account assets. Life expects to fully fund the general account obligations from cash flows from general account investments and future deposits and premiums. [3] Includes contractual principal and interest payments. All long-term debt obligations have fixed rates of interest. Long-term debt obligations shown above include principal and interest payments. See Note 14 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional discussion of long-term debt obligations. [4] Consumer notes include principal payments and contractual interest for fixed rate notes and interest based on current rates for floating rate notes. See Note 14 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional discussion of consumer notes. [5] Includes $1.7 billion in commitments to purchase investments including about $1 billion of limited partnership and $333 of mortgage and construction loans. Outstanding commitments under these limited partnerships and mortgage and construction loans are included in payments due in less than 1 year since the timing of funding these commitments cannot be estimated. The remaining $314 relates to payables for securities purchased which are reflected on the Company consolidated balance sheet. [6] As of December 31, 2006, the Company has accepted cash collateral of $2.3 billion in connection with the Company securities lending program and derivative instruments. Since the timing of the return of the collateral is uncertain, the return of the collateral has been included in the payments due in less than 1 year. [7] Includes $42 in collateralized debt obligations ( CDOs ) issued to third-party investors by consolidated investment management entities sponsored by the Company in connection with synthetic CDO transactions. The CDO investors have no recourse to the Company assets other than the dedicated assets collateralizing the CDOs. Refer to Note 4 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional discussion of CDOs. [8] Does not include estimated voluntary contribution of $200 to the Company pension plan in 2007. 143 Table of Contents Pension Plans and Other Postretirement Benefits The Company made contributions to its pension plans of $402, $504 and $317 in 2006, 2005 and 2004, respectively. The Company 2006 required minimum funding contribution was immaterial. The Company presently anticipates contributing approximately $200 to its pension plans in 2007, based upon certain economic and business assumptions. These assumptions include, but are not limited to, equity market performance, changes in interest rates and the Company other capital requirements. The Company does not have a required minimum funding contribution for the U.S. qualified defined benefit pension plan for 2007 and the funding requirements for all of the pension plans is expected to be immaterial. Pension expense reflected in the Company net income was $152, $137 and $104 in 2006, 2005 and 2004, respectively. The Company estimates its 2007 pension expense will be approximately $115, based on current assumptions. As provided for under SFAS No. 87, the Company uses a five-year averaging method to determine the market-related value of plan assets, which is used to determine the expected return component of pension expense. Under this methodology, asset gains/losses that result from returns that differ from the Company long-term rate of return assumption are recognized in the market-related value of assets on a level basis over a five year period. The difference between actual asset returns for the plans of $356 and $176 for the years ended December 31, 2006 and 2005, respectively, as compared to expected returns of $244 and $221 for the years ended December 31, 2006 and 2005, respectively, will be fully reflected in the market-related value of plan assets over the next five years using the methodology described above. The level of actuarial net losses continues to exceed the allowable amortization corridor as defined under SFAS No. 87. Based on the 5.75% discount rate selected as of December 31, 2006 and taking into account estimated future minimum funding, the difference between actual and expected performance in 2006 will decrease annual pension expense in future years. The decrease in pension expense will be approximately $4 in 2007 and will increase ratably to a decrease of approximately $19 in 2011. Capitalization The capital structure of The Hartford as of December 31, 2006 and 2005 consisted of debt and equity, summarized as follows: As of December 31, 2006 2005 Short-term debt (includes current maturities of long-term debt) $ 599 $ 719 Long-term debt [1] 3,504 4,048 Total debt [2] 4,103 4,767 Equity excluding accumulated other comprehensive income, net of tax ( AOCI ) 18,698 15,235 AOCI 178 90 Total stockholders equity $ 18,876 $ 15,325 Total capitalization including AOCI $ 22,979 $ 20,092 Debt to equity 22 % 31 % Debt to capitalization 18 % 24 % [1] Includes junior subordinated debentures of $0 and $691 and debt associated with equity units of $0 and $1,020 as of December 31, 2006 and 2005, respectively. [2] Total debt of the Company excludes $258 and $0 of consumer notes as of December 31, 2006 and 2005, respectively. The Hartford total capitalization increased $2.9 billion as of December 31, 2006 as compared with December 31, 2005. This increase was due to a $3.6 billion increase in equity partially offset by a $664 decrease in debt. Total stockholders equity increased due to net income of $2.7 billion and issuance of shares from equity unit contracts of $1.0 billion in 2006. The decrease in debt was primarily due to repayments of commercial paper and long-term debt of $173 and $1.4 billion, respectively, partially offset by debt issuances of $990 in 2006. Debt The following discussion describes the Company debt financing activities for 2006. In May 2006, $690 of senior notes originally issued in May 2003 in connection with the Company 7% equity units were remarketed on behalf of the holders of the equity units and the interest rate on the senior notes was reset to 5.55%. In connection with the remarketing, the Company purchased and retired $265 of the senior notes classified in long-term debt. See Note 14 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. On June 1, 2006, the Company repaid $250 of 2.375% senior notes at maturity. During 2006, the Company issued $715 of commercial paper to finance the retirement of $265 of senior notes connected with the 7% equity units, the repayment of $250 of senior notes described above, and the redemption of $200 junior subordinated debentures described below. The Company used the proceeds from the settlement of the forward purchase contracts associated with the 7% equity units in August 2006 and cash on hand to pay down $690 of commercial paper. 144 Table of Contents On July 14, 2006, The Hartford retired its $200 7.625% junior subordinated debentures underlying the trust preferred securities due 2050 issued by Hartford Life Capital II at par. In August 2006, $330 of senior notes originally issued in September 2002 in connection with the Company 6% equity units were remarketed on behalf of the holders of the equity units and the interest rate on the senior notes was reset to 5.663%. See Note 14 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. On October 3, 2006, the Company issued $400 of 5.25% senior notes due October 15, 2011, $300 of 5.50% senior notes due October 15, 2016, and $300 of 5.95% senior notes due October 15, 2036, and received total net proceeds of approximately $990. The issuance was pursuant to the Company existing shelf registration statement. On October 10, 2006, the Company completed offers to exchange existing senior unsecured notes comprising the $250 of 7.65% notes due 2027 and the $400 of 7.375% notes due 2031 issued by HLI ( HLI notes ) for up to $650 in new senior unsecured notes of the Company and a cash payment, in order to consolidate debt at the holding company. The new notes have an extended maturity and bear a market interest rate and, together with the cash payment, have a present value not significantly different than the existing notes using the existing notes effective interest rates. On October 10, 2006, the Company issued approximately $409 of 6.1% senior notes due October 1, 2041 and paid cash totaling $85 in exchange for $101 of the 7.65% notes due 2027 and $308 of the 7.375% notes due 2031. Cash paid to holders of HLI notes in connection with the exchange offers is reflected on our balance sheet as a reduction of long-term debt. The Company financed the cash payment through available cash. On November 17, 2006, The Hartford retired its $500 7.45% junior subordinated debentures underlying the trust preferred securities due 2050 issued by Hartford Capital III at par. The Company recognized a loss on extinguishment of $17, after-tax, for the write-off of the unamortized issue costs and discount. On December 15, 2006, The Hartford redeemed its $200 7.1% senior notes due 2007 at a price of $202 plus accrued and unpaid interest. Consumer Notes Institutional Solutions Group began issuing Consumer Notes through its Retail Investor Notes Program in September 2006. A Consumer Note is an investment product distributed through broker-dealers directly to retail investors as medium-term, publicly traded fixed or floating rate, or a combination of fixed and floating rate, notes. In addition, discount notes, amortizing notes and indexed notes may also be offered and issued. Consumer Notes are part of the Company spread-based business and proceeds are used to purchase investment products, primarily fixed rate bonds. Proceeds are not used for general operating purposes. Consumer Notes are offered weekly with maturities up to 30 years and varying interest rates and may include a call provision. Certain Consumer Notes may be redeemed by the holder in the event of death. Redemptions are subject to certain limitations, including calendar year aggregate and individual limits equal to the greater of $1 or 1% of the aggregate principal amount of the notes and $250 thousand per individual, respectively. Derivative instruments will be utilized to hedge the Company exposure to interest rate risk in accordance with Company policy. As of December 31, 2006, $258 of Consumer Notes had been issued. These notes have interest rates ranging from 5.0% to 6.0% for fixed notes and consumer price index plus 175 basis points to 225 basis points for variable notes. The aggregate maturities of Consumer Notes are as follows: $230 in 2008, $10 in 2009 and $18 in 2011. For 2006, interest credited to holders of Consumer Notes was $2. For additional information regarding debt, see Note 14 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Stockholders Equity On November 16, 2006, the Company issued approximately 5.7 million shares of common stock in connection with the settlement of purchase contracts originally issued in September 2002 as components of our 6% equity units. The Company received proceeds of approximately $330 from the issuance of common stock in settlement of the purchase contracts. On August 16, 2006, the Company issued approximately 12.1 million shares of common stock in connection with the settlement of purchase contracts originally issued in May 2003 as components of our 7% equity units. The Company received proceeds of approximately $690 from the issuance of common stock in settlement of the purchase contracts. Dividends On February 22, 2007, The Hartford Board of Directors declared a quarterly dividend of $0.50 per share payable on April 2, 2007 to shareholders of record as of March 1, 2007. The Hartford declared $531 and paid $460 in dividends to shareholders in 2006 and declared $350 and paid $345 in dividends to shareholders in 2005. AOCI - AOCI increased by $88 to $178 as of December 31, 2006 compared with $90 as of December 31, 2005. The increase in AOCI is primarily due to total other comprehensive income of $554, offset by a $(466) decrease from SFAS 158 adjustment. 145 Table of Contents The after-tax reduction of stockholders equity of $526 related to pension and other postretirement plans as of December 31, 2006 reflects the adoption of SFAS No. 158 Employers Accounting for Defined Benefit Pension and Other Postretirement Plans, an amendment of FASB Statements No. 87, 88, 106 and 132(R) and represents the net actuarial losses and prior service credits related to the Company pension and other postretirement plans. As of December 31, 2005, the balance of $620 represented the minimum pension liability adjustment (required for pension plans when the accumulated benefit obligation exceeds the fair value of plan assets). The net change of $94 is due to: For the other postretirement plans, an increase in AOCI of $24, after-tax, which coincided with a before-tax decrease in the liability of $37. This was driven by reflecting actuarial gains as a result of the adoption of SFAS 158. For the pension plans, an increase of $70, after-tax, which coincided with a $108 before-tax reduction in the liability. This was driven by: $135 after-tax increase in AOCI due to favorable experience in pension assumptions which resulted in a gain (increase in the discount rate, actual asset returns exceeding expected asset returns), combined with $48 after-tax increase in AOCI due to the amortization of actuarial losses into expense. These changes were offset by: $113 after-tax decrease in AOCI to recognize the effects of future salary increases into The Hartford obligation (the spread between the 2005 PBO and ABO, consistent with the adoption of SFAS 158). For additional information on stockholders equity, AOCI, and pension and other postretirement plans see Notes 15, 16 and 17, respectively, of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Cash Flow 2006 2005 2004 Net cash provided by operating activities $ 5,638 $ 3,732 $ 2,634 Net cash used for investing activities $ (7,410 ) $ (4,860 ) $ (2,401 ) Net cash provided by financing activities $ 1,915 $ 1,280 $ 477 Cash end of year $ 1,424 $ 1,273 $ 1,148 Year ended December 31, 2006 compared to the year ended December 31, 2005 The increase in cash from operating activities was primarily the result of premium cash flows in excess of claim payments and increased net income as compared to prior year period. Net purchases of available-for-sale securities accounted for the majority of cash used for investing activities. Cash provided by financing activities increased primarily due to higher net receipts from policyholder accounts related to investment and universal life contracts, proceeds from issuance of consumer notes and proceeds from issuance of shares from equity unit contracts, less the portion that was used for debt repayments. Year ended December 31, 2005 compared to the year ended December 31, 2004 The increase in cash from operating activities was primarily the result of the funding of $1.15 billion in settlement of the MacArthur litigation in 2004 and increased net income as compared to the prior year period. Cash provided by financing activities increased primarily due to higher net receipts from policyholder accounts related to investment and universal life contracts and increased proceeds from stock option exercises in 2005 as compared to the prior year period. Also contributing to the increase in cash provided by financing activities was a decrease in debt repayments in 2005 as compared to the prior year period. Net purchases of available-for-sale securities accounted for the majority of cash used for investing activities. Operating cash flows in each of the last three years have been adequate to meet liquidity requirements. Equity Markets For a discussion of the potential impact of the equity markets on capital and liquidity, see the Capital Markets Risk Management section under Market Risk . The Company statutory financial results also have exposure to equity market volatility due to the issuance of variable annuity contracts with guarantees. Specifically, in scenarios where equity markets decline substantially, we would expect significant increases in the amount of statutory surplus the Company would have to devote to maintain targeted rating agency and regulatory risk based capital ( RBC ) ratios (via the C3 Phase II methodology) and other similar solvency margin ratios. Various actions have been taken to partially mitigate this risk including the use of guaranteed benefit reinsurance, dynamic hedging programs of U.S. GMWB s, and other statutory reserve hedges. 146 Table of Contents Ratings Ratings are an important factor in establishing the competitive position in the insurance and financial services marketplace. There can be no assurance that the Company ratings will continue for any given period of time or that they will not be changed. In the event the Company ratings are downgraded, the level of revenues or the persistency of the Company business may be adversely impacted. On May 9, 2006, Standard & Poor raised its long-term and short-term counterparty credit ratings on The Hartford Financial Services Group, Inc. and Hartford Life Inc. to A/A-1 from A-/A-2. In addition, Standard & Poor affirmed its AA- counterparty credit and financial strength ratings on the insurance operating companies. The outlook is stable. On September 27, 2006, Moody Investors Service upgraded the senior debt ratings of The Hartford Financial Services Group, Inc. and Hartford Life, Inc. from A3 to A2 and the commercial paper ratings from P-2 to P-1 . In addition, Moody Investor Services affirmed its Aa3 insurance financial strength ratings on the insurance operating companies. The outlook is stable. The following table summarizes The Hartford significant member companies financial ratings from the major independent rating organizations as of February 16, 2007. Insurance Financial Strength Ratings: A.M. Best Fitch Standard & Poor Moody Hartford Fire Insurance Company A+ AA AA- Aa3 Hartford Life Insurance Company A+ AA AA- Aa3 Hartford Life and Accident Insurance Company A+ AA AA- Aa3 Hartford Life and Annuity Insurance Company A+ AA AA- Aa3 Hartford Life Insurance KK (Japan) AA- Hartford Life Limited (Ireland) AA- Other Ratings: The Hartford Financial Services Group, Inc.: Senior debt a- A A A2 Commercial paper AMB-2 F1 A-1 P-1 Hartford Life, Inc.: Senior debt a- A A A2 Hartford Life Insurance Company: Short Term Rating A-1+ P-1 Consumer Notes a+ AA- AA- A1 These ratings are not a recommendation to buy or hold any of The Hartford securities and they may be revised or revoked at any time at the sole discretion of the rating organization. The agencies consider many factors in determining the final rating of an insurance company. One consideration is the relative level of statutory surplus necessary to support the business written. Statutory surplus represents the capital of the insurance company reported in accordance with accounting practices prescribed by the applicable state insurance department. The table below sets forth statutory surplus for the Company insurance companies. 2006 2005 Life Operations $ 4,734 $ 4,364 Japan Life Operations 1,380 1,017 Property & Casualty Operations 8,230 6,981 Total $ 14,344 $ 12,362 Risk-based Capital The National Association of Insurance Commissioners ( NAIC ) has regulations establishing minimum capitalization requirements based on risk-based capital ( RBC ) formulas for both life and property and casualty companies. The requirements consist of formulas, which identify companies that are undercapitalized and require specific regulatory actions. The RBC formula for life companies establishes capital requirements relating to insurance, business, asset and interest rate risks and effective for 2005, it addresses the equity, interest rate and expense recovery risks associated with variable annuities and group annuities that contain death benefits or certain living benefit. RBC is calculated for property and casualty companies after adjusting capital for certain underwriting, asset, credit and off-balance sheet risks. As of December 31, 2006, each of The Hartford insurance subsidiaries within Life and Ongoing Property & Casualty had more than sufficient capital to meet the NAIC minimum RBC requirements. Contingencies Legal Proceedings For a discussion regarding contingencies related to The Hartford legal proceedings, please see Item 3, Legal Proceedings . 147 Table of Contents Dependence on Certain Third Party Relationships The Company distributes its annuity, life and certain property and casualty insurance products through a variety of distribution channels, including broker-dealers, banks, wholesalers, its own internal sales force and other third party organizations. The Company periodically negotiates provisions and renewals of these relationships and there can be no assurance that such terms will remain acceptable to the Company or such third parties. An interruption in the Company continuing relationship with certain of these third parties could materially affect the Company ability to market its products. For a discussion regarding contingencies related to the manner in which The Hartford compensates brokers and other producers, please see Overview Broker Compensation above. Regulatory Developments For a discussion regarding contingencies related to regulatory developments that affect The Hartford, please see Note 12 of Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. Legislative Initiatives On January 22, 2007, the Florida legislature adopted legislation intended to address increasing rates and shrinking capacity for homeowners insurance in the state. The legislation subsequently was signed into law by Governor Crist. The legislation will make significantly more reinsurance capacity available to companies who choose to purchase it. Specifically, the legislation increases the capacity of the Florida Hurricane Catastrophe Fund (the FHCF ), which provides reinsurance to primary insures for Florida catastrophes at generally below-market rates, from the current level of $16 billion to a potential total of $35 billion. The new Florida legislation includes many other provisions, including steps designed to make Citizens Property Insurance Corporation more competitive with private insures, provisions to provide rate relief to homeowners and requirements that excess profits on residential property business be returned to policyholders. The Hartford is still in the process of analyzing the new legislation to assess the impact on The Hartford. On May 26, 2005, the Senate Judiciary Committee approved legislation that provides for the creation of a Federal asbestos trust fund in place of the current tort system for determining asbestos liabilities. On February 6, 2006, the Senate began consideration of S. 852, The Fairness in Asbestos Injury Resolution Act of 2005 . However, the proponents were unable to secure the sixty votes necessary to overcome a procedural budget objection. The prospects for enactment and the ultimate details of any legislation creating a Federal asbestos trust fund remain very uncertain. Depending on the provisions of any legislation which is ultimately enacted, the legislation may have a material adverse effect on the Company. Legislation introduced in Congress would provide for new retirement and savings vehicles designed to simplify retirement plan administration and expand individual participation in retirement savings plans. If enacted, these proposals could have a material effect on sales of the Company life insurance and investment products. Prospects for enactment of this legislation in 2007 are uncertain. In addition, other tax proposals and regulatory initiatives which have been or are being considered by Congress could have a material effect on the insurance business. These proposals and initiatives include changes pertaining to the tax treatment of insurance companies and life insurance products and annuities, repeal or reform of the estate tax and comprehensive federal tax reform. The nature and timing of any Congressional action with respect to these efforts is unclear. On May 17, 2006, the President signed into law the Tax Increase Prevention and Reconciliation Act of 2005, which is not expected to be material to the Company. In addition, other tax proposals and regulatory initiatives which have been or are being considered by Congress could have a material effect on the insurance business. These proposals and initiatives include changes pertaining to the tax treatment of insurance companies and life insurance products and annuities, repeal or reform of the estate tax and comprehensive federal tax reform. The nature and timing of any Congressional action with respect to these efforts is unclear. On August 17, 2006, the President signed into law the Pension Protection Act of 2006, which, among other items, addressed age discrimination in defined benefit pension plans and revised pension plan funding requirements. The Act is not expected to materially affect the Company retirement plans. Guaranty Fund and Other Insurance-related Assessments In all states, insurers licensed to transact certain classes of insurance are required to become members of a guaranty fund. In most states, in the event of the insolvency of an insurer writing any such class of insurance in the state, members of the funds are assessed to pay certain claims of the insolvent insurer. A particular state fund assesses its members based on their respective written premiums in the state for the classes of insurance in which the insolvent insurer was engaged. Assessments are generally limited for any year to one or two percent of premiums written per year depending on the state. The Hartford accounts for guaranty fund and other insurance assessments in accordance with Statement of Position No. 97-3, Accounting by Insurance and Other Enterprises for Insurance-Related Assessments . Liabilities for guaranty fund and other insurance-related assessments are accrued when an assessment is probable, when it can be reasonably estimated, and when the event obligating the Company to pay an imposed or probable assessment has occurred. Liabilities for guaranty funds and other insurance-related assessments are not discounted and are included as part of other liabilities in the Consolidated Balance Sheets. As of December 31, 2006 and 2005, the liability balance was $149 and $223, respectively. As of December 31, 2006 and 2005, $20 and $20, respectively, related to premium tax offsets were included in other assets. 148 Table of Contents IMPACT OF NEW ACCOUNTING STANDARDS For a discussion of accounting standards, see Note 1 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 
