CIK: 882095
Company Name: GILEAD SCIENCES INC
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2007-02-27


ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS The following Management Discussion and Analysis (MD&A) is intended to help the reader understand our results of operations and financial condition. MD&A is provided as a supplement to, and should be read in conjunction with, our audited Consolidated Financial Statements and the accompanying notes to the financial statements and other disclosures included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K (including the disclosures under Item 1A. Risk Factors ). Our Consolidated Financial Statements have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles and are presented in U.S. dollars. Executive Summary We experienced another successful year in 2006 with the achievement of several significant financial and operating milestones. Driven by the continued growth of our sales of HIV products (Truvada, Viread, Atripla and Emtriva), total product sales reached $2.59 billion during 2006, a 43% increase over 2005. Coupled with a significant increase in royalty revenue for the year, total 2006 revenues increased to $3.03 billion. Sales from our HIV products of $2.13 billion represented a 52% increase over 2005 HIV product sales, primarily driven by the continued growth of Truvada, especially in Europe. Truvada product sales comprised more than half of our total 2006 HIV product sales. The launch of Atripla, the single tablet regimen of our Truvada with Bristol Myers Squibb Company (BMS) Sustiva (efavirenz), in the United States in July 2006 and its successful uptake during the latter half of the year further contributed to the higher HIV product sales in 2006 over 2005. Building on the momentum established by our joint venture with BMS, in September 2006, we established a three-way joint venture with BMS and Merck & Co., Inc. (Merck), to hold the European marketing authorization for Atripla. This joint venture filed for marketing authorization with the European Medicines Agency in October 2006, under the centralized licensing procedure. If and when the marketing authorization application is finalized and approved, the joint venture will hold one marketing authorization in all member states of the European Union. Discussions among the three companies regarding agreements for manufacturing, commercialization and distribution of Atripla in the European Union are ongoing. The sales increases generated by the strong performance of Truvada and Atripla in 2006 were partially offset by a decrease in sales of Viread in 2006 from 2005 due primarily to patients switching from a Viread-containing regimen to one containing Truvada and/or Atripla in countries where Truvada and/or Atripla are available. Despite facing continued strong competitive forces worldwide, sales of AmBisome increased slightly by one percent compared to 2005. As previously anticipated, the availability of several new treatment options to patients living with hepatitis B infection has helped the HBV market expand. Hepsera product sales for 2006 increased 24% from 2005 driven primarily by sales volume growth in Europe. In addition to growth in our product sales, royalty revenue increased significantly during the year. Of the $416.5 million in royalty revenue that we recognized, $364.6 million came from royalties on the sales of Tamiflu by F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd (together with Hoffmann-La Roche Inc., Roche). Tamiflu royalties increased from 2005 due to strong sales of Tamiflu by Roche, including sales of Tamiflu related to pandemic planning initiatives worldwide, as well as the elimination of the contractual cost of goods adjustment that was implemented in 2005. On January 1, 2006, we adopted the provisions of Statement of Financial Accounting Standards (SFAS) No. 123 (revised 2004), Share-Based Payment (SFAS 123R) and began expensing the fair value of stock-based awards. As a result, stock-based compensation expense was a significant component of the increase in our operating costs and expenses for the year ended December 31, 2006 as compared to prior years. Further discussion regarding our adoption of SFAS 123R is included in Critical Accounting Policies, Estimates and Judgments below. Over the last few years, we focused on creating a solid foundation for long-term growth as highlighted by the strong performance of our anti-infectives in HIV, HBV and antifungals. Our strategy for building on this foundation continues to be through opportunities to acquire or in-license and partner with innovative 40 Table of Contents technologies or drug candidates and developing those technologies alongside our in-house initiatives. In 2006, we further implemented this strategy by completing two significant acquisitions to acquire additional innovative technologies and drug candidates. On August 11, 2006, we completed the acquisition of Corus Pharma, Inc. (Corus), a privately-held development stage biopharmaceutical company based in Seattle, Washington, focused on the development and commercialization of novel drugs for respiratory and infectious diseases, for an aggregate purchase price of $415.5 million. Corus had one product candidate in late-stage clinical development, aztreonam lysine for inhalation for the treatment of patients with cystic fibrosis who have pulmonary infection with Pseudomonas aeruginosa . On November 17, 2006, we completed the acquisition of all of the outstanding shares of common stock of Myogen, Inc. (Myogen), a publicly-held biopharmaceutical company based in Westminster, Colorado that focused on the discovery, development and commercialization of small molecule therapeutics for the treatment of cardiovascular disorders, for an aggregate purchase price of $2.44 billion. Myogen had two product candidates in late-stage clinical development: ambrisentan for the treatment of patients with pulmonary arterial hypertension and darusentan for the treatment of patients with resistant hypertension. We believe our acquisitions of Corus and Myogen will provide us with an opportunity to expand into the respiratory and cardiopulmonary therapeutic areas. In the clinic, we made considerable progress on compounds and drug candidates in-licensed from our collaboration partners. In HIV, during the first quarter of 2006, we dosed the first patients in a Phase 2 clinical study of our novel integrase inhibitor for HIV, GS 9137, which we licensed from Japan Tobacco Inc. (Japan Tobacco) in 2005. In February 2007, we announced completion of a Phase 2 clinical trial and announced that the clinical study met its primary endpoint of non-inferiority in viral load reduction in HIV-positive patients. In the hepatitis area, we completed enrollment of patients into our two pivotal Phase 3 clinical studies of tenofovir disoproxil fumarate for chronic hepatitis B in the second quarter of 2006, and our collaboration partner, Achillion Pharmaceuticals, Inc., began dosing HCV-infected patients in a Phase 1/2 viral dynamics clinical study of GS 9132, a small molecule inhibitor of HCV, in the fourth quarter of 2006. In February 2007, based on preliminary data from the study, the companies decided to discontinue development of GS 9132 for HCV infection. We filed an investigational new drug application with the FDA for GS 9190, a non-nucleoside HCV polymerase inhibitor, for the potential treatment of hepatitis C and began dosing infected patients in the Phase 1 clinical study for GS 9190 during the fourth quarter of 2006. We anticipate data from our GS 9190 program in the second quarter of 2007. Although we will continue to explore new opportunities where there is significant unmet medical need as part of our long-term growth strategy, our primary focus for 2007 will be to develop our current pipeline, including those drug and product candidates from our Corus and Myogen acquisitions. Our success in 2006, both commercially and from a research and development perspective, was the product of the strong global organization and infrastructure we built over the past several years. We will continue to invest in infrastructure to facilitate continued strong growth in 2007 and beyond. In 2005, we relocated our European commercial, medical and administrative headquarters from France to the United Kingdom, thereby uniting these functions with the regulatory, safety and information technology groups already headquartered in the United Kingdom. In 2006, we undertook a strategic re-alignment of our international commercial organization to better build, manage and expand our presence in new and existing markets. During the year, we also began assessing and addressing the way in which we distribute product to the markets we serve as well as enhancing our manufacturing capabilities. With the growth in demand for our products, the increased need for timely and adequate procurement of clinical materials and our focus on continuously looking at ways in which we can manufacture more efficiently and effectively, we completed the acquisition of Raylo Chemicals Inc. (Raylo), a wholly-owned subsidiary of Germany-based specialty chemicals company Degussa AG, in November 2006 for an aggregate purchase price of $133.3 million. Located in Edmonton, Alberta, Canada, Raylo operations encompassed custom manufacturing of active pharmaceutical ingredient (API) and advanced intermediates for the pharmaceutical and biopharmaceutical industries. We intend to utilize the Edmonton site for process research and scale-up of our clinical development candidates, for the manufacture of our API for both investigational and commercial products, and for our chemical development activities to improve existing commercial manufacturing processes. 41 Table of Contents The cost of funding corporate development opportunities, building infrastructure and meeting daily operating needs, continued to be an area of management focus in 2006. Although we generated operating cash flows of $1.22 billion during 2006, we continued to explore ways of accessing cash in order to fund our corporate initiatives. In April 2006, we took advantage of favorable market and corporate conditions to issue $1.30 billion principal amount of convertible senior notes. Concurrently, we repurchased $544.9 million of our common stock under our stock repurchase program, purchased convertible note hedges at a cost of $379.1 million and sold warrants for proceeds of $235.5 million. These transactions, along with our operating cash flows, helped to fund the significant cash outlays required during the year for the Myogen, Corus and Raylo acquisitions and the $201.0 million of payments made towards the principal on our term loan. As a result, our December 31, 2006 cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities balance was $1.39 billion. We currently anticipate that our current cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities, along with our revolving credit facility that we have not yet used, will be adequate to satisfy our capital needs for the foreseeable future. Our focus for 2007 will be to continue building our infrastructure, advancing our drug candidates through the clinic and accomplishing our operational goals of promoting our products safety and efficacy data to drive higher patient adoption. We also intend to continue building strong working relationships with our corporate partners, such as Roche, with respect to Tamiflu, BMS and Merck, with respect to Atripla, and GlaxoSmithKline, with respect to Hepsera. Due to the number of acquisitions made during 2006, significant energy will be invested in 2007 to ensure that we successfully integrate the people, processes and systems at our Edmonton, Seattle and Westminster sites. We will also expend significant resources preparing for the launch of ambrisentan in the United States as well as the filing of a new drug application (NDA) for aztreonam lysine for inhalation in the United States. Finally, we will continue to strengthen our global infrastructure to better support our growing employee and customer base, to better facilitate our expanding manufacturing, research, development and commercial activities, and to ensure that the activities undertaken by our employees continue to be executed within a framework of high integrity. Critical Accounting Policies, Estimates and Judgments The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our Consolidated Financial Statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosures. On an on-going basis, we evaluate our estimates, including those related to revenue recognition, allowance for doubtful accounts, inventories, prepaid royalties, clinical trial accruals, our tax provision and stock-based compensation. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other market-specific assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results, however, may differ significantly from these estimates. We believe the following critical accounting policies reflect the more significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our Consolidated Financial Statements Revenue Recognition Product Sales We recognize revenues from product sales when there is persuasive evidence an arrangement exists, delivery to the customer has occurred, the price is fixed or determinable and collectibility is reasonably assured. We record estimated reductions to revenues for government rebates such as Medicaid reimbursements, customer incentives such as cash discounts for prompt payment, distributor fees and expected returns of expired products. These estimates are deducted from gross product sales at the time such revenues are recognized. Of these reductions from gross product sales, government rebates significantly impact our reported net product sales and are based upon certain estimates that require complex and significant management judgments. 42 Table of Contents Government Rebates We estimate amounts payable by us to government-managed Medicaid programs as well as to certain other qualifying federal and state government programs for the reimbursement of portions of the retail price of prescriptions filled that are covered by these programs. Government rebates that are invoiced directly to us are recorded in other accrued liabilities in our Consolidated Balance Sheets. For qualified programs that can purchase our products through wholesalers at a lower contractual government price, the wholesalers charge back to us the difference between their acquisition cost and the lower price, which we record as allowances against accounts receivable. We estimate these sales allowances based on contractual terms, historical utilization rates, any new information regarding changes in these programs regulations and guidelines that would impact the amount of the actual rebates, our expectations regarding future utilization rates for these programs, and channel inventory data as obtained from our major U.S. wholesalers in accordance with our inventory management agreements. During 2006, 2005 and 2004, $272.2 million, $184.8 million and $113.0 million, respectively, representing 9%, 9% and 8% of total gross product sales, respectively, were deducted from gross product sales for government rebates. Based on the current information available to us, actual government rebates claimed for these periods have varied by less than 3% from our estimates recorded in those periods. As of December 31, 2006 and 2005, we had accrued government rebates of $65.7 million and $63.4 million, respectively, in other accrued liabilities and an allowance of $10.6 million and $7.8 million, respectively, recorded against accounts receivable. The following table summarizes the aggregate activity in these accrued government rebates allowance and accrued liabilities accounts: Balance at Beginning of Year Charged to Expense Deducted from Accruals Balance at End of Year Year ended December 31, 2006: Government rebates allowances and accrued liabilities Activity related to 2006 sales $ $ 246,274 $ 190,258 $ 56,016 Activity related to sales prior to 2006 71,220 (4,681 ) 46,193 20,346 Total $ 71,220 $ 241,593 $ 236,451 $ 76,362 Year ended December 31, 2005: Government rebates allowances and accrued liabilities Activity related to 2005 sales $ $ 189,507 $ 124,371 $ 65,136 Activity related to sales prior to 2005 40,507 (2,470 ) 31,953 6,084 Total $ 40,507 $ 187,037 $ 156,324 $ 71,220 Contract Revenue Contract revenue for research and development (R&D) is recorded as performance occurs and the earnings process is completed based on the performance requirements of the contract. Nonrefundable contract fees for which no further performance obligations exist, and where there is no continuing involvement by us, are recognized when the payments are received or when collection is reasonably assured. Revenue from non-refundable up-front license fees and milestone payments where we continue to have involvement, such as through a development collaboration or an obligation to supply product, is recognized as performance occurs and our obligations are completed. In accordance with the specific terms of our obligations under these types of arrangements, revenues are recognized as the obligation is fulfilled or ratably over the development or manufacturing period. Revenues associated with substantive at-risk milestones are recognized based upon the achievement of the milestones as defined in the respective agreements. Advance payments received in excess of amounts earned are classified as deferred revenue. 43 Table of Contents Allowance for Doubtful Accounts We also maintain an allowance for doubtful accounts for estimated losses resulting from the inability of our customers to make required payments. This allowance is based on our analysis of several factors including, but not limited to, contractual payment terms, historical payment patterns of our customers and individual customer circumstances, an analysis of days sales outstanding by customer and geographic region and a review of the local economic environment and its potential impact on government funding and reimbursement practices. If the financial condition of our customers or the economic environment in which they operate were to deteriorate, resulting in an inability to make payments, additional allowances may be required. Our allowance for doubtful accounts balance as a percentage of total accounts receivable did not materially change from December 31, 2005 to December 31, 2006. We believe that the allowance for doubtful accounts is adequate to cover anticipated losses under current conditions; however, significant deterioration in any of the above factors, especially with respect to the government funding and reimbursement practices in the European market could materially change these expectations and result in an increase to our allowance for doubtful accounts. Inventories We record write-downs in the value of our inventory based on our review of bad batches experienced during the manufacturing process as well as quality control reviews of our inventory. We generally do not record inventory write-downs relating to estimated obsolescence or risk of competition primarily because the shelf life of our products is long. However, if our current assumptions about future production or inventory levels, demand or competition were to change or if actual market conditions are less favorable than those projected by management, additional inventory write-downs may be required, which could negatively impact our product gross margins and results of operations. Prepaid Royalties We capitalize royalties that we have prepaid at cost, specifically those related to the emtricitabine royalties we paid to Emory University (Emory) for the HIV indication, based on the present value of the future royalty obligation that we would expect to pay to Emory assuming certain expected future levels of our product sales incorporating the emtricitabine technology. The present value of our future royalty obligation was derived using our weighted average cost of capital. We review quarterly the expected future sales levels of our products and any indicators that might require a write-down in the net recoverable value of our asset or a change in the estimated life of the prepaid royalty. Some potential indicators of impairment include the launch of a significant product by a competitor, significant deviations in recognized product sales compared to forecast and product safety issues and recalls. We amortize our prepaid royalties based on an effective royalty rate that we derive from forecasted HIV product sales incorporating emtricitabine. Our product sales forecasts are prepared annually and determined using our best estimates of future activity considering such factors as historical and expected future patient usage or uptake of our products, the introduction of complimentary or combination therapies or products, and future product launch plans. If a previously unanticipated and significant change occurs to our sales forecasts, including the introduction of a competing product by us or one of our competitors into the same HIV market as emtricitabine, we would prospectively update the royalty rate used to amortize our prepaid royalties which may increase future royalty expense. As of December 31, 2006, we had a prepaid royalty asset relating to the emtricitabine royalties we paid to Emory of $321.0 million. Amortization expense relating to this prepaid royalty asset was $15.1 million and $6.2 million, for the years ended December 31, 2006 and 2005, respectively. Clinical Trial Accruals We record accruals for estimated clinical study costs. Most of our clinical studies are performed by third-party contract research organizations (CROs). These costs are a significant component of R&D expenses. During 2006, 2005 and 2004, we incurred CRO costs of $30.2 million, $21.1 million and $24.7 million, respectively. We 44 Table of Contents accrue costs for clinical studies performed by CROs on a straight-line basis over the service periods specified in the contracts and adjust our estimates, if required, based upon our on-going review of the level of effort and costs actually incurred by the CRO. We validate our accruals quarterly with our vendors and perform detailed reviews of the activities related to our significant contracts. Based upon the results of these validation processes, we assess the appropriateness of our accruals and make any adjustments we deem necessary to ensure that our expenses reflect the actual effort incurred by the CROs. Generally, a significant portion of the total clinical trial costs are associated with start up activities for the trial and patient enrollment. We extensively outsource our clinical trial activities and usually perform only a small portion of the start-up activities in-house. As a result, CROs typically perform most of the total start-up activities for our trials, including document preparation, site identification, screening and preparation, pre-study visits, training and program management. On a budgeted basis, these costs are typically 20% to 30% of the total contract value. On an actual basis, this percentage range is significantly wider as many of our contracts are either expanded or reduced in scope compared to the original budget, while start-up costs for the particular trial do not change significantly. Start-up costs usually occur within a few months after the contract has been executed and are milestone or event driven in nature. The remaining activities and related costs, such as patient monitoring and administration, generally occur ratably throughout the life of the individual contract or study. Most contracts are negotiated as fixed unit prices and can vary in length between six months for a single dose Phase 1 study and up to two years or more for a more complex Phase 3 study. The average length of contracts in 2006, 2005 and 2004 has been at the upper end of this range in order to provide long-term safety and efficacy data to support the commercial launches of Truvada, Viread, Atripla, Emtriva and Hepsera. All of our material CRO contracts are terminable by us upon written notice and Gilead is generally only liable for actual effort expended by the CRO at any point in time during the contract, regardless of payment status. Amounts paid in advance of services being performed will be refunded if a contract is terminated. Through December 31, 2006, differences between actual and estimated activity levels for any particular study were not significant enough to require a material adjustment. However, if management does not receive complete and accurate information from our vendors or has underestimated activity levels associated with a study at a given point in time, we would have to record additional and potentially significant R&D expenses in future periods. Tax Provision We estimate our income tax provision, including deferred tax assets and liabilities, based on significant management judgment. We evaluate the realization of all or a portion of our deferred tax assets on a quarterly basis. We record a valuation allowance to reduce our deferred tax assets to the amounts that are more likely than not to be realized. We consider future taxable income, ongoing tax planning strategies and our historical financial performance in assessing the need for a valuation allowance. As part of the purchase of Myogen in the fourth quarter of 2006, we determined that it was more likely than not that certain of our acquired deferred tax assets related to state net operating loss carryforwards would not be realized and therefore established a valuation allowance of approximately $7.1 million. If we expect to realize deferred tax assets for which we have previously recorded a valuation allowance, we would reduce the valuation allowance in the period in which such determination is first made. Such an adjustment was made in the fourth quarter of 2005 when we determined that it was more likely than not that certain of our deferred tax assets would be realized, and therefore, we released the related valuation allowance. This resulted in an income tax benefit for 2005 of approximately $8.2 million. Our future effective income tax rate may be affected by such factors as changes in tax laws, regulations or rates, changing interpretation of existing laws or regulations, the impact of accounting for stock-based compensation, changes in our international organization, and changes in overall levels of income before tax. 45 Table of Contents Our income tax returns are routinely audited by the various state and foreign tax authorities. There are differing interpretations of tax laws and regulations, and as a result significant disputes may arise with these tax authorities involving issues of the timing and amount of deductions and allocations of income among various tax jurisdictions. We periodically evaluate our exposures associated with tax filing positions. While we believe our positions comply with applicable laws, we record liabilities based upon SFAS No. 5, Accounting for Contingencies . We do not believe any such items currently pending will have a material adverse effect on our Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, although an adverse resolution of one or more of these items in any quarterly reporting period covered by our Consolidated Financial Statements could have a material impact on the results of operations for that period. Stock-based Compensation In December 2004, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) issued SFAS 123R, which requires that all share-based payments to employees and directors, including grants of stock options, be recognized in the statement of operations based on their fair values. SFAS 123R supersedes Accounting Principles Board Opinion No. 25, Accounting for Stock Issued to Employees (APB 25) and amends SFAS No. 95, Statement of Cash Flows . On January 1, 2006, we adopted SFAS 123R using the modified prospective method of adoption as permitted under SFAS 123R, which requires that compensation expense be recorded for all nonvested stock options and other stock-based awards as of the beginning of the first quarter of adoption. In accordance with the modified prospective method, no prior period amounts have been restated to reflect the provisions of SFAS 123R. Prior to the adoption of SFAS 123R, in accordance with the provisions of SFAS 123, we elected to follow APB 25, and FASB Interpretation No. 44, Accounting for Certain Transactions Involving Stock Compensation an Interpretation of APB Opinion No. 25 , in accounting for our employee stock-based plans. Under APB 25, if the exercise price of our employee and director stock options was equal to or greater than the fair value of the underlying stock on the date of grant, no compensation expense was recognized. However, as required by SFAS 123, the pro forma impact of expensing the fair value of our stock options and employee stock purchase plan was disclosed in the notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements. In connection with our adoption of SFAS 123R, we refined our valuation assumptions and the methodologies used to derive those assumptions; however, we elected to continue using the Black-Scholes option valuation model. The fair value of stock options granted prior to the adoption of SFAS 123R was calculated using the multiple option approach while the fair value of stock options granted beginning January 1, 2006 was calculated using the single option approach. Concurrent with our adoption of SFAS 123R, we determined that a blend of historical volatility along with implied volatility for traded options on our stock would be a better measure of market conditions and expected volatility. Previously, we used historical stock price volatility as it was the most reliable source of volatility data. We estimate the weighted-average expected life of our stock options based on historical cancellation and exercise data related to our stock options as well as the contractual term and vesting terms of the awards. We record stock-based compensation expense using a graded vesting expense attribution approach for nonvested stock options granted prior to the adoption of SFAS 123R consistent with the expense attribution approach used in our historical SFAS 123 disclosures and using a straight-line expense attribution approach for stock options granted after the adoption of SFAS 123R. We currently believe that the straight-line expense attribution approach better reflects the level of service to be provided over the vesting period of our awards. Stock-based compensation expense related to stock options is recognized net of estimated forfeitures. We estimated forfeitures based on our historical experience. As a result of the adoption of SFAS 123R, we will only recognize a benefit from stock-based compensation in additional paid-in-capital (APIC) if an incremental tax benefit is realized after all other tax attributes currently available to us have been utilized. In addition, we have elected to account for the indirect benefits of stock-based compensation on the research tax credit and the extraterritorial income deduction through the Consolidated Statement of Operations rather than through APIC. 46 Table of Contents During the year ended December 31, 2006, we recognized stock-based compensation expense of $133.8 million in operating expenses, and we capitalized $2.4 million into inventory. As of December 31, 2006, we had unrecognized stock-based compensation of $273.7 million related to nonvested stock options, which we expect to expense over an estimated weighted-average period of two years. Senior management has discussed the development, selection and disclosure of these critical accounting policies with the Audit Committee of our Board of Directors, and the Audit Committee has reviewed the disclosure presented above relating to them. Results of Operations Total Revenues We had total revenues of $3.03 billion in 2006, $2.03 billion in 2005 and $1.32 billion in 2004. Included in total revenues are product sales, royalty revenue, and contract and other revenue. Product Sales Product sales for the last three years consisted of the following (in thousands): 2006 Change 2005 Change 2004 HIV products: Truvada $ 1,194,292 110 % $ 567,829 737 % $ 67,865 Viread 689,356 (11 )% 778,783 (1 )% 782,915 Atripla 205,729 Emtriva 36,393 (23 )% 47,486 (18 )% 57,600 Total HIV products sales 2,125,770 52 % 1,394,098 53 % 908,380 Hepsera 230,531 24 % 186,532 66 % 112,525 AmBisome 223,031 1 % 220,753 4 % 211,688 Other 8,865 12 % 7,916 (18 )% 9,631 Total product sales $ 2,588,197 43 % $ 1,809,299 46 % $ 1,242,224 Total product sales increased by 43% in 2006 compared to 2005, and 46% in 2005 compared to 2004, in each case, primarily due to an increase in the volume of sales of our HIV products. A significant percentage of our product sales continue to be denominated in foreign currencies. We use forward contracts to hedge a percentage of our forecasted international sales, primarily those denominated in Euro. This reduces, but does not eliminate, fluctuations in sales due to changes in foreign currency exchange rates. HIV Products Viread, Emtriva, Truvada and Atripla were approved for sale in the United States in October 2001, July 2003, August 2004 and July 2006, respectively. Viread, Emtriva and Truvada were approved for sale in the European Union in February 2002, October 2003 and February 2005, respectively. We are currently seeking approval of Atripla for sale in the European Union. HIV product sales increased by 52% compared to 2005, and 53% in 2005 compared to 2004, primarily driven by product volume growth. We experienced steady prescription gains for our HIV product portfolio throughout 2006. During 2006, the average selling prices of our HIV products increased compared to 2005, primarily driven by higher overall selling prices of our HIV products as well as the transition of some patients in the United States from coverage under Medicaid to Medicare Part D, which reduced the amount of Medicaid claims. As a result of 47 Table of Contents this transition, we estimated that assuming all patients dually eligible under Medicaid did in fact transition to Medicare Part D, the benefit to net product sales resulting from a reduction in Medicaid claims was approximately $38 million for 2006. Truvada Truvada sales increased by 110% in 2006 compared to 2005, primarily driven by strong sales volume growth across the major geographic regions. Truvada sales accounted for 56% and 41% of our total HIV product sales for 2006 and 2005, respectively, reflecting its strong position as the NRTI backbone of choice in the United States, as well as rapid and significant uptake in key European territories during 2006. Truvada sales increased in the United States in 2005, the first full year of Truvada sales, primarily due to patients new to therapy and secondarily, from patients switching from other regimens, including those containing Viread and/or Emtriva. Viread Viread sales decreased by 11% in 2006 compared to 2005, primarily due to patients switching from a Viread-containing regimen to one containing Truvada in countries where Truvada is available, partially offset by sales volume increases in Latin America. Viread sales in 2005 were relatively consistent with sales levels in 2004, resulting from the continued strong performance of Viread despite the offsetting impact of patients switching from a Viread-containing regimen to one containing Truvada in countries where Truvada is available. Atripla Atripla sales were $205.7 million in 2006. Since we consolidate 100% of Atripla product sales as we are the primary beneficiary of our joint venture with BMS, these sales included approximately $76 million relating to Sustiva. Atripla was approved for sale in the United States in July 2006 and accounted for 10% of our 2006 HIV product sales since its launch through December 31, 2006. Emtriva Emtriva sales decreased by 23% in 2006 compared to 2005 and by 18% in 2005 compared to 2004. The decreases in both years were primarily driven by the impact of patients switching from an Emtriva-containing regimen to one containing Truvada and/or Atripla in countries where these products are available. Hepsera Hepsera sales increased by 24% in 2006 compared to 2005 and by 66% in 2005 compared to 2004, primarily driven by sales volume growth in both Europe and the United States. Hepsera sales volume also increased with respect to our sales of Hepsera to GlaxoSmithKline Inc. (GSK). We sell Hepsera to GSK at our manufacturing cost in connection with GSK distribution activities in Asia. Royalties earned by us on sales of Hepsera by GSK are recorded as royalty revenue. AmBisome Sales of AmBisome increased one percent in 2006 compared to 2005, and increased by four percent in 2005 compared to 2004. The increases in both comparative periods were primarily due to increased sales in the United States. AmBisome product sales in the United States relate solely to our sales of AmBisome to Astellas Pharma Inc. (Astellas) which are recorded at our manufacturing cost. Royalties that we earn on sales of AmBisome by Astellas are discussed under Royalty Revenue below. In both comparative periods, although AmBisome sales volume increased in the European Union, lower pricing in most regions slightly reduced the related net product sales that we recognized. In 2007, we expect our total product sales on our marketed products to continue to grow as we continue to expand our sales and marketing efforts. 48 Table of Contents Royalty Revenue The following table summarizes the period over period changes in our royalty revenue (in thousands): 2006 Change 2005 Change 2004 Royalty revenue $ 416,526 112 % $ 196,873 210 % $ 63,444 Our most significant sources of royalty revenue for 2006, 2005 and 2004 were from sales of Tamiflu by Roche and sales of AmBisome in the United States by Astellas. Royalty revenue for 2006 was $416.5 million, an increase of 112% compared to 2005, primarily driven by the recognition of Tamiflu royalties from Roche of $364.6 million in 2006. The increase in Tamiflu royalties is due to the higher Tamiflu sales recorded by Roche, including sales related to pandemic planning initiatives worldwide, as well as the elimination of a contractual cost of goods adjustment resulting from the dispute resolution in November 2005 that had historically reduced the amount of Tamiflu royalties recognized by us. We recognize royalties on Tamiflu sales by Roche the quarter following the quarter in which it is sold. Royalty revenue for 2005 was $196.9 million, an increase of 210% compared to 2004, primarily driven by the amounts received in connection with the dispute resolution discussed below, the recognition of the higher royalties received from Roche for higher Tamiflu sales caused by the significant 2004/2005 flu season, particularly in Japan, as well as the fulfillment of orders for pandemic readiness supplies in certain countries in 2005. In November 2005, we resolved our dispute with Roche relating to our 1996 development and license agreement and agreed to terminate the related arbitration pending between Roche and us. Related to the dispute resolution, Roche also paid us $80.7 million that we recognized as royalty revenue in 2005, which consisted of $18.2 million relating to disputed royalties from 2001 to 2003, $11.8 million relating to the reimbursement of the 2004 contractual cost of goods adjustment that had previously reduced our earned royalties and $50.7 million relating to the updating of royalties payable to us for the first nine months of 2005 based on the 2005 then-current royalty rates instead of the prior year effective royalty rate. Royalty revenue earned by us from Roche, including the amounts recognized from the dispute resolution in 2005, were $161.6 million and $44.6 million for 2005 and 2004, respectively. Royalty revenue earned on sales of AmBisome by Astellas was $12.2 million for 2006, a seven percent decrease from 2005, and was at $13.0 million for each of 2005 and 2004. Contract and Other Revenue The following table summarizes the period over period changes in our contract and other revenue (in thousands): 2006 Change 2005 Change 2004 Contract and other revenue $ 21,416 (4 )% $ 22,228 17 % $ 18,953 Contract and other revenue was $21.4 million in 2006, a decrease of 4% compared to 2005. In 2006, contract and other revenue consisted primarily of net product distribution service revenue from sales of Flolan, a $5.0 million milestone payment we received from OSI Pharmaceuticals, Inc. (OSI) related to the first commercial sale of Macugen in the European Union, revenue earned from various contract manufacturing projects as well as the amortization of previously deferred milestone revenues. In 2005, contract and other revenue consisted primarily of a $7.0 million milestone payment earned from OSI, related to its first commercial sale of Macugen in the United States in 2005, revenue earned from various contract manufacturing projects as well as the amortization of previously deferred milestone revenues. 49 Table of Contents Cost of Goods Sold and Product Gross Margin The following table summarizes the period over period changes in our product sales (in thousands) and cost of goods sold (in thousands) and product gross margin: 2006 Change 2005 Change 2004 Total product sales $ 2,588,197 43 % $ 1,809,299 46 % $ 1,242,224 Cost of goods sold $ 433,320 66 % $ 260,326 56 % $ 166,587 Product gross margin 83% 86% 87% Our product gross margin for 2006 was 83%, compared to 86% for 2005. The lower gross margin was primarily due to the launch of Atripla in the United States, $15.8 million in write-downs of inventory for our Gilead Access Program to its estimated net realizable value, as well as product mix changes as patients continue to switch from Viread, a higher margin product, to Truvada and/or Atripla, partially offset by the lower effective royalty rate resulting from our July 2005 emtricitabine royalty buyout discussed below, lower API costs and the higher average selling prices of our HIV products in the United States. Atripla product sales decreased our product gross margin, without a corresponding impact to our product gross profit. As the primary beneficiary of our joint venture with BMS, we consolidate 100% of Atripla product sales but only benefit from the product gross margin on the Truvada portion of Atripla. The Sustiva portion of Atripla product sales carries a zero product gross profit since the joint venture purchases Sustiva API from BMS at BMS estimated net selling price of Sustiva in the U.S. market. Our product gross margin for 2005 was 86%, compared to 87% for 2004, primarily due to product mix changes as patients switched from Viread, a higher margin product, to Truvada. Prior to July 2005, we paid royalties to Emory on worldwide net sales of product containing emtrcitabine. In July 2005, we and Royalty Pharma purchased 65% and 35%, respectively, of the royalty interest owned by Emory in exchange for the elimination of the royalty obligation. As a result of the purchase, we capitalized $341.3 million in prepaid royalties, representing our 65% share of the $525.0 million purchase price. In the third quarter of 2005, we began to amortize this prepaid royalty to cost of goods sold over the remaining life of the underlying patent based on an effective royalty rate derived from our forecasted sales of products containing emtricitabine. We recorded royalties to Royalty Pharma based on actual emtricitabine net sales relative to Royalty Pharma 35% ownership interest in the underlying Emory royalty interest. We expect our product gross margin in 2007 to be lower, driven by the higher mix of Atripla product sales, which include the Sustiva portion at zero product gross profit, partially offset by gross margin improvements driven by lower API costs and the continued benefit associated with our prepaid emtricitabine royalties. Research and Development Expenses The following table summarizes the period over period changes in the major components of our R&D expenses over the last three years (in thousands): 2006 Change 2005 Change 2004 Research $ 85,202 52 % $ 55,918 27 % $ 43,872 Clinical development 238,270 34 % 178,015 21 % 146,983 Pharmaceutical development 60,389 38 % 43,791 34 % 32,697 Total research and development $ 383,861 38 % $ 277,724 24 % $ 223,552 R&D expenses consist primarily of personnel costs, including salaries, benefits and stock-based compensation, clinical studies performed by CROs, materials and supplies, licenses and fees and overhead allocations consisting of various support and facilities related costs. Our R&D activities are separated into three main categories: research, clinical development and pharmaceutical development. Research costs typically consist of preclinical and toxicology costs. Clinical development costs include costs for Phase 1, 2, 3 and 4 clinical trials. Pharmaceutical development expenses consist of costs for product formulation and chemical analysis. 50 Table of Contents R&D expenses in 2006 increased by $106.1 million compared to 2005, primarily due to increased compensation and benefits of $73.9 million due largely to higher headcount and which included stock-based compensation expense of $52.2 million from our adoption of SFAS 123R on January 1, 2006, as well as increased contract service and clinical study expenses of $50.1 million relating to clinical, product development and research activities in our HIV and hepatitis programs and our newly-acquired programs in the respiratory and cardiopulmonary areas. These higher expenses were partially offset by lower milestone payments made to Japan Tobacco in 2006 compared to 2005 related to the licensing and development of our lead integrase inhibitor candidate, GS 9137, as well as a $15.0 million payment to Emory in 2005 in connection with the amendment of our license agreement with Emory related to our obligation to develop emtricitabine for the hepatitis B indication. In general, significant collaboration payments, as seen in our payments to Japan Tobacco and Emory, during a period can cause our R&D expenses to fluctuate period over period. R&D expenses in 2005 increased by $54.2 million compared to 2004, primarily due to the $15.0 million payment made to Emory mentioned above, a $15.0 million payment made to Japan Tobacco related to the execution of our HIV integrase license agreement for GS 9137, increased compensation and benefits of $8.9 million from higher headcount and increased clinical and product development activities associated with our HIV and hepatitis programs. The payments made to Emory and Japan Tobacco were expensed as the underlying technologies were incomplete and had no alternative future use, and in the case of Emory, no significant R&D activities are expected in the next several years. In 2007, we expect R&D expenses to increase over 2006 levels reflecting increased spending on our internal and collaborative R&D efforts, as well as product licensing activity relating to our expectation that our product candidates will progress into more advanced clinical trials, especially in the respiratory and cardiopulmonary areas. Selling, General and Administrative Expenses The following table summarizes the period over period changes in our selling, general and administrative (SG&A) expenses over the last three years (in thousands): 2006 Change 2005 Change 2004 Selling, general and administrative $ 573,660 50 % $ 381,283 24 % $ 307,095 SG&A expenses for 2006 increased by $192.4 million compared to 2005. Higher expenses were primarily driven by higher headcount which increased compensation and benefits by $92.0 million including stock-based compensation expense of $70.8 million from our adoption of SFAS 123R on January 1, 2006, increased expenses of $54.3 million in contract services and promotional programs relating to our business growth, business development activities and activities to prepare us for the launch of Atripla and a $7.9 million write-off of certain capital assets related to renovations at our corporate headquarter campus. In addition, beginning in 2006, we began reporting net foreign exchange transaction gains or losses as well as fair value changes on derivative instruments not designated as hedges in interest and other income, net. These amounts, which were previously reported as SG&A expenses, were reclassified to enhance the comparability of our financial statements with those of other companies. Prior year amounts, although insignificant, have been reclassified to be consistent with the current year presentation. SG&A expenses for 2005 increased by $74.2 million compared to 2004. The increase was primarily due to an increase in compensation and benefits of $12.8 million due largely to higher headcount, an increase in market research, speaker programs and symposia costs of $9.2 million, $8.4 million of severance and relocation expenses associated with the relocation of our European commercial, medical and administrative headquarters from France to the United Kingdom, an increase in medical education costs of $5.6 million, an increase in journal advertising costs of $4.6 million, as well as costs related to a general expansion of our sales and marketing activities worldwide. These increases were partially offset by a decrease in bad debt expense of $5.7 million as a result of higher collections activity in certain European countries. 51 Table of Contents In 2007, we expect SG&A expenses to increase primarily due to higher costs to be incurred on administrative activities and sales and marketing efforts to support our business growth, as well as on the sales force expansion planned for the anticipated ambrisentan launch in the United States, higher costs related to our ongoing investment in our global commercial organization through additional hiring and promotional programs, as well as incremental operating expenses associated with our acquisitions of Corus and Myogen. Purchased In-process Research and Development In connection with our acquisitions of Myogen and Corus, we recorded purchased in-process research and development (IPR&D) expense of $2.06 billion and $335.6 million, respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2006. The purchased IPR&D expense for Myogen represented the estimated fair value of Myogen incomplete research and development programs that had not yet reached technological feasibility and had no alternative future use as of the acquisition date and, therefore, was expensed upon acquisition. A summary of these research and development programs as of the acquisition date is as follows: Program Description Status of Development Estimated Acquisition Date Fair Value (in millions) Ambrisentan An orally active, non-sulfonamide, propanoic acid-class, endothelin receptor antagonist (ERA) for the treatment of pulmonary arterial hypertension. Phase 3 clinical trials were completed prior to the acquisition date. We filed an NDA with the FDA in December 2006. In February 2007, the FDA granted us priority review status for the NDA for marketing approval of ambrisentan, and established a target review date of June 2007. $ 1,413.7 Darusentan An orally active ETA-selective ERA for the treatment of resistant hypertension. In Phase 3 clinical development as of the acquisition date and the date of this filing. $ 644.5 The estimated fair value of the purchased IPR&D was determined using the income approach, which discounts expected future cash flows to present value. We estimated the related future net cash flows using a present value risk-adjusted discount rate of 14%, which is a significant assumption and is based on the estimated internal rate of return for Myogen operations and is comparable to the estimated weighted average cost of capital for companies with Myogen profile. The projected cash flows from the ambrisentan and darusentan programs were based on key assumptions such as estimates of revenues and operating profits related to the programs considering their stages of development; the time and resources needed to complete the development and approval of the related products; the life of the potential commercialized products and associated risks, including the inherent difficulties and uncertainties in developing a drug compound such as obtaining FDA and other regulatory approvals; and risks related to the viability of and potential alternative treatments in any future target markets. For the purpose of estimating the fair value of the ambrisentan program, we estimated that the program was approximately 78% complete as of the acquisition date, based on estimated time and cost to complete, as Phase 3 clinical trials had been completed. Based on this assumption, we would incur future research and development costs of approximately $35 million to $45 million from the date of acquisition through and including the year when commercialization is expected to occur. Material net cash inflows are estimated to begin in 2009 for ambrisentan, assuming the necessary regulatory approvals would be received and the product would be successfully commercialized by that date. 52 Table of Contents For the purpose of estimating the fair value of the darusentan program, we estimated that the program was approximately 35% complete as of the acquisition date, based on estimated time and cost to complete, and remaining efforts would include the completion of Phase 3 clinical development as well as preparing for and filing an NDA with the FDA. Based on this assumption, we would incur future research and development costs of approximately $130 million to $140 million from the date of acquisition through and including the year when commercialization is expected to occur. Material net cash inflows are estimated to begin in 2012 for darusentan, assuming the necessary regulatory approvals would be received and the product would be successfully commercialized by that date. The remaining efforts for completing Myogen IPR&D programs primarily consist of clinical trials, the cost, length and success of which are extremely difficult to predict, and obtaining necessary regulatory approvals. Numerous risks and uncertainties exist that could prevent completion of development, including the ability to enroll patients in clinical trials, the possibility of unfavorable results of our clinical trials and the risk of failing to obtain FDA and other regulatory body approvals. Feedback from regulatory authorities or results from clinical trials might require modifications to or delays in later stage clinical trials or additional trials to be performed. We cannot be certain that either ambrisentan or darusentan, purchased from Myogen, will be approved in the United States or in countries outside of the United States or whether marketing approvals will have significant limitations on its use. Future discussions with regulatory agencies will determine the amount of data needed and timelines for review, which may differ materially from current projections. The acquired product candidates under development may never be successfully commercialized. As a result, we may make a strategic decision to discontinue development of these product candidates if, for example, we believe commercialization will be difficult relative to other opportunities in our pipeline. If these programs cannot be completed on a timely basis or at all, then our prospects for future revenue growth may be adversely impacted. No assurance can be given that the underlying assumptions used to forecast the above cash flows or the timely and successful completion of the projects will materialize as estimated. For these reasons, among others, actual results may vary significantly from estimated results. The purchased IPR&D expense for Corus represented the estimated fair value of Corus incomplete inhaled aztreonam lysine for cystic fibrosis research and development program that had not yet reached technological feasibility and had no alternative future use as of the acquisition date and, therefore, was expensed upon acquisition. A description of this program as of the acquisition date is as follows: Program Description Status of Development Estimated Acquisition Date Fair Value (in millions) Inhaled aztreonam lysine for cystic fibrosis Aztreonam formulation for inhalation to be used against Gram-negative bacteria that cause lung infections in patients with cystic fibrosis. In Phase 3 clinical trials as of the acquisition date and the date of this filing. $ 335.6 The estimated fair value of the purchased IPR&D was determined using the income approach, which discounts expected future cash flows to present value. We estimated the related future net cash flows using a present value risk-adjusted discount rate of 16%, which is a significant assumption and is based on the estimated internal rate of return for Corus operations and is comparable to the estimated weighted-average cost of capital for companies with Corus profile. The projected cash flows from the aztreonam lysine for inhalation program were based on key assumptions such as estimates of revenues and operating profits related to the program considering its stage of development; the time and resources needed to complete the development and approval of the related product; the life of the potential commercialized product and associated risks, including the inherent difficulties and uncertainties in developing a drug compound such as obtaining FDA and other regulatory approvals; and risks related to the viability of and potential alternative treatments in any future target markets. Corus two other early-stage candidates were not included in the valuation of purchased IPR&D because they were early-stage programs that did not have identifiable revenues and expenses associated with them. 53 Table of Contents For the purpose of estimating the fair value of the aztreonam program, we estimated that the program was approximately 71% complete as of the acquisition date, based on estimated time and cost to complete, and remaining efforts would include the completion of Phase 3 clinical development as well as preparing for and filing an NDA with the FDA. Based on this assumption, we would incur future research and development costs of approximately $30 million to $35 million from the date of acquisition through and including the year when commercialization is expected to occur. Material net cash inflows are estimated to begin in 2009 for the aztreonam program, assuming the necessary regulatory approvals would be received and the product would be successfully commercialized by that date. The remaining efforts for completing Corus IPR&D program primarily consist of clinical trials, the cost, length and success of which are extremely difficult to predict, and obtaining necessary regulatory approvals. Numerous risks and uncertainties exist that could prevent completion of development, including the ability to enroll patients in clinical trials, the possibility of unfavorable results of our clinical trials, and the risk of failing to obtain FDA and other regulatory body approvals. Feedback from regulatory authorities or results from clinical trials might require modifications to or delays in later stage clinical trials or additional trials to be performed. We cannot be certain that aztreonam lysine for cystic fibrosis, purchased from Corus, will be approved in the United States or countries outside of the United States or whether marketing approvals will have significant limitations on its use. Future discussions with regulatory agencies will determine the amount of data needed and timelines for review, which may differ materially from current projections. The acquired product candidate under development may never be successfully commercialized. As a result, we may make a strategic decision to discontinue development of this product candidate if, for example, we believe commercialization will be difficult relative to other opportunities in our pipeline. If this program cannot be completed on a timely basis or at all, then our prospects for future revenue growth may be adversely impacted. No assurance can be given that the underlying assumptions used to forecast the above cash flows or the timely and successful completion of the project will materialize as estimated. For these reasons, among others, actual results may vary significantly from estimated results. Gain on Warrant Pursuant to our March 2000 agreement with Eyetech Pharmaceuticals, Inc. (Eyetech), as predecessor to OSI, we received a warrant to purchase 791,667 shares of Eyetech series B convertible preferred stock, exercisable at a price of $6.00 per share. In January 2004, Eyetech completed an initial public offering of its common stock at which time we adjusted the fair value of the warrant resulting in a gain of $20.6 million. At that time, the fair value of the warrant was estimated using the Black-Scholes valuation model with a volatility rate of 50% and a discount rate of 2.8%. At the end of the first quarter of 2004, we exercised the warrant on a net basis using shares of Eyetech common stock as consideration for the exercise price and subsequently held 646,841 shares of Eyetech common stock. In the second quarter of 2004, we sold all of the Eyetech shares we owned and realized a gain of approximately $2.3 million, which is included in interest and other income, net, in 2004. Make-Whole Payment on Convertible Debt Redemption In October 2004, we called for the redemption of all our outstanding 2% convertible senior notes due December 15, 2007. The convertible senior notes were redeemed on November 20, 2004 under a provisional redemption based upon the market price of our common stock exceeding certain thresholds. The aggregate principal amount outstanding of the notes was $345.0 million. The convertible senior notes were redeemable at a redemption price equal to 100% of the principal amount of the notes, plus a cash payment equal to accrued and unpaid interest to the redemption date and a cash make-whole payment equal to $60 per $1,000 principal value of the notes less interest actually paid or accrued and unpaid from the date of issuance of the notes to the redemption date. Interest on the convertible senior notes ceased to accrue on the redemption date, and the only remaining right of the holders thereafter was to receive the redemption payment, including accrued and unpaid interest to the redemption date and the make-whole payment. Alternatively, note holders could elect to convert their notes into shares of our common stock at a price of $23.50 per share, or 42.55 shares of our common stock per $1,000 principal amount of the notes. Holders of substantially all of the outstanding notes converted their 54 Table of Contents notes into shares of our common stock prior to the November 20, 2004 redemption date. As a result of these conversions, 14,676,952 shares of common stock were issued to these note holders. In connection with the redemption, we made aggregate make-whole payments of $7.4 million to note holders as classified within our Consolidated Statement of Operations. Interest and Other Income, Net We recorded interest and other income, net, of $134.6 million, $49.2 million and $23.2 million in 2006, 2005 and 2004, respectively. These amounts included the reclassification of net foreign exchange transaction gains or losses discussed above. The increases in 2006 and 2005 were primarily attributable to the higher average cash and investment balances over the prior years. Interest income in 2007 will depend principally upon prevailing interest rates and the level of our cash, cash equivalent and marketable securities balances. Interest Expense We incurred interest expense of $20.4 million in 2006, compared to $0.4 million in 2005 and $7.3 million in 2004. In April 2006, we issued $650.0 million principal amount of convertible senior notes due 2011 (2011 Notes) and $650.0 million principal amount of convertible senior notes due 2013 (2013 Notes) (collectively, the Notes) in a private placement pursuant to Rule 144A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended. The 2011 Notes and the 2013 Notes were issued at par and bear interest rates of 0.50% and 0.625%, respectively. Debt issuance costs of $23.8 million in connection with the issuance of the Notes were recorded in other noncurrent assets and are being amortized to interest expense on a straight-line basis over the contractual terms of the Notes. The increase in interest expense in 2006 over 2005 was primarily due to interest on our term loan which we entered into in December 2005 and the interest on our 2011 and 2013 Notes. The decrease in 2005 interest expense over 2004 was primarily attributable to the conversion of our $345.0 million 2% convertible senior notes into shares of our common stock in November 2004. We expect interest expense in 2007 to decrease as we continue to make payments towards our term loan. Minority Interest in Joint Venture The minority interest in joint venture on our Consolidated Financial Statements reflects BMS interest in the operating results of our joint venture with BMS in the United States. As the primary beneficiary of the joint venture as determined under Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) Interpretation No. 46, Consolidation of Variable Interest Entities , we consolidate the operations of the joint venture in our Consolidated Financial Statements. The operations of the joint venture commenced in 2005 with activities primarily focusing on the co-formulation of the once-daily single tablet regimen and achieving bioequivalence with the various co-formulations. We achieved bioequivalence on a formulation of the single tablet regimen at the end of 2005, and an NDA was filed in April 2006 for the single tablet regimen. In July 2006, we received approval from FDA for the single tablet regimen in the United States, which has been given the trade name Atripla. Provision for Income Taxes Our provision for income taxes was $551.8 million, $347.9 million and $207.1 million in 2006, 2005 and 2004, respectively. Included in our operating income in 2006 were pre-tax charges of $335.6 million and $2.06 billion for purchased IPR&D expenses associated with our Corus and Myogen acquisitions, respectively. The 2006 effective tax rate of (86.5)% differs from the U.S. federal statutory rate of 35% primarily due to our federal tax non-deductible purchased IPR&D expenses and state taxes, offset by tax credits and certain operating earnings from non-U.S. subsidiaries that are considered indefinitely invested outside the United States. The 2005 effective tax rate of 29.9% differs from the U.S. federal statutory rate of 35% due generally to state taxes offset by the recognition of previously unbenefitted net operating loss and tax credit carryforwards, certain operating earnings from non-U.S. subsidiaries that are considered indefinitely invested outside the United States, and the one-time benefit for qualifying dividends under the American Jobs Creation Act (AJCA). 55 Table of Contents On October 22, 2004, the AJCA was signed into law. The AJCA allows for a deduction of 85% of certain qualified foreign earnings that are repatriated, as defined in the AJCA. We elected to apply this provision to qualifying earnings that were repatriated in 2005. The earnings repatriation resulted in a one-time tax provision benefit of approximately $25.1 million which we recognized in 2005. The 2004 effective income tax rate of 31.5% differs from the U.S. federal statutory rate of 35% due generally to the recognition of previously unbenefitted net operating losses and tax credit carryforwards and certain earnings from operations in jurisdictions with lower tax rates than the United States and in jurisdictions for which no U.S. taxes have been provided because such earnings are planned to be reinvested indefinitely outside the United States, partially offset by state taxes. In June 2006, the FASB issued FASB Interpretation No. 48, Accounting for Uncertainty in Income Taxes (FIN 48), an interpretation of SFAS No. 109, Accounting for Income Taxes (SFAS 109). FIN 48 clarifies the accounting for uncertainty in income taxes recognized in an enterprise financial statements in accordance with SFAS 109 by prescribing a minimum recognition threshold and measurement attribute for the financial statement recognition and measurement of a tax position taken or expected to be taken in a tax return. FIN 48 also provides guidance on derecognition, classification, interest and penalties, accounting in interim periods, disclosure, and transition. FIN 48 is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2006. We have adopted FIN 48 as of January 1, 2007, as required. Our preliminary determination of the impact of adopting this standard is in the range of $10 million to $20 million, and the actual amount will be recorded as a charge to our accumulated deficit on our Consolidated Balance Sheet upon adoption of FIN 48. Liquidity and Capital Resources The following table summarizes our cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities, our working capital, and our cash flow activity as of the end of, and for each of, the last three years (in thousands): 2006 2005 2004 As of December 31: Cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities $ 1,389,566 $ 2,311,033 $ 1,250,624 Working capital 1,664,930 2,627,045 1,596,241 Year Ended December 31: Cash provided by (used in): Operating activities 1,218,059 705,642 507,964 Investing activities (1,739,334 ) (682,478 ) (487,414 ) Financing activities 649,261 441,896 78,659 Cash, Cash Equivalents and Marketable Securities Cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities totaled $1.39 billion at December 31, 2006, a decrease of 40% from December 31, 2005. The decrease of $921.5 million in 2006 was primarily due to: net cash paid of $2.74 billion for the acquisitions of Myogen, Raylo and Corus; and cash of $201.0 million paid toward the principal outstanding under our term loan. These decreases were partially offset by: net cash provided by operations of $1.22 billion in 2006; net proceeds of $587.6 million from the issuance of the Notes and related transactions in 2006; and proceeds from issuance of stock under employee stock plans of $167.9 million in 2006. 56 Table of Contents Cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities totaled $2.31 billion at December 31, 2005, an increase of 85% from December 31, 2004. The increase of $1.06 billion in 2005 was primarily due to: net cash provided by operations of $705.6 million in 2005; proceeds from our $300.0 million term loan entered into in 2005; and proceeds from issuance of stock under employee stock plans of $143.3 million in 2005. These increases were partially offset by capital expenditures of $46.9 million in 2005. Working Capital Working capital at December 31, 2006 was $1.66 billion compared to $2.63 billion at December 31, 2005. Significant factors that resulted in the decrease in 2006 working capital were: $1.37 billion decrease in cash, cash equivalents and short-term marketable securities, primarily due to our need to fund significant acquisition activities in 2006, as well as a decrease in our marketable securities portfolio and a decrease resulting from the classification of certain of our marketable securities to long-term securities; and $296.1 million increase in accounts payable primarily due to the launch of Atripla in July 2006 and the related purchases of Sustiva API from BMS at BMS approximate market value of Sustiva in order for the joint venture to build inventory levels to supply increasing Atripla demand. These working capital decreases were partially offset by: $347.2 million increase in inventories primarily due to the increase in Atripla inventory which included Sustiva API at BMS approximate market value of Sustiva; and $213.2 million increase in accounts receivable primarily due to increased sales in 2006 and the lower receivables collections in certain European countries where collections traditionally have been slower. Working capital at December 31, 2005 was $2.63 billion compared to $1.60 billion at December 31, 2004. Significant factors that resulted in an increase in 2005 working capital were: $1.06 billion increase in cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities; $80.9 million increase in inventories to meet growing demand in our HIV products and Hepsera as well as to meet our Gilead Access Program requirements; $44.5 million increase in prepaids and other current assets primarily related to the current portion of our prepaid royalties to Emory for emtricitabine; $31.8 million increase in deferred tax assets; and $24.9 million increase in accounts receivable primarily due to increased sales in 2005, partially offset by higher collection activity especially in certain European countries where collections traditionally have been slower. These increases were partially offset by: $87.0 million increase in income taxes payable primarily due to higher profitability, partially offset by tax benefits from employee stock plans; $60.0 million increase reflecting the current portion of the $300.0 million term loan that we entered into in December 2005; and $25.4 million increase in other accrued liabilities including increases in accruals related to Medicaid rebates, royalty expenses, sales and marketing expenses, partially offset by a decrease in the liability associated with the fair value of our forward currency contracts as the U.S. dollar strengthened against the Euro. 57 Table of Contents Cash Provided by Operating Activities Cash provided by operating activities of $1.22 billion in 2006 was comprised primarily of: $1.19 billion in net loss which was adjusted for non-cash items such as our $2.39 billion purchased IPR&D expense, stock-based compensation expense of $133.8 million and $127.6 million of tax benefits related to employee stock plans, partially offset by $95.3 million of excess tax benefits from stock option exercises; and $286.2 million of net cash outflow related to changes in operating assets and liabilities including: $358.2 million of increased inventories, partially offset by $264.0 million of increased accounts payable, both of which related primarily to increases in Atripla inventory as mentioned above; and $184.4 million of increased accounts receivable due to our product sales growth and lower receivables collections in certain European countries where collections have traditionally been slower. Cash provided by operating activities of $705.6 million in 2005 was comprised primarily of: $813.9 million of net income which was adjusted for non-cash items such as $168.5 million of tax benefits from employee stock plans; and $253.4 million of net cash outflow related to changes in operating assets and liabilities, which included $341.3 million of prepaid royalties that we made to Emory related to emtricitabine. Cash provided by operating activities of $508.0 million in 2004 was comprised primarily of: $449.4 million of net income which was adjusted for non-cash items such as $151.6 million of deferred income taxes primarily resulting from the utilization of net operating losses and tax credit carryforwards to offset taxable income. This was partially offset by $126.3 million of net cash outflow related to changes in operating assets and liabilities, which included $118.8 million increase in accounts receivable primarily resulting from our product sales growth. Cash Used in Investing Activities Cash used in investing activities in 2006 primarily related to purchases, sales and maturities of available-for-sale securities, our acquisitions of Myogen, Raylo and Corus, as well as capital expenditures. Cash used in investing activities in 2005 and 2004 primarily related to purchases, sales and maturities of available-for-sale securities. We used $1.74 billion of cash for investing activities during 2006, compared to $682.5 million during 2005 and $487.4 million in 2004. The increase in cash used in investing activities for 2006 was primarily the result of our acquisitions of Myogen, Raylo and Corus for a total of $2.74 billion. In 2006, net cash of $1.11 billion was provided from the sales, maturities and purchases of available-for-sale securities, compared to net cash used of $634.5 million during 2005 and $436.0 million in 2004. During 2006, we used net cash in investing activities including capital expenditures of $105.2 million and $8.7 million that we invested in non-marketable securities issued by certain of our strategic partners. Capital expenditures made in 2006, 2005 and 2004 related primarily to expanding certain aspects of our manufacturing capabilities, upgrading our facilities, as well as additional spending on computer and laboratory equipment to accommodate our continued growth. In 2006, capital expenditures also included the purchase of two buildings that we previously leased at our Foster City, California headquarters. 58 Table of Contents Cash Provided by Financing Activities In April 2006, we issued $650.0 million principal amount of convertible senior notes due 2011 and $650.0 million principal amount of convertible senior notes due 2013 (collectively, the Notes) in a private placement pursuant to Rule 144A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended. Part of the net proceeds from the Notes issuances of $1.28 billion, after deducting the initial purchasers discount and the estimated offering expenses, were used to repurchase $544.9 million of our common stock. Concurrent with the issuance of the Notes, we purchased convertible note hedges in private transactions at a cost of $379.1 million. We also sold warrants to acquire 16.9 million shares of our common stock in private transactions and received net proceeds of $235.5 million. Taken together, the convertible note hedges and warrants are intended to reduce the potential dilution upon future conversions of the Notes by effectively increasing the initial conversion price of the Notes. In total, these transactions generated net proceeds of $587.6 million for us. Cash provided by financing activities in 2006 was $649.3 million, primarily resulting from the $587.6 million of net proceeds generated from the issuance of our Notes and related transactions mentioned above. In addition, we received proceeds from employee stock option exercises of $167.9 million, as well as $95.3 million of excess tax benefits from stock option exercises. These cash inflows were partially offset by $201.0 million paid towards principal on our term loan during 2006. Cash provided by financing activities in 2005 primarily related to proceeds from our $300.0 million term loan and $143.3 million from stock option exercises and stock purchases made under our employee stock plans. Cash provided by financing activities in 2004 primarily related to the $78.8 million proceeds from stock option exercises and stock purchases under our employee stock purchase plan. Other Information As of December 31, 2006, we had an uncollateralized revolving credit facility of $401.0 million of which there were no outstanding amounts. The capacity of the revolving credit facility will continue to increase to a maximum of $500.0 million commensurate with the repayments of principal under our term loan. We believe that our existing capital resources, supplemented by cash generated from our operations, will be adequate to satisfy our capital needs for the foreseeable future. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including but not limited to the following: the commercial performance of our current and future products; the progress and scope of our R&D efforts, including preclinical studies and clinical trials; the cost, timing and outcome of regulatory reviews; the expansion of our sales and marketing capabilities; administrative expenses; the possibility of acquiring manufacturing capabilities or additional office facilities; the possibility of acquiring other companies or new products; the establishment of additional collaborative relationships with other companies; and defense costs associated with, settlements of and adverse results of litigation and government investigations. We may in the future require additional funding, which could be in the form of proceeds from equity or debt financings. If such funding is required, we cannot assure that it will be available to us on favorable terms, if at all. Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that are currently material or reasonably likely to be material to our financial position or results of operations. 59 Table of Contents Contractual Obligations Our contractual obligations consist of debt obligations, capital and operating leases, as well as purchase obligations primarily in the form of capital commitments, purchase obligations for active pharmaceutical ingredients and inventory-related items and clinical trials contracts. The following table summarizes our significant enforceable and legally binding obligations, future commitments and obligations related to all contracts that we are likely to continue regardless of the fact that they are cancelable as of December 31, 2006 (in thousands): Contractual Obligations Payments due by period Total Less than one year 1-3 years 3-5 years More than 5 years Convertible senior notes (1)(6) $ 1,300,000 $ $ $ 650,000 $ 650,000 Term loan (2)(6) 99,000 18,364 27,140 53,496 Capital lease obligations (6) 686 383 296 7 Operating lease obligations 96,814 20,683 31,817 18,836 25,478 Capital commitments (3) 38,562 37,358 1,204 Purchase obligations (4)(7) 620,425 248,366 166,359 95,106 110,594 Clinical trials (5) 116,477 58,981 45,841 11,655 Total $ 2,271,964 $ 384,135 $ 272,657 $ 829,100 $ 786,072 (1) At December 31, 2006, we had outstanding principal of $1.30 billion on the Notes that we issued in April 2006. (2) At December 31, 2006, we had outstanding principal of $99.0 million on the $300.0 million, five-year term loan that we entered into in December 2005. (3) At December 31, 2006, we had firm capital project commitments of approximately $38.6 million primarily relating to the expansion of certain aspects of our manufacturing capabilities and upgrading our facilities. (4) At December 31, 2006, we had firm commitments to purchase active pharmaceutical ingredients and inventory-related items. The amounts disclosed only represent minimum purchase requirements. Actual purchases are expected to significantly exceed these amounts. (5) At December 31, 2006, we had several clinical studies in various clinical trial phases. Our most significant clinical trial expenditures are to CROs. Although most of our contracts with CROs are cancelable, we generally have not cancelled such contracts. These amounts reflect commitments based on existing contracts and do not reflect any future modifications to existing contracts and anticipated or potential new contracts. (6) Excludes interest related payments on convertible senior notes, term loan and capital lease obligations. (7) In addition to the above, we have committed to make potential future milestone payments to third-parties as part of licensing and development programs. Payments under these agreements generally become due and payable only upon achievement of certain developmental, regulatory and/or commercial milestones. Because the achievement of these milestones is neither probable nor reasonably estimable, such contingencies have not been recorded on our consolidated balance sheet and have not been included in the table above. Recent Accounting Pronouncements In June 2006, the FASB issued FASB Interpretation No. 48, Accounting for Uncertainty in Income Taxes (FIN 48), an interpretation of SFAS No. 109, Accounting for Income Taxes (SFAS 109). FIN 48 clarifies the accounting for uncertainty in income taxes recognized in an enterprise financial statements in accordance with SFAS 109 by prescribing a minimum recognition threshold and measurement attribute for the financial statement recognition and measurement of a tax position taken or expected to be taken in a tax return. FIN 48 also provides guidance on derecognition, classification, interest and penalties, accounting in interim periods, disclosure, and transition. FIN 48 is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2006. We have adopted FIN 48 as of January 1, 2007, as required. Our preliminary determination of the impact of adopting this standard is in the range of $10 million to $20 million, and the actual amount will be recorded as a charge to our accumulated deficit on our Consolidated Balance Sheet upon adoption of FIN 48. 60 Table of Contents 
