CIK: 899051
Company Name: ALLSTATE CORP
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2007-02-22


Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Page Overview 32 2006 Highlights 32 Consolidated Net Income 33 Application of Critical Accounting Estimates 33 Property-Liability 2006 Highlights 44 Property-Liability Operations 45 Allstate Protection Segment 47 Discontinued Lines and Coverages Segment 65 Property-Liability Investment Results 66 Property-Liability Claims and Claims Expense Reserves 67 Allstate Financial 2006 Highlights 84 Allstate Financial Segment 86 Investments 99 Market Risk 112 Pension Plans 116 Capital Resources and Liquidity 118 Enterprise Risk Management 127 Regulation and Legal Proceedings 127 Pending Accounting Standards 127 31 OVERVIEW The following discussion highlights significant factors influencing the consolidated financial position and results of operations of The Allstate Corporation (referred to in this document as "we", "our", "us", the "Company" or "Allstate"). It should be read in conjunction with the 5-year summary of selected financial data, consolidated financial statements and related notes found under Part II, Item 6 and Item 8 contained herein. Further analysis of our insurance segments is provided in Property-Liability Operations (which includes the Allstate Protection and Discontinued Lines and Coverages segments) and in Allstate Financial Segment sections of Management's Discussion and Analysis ("MD&A"). The segments are consistent with the way in which we use financial information to evaluate business performance and to determine the allocation of resources. The most important factors we monitor to evaluate the financial condition and performance of our company include: For Allstate Protection: premium written, the number of policies in force ("PIF"), retention, price changes, claim frequency (rate of claim occurrence) and severity (average cost per claim), catastrophes, loss ratio, expenses, underwriting results and sales of all products and services; For Allstate Financial: premiums, deposits, gross margin including investment and benefit margins, amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs, expenses, operating income, invested assets, and profitably growing distribution partner relationships; For Investments: credit quality/experience, stability of long-term returns, cash flows and asset and liability duration; and For financial condition: our financial strength ratings, operating leverage, debt leverage, and return on equity. 2006 HIGHLIGHTS Net income increased to $4.99 billion in 2006 from $1.77 billion in 2005. Net income per diluted share increased to $7.84 in 2006 from $2.64 in 2005. Total revenues reached a record $35.80 billion, an increase of 1.2% compared to last year. Property-Liability premiums earned increased 1.2% to $27.37 billion. The combined ratio improved 18.8 points to 83.6 in 2006. Catastrophe losses in 2006 totaled $810 million, with an impact to the combined ratio of 3.0 points, compared to $5.67 billion in 2005, with a combined ratio impact of 21.0 points. Allstate Financial investments as of December 31, 2006 increased 1.0% over December 31, 2005. Allstate Financial net income increased 11.5% to $464 million in 2006 from $416 million in 2005. Stock repurchases totaled $1.75 billion for the year. Book value per share increased 12.4% to $34.84 as of December 31, 2006 from $31.01 as of December 31, 2005. Return on equity improved 15.4 points to 23.8%. 32 CONSOLIDATED NET INCOME For the years ended December 31, (in millions) 2006 2005 2004 Revenues Property-liability insurance premiums $ 27,369 $ 27,039 $ 25,989 Life and annuity premiums and contract charges 1,964 2,049 2,072 Net investment income 6,177 5,746 5,284 Realized capital gains and losses 286 549 591 Total revenues 35,796 35,383 33,936 Costs and expenses Property-liability insurance claims and claims expense (16,017 ) (21,175 ) (17,843 ) Life and annuity contract benefits (1,570 ) (1,615 ) (1,618 ) Interest credited to contractholder funds (2,609 ) (2,403 ) (2,001 ) Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs (4,757 ) (4,721 ) (4,465 ) Operating costs and expenses (3,033 ) (2,997 ) (3,040 ) Restructuring and related charges (182 ) (41 ) (51 ) Interest expense (357 ) (330 ) (308 ) Total costs and expenses (28,525 ) (33,282 ) (29,326 ) Loss on disposition of operations (93 ) (13 ) (24 ) Income tax expense (2,185 ) (323 ) (1,230 ) Income before cumulative effect of change in accounting principle, after-tax 4,993 1,765 3,356 Cumulative effect of change in accounting principle, after-tax (175 ) Net income $ 4,993 $ 1,765 $ 3,181 Property-Liability $ 4,614 $ 1,431 $ 3,045 Allstate Financial 464 416 246 Corporate and Other (85 ) (82 ) (110 ) Net income $ 4,993 $ 1,765 $ 3,181 APPLICATION OF CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES We have identified five accounting policies that require us to make estimates that are significant to the consolidated financial statements. It is reasonably likely that changes in these estimates could occur from period to period and result in a material impact on our consolidated financial statements. A brief summary of each of these critical accounting estimates follows. For a more detailed discussion of the effect of these estimates on our consolidated financial statements, and the judgments and assumptions related to these estimates, see the referenced sections of the MD&A. For a complete summary of our significant accounting policies see Note 2 of the consolidated financial statements. Investment Valuation The fair value of publicly traded fixed income and equity securities is based on independent market quotations, whereas the fair value of non-publicly traded securities is based on either widely accepted pricing valuation models, which use internally developed ratings and independent third party data as inputs, or independent third party pricing sources. Factors used in our internally 33 developed models, such as liquidity risk associated with privately-placed securities, are difficult to independently observe and quantify. Because of this, judgment is required in developing certain of these estimates and, as a result, the estimated fair value of non-publicly traded securities may differ from amounts that would be realized upon an immediate sale of the securities. For investments classified as available for sale, the difference between fair value and amortized cost for fixed income securities or cost for equity securities, net of deferred income taxes and certain other items (as disclosed in Note 5), is reported as a component of accumulated other comprehensive income on the Consolidated Statements of Financial Position and is not reflected in the operating results of any period until reclassified to net income upon the consummation of a transaction with an unrelated third party or when declines in fair values are deemed other-than-temporary. The assessment of other-than-temporary impairment of a security's fair value is performed on a portfolio review as well as a case-by-case basis considering a wide range of factors. For our portfolio review evaluations, we ascertain whether there are any approved programs involving the disposition of investments such as changes in duration, revision to strategic asset allocations and liquidity actions; and any dispositions anticipated by the portfolio managers. In these instances, we recognize impairment on securities being considered for these approved anticipated actions if the security is in an unrealized loss position. There are a number of assumptions and estimates inherent in evaluating impairments and determining if they are other-than-temporary, including 1) our ability and intent to hold the investment for a period of time sufficient to allow for an anticipated recovery in value; 2) the expected recoverability of principal and interest; 3) the duration and extent to which the fair value has been less than amortized cost for fixed income securities or cost for equity securities; 4) the financial condition, near-term and long-term prospects of the issuer, including relevant industry conditions and trends, and implications of rating agency actions and offering prices; and 5) the specific reasons that a security is in a significant unrealized loss position, including market conditions which could affect liquidity. Additionally, once assumptions and estimates are made, any number of changes in facts and circumstances could cause us to later determine that an impairment is other-than-temporary, including 1) general economic conditions that are worse than previously assumed or that have a greater adverse effect on a particular issuer than originally estimated; 2) changes in the facts and circumstances related to a particular issuer's ability to meet all of its contractual obligations; and 3) changes in facts and circumstances or new information obtained which causes a change in our ability or intent to hold a security to maturity or until it recovers in value. Changes in assumptions, facts and circumstances could result in additional charges to earnings in future periods to the extent that losses are realized. The charge to earnings, while potentially significant to net income, would not have a significant effect on shareholders' equity since the majority of our portfolio is carried at fair value and as a result, any related net unrealized loss would already be reflected as a component of accumulated other comprehensive income in shareholders' equity. For a more detailed discussion of the risks relating to changes in investment values and levels of investment impairment, and the potential causes of such changes, see Note 5 of the consolidated financial statements and the Investments, Market Risk, Enterprise Risk Management and Forward-looking Statements and Risk Factors sections of this document. Derivative Instrument Hedge Effectiveness We primarily use derivative financial instruments to reduce our exposure to market risk and in conjunction with asset/liability management, particularly in the Allstate Financial segment. The fair value of exchange traded derivative contracts is based on independent market quotations, whereas the fair value of non-exchange traded derivative contracts is based on either widely accepted pricing valuation models which use independent third party data as inputs or independent third party pricing sources. 34 When derivatives meet specific criteria, they may be designated as accounting hedges and accounted for as fair value, cash flow, foreign currency fair value, or foreign currency cash flow hedges. When designating a derivative as an accounting hedge, we formally document the hedging relationship, risk management objective and strategy. The documentation identifies the hedging instrument, the hedged item, the nature of the risk being hedged and the assumptions used to assess how effective the hedging instrument is in offsetting the exposure to changes in the hedged item's fair value attributable to the hedged risk. In the case of a cash flow hedge, this documentation includes the exposure to changes in the hedged transaction's variability in cash flows attributable to the hedged risk. We do not exclude any component of the change in fair value of the hedging instrument from the effectiveness assessment. At each reporting date, we confirm that the hedging instrument continues to be highly effective in offsetting the hedged risk. For further discussion of these policies and quantification of the impact of these estimates and assumptions, see Note 6 of the consolidated financial statements and the Investments, Market Risk, Enterprise Risk Management and Forward-looking Statements and Risk Factors sections of this document. Deferred Policy Acquisition Cost ("DAC") Amortization We incur significant costs in connection with acquiring business. In accordance with generally accepted accounting principles ("GAAP"), costs that vary with and are primarily related to acquiring business are deferred and recorded as an asset on the Consolidated Statements of Financial Position. DAC related to property-liability contracts is amortized to income as premiums are earned, typically over periods of six to twelve months. The amortization methodology for DAC for Allstate Financial policies and contracts includes significant assumptions and estimates. DAC related to traditional life insurance is amortized over the premium paying period of the related policies in proportion to the estimated revenues on such business. Significant assumptions relating to estimated premiums, investment income and realized capital gains and losses, as well as to all other aspects of DAC are determined based upon conditions as of the date of policy issuance and are generally not revised during the life of the policy. Any deviations from projected business in force resulting from actual policy terminations differing from expected levels and any estimated premium deficiencies change the rate of amortization in the period such events occur. Generally, the amortization periods for these contracts approximate the estimated lives of the policies. DAC related to interest-sensitive life, annuities and other investment contracts is amortized in proportion to the incidence of the total present value of gross profits which includes both actual historical gross profits ("AGP") and estimated future gross profits ("EGP") expected to be earned over the estimated lives of the contracts. Actual amortization periods range from 15-30 years; however, incorporating estimates of customer surrender rates, partial withdrawals and deaths generally results in the majority of the DAC being amortized over the surrender charge period. AGP and EGP consist of the following components: benefit margins primarily from mortality; investment margin including realized capital gains and losses; and contract administration, surrender and other contract charges, less maintenance expenses. We periodically review and make revisions to EGPs resulting in changes in the cumulative amounts expensed as a component of amortization of DAC in the period in which the revision is made. This is commonly known as "DAC unlocking". For quantification of the impact of these estimates and assumptions on Allstate Financial, see the Allstate Financial Segment and Forward-looking Statements and Risk Factors sections of this document and Note 2 and 10 of the consolidated financial statements. Reserve for Property-Liability Insurance Claims and Claims Expense Estimation Reserves are established to provide for the estimated costs of paying claims and claims expenses under insurance 35 policies we issued. Property-Liability underwriting results are significantly influenced by estimates of property-liability insurance claims and claims expense reserves. These reserves are an estimate of amounts necessary to settle all outstanding claims, including claims that have been incurred but not reported ("IBNR"), as of the financial statement date. Characteristics of Reserves Reserves are established independently of business segment management for each business segment and line of business based on estimates of the ultimate cost to settle claims, less losses that have been paid. The significant lines of business for Allstate Protection are Auto, Homeowners, and Other Lines. For Discontinued Lines and Coverages, they are Asbestos, Environmental, and Other Discontinued Lines. Allstate Protection's claims are typically reported promptly with relatively little reporting lag between the date of occurrence and the date of loss report. Auto and Homeowners liability losses generally take an average of about two years to settle, while Auto Physical Damage, Homeowners property and Other Personal Lines have an average settlement time of less than one year. Discontinued Lines and Coverages involve long-tail losses, such as those related to asbestos and environmental claims, which often involve substantial reporting lags and extended times to settle. Reserves are the difference between the estimated ultimate cost of losses incurred and the amount of paid losses as of the reporting date. Reserves are estimated for both reported and unreported claims, and include estimates of all expenses associated with processing and settling all incurred claims. We update our reserve estimates quarterly and as new information becomes available or as events unfold that may affect the resolution of unsettled claims. Changes in prior year reserve estimates (reserve reestimates), which may be material, are determined by comparing updated estimates of ultimate losses to prior estimates, and the differences are recorded as property-liability insurance claims and claims expenses in the Consolidated Statements of Operations in the period such changes are determined. Estimating the ultimate cost of claims and claims expenses is an inherently uncertain and complex process involving a high degree of judgment and is subject to evaluation of numerous variables. The Actuarial Methods used to Develop Reserve Estimates Reserves estimates are derived by using several different actuarial estimation methods that are variations on one primary actuarial technique. This actuarial technique is known as a "chain ladder" estimation process in which historical loss patterns are applied to actual paid losses and reported losses (paid losses plus individual case reserves established by claim adjusters) for an accident year or a report year to create an estimate of how losses are likely to develop over time. An accident year refers to classifying claims based on the year in which the claims occurred. A report year refers to classifying claims based on the year in which the claims are reported. Both classifications are used to prepare estimates of required reserves for payments to be made in the future. The key assumptions affecting our reserve estimates comprise data elements including claim counts, paid losses, case reserves, and development factors calculated with this data. In the chain ladder estimation technique, a ratio (development factor) is calculated which compares current period results to results in the prior period for each accident year. A three-year or two-year average development factor, based on historical results, is usually multiplied by the current period experience to estimate the development of losses of each accident year into the next time period. The development factors for the future time periods for each accident year are compounded over the remaining future periods to calculate an estimate of ultimate losses for each accident year. The implicit assumption of this technique is that an average of historical development factors is predictive of future loss development, as the significant size of our experience data base achieves a high degree of statistical credibility in actuarial projections of this type. The effects of inflation are implicitly considered in the reserving process, the implicit assumption being that a multi-year average development factor includes an adequate provision. Occasionally, unusual aberrations in loss patterns are caused by external and internal factors such as changes in claim reporting, settlement patterns, unusually large losses, process changes, 36 legal or regulatory changes, and other influences. In these instances, analyses of alternate development factor selections are performed to evaluate the effect of these factors, and actuarial judgment is applied to make appropriate development factor assumptions needed to develop a best estimate of ultimate losses. How Reserve Estimates are Established and Updated Reserve estimates are developed at a very detailed level, and the results of these numerous micro-level best estimates are aggregated to form a consolidated reserve estimate. For example, over one thousand actuarial estimates of the types described above are prepared each quarter to estimate losses for each line of insurance, major components of losses (such as coverages and perils), major states or groups of states and for reported losses and IBNR. The actuarial methods described above are used to analyze the settlement patterns of claims by determining the development factors for specific data elements that are necessary components of a reserve estimation process. Development factors are calculated quarterly for data elements such as, claim counts reported and settled, paid losses, and paid losses combined with case reserves. The calculation of development factors from changes in these data elements also impacts claim severity (average cost per claim) trends, which is a common industry reference used to explain changes in reserve estimates. The historical development patterns for these data elements are used as the assumptions to calculate reserve estimates. Often, several different estimates are prepared for each detailed component, incorporating alternative analyses of changing claim settlement patterns and other influences on losses, from which we select our best estimate for each component, occasionally incorporating additional analyses and actuarial judgment, as described above. These micro-level estimates are not based on a single set of assumptions. Actuarial judgments that may be applied to these components of certain micro-level estimates generally do not have a material impact on the consolidated level of reserves. Moreover, this detailed micro-level process does not permit or result in a compilation of a company-wide roll up to generate a range of needed loss reserves that would be meaningful. Based on our review of these estimates, our best estimate of required reserves for each state/line/coverage component is recorded for each accident year, and the required reserves for each component are summed to create the reserve balances carried on our Consolidated Statements of Financial Position. Reserves are reestimated quarterly, by combining historical results with current actual results to calculate new development factors. This process incorporates the historic and latest actual trends, and other underlying changes in the data elements used to calculate reserve estimates. New development factors are likely to differ from previous development factors used in prior reserve estimates because actual results (claims reported or settled, losses paid, or changes to case reserves) occur differently than the implied assumptions contained in the previous development factor calculations. If claims reported, paid losses, or case reserves changes are greater or lower than the levels estimated by previous development factors, reserve reestimates increase or decrease. When actual development of these data elements is different than the historical development pattern used in a prior period reserve estimate, a new reserve is determined. The difference between indicated reserves based on new reserve estimates and recorded reserves (the previous estimate) is the amount of reserve reestimate and an increase or decrease in property-liability insurance claims and claims expense will be recorded in the Consolidated Statements of Operations. Total Property-liability reserve reestimates, after-tax, as a percent of net income, from 2004, 2005 and 2006 were 4.7%, 17.2% and 12.6%, respectively. For Property-Liability, the 3-year average of reserve reestimate as a percentage of total reserves was 3.1% favorable reestimate, for Allstate Protection the 3-year average of reserve estimates was a favorable 5.7% and for Discontinued Lines and Coverages the 3-year average of reserve reestimates was an unfavorable 15.9%, each of these results being consistent within a reasonable actuarial tolerance for our respective businesses. Allstate Protection 37 reserve reestimates were primarily the result of claim severity development that was better than expected and late reported loss development that was better than expected due to lower frequency trends, and for Discontinued Lines and Coverages, reestimates were primarily a result of increased reported claim activity (claims frequency). A more detailed discussion of reserve reestimates is presented in the Property-Liability Claims and Claims Expense Reserves section of the MD&A. The following table shows claims and claims expense reserves by operating segment and line of business as of December 31: (in millions) 2006 2005 2004 Allstate Protection Auto $ 9,995 $ 10,460 $ 10,228 Homeowners 2,226 3,675 1,917 Other Lines 2,235 2,619 2,289 Total Allstate Protection $ 14,456 $ 16,754 $ 14,434 Discontinued Lines and Coverages Asbestos 1,375 1,373 1,464 Environmental 194 205 232 Other Discontinued Lines 585 599 631 Total Discontinued Lines and Coverages $ 2,154 $ 2,177 $ 2,327 Total Property-Liability $ 16,610 $ 18,931 $ 16,761 Allstate Protection Reserve Estimates Factors Affecting Reserve Estimates Reserve estimates are developed based on the processes and historical development trends as previously described. These estimates are considered in conjunction with known facts and interpretations of circumstances and factors including our experience with similar cases, actual claims paid, differing payment patterns and pending levels of unpaid claims, loss management programs, product mix and contractual terms, changes in law and regulation, judicial decisions, and economic conditions. When we experience changes of the type previously mentioned, we may need to apply actuarial judgment in the determination and selection of development factors considered more reflective of the new trends, such as combining shorter or longer periods of historical results with current actual results to produce development factors based on two-year, three-year, or longer development periods to reestimate our reserves. For example, if a legal change is expected to have a significant impact on the development of claim severity for a coverage which is part of a particular line of insurance in a specific state, actuarial judgment is applied to determine appropriate development factors that will most accurately reflect the expected impact in that specific estimate. Another example would be when a change in economic conditions is expected to affect the cost of repairs to damaged autos or property for a particular line, coverage, or state, actuarial judgment is applied to determine appropriate development factors to use in the reserve estimate that will most accurately reflect the expected impacts on severity development. As claims are reported, for certain liability claims of sufficient size and complexity, the field adjusting staff establishes case reserve estimates of ultimate cost, based on their assessment of facts and circumstances related to each individual claim. For other claims which occur in large volumes and settle in a relatively short time frame, it is not practical or efficient to set case reserves for each claim, and a statistical case reserve is set for these claims based on estimating techniques previously described. In the normal course of business, we may also supplement our claims processes by utilizing third party 38 adjusters, appraisers, engineers, inspectors, other professionals and information sources to assess and settle catastrophe and non-catastrophe related claims. Historically, the case reserves set by the field adjusting staff have not proven to be an entirely accurate estimate of the ultimate cost of claims. To provide for this, a development reserve is estimated using previously described processes, and allocated to pending claims as a supplement to case reserves. Typically, the case and supplemental development reserves comprise about 90% of total reserves. Another major component of reserves is IBNR. Typically, IBNR comprises about 10% of total reserves. Generally, the initial reserves for a new accident year are established based on severity assumptions for different business segments, lines, and coverages based on historical relationships to relevant inflation indicators, and reserves for prior accident years are statistically determined using processes previously described. Changes in auto current year claim severity are generally influenced by inflation in the medical and auto repair sectors of the economy. We mitigate these effects through various loss management programs. Injury claims are affected largely by medical cost inflation while physical damage claims are affected largely by auto repair cost inflation and used car prices. For auto physical damage coverages, we monitor our rate of increase in average cost per claim against a weighted average of the Maintenance and Repair price index and the Parts & Equipment price index. We believe our claim settlement initiatives, such as improvements to the claim review and settlement process, the use of special investigative units to detect fraud and handle suspect claims, litigation management and defense strategies, as well as various other loss management initiatives underway, contribute to the mitigation of injury and physical damage severity trends. Changes in homeowners current year claim severity are generally influenced by inflation in the cost of building materials, the cost of construction and property repair services, the cost of replacing home furnishings and other contents, the types of claims that qualify for coverage, deductibles and other economic and environmental factors. We employ various loss management programs to mitigate the effect of these factors. As loss experience for the current year develops for each type of loss, it is monitored relative to initial assumptions until it is judged to have sufficient statistical credibility. From that point in time and forward, reserves are re-estimated using statistical actuarial processes to reflect the impact actual loss trends have on development factors incorporated into the actuarial estimation processes. Statistical credibility is usually achieved by the end of the first calendar year, however, when trends for the current accident year exceed initial assumptions sooner, they are usually given credibility, and reserves are increased accordingly. The very detailed processes for developing reserve estimates and the lack of a need and existence of a common set of assumptions or development factors, limits aggregate reserve level testing for variability of data elements. However, by applying standard actuarial methods to consolidated historic accident year loss data for major loss types, comprising auto injury losses, auto physical damage losses and homeowner losses, we develop variability analyses consistent with the way we develop reserves by measuring the potential variability of development factors, as described in the section titled, "Potential Reserve Estimate Variability" below. Causes of Reserve Estimate Uncertainty Since reserves are estimates of the unpaid portions of claims and claims expenses that have occurred, including IBNR losses, the establishment of appropriate reserves, including reserves for catastrophes, requires regular reevaluation and refinement of estimates to determine our ultimate loss estimate. 39 At each reporting date, the highest degree of uncertainty in estimates of losses arises from claims remaining to be settled for the current accident year and the most recent preceding accident year. The greatest degree of uncertainty exists in the current accident year because the current accident year contains the greatest proportion of losses that have not been reported or settled but must be estimated as of the current reporting date. Most of these losses relate to damaged property such as automobiles and homes, and to medical care for injuries from accidents. During the first year after the end of an accident year, a large portion of the total losses for that accident year are settled. When accident year losses paid through the end of the first year following the accident year are incorporated into updated actuarial estimates, the trends inherent in the settlement of claims emerge more clearly. Consequently, this is the point in time at which we tend to make our largest reestimates of losses for an accident year. After the second year, the losses that we pay for an accident year typically relate to claims that are more difficult to settle, such as those involving serious injuries or litigation. Private passenger auto insurance provides a good illustration of the uncertainty of future loss estimates: our typical annual percentage payout of reserves for an accident year is approximately 45% in the first year after the end of the accident year, 20% in the second year, 15% in the third year, 10% in the fourth year, and the remaining 10% thereafter. Reserves for Catastrophe Losses Property-Liability claims and claims expense reserves also include reserves for catastrophe losses. Catastrophe losses are an inherent risk of the property-liability insurance industry that have contributed, and will continue to contribute, to potentially material year-to-year fluctuations in our results of operations and financial position. We define a "catastrophe" as an event that produces pretax losses before reinsurance in excess of $1 million and involves multiple first party policyholders, or an event that produces a number of claims in excess of a preset, per-event threshold of average claims in a specific area, occurring within a certain amount of time following the event. Catastrophes are caused by various natural events including earthquakes, volcanoes, wildfires, tornadoes, hailstorms, hurricanes, tropical storms, high winds and winter storms. We are also exposed to man-made catastrophic events, such as certain acts of terrorism or industrial accidents. The nature and level of catastrophes in any period cannot be predicted. The estimation of claims and claims expense reserves for catastrophes also comprises estimates of losses from reported claims and IBNR, primarily for damage to property. In general, our estimates for catastrophe reserves are based on claim adjuster inspections and the application of historical loss development factors as described previously. However, depending on the nature of the catastrophe, as noted above, the estimation process can be further complicated. For example, for hurricanes, complications could include the inability of insureds to be able to promptly report losses, limitations placed on claims adjusting staff affecting their ability to inspect losses, determining whether losses are covered by our homeowners policy (generally for damage caused by wind or wind driven rain), or specifically excluded coverage caused by flood, estimating additional living expenses, and assessing the impact of demand surge, exposure to mold damage, and the effects of numerous other considerations, including the timing of a catastrophe in relation to other events, such as at or near the end of a financial reporting period, which can affect the availability of information needed to estimate reserves for that reporting period. In these situations, we may need to adapt our practices to accommodate these circumstances in order to determine a best estimate of our loss from a catastrophe. As an example, to complete an estimate for certain areas affected by Hurricane Katrina and not yet inspected by our claims adjusting staff, or where we believed our historical loss development factors were not predictive, we relied on analysis of actual claim notices received compared to total policies in force, as well as visual, governmental and third party information, including aerial photos, area observations, and data on wind speed and flood depth to the extent available. 40 Potential Reserve Estimate Variability The aggregation of numerous micro-level estimates for each business segment, line of insurance, major components of losses (such as coverages and perils), and major states or groups of states for reported losses and IBNR forms the reserve liability recorded in the Consolidated Statements of Financial Position. Because of this detailed approach to developing our reserve estimates, there is not a single set of assumptions that determine our reserve estimates at the consolidated level. Moreover, management does not compile a range of reserve estimates, because management does not believe the processes that we follow will produce a statistically credible or reliable actuarial reserve range that would be meaningful. Reserve estimates, by their very nature, are very complex to determine and subject to significant judgment, and do not represent an exact determination for each outstanding claim. Accordingly, as actual claims, and/or paid losses, and/or case reserve results emerge, our estimate of the ultimate cost to settle will be different than previously estimated. To develop a statistical indication of potential reserve variability within reasonably likely possible outcomes, an actuarial (stochastic modeling) technique is applied to the countrywide consolidated data elements for paid losses and paid losses combined with case reserves separately for injury losses, auto physical damage losses, and homeowners losses excluding catastrophe losses. Based on the combined historical variability of the development factors calculated for these data elements an estimate of the standard error or standard deviation around these reserve estimates is calculated within each accident year for the last eleven years for each type of loss. The variability of these reserve estimates within one standard deviation of the mean (a measure of frequency of dispersion often viewed to be an acceptable level of accuracy) is believed by management to represent a reasonable and statistically probable measure of potential variability. Based on our products and coverages, historical experience, the statistical credibility of our extensive data, and stochastic modeling of actuarial chain ladder methodologies used to develop reserve estimates, we estimate that the potential variability of our Allstate Protection reserves, after-tax, within a reasonable probability of other possible outcomes, may be approximately plus or minus 4%, or plus or minus $400 million in net income. A lower level of variability exists for auto injury losses, which comprise approximately 70% of reserves, due to their relatively stable development patterns over a longer duration of time required to settle claims. Other types of losses, such as auto physical damage, homeowners losses and other losses, which comprise about 30% of reserves, tend to have greater variability, but are settled in a much shorter period of time. Although this evaluation reflects most reasonably likely outcomes, it is possible the final outcome may fall below or above these amounts. Historical variability of reserve estimates is reported in the Property-Liability Claims and Claims Expense Reserves section of the MD&A. Adequacy of Reserve Estimates We believe our net claims and claims expense reserves are appropriately established based on available methodology, facts, technology, laws and regulations. We calculate and record a single best reserve estimate, in conformance with generally accepted actuarial standards, for each line of insurance, its components (coverages and perils), and state, for reported losses and for IBNR losses and as a result we believe that no other estimate is better than our recorded amount. Due to the uncertainties involved, the ultimate cost of losses may vary materially from recorded amounts, which are based on our best estimates. Discontinued Lines and Coverages Reserve Estimates Characteristics of Discontinued Lines Exposure We continue to receive asbestos and environmental claims. Asbestos claims relate primarily to bodily injuries asserted by people who were exposed to asbestos or products containing asbestos. Environmental claims relate primarily to pollution and related clean-up costs. 41 Our exposure to asbestos, environmental and other discontinued lines claims arises principally from assumed reinsurance coverage written during the 1960s through the mid-1980s, including reinsurance on primary insurance written on large United States companies, and from direct excess insurance written from 1972 through 1985, including substantial excess general liability coverages on Fortune 500 companies. Additional exposure stems from direct primary commercial insurance written during the 1960s through the mid-1980s. Other discontinued lines exposures primarily relate to general liability and product liability mass tort claims, such as those for medical devices and other products. In 1986, the general liability policy form used by us and others in the property-liability industry was amended to introduce an "absolute pollution exclusion," which excluded coverage for environmental damage claims, and to add an asbestos exclusion. Most general liability policies issued prior to 1987 contain annual aggregate limits for product liability coverage. General liability policies issued in 1987 and thereafter contain annual aggregate limits for product liability coverage and annual aggregate limits for all coverages. Our experience to date is that these policy form changes have limited the extent of our exposure to environmental and asbestos claim risks. Our exposure to liability for asbestos, environmental, and other discontinued lines losses manifests differently depending on whether it arises from assumed reinsurance coverage, direct excess insurance, or direct primary commercial insurance. The direct insurance coverage we provided that covered asbestos, environmental and other discontinued lines was substantially "excess" in nature. Direct excess insurance and reinsurance involve coverage written by us for specific layers of protection above retentions and other insurance plans. The nature of excess coverage and reinsurance provided to other insurers limits our exposure to loss to specific layers of protection in excess of policyholder retention on primary insurance plans. Our exposure is further limited by the significant reinsurance that we had purchased on our direct excess business. Our assumed reinsurance business involved writing generally small participations in other insurers' reinsurance programs. The reinsured losses in which we participate may be a proportion of all eligible losses or eligible losses in excess of defined retentions. The majority of our assumed reinsurance exposure, approximately 85%, is for excess of loss coverage, while the remaining 15% is for pro-rata coverage. Our direct primary commercial insurance business did not include coverage to large asbestos manufacturers. This business comprises a cross section of policyholders engaged in many diverse business sectors located throughout the country. How Reserve Estimates are Established and Updated We conduct an annual review in the third quarter of each year to evaluate and establish asbestos, environmental and other discontinued lines reserves. Reserves are recorded in the reporting period in which they are determined. Using established industry and actuarial best practices and assuming no change in the regulatory or economic environment, this detailed and comprehensive "ground up" methodology determines asbestos reserves based on assessments of the characteristics of exposure (e.g. claim activity, potential liability, jurisdiction, products versus non-products exposure) presented by individual policyholders, and determines environmental reserves based on assessments of the characteristics of exposure (e.g. environmental damages, respective shares of liability of potentially responsible parties, appropriateness and cost of remediation) to pollution and related clean-up costs. The number and cost of these claims is affected by intense advertising by trial lawyers seeking asbestos plaintiffs, and entities with asbestos exposure seeking bankruptcy protection as a result of asbestos liabilities, initially causing a delay in the reporting of claims, often followed by an acceleration and an increase in claims and claims expenses as settlements occur. 42 After evaluating our insureds' probable liabilities for asbestos and/or environmental claims, we evaluate our insureds' coverage programs for such claims. We consider our insureds' total available insurance coverage, including the coverage we issued. We also consider relevant judicial interpretations of policy language and applicable coverage defenses or determinations, if any. Evaluation of both the insureds' estimated liabilities and our exposure to the insureds depends heavily on an analysis of the relevant legal issues and litigation environment. This analysis is conducted by our specialized claims adjusting staff and legal counsel. Based on these evaluations, case reserves are established by claims adjusting staff and actuarial analysis is employed to develop an IBNR reserve, which includes estimated potential reserve development and claims that have occurred but have not been reported. As of December 31, 2006, IBNR was 66.5% of combined asbestos and environmental reserves. For both asbestos and environmental reserves, we also evaluate our historical direct net loss and expense paid and incurred experience to assess any emerging trends, fluctuations or characteristics suggested by the aggregate paid and incurred activity. Other Discontinued Lines and Coverages Reserves for Other Discontinued Lines provide for remaining loss and loss expense liabilities related to business no longer written by us, other than asbestos and environmental, and are presented in the following table. (in millions) 2006 2005 2004 Other mass torts $ 185 $ 203 $ 205 Workers' compensation 140 151 152 Commercial and other 260 245 274 Other discontinued lines $ 585 $ 599 $ 631 Other mass torts describes direct excess and reinsurance general liability coverage provided for cumulative injury losses other than asbestos and environmental. Workers' compensation and commercial and other include run-off from discontinued direct primary, direct excess and reinsurance commercial insurance operations of various coverage exposures other than asbestos and environmental. Reserves are based on considerations similar to those previously described, as they relate to the characteristics of specific individual coverage exposures. Potential Reserve Estimate Variability Establishing Discontinued Lines and Coverages net loss reserves for asbestos, environmental and other discontinued lines claims is subject to uncertainties that are much greater than those presented by other types of claims. Among the complications are lack of historical data, long reporting delays, uncertainty as to the number and identity of insureds with potential exposure and unresolved legal issues regarding policy coverage; unresolved legal issues regarding the determination, availability and timing of exhaustion of policy limits; plaintiffs' evolving and expanding theories of liability, availability and collectibility of recoveries from reinsurance; retrospectively determined premiums and other contractual agreements; estimates of the extent and timing of any contractual liability; the impact of bankruptcy protection sought by various asbestos producers and other asbestos defendants; and other uncertainties. There are also complex legal issues concerning the interpretation of various insurance policy provisions and whether those losses are covered, or were ever intended to be covered, and could be recoverable through retrospectively determined premium, reinsurance or other contractual agreements. Courts have reached different and sometimes inconsistent conclusions as to when losses are deemed to have occurred and which policies provide coverage; what types of losses are covered; whether there is an insurer obligation to defend; how policy limits are determined; how policy exclusions and conditions are applied and interpreted; and whether clean-up costs represent insured 43 property damage. Our reserves for asbestos and environmental exposures could be affected by tort reform, class action litigation, and other potential legislation and judicial decisions. Environmental exposures could also be affected by a change in the existing federal Superfund law and similar state statutes. There can be no assurance that any reform legislation will be enacted or that any such legislation will provide for a fair, effective and cost-efficient system for settlement of asbestos or environmental claims. We believe these issues are not likely to be resolved in the near future, and the ultimate costs may vary materially from the amounts currently recorded resulting in material changes in loss reserves. Historical variability of reserve estimates is demonstrated in the Property-Liability Claims and Claims Expense Reserves section of the MD&A. Adequacy of Reserve Estimates Management believes its net loss reserves for environmental, asbestos and other discontinued lines exposures are appropriately established based on available facts, technology, laws, regulations, and assessments of other pertinent factors and characteristics of exposure (e.g. claim activity, potential liability, jurisdiction, products versus non-products exposure) presented by individual policyholders, assuming no change in the legal, legislative or economic environment. Due to the uncertainties and factors described above, management believes it is not practicable to develop a meaningful range for any such additional net loss reserves that may be required. Further Discussion of Reserve Estimates For further discussion of these estimates and quantification of the impact of reserve estimates, reserve reestimates and assumptions, see Notes 7 and 13 to the consolidated financial statements and the Catastrophe Losses, Property-Liability Claims and Claims Expense Reserves and Forward-looking Statements and Risk Factors sections of this document. Reserve for Life-Contingent Contract Benefits Estimation Long-term actuarial assumptions of future investment yields, mortality, morbidity, policy terminations and expenses are used when establishing the reserve for life-contingent contract benefits. These assumptions, which for life contingent annuities and traditional life insurance are applied using the net level premium method, include provisions for adverse deviation and generally vary by such characteristics as type of annuity benefit or coverage, year of issue and policy duration. Future investment yield assumptions are determined at the time the policy is issued based upon prevailing investment yields as well as estimated reinvestment yields. Mortality, morbidity and policy termination assumptions are based on our experience and industry experience prevailing at the time the policies are issued. Expense assumptions include the estimated effects of inflation and expenses to be incurred beyond the premium-paying period. For further discussion of these policies, see Note 8 of the consolidated financial statements and the Forward-looking Statements and Risk Factors section of this document. PROPERTY-LIABILITY 2006 HIGHLIGHTS Premiums written, an operating measure that is defined and reconciled to premiums earned on page 49, increased 0.5% to $27.53 billion in 2006 over 2005. Allstate brand standard auto premiums written increased 3.5% in 2006 over 2005. Allstate brand homeowners premiums written decreased 1.9% in 2006 from 2005. The impact of the cost of the catastrophe reinsurance program on premiums written totaled $607 million in 2006 compared to $196 million in 2005. Excluding this cost, premiums written grew 2.0% in 2006 over 2005. Allstate brand standard auto new issued applications increased 2.9% in 2006 over 2005. Allstate brand homeowners new issued applications decreased 16.5% in 2006 from 2005. 44 PIF as of December 31, 2006 when compared to December 31, 2005 for Allstate brand standard auto and homeowners increased 2.7% and 0.1%, respectively. The Allstate brand standard auto renewal ratio was 90.0 in 2006 compared to 90.5 in 2005. The Allstate brand homeowners renewal ratio was 87.3 in 2006 compared to 88.2 in 2005. Claim frequencies, excluding catastrophes, in the auto and homeowners insurance lines continued to decline, while current year claim severity was higher, when compared to 2005. Underwriting income for Property-Liability was $4.50 billion in 2006 compared to an underwriting loss of $636 million in 2005. The combined ratio was 83.6 in 2006 compared to 102.4 in 2005. Underwriting income (loss), a measure that is not based on GAAP, is defined below. Catastrophe losses in 2006 totaled $810 million compared to $5.67 billion in 2005. The effect of catastrophe losses on the combined ratio was 3.0 and 21.0 points in 2006 and 2005, respectively. Prior year favorable net reserve reestimates in 2006 totaled $971 million compared to $468 million in 2005, including reserve reestimates of catastrophe losses of $223 million favorable in 2006 and $94 million unfavorable in 2005. PROPERTY-LIABILITY OPERATIONS Overview Our Property-Liability operations consist of two business segments: Allstate Protection and Discontinued Lines and Coverages. Allstate Protection is structured around two brands, the Allstate brand and Encompass brand. Allstate Protection is principally engaged in the sale of personal property and casualty insurance, primarily private passenger auto and homeowners insurance, to individuals in the United States and Canada. Discontinued Lines and Coverages includes results from insurance coverage that we no longer write and results for certain commercial and other businesses in run-off. These segments are consistent with the groupings of financial information that management uses to evaluate performance and to determine the allocation of resources. Underwriting income (loss), is not a GAAP measure and is reconciled to net income on page 47. It is calculated as premiums earned, less claims and claims expense ("losses"), amortization of DAC, operating costs and expenses and restructuring and related charges, as determined using GAAP. We use this measure in our evaluation of results of operations to analyze the profitability of the Property-Liability insurance operations separately from investment results. It is also an integral component of incentive compensation. It is useful for investors to evaluate the components of income separately and in the aggregate when reviewing performance. Underwriting income (loss) should not be considered as a substitute for net income and does not reflect the overall profitability of the business. Net income is the GAAP measure most directly comparable to underwriting income (loss). The table below includes GAAP operating ratios we use to measure our profitability. We believe that they enhance an investor's understanding of our profitability. They are calculated as follows: Claims and claims expense ("loss") ratio the ratio of claims and claims expense to premiums earned. Loss ratios include the impact of catastrophe losses. Expense ratio the ratio of amortization of DAC, operating costs and expenses and restructuring and related charges to premiums earned. Combined ratio the ratio of claims and claims expense, amortization of DAC, operating costs and expenses and restructuring and related charges to premiums earned. The combined ratio is the 45 sum of the loss ratio and the expense ratio. The difference between 100% and the combined ratio represents underwriting income (loss) as a percentage of premiums earned. We have also calculated the following impacts of specific items on the GAAP operating ratios because of the volatility of these items between fiscal periods. Effect of catastrophe losses on combined ratio the percentage of catastrophe losses included in claims and claims expenses to premiums earned. This ratio includes prior year reserve reestimates. Effect of pretax reserve reestimates on combined ratio the percentage of pretax reserve reestimates included in claims and claims expense to premiums earned. This ratio includes prior year reserve reestimates including catastrophe losses. Effect of restructuring and related charges on combined ratio the percentage of restructuring and related charges to premiums earned. Effect of Discontinued Lines and Coverages on combined ratio the ratio of claims and claims expense and other costs and expenses in the Discontinued Lines and Coverages segment to Property-Liability premiums earned. The sum of the effect of Discontinued Lines and Coverages on the combined ratio and the Allstate Protection combined ratio is equal to the Property-Liability combined ratio. 46 Summarized financial data, a reconciliation of underwriting income (loss) to net income and GAAP operating ratios for our Property-Liability operations for the years ended December 31, are presented in the following table. (in millions, except ratios) 2006 2005 2004 Premiums written $ 27,526 $ 27,391 $ 26,531 Revenues Premiums earned $ 27,369 $ 27,039 $ 25,989 Net investment income 1,854 1,791 1,773 Realized capital gains and losses 348 516 592 Total revenues 29,571 29,346 28,354 Costs and expenses Claims and claims expense (16,017 ) (21,175 ) (17,843 ) Amortization of DAC (4,131 ) (4,092 ) (3,874 ) Operating costs and expenses (2,567 ) (2,369 ) (2,396 ) Restructuring and related charges (157 ) (39 ) (46 ) Total costs and expenses (22,872 ) (27,675 ) (24,159 ) Loss on disposition of operations (1 ) Income tax expense (2,084 ) (240 ) (1,150 ) Net income $ 4,614 $ 1,431 $ 3,045 Underwriting income (loss) 4,497 $ (636 ) $ 1,830 Net investment income 1,854 1,791 1,773 Income tax expense on operations (1,963 ) (63 ) (955 ) Realized capital gains and losses, after-tax 227 339 397 Loss on disposition of operations, after-tax (1 ) Net income $ 4,614 $ 1,431 $ 3,045 Catastrophe losses $ 810 $ 5,674 $ 2,468 GAAP operating ratios Claims and claims expense ratio 58.5 78.3 68.7 Expense ratio 25.1 24.1 24.3 Combined ratio 83.6 102.4 93.0 Effect of catastrophe losses on combined ratio 3.0 21.0 9.5 Effect of pretax reserve reestimates on combined ratio (3.5 ) (1.7 ) (0.9 ) Effect of restructuring and related charges on combined ratio 0.6 0.1 0.2 Effect of Discontinued Lines and Coverages on combined ratio 0.5 0.7 2.5 ALLSTATE PROTECTION SEGMENT Overview and Strategy The Allstate Protection segment sells primarily private passenger auto and homeowner insurance to individuals through Allstate Exclusive Agencies, Customer Information Centers and over the Internet under the Allstate brand and through independent agencies under the Encompass and Deerbrook brands. The Encompass brand includes standard auto and homeowners products while the Deerbrook brand is used for non-standard auto products. 47 The key elements of the Allstate Protection strategy are: Investing in marketing and brand awareness Improving the customer experience Expanding distribution Utilizing sophisticated pricing and underwriting discipline Developing innovative and differentiated products Leveraging claims capabilities We are seeking, through the utilization of our distribution channels, our sophisticated risk segmentation process ("Tiered Pricing") and consumer marketing, to attract and retain high lifetime value customers who will potentially provide favorable prospects for profitability over the course of their relationship with us. We maintain a broad marketing approach throughout the U.S. We have aligned agency and management compensation and the overall strategies of the Allstate brand to best serve our customers by basing certain incentives on Allstate brand profitability, unit growth, retention, and sales of financial products. We differentiate the Allstate brand from competitors by offering a choice of products, including our innovative Allstate Your Choice Auto ("YCA") with options such as safe driving deductibles and a safe driving bonus, Allstate Your Choice Homeowners ("YCH") with options such as claims free bonus and personalized coverage and Allstate Blue SM our new non-standard auto product with features such as loyalty bonuses and roadside assistance, as well as other discount options available depending on a consumer's needs. Tiered Pricing and underwriting are designed to enhance both our competitive position and profit potential, and produce a broader range of premiums that is more refined than the range generated by the standard/non-standard model. Tiered Pricing includes our Strategic Risk Management program, which uses a number of risk evaluation factors including, to the extent legally permissible, insurance scoring based on information that is obtained from credit reports. We continue to expand the number of tiers with successive rating program releases. Substantially all of new and approximately 86% of renewal business written for Allstate brand auto uses Tiered Pricing. For Allstate brand homeowners, approximately 87% of new and 53% of renewal business written uses Tiered Pricing. For Allstate brand auto and homeowners business written under Tiered Pricing, our results indicate a shift toward more customers who we consider high lifetime value that generally are retained longer and have more favorable loss results. As we continue to use Tiered Pricing, there is a diminishing capacity to draw meaningful comparisons to historical presentations, including the distinctions between standard and non-standard which have become less relevant in certain states. Generally, standard auto customers are expected to have lower risks of loss than non-standard auto customers. We are pursuing improvements in the overall customer experience through actions targeted to increase customer satisfaction and retention. These programs are designed around establishing customer service expectations and customer relationship building. Our claims strategy focuses on delivering fast, fair and consistent claim service while achieving loss cost management and customer satisfaction. We continue to enhance technology to integrate our distribution channels, improve customer service, facilitate the introduction of new products and services and reduce infrastructure costs related to supporting agencies and handling claims. These actions and others are designed to optimize the 48 effectiveness of our distribution and service channels by increasing the productivity of the Allstate brand's exclusive agencies and our direct channels: the Internet and call centers. Our strategy for the Encompass brand includes enhancing pricing and product sophistication through our Tiered Pricing approach Encompass Edge , increasing distribution effectiveness and improving agency technology interfaces to support profitable growth. We are positioning the brand to expand product breadth and improve agency penetration by leveraging technology and service capabilities We continue to pursue our strategy to manage our property catastrophe exposure to provide our shareholders an acceptable return on the risks assumed in our property business and to reduce the variability of our earnings, while providing protection to our customers. Although in many areas of the country we are currently achieving returns within acceptable risk tolerances, we continue to seek solutions to improve returns in areas that have known exposure to hurricanes, earthquakes, fires following earthquakes and other catastrophes. Management's measurements for our property business include exposure limits based on hurricane and earthquake losses which have a one percent probability of occurring on an annual aggregate countrywide basis. We are working for changes in the regulatory environment, including fewer restrictions on underwriting, recognizing the need for and improving appropriate risk based pricing and promoting the creation of government sponsored, privately funded solutions. Our property business includes personal homeowners, commercial property and other property lines. While the actions that we take will be primarily focused on reducing the catastrophe exposure in our property business, we also consider their impact on our ability to market our auto lines. Pricing of property products is typically intended to establish returns that we deem acceptable over a long-term period. Losses, including losses from catastrophic events and weather-related losses (such as wind, hail, lightning and freeze losses not meeting our criteria to be declared a catastrophe) are accrued on an occurrence basis within the policy period. Therefore, in any reporting period, loss experience from catastrophic events and weather-related losses may contribute to negative or positive underwriting performance relative to the expectations we incorporated into the products' pricing. Accordingly, property products are more capital intensive than other personal lines products. Premiums written , an operating measure, is the amount of premiums charged for policies issued during a fiscal period. Premiums earned is a GAAP measure. Premiums are considered earned and are included in the financial results on a pro-rata basis over the policy period. The portion of premiums written applicable to the unexpired terms of the policies is recorded as unearned premiums on our Consolidated Statements of Financial Position. Since the Allstate brand policy periods are typically 6 months for auto and 12 months for homeowners, Encompass auto and homeowners policy periods are typically 12 months and Deerbrook auto policy periods are typically 6 months, rate changes will generally be recognized in premiums earned over a period of 6 to 24 months. During this period, premiums written at a higher rate will cause an increase in the balance of unearned premiums on our Consolidated Statements of Financial Position. 49 The following table shows the unearned premium balance at December 31 and the timeframe in which we expect to recognize these premiums as earned. % earned after (in millions) 2006 2005 90 days 180 days 270 days 360 days Allstate brand: Standard auto $ 3,971 $ 3,851 74.3 % 98.7 % 99.7 % 100.0 % Non-standard auto 349 401 71.5 % 96.7 % 99.3 % 100.0 % Auto 4,320 4,252 74.0 % 98.6 % 99.7 % 100.0 % Homeowners 3,332 3,252 43.6 % 75.8 % 94.3 % 100.0 % Other personal lines (1) 1,441 1,302 40.1 % 69.4 % 86.7 % 93.0 % Total Allstate brand 9,093 8,806 57.5 % 85.6 % 95.7 % 98.9 % Encompass brand: Standard auto 573 594 44.3 % 76.1 % 94.4 % 100.0 % Non-standard auto (Deerbrook) 23 28 75.2 % 100.0 % 100.0 % 100.0 % Auto 596 622 45.5 % 77.0 % 94.6 % 100.0 % Homeowners 316 317 44.2 % 76.2 % 94.5 % 100.0 % Other personal lines 73 84 44.3 % 76.2 % 94.4 % 100.0 % Total Encompass brand 985 1,023 45.0 % 76.7 % 94.5 % 100.0 % Total Allstate Protection unearned premiums $ 10,078 $ 9,829 56.3 % 84.7 % 95.5 % 99.0 % (1) December 31, 2006 includes $201 million of unearned premiums related to the loan protection business previously managed by Allstate Financial. Policies have terms of up to 7 years. A reconciliation of premiums written to premiums earned for the years ended December 31 is presented in the following table. (in millions) 2006 2005 2004 Premiums written: Allstate Protection $ 27,525 $ 27,393 $ 26,527 Discontinued Lines and Coverages 1 (2 ) 4 Property-Liability premiums written 27,526 27,391 26,531 Increase in unearned premiums (354 ) (349 ) (608 ) Other (1) 197 (3 ) 66 Property-Liability premiums earned $ 27,369 $ 27,039 $ 25,989 Premiums earned: Allstate Protection $ 27,366 $ 27,038 $ 25,983 Discontinued Lines and Coverages 3 1 6 Property-Liability $ 27,369 $ 27,039 $ 25,989 (1) Includes the transfer at January 1, 2006 of $152 million to Property-Liability unearned premiums related to the loan protection business previously managed by Allstate Financial. Prior periods have not been reclassified. 50 Premiums written by brand are shown in the following table. Allstate brand Encompass brand Total Allstate Protection (in millions) 2006 2005 2004 2006 2005 2004 2006 2005 2004 Standard auto $ 15,704 $ 15,173 $ 14,491 $ 1,138 $ 1,174 $ 1,212 $ 16,842 $ 16,347 $ 15,703 Non-standard auto 1,386 1,587 1,777 94 116 153 1,480 1,703 1,930 Auto 17,090 16,760 16,268 1,232 1,290 1,365 18,322 18,050 17,633 Homeowners 5,926 6,040 5,639 589 611 552 6,515 6,651 6,191 Other personal lines (1) 2,548 2,523 2,551 140 169 152 2,688 2,692 2,703 Total $ 25,564 $ 25,323 $ 24,458 $ 1,961 $ 2,070 $ 2,069 $ 27,525 $ 27,393 $ 26,527 (1) Other personal lines include involuntary auto, commercial lines, condominium, renters and other personal lines. Premiums earned by brand are shown in the following table. Allstate brand Encompass brand Total Allstate Protection (in millions) 2006 2005 2004 2006 2005 2004 2006 2005 2004 Standard auto $ 15,591 $ 15,034 $ 14,290 $ 1,160 $ 1,186 $ 1,208 $ 16,751 $ 16,220 $ 15,498 Non-standard auto 1,436 1,642 1,823 98 125 161 1,534 1,767 1,984 Auto 17,027 16,676 16,113 1,258 1,311 1,369 18,285 17,987 17,482 Homeowners 5,793 5,792 5,349 590 583 529 6,383 6,375 5,878 Other personal lines 2,546 2,514 2,482 152 162 141 2,698 2,676 2,623 Total $ 25,366 $ 24,982 $ 23,944 $ 2,000 $ 2,056 $ 2,039 $ 27,366 $ 27,038 $ 25,983 Premium operating measures and statistics that are used to analyze the business are calculated and described below. Measures and statistics presented for Allstate brand exclude Allstate Canada and specialty auto. Encompass brand statistics are subject to some distortion due to the integration of systems and exclude specialty auto. New issued applications: Item counts of automobiles or homeowners insurance applications for insurance policies that were issued during the period. Does not include automobiles that are added by existing customers. Renewal ratio: Renewal policies issued during the period, based on contract effective dates, divided by the total policies issued 6 months prior for auto (12 months prior for Encompass brand standard auto) or 12 months prior for homeowners. PIF: Policy counts are based on items rather than customers. A multi-car customer would generate multiple item (policy) counts, even if all cars were insured under one legal policy. Average premium gross written: Gross premiums written divided by issued item count. Gross premiums written do not include the impacts from mid-term premium adjustments, ceded reinsurance, or premium refund accruals. Allstate brand average premiums represent the appropriate policy term for each line, which is 6 months for auto and 12 months for homeowners. Encompass brand average premiums represent the appropriate policy term for each line, which is 12 months for standard auto and homeowners and 6 months for non-standard auto. Standard auto premiums written increased 3.0% to $16.84 billion in 2006 from $16.35 billion in 2005, following a 4.1% increase in 2005 from $15.70 billion in 2004. 51 Allstate brand standard auto premiums written increased 3.5% to $15.70 billion in 2006 from $15.17 billion in 2005, following a 4.7% increase in 2005 from $14.49 billion in 2004. Our Allstate brand standard auto growth strategy includes actions such as the continued rollout of YCA policy options which represented $1.15 billion of premiums written in 2006, increased marketing, the continued refinement of Tiered Pricing, underwriting actions and agency growth, while recognizing that the impact of catastrophe management actions on cross-sell opportunities and competitive pressures in certain markets may lessen their success. These growth strategies are particularly emphasized as applicable in states most impacted by our catastrophe management actions such as Florida, New York and Texas. Allstate brand standard auto new issued applications are shown in the table below. (in thousands) 2006 2005 2004 Allstate brand standard auto Hurricane exposure states (1) 1,037 999 1,089 California 319 316 322 All other states 627 612 658 Total new issued applications 1,983 1,927 2,069 (1) Hurricane exposure states are Alabama, Connecticut, Delaware, Florida, Georgia, Louisiana, Maine, Maryland, Mississippi, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New York, North Carolina, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, South Carolina, Texas and Virginia and Washington, D.C. Allstate brand standard auto new issued applications in the hurricane exposure states increased 3.8% in 2006 when compared to 2005. Included in this increase was a 25.5% increase in the state of Florida due to agency growth, price and product modifications, and improved marketing effectiveness. New issued applications in the hurricane exposure states continue to be impacted by catastrophe management actions on cross-sell opportunities and competitive pressures in certain markets. Allstate brand standard auto new issued applications decreased 6.9% in 2005 when compared to 2004 primarily due to competitive pressures in certain states and the effects of our catastrophe management actions. Allstate brand Standard Auto 2006 2005 2004 Renewal ratio (%) 90.0 90.5 90.8 PIF (thousands) 18,084 17,613 17,122 Average premium gross written (six months) $ 420 $ 417 $ 411 Allstate brand standard auto premiums written increased in 2006 when compared to 2005 due to increases in PIF and average premium. The 2.7% increase in Allstate brand standard auto PIF as of December 31, 2006 as compared to December 31, 2005 was primarily the result of growth in policies available for renewal and new issued applications, resulting in increases in 35 of our 49 states and in the District of Columbia. Allstate brand standard auto average premium increased 0.7% in 2006 compared to 2005 primarily due to higher average new premiums reflecting a shift by policyholders to newer and more expensive autos, partly offset by net rate decreases. The Allstate brand standard auto renewal ratio declined 0.5 points in 2006 compared to 2005 due to competitive pressures in certain states. Allstate brand standard auto premiums written increased in 2005 when compared to 2004 due to increases in PIF and average premium. The increase in Allstate brand standard auto PIF as of December 31, 2005 as compared to December 31, 2004 was primarily the result of growth in policies 52 available for renewal and new issued applications. The increase in the Allstate brand standard auto average premium in 2005 compared to 2004 was primarily due to a shift by policyholders to newer and more expensive autos and, to a lesser extent, rate actions. Encompass brand standard auto premiums written decreased 3.1% to $1.14 billion in 2006 from $1.17 billion in 2005 due to declines in PIF. PIF declined 1.8% to 1.12 million as of December 31, 2006 as compared to December 31, 2005 due to a decline in the policies available to renew and from the negative impact of our catastrophe management actions in certain markets more than offsetting new business. We expect the rate of decline in Encompass brand standard auto PIF to continue to moderate as we pursue growth opportunities in this channel. The 12-month average premium decreased 0.1% to $983 in 2006 from $984 in 2005. The renewal ratio was 76.4% in 2006 compared to 75.0% in 2005. Encompass brand standard auto premiums written decreased in 2005 when compared to 2004 due to declines in PIF, partially offset by increases in average premium. PIF declined in 2005 due to insufficient new business to offset the decline in the renewal ratio. The increases in average premium were primarily due to rate activity. Rate increases that are indicated based on loss trend analysis to achieve a targeted return will continue to be pursued in all locations. The following table shows the net rate changes that were approved for standard auto during 2006 and 2005. These rate changes do not reflect initial rates filed for insurance subsidiaries initially writing new business in a state. # of States Countrywide(%) (1) State Specific(%) (2) 2006 2005 2006 (3) 2005 (4) 2006 (3) 2005 (4) Allstate brand 26 23 (0.2 ) 0.4 (0.5 ) 1.0 Encompass brand 16 22 (0.4 ) 0.7 (1.6 ) 1.6 (1) Represents the impact in the states where rate changes were approved during 2006 as a percentage of total countrywide prior year-end premiums written. (2) Represents the impact in the states where rate changes were approved during 2006 as a percentage of total prior year-end premiums written in those states. (3) Excluding the impact of rate reductions in North Carolina and Texas for Allstate brand, the countrywide rate change is 0.2% and the state specific rate change is 0.9%. (4) Excluding the impact of a rate reduction in the state of New York for Allstate brand, the countrywide rate change is 0.8% and the state specific rate change is 2.5%. Non-standard auto premiums written decreased 13.1% to $1.48 billion in 2006 from $1.70 billion in 2005, following an 11.8% decrease in 2005 from $1.93 billion in 2004. Allstate brand non-standard auto premiums written decreased 12.7% to $1.39 billion in 2006 from $1.59 billion in 2005, following a 10.7% decrease in 2005 from $1.78 billion in 2004. Our Allstate brand non-standard growth strategy includes our new Allstate Blue product which is targeted toward consumers who prefer a recognized brand of insurance and generally have a long-term relationship with their insurer. It was introduced in the state of Virginia during 2006. Allstate brand Non-Standard Auto 2006 2005 2004 Renewal ratio (%) 75.9 77.6 78.2 PIF (thousands) 943 1,110 1,267 Average premium gross written (six months) $ 617 $ 629 $ 631 53 Allstate brand non-standard auto premiums written decreased in 2006 when compared to 2005 due to declines in PIF and average premium. Allstate brand non-standard auto new issued applications decreased 11.4% in 2006 when compared to 2005 due to lower new business production as agencies continued to focus on our standard auto business. PIF decreased 15.0% as of December 31, 2006 compared to December 31, 2005 due to new business production insufficient to offset the inherently low renewal ratio in this business. The decline of 1.9% in average premium in 2006 compared to 2005 is due to a shift in the geographic mix of business and net rate decreases. Allstate brand non-standard auto premiums written declined during 2005 when compared to 2004 due to lower new business production, PIF and average premium. The decline in average premium during 2005 when compared to 2004 was due to a shift in the geographic mix of business and net rate decreases. Encompass brand (Deerbrook) non-standard auto premiums written decreased 19.0% to $94 million in 2006 from $116 million in 2005, primarily due to declines in PIF and average premium. PIF declined 14.4% to 85 thousand as of December 31, 2006 compared to December 31, 2005. Average premium declined 4.6% to $535 in 2006 from $561 in 2005. The renewal ratio was 67.3% in 2006 compared to 65.3% in 2005. Encompass brand non-standard auto premiums written decreased in 2005 when compared to 2004 primarily because of declines in new business. Rate increases that are indicated based on loss trend analysis to achieve a targeted return will continue to be pursued in all locations. The following table shows the net rate changes that were approved for non-standard auto during 2006 and 2005. These rate changes do not reflect initial rates filed for insurance subsidiaries initially writing new business in a state. # of States Countrywide(%) (1) State Specific(%) (2) 2006 2005 2006 (3) 2005 2006 (3) 2005 Allstate brand 3 6 (1.6 ) (0.3 ) (3.5 ) (1.4 ) Encompass brand 3 1 (0.1 ) (0.2 ) (0.2 ) (1) Represents the impact in the states where rate changes were approved during 2006 as a percentage of total countrywide prior year-end premiums written. (2) Represents the impact in the states where rate changes were approved during 2006 as a percentage of total prior year-end premiums written in those states. (3) Excluding the impact of the rate reduction in Texas for Allstate brand, the countrywide rate change is (0.6)% and the state specific rate change is (1.7)%. Auto premiums written (standard and non-standard) increased 1.5% to $18.32 billion in 2006 from $18.05 billion in 2005, following a 2.4% increase in 2005 from $17.63 billion in 2004. Allstate brand auto premiums written increased 2.0% to $17.09 billion in 2006 from $16.76 billion in 2005, following a 3.0% increase in 2005 from $16.27 billion in 2004. Allstate brand Auto 2006 2005 2004 Renewal ratio (%) 89.1 89.6 89.7 PIF (thousands) 19,027 18,723 18,390 Average premium gross written $ 431 $ 431 $ 428 54 Allstate brand auto premiums written increased in 2006 when compared to 2005 due to increases in PIF. The 1.6% increase in Allstate brand auto PIF as of December 31, 2006 compared to December 31, 2005 was the result of growth in policies available for renewal and new issued applications. Allstate brand auto new issued applications increased 0.9% to 2.26 million in 2006 when compared to 2005 due to agency growth and national and local marketing, partially offset by the impact of catastrophe management actions on cross-sell opportunities and competitive pressures in certain markets. The Allstate brand auto average premium was comparable in 2006 to 2005 as Allstate brand standard auto average premium increase was offset by Allstate brand non-standard auto average premium decrease in 2006 compared to 2005. The Allstate brand auto renewal ratio declined 0.5 points in 2006 compared to 2005 due to competitive pressures in certain states. Allstate brand auto premiums written increased in 2005 when compared to 2004 due to increases in PIF and average premiums, partially offset by a decrease in new issued applications of 7.9% primarily related to competitive pressures in certain states and the effects of our catastrophe management actions. The increase in Allstate brand auto PIF as of December 31, 2005 as compared to December 31, 2004 was the result of new business. The increase in the Allstate brand auto average premium in 2005 compared to 2004 was primarily due to a shift by policyholders to newer and more expensive autos and, to a lesser extent, rate actions. Encompass brand auto premiums written decreased 4.5% to $1.23 billion in 2006 compared to $1.29 billion in 2005 due to declines in PIF. PIF declined 2.8% as of December 31, 2006 compared to December 31, 2005 due to a decline in policies available for renewal and from the negative impact of our catastrophe management actions in certain markets more than offsetting new business. Average premium (12-month for standard auto and six-month for non-standard) increased 0.4% to $926 in 2006 from $922 in 2005 primarily due to a shift by policyholders to newer and more expensive autos, partially offset by a change in the mix of business to polices with a lower average premium. The renewal ratio was 75.2% in 2006 compared to 73.5% in 2005. Encompass brand auto premiums written decreased in 2005 when compared to 2004 due to declines in PIF, partially offset by increase in average premium. The increases in average premium are primarily due to rate activity. PIF declined in 2005 due to insufficient new business to offset declines due to decreases in the renewal ratio. 55 Rate increases that are indicated based on loss trend analysis to achieve a targeted return will continue to be pursued in all locations. The following table shows the net rate changes that were approved for auto during 2006 and 2005. These rate changes do not reflect initial rates filed for insurance subsidiaries initially writing new business in a state. # of States Countrywide(%) (1) State Specific(%) (2) 2006 2005 2006 (3) 2005 (4) 2006 (3) 2005 (4) Allstate brand 26 23 (0.3 ) 0.3 (0.9 ) 0.9 Encompass brand 18 22 (0.3 ) 0.6 (1.6 ) 1.5 (1) Represents the impact in the states where rate changes were approved during 2006 as a percentage of total countrywide prior year-end premiums written. (2) Represents the impact in the states where rate changes were approved during 2006 as a percentage of total prior year-end premiums written in those states. (3) Excluding the impact of rate reductions in North Carolina and Texas for Allstate brand, the countrywide rate change is 0.1% and the state specific rate change is 0.6%. (4) Excluding the impact of a rate reduction in the state of New York for Allstate brand, the countrywide rate change is 0.7% and the state specific rate change is 2.3%. Homeowners premiums written decreased 2.0% to $6.52 billion in 2006 from $6.65 billion in 2005, following a 7.4% increase in 2005 from $6.19 billion in 2004. Excluding the cost of catastrophe reinsurance, premiums written grew 3.0% in 2006 and 8.5% in 2005 compared to the prior year. For a more detailed discussion on reinsurance, see the Property-Liability Claims and Claims Expense Reserves section of the MD&A and Note 9 of the consolidated financial statements. Allstate brand homeowners premiums written declined 1.9% to $5.93 billion in 2006 from $6.04 billion in 2005, following a 7.1% increase in 2005 from $5.64 billion in 2004. Catastrophe management actions have had an impact on our new business writings for homeowners insurance during 2006 and 2005, as demonstrated by the decline in Allstate brand homeowners new issued applications in the following table. We expect this trend to continue in 2007 while we address our catastrophe exposure. (in thousands) 2006 2005 2004 Allstate brand homeowners Hurricane exposure states (1) 472 574 639 California 56 111 156 All other states 459 497 495 Total new issued applications 987 1,182 1,290 (1) Hurricane exposure states are Alabama, Connecticut, Delaware, Florida, Georgia, Louisiana, Maine, Maryland, Mississippi, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New York, North Carolina, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, South Carolina, Texas and Virginia and Washington, D.C. Allstate brand homeowners new issued applications decreased in almost all hurricane exposure states in 2006 when compared to 2005 as a result of our catastrophe management actions. The decrease in California new issued applications in 2006 is due to changes in underwriting requirements related to 56 catastrophe management actions. The decrease in all other states in 2006 includes the impact of earthquake coverage-related actions. Allstate brand Homeowners 2006 2005 2004 Renewal ratio (%) 87.3 88.2 88.4 PIF (thousands) 7,836 7,828 7,572 Average premium gross written (12 months) $ 832 $ 799 $ 757 Allstate brand homeowners premiums written declined in 2006 when compared to 2005 due to increases in ceded reinsurance premiums, partially offset by increases in PIF and average premium. The 0.1% increase in Allstate brand homeowners PIF as of December 31, 2006 as compared to December 31, 2005 is the result of growth in policies available for renewal. PIF and renewal ratio have been negatively impacted by our catastrophe management actions. This trend will continue into 2007 due to actions such as our decision to discontinue offering coverage by Allstate Floridian Insurance Company and its subsidiaries ("Allstate Floridian") on approximately 120,000 property policies, as part of a renewal rights and reinsurance arrangement with Royal Palm Insurance Company ("Royal Palm") commencing in the fourth quarter of 2006 ("Royal Palm 1"), and an additional 106,000 property policies under a renewal rights agreement in anticipation of entering into a reinsurance agreement with Royal Palm ("Royal Palm 2"), and as noted below the impact of a similar arrangement with Universal Insurance Company of North America ("Universal") entered into in 2005. Allstate Floridian plans to no longer offer coverage on the policies involved in Royal Palm 1 and Royal Palm 2, at which time Royal Palm may offer coverage to these policyholders. The policies involved in Royal Palm 1 expired at the rate of 4% in the fourth quarter of 2006. The policies involved in Royal Palm 1 and Royal Palm 2 are expected to expire at a rate of 3% in the first quarter of 2007, 26% in the second quarter of 2007, 27% in the third quarter of 2007, 22% in the fourth quarter of 2007 and 18% in the first quarter of 2008. As of February 1, 2007, Royal Palm 1 had approximately 94,000 policies that had not expired. On January 30, 2007, Emergency Rule 69OER7-1 was enacted by the Florida Financial Services Commission, the provisions of which temporarily limit policy non-renewals and filings for rate increases. Subsequently on February 19, 2007, an Order that the Office of Insurance Regulation was required to make by new property legislation provided further clarity on the temporary limitations on policy renewals imposed by Emergency Rule 69OER7-1. The February 19 order requires property insurers to file new and lower rates, which reflect the lower cost of acquiring additional reimbursement protection from the Florida Hurricane Catastrophe Fund ("FHCF") as compared to purchasing reinsurance coverage, prior to commencing new non-renewal notices. We intend to comply with these requirements and do not anticipate any signficant delays or impacts on the renewal rights agreements and anticipated reinsurance agreement with Royal Palm. The Allstate brand homeowners average premium increased 4.1% in 2006 when compared to 2005 primarily due to higher average renewal premiums related to increases in insured value and rate changes approved including our net cost of reinsurance. The Allstate brand homeowners renewal ratio declined 0.9 points in 2006 compared to 2005 primarily due to our catastrophe management actions. Allstate brand homeowners premiums written increased in 2005 compared to 2004, primarily due increases in PIF and average premium. The increase in Allstate brand homeowners PIF as of December 31, 2005 compared to December 31, 2004 is the result of new business partly offset by the impact of our agreement with Universal. Under our agreement with Universal we discontinued offering coverage by Allstate Floridian on approximately 95,000 property policies commencing in the third quarter 57 of 2005. Allstate Floridian no longer offers coverage when these policies expire. The policies involved in the Universal agreement expired at a rate of 13% in the third quarter of 2005, 21% in the fourth quarter of 2005, 20% in the first quarter of 2006, 25% in the second quarter of 2006, 13% in the third quarter of 2006, 2% in the fourth quarter of 2006. Of the remaining 6%, 1% expired in January 2007 and 5% are subject to the non-renewal regulations in Florida discussed above. The increases in Allstate brand homeowners average premium during 2005 were primarily due to higher average renewal premiums, primarily related to increases in insured value along with rate actions taken in the current and prior years. Encompass brand homeowners premiums written decreased 3.6% to $589 million in 2006 as compared to $611 million in 2005 due to increases in ceded reinsurance and declines in PIF, partially offset by increases in average premium. PIF declined 3.3% to 527 thousand as of December 31, 2006 compared to December 31, 2005 due to lower retention. The 12 month average premium increased 4.6% to $1,136 in 2006 from $1,086 in 2005, due to rate actions taken during the current and prior year and increases in insured value. The renewal ratio was 84.0% in 2006 compared to 88.1% in 2005. The decline in the renewal ratio was primarily due to catastrophe management actions. Encompass brand homeowners premiums written increased in 2005 due to increases in PIF and average premium. Increases in Encompass brand homeowners average premium were due to rate actions taken during the current and prior year and increases in insured value. We continue to pursue rate changes for homeowners in all locations when indicated. The following table shows the net rate changes that were approved for homeowners during 2006 and 2005, including rate changes approved based on our net cost of reinsurance. For a discussion relating to reinsurance costs, see the Property-Liability Claims and Claims Expense Reserves section of the MD&A. # of States Countrywide(%) (1) State Specific(%) (2) 2006 2005 2006 (3) 2005 2006 (3) 2005 Allstate brand 26 (4) 13 2.4 1.0 2.6 5.0 Encompass brand 22 (4) 19 2.3 1.5 4.9 3.6 (1) Represents the impact in the states where rate changes were approved during 2006 as a percentage of total countrywide prior year-end premiums written. (2) Represents the impact in the states where rate changes were approved during 2006 as a percentage of total prior year-end premiums written in those states. (3) Excluding the impact of rate reductions in Texas for the Allstate brand, the countrywide rate change is 3.1% and the state specific rate change is 5.7%. (4) Includes Washington D.C. 58 Underwriting results are shown in the following table. (in millions) 2006 2005 2004 Premiums written $ 27,525 $ 27,393 $ 26,527 Premiums earned $ 27,366 $ 27,038 $ 25,983 Claims and claims expense (15,885 ) (21,008 ) (17,208 ) Amortization of DAC (4,131 ) (4,092 ) (3,874 ) Other costs and expenses (2,557 ) (2,360 ) (2,387 ) Restructuring and related charges (157 ) (39 ) (46 ) Underwriting income (loss) $ 4,636 $ (461 ) $ 2,468 Catastrophe losses $ 810 $ 5,674 $ 2,468 Underwriting income (loss) by brand Allstate brand $ 4,451 $ (437 ) $ 2,340 Encompass brand 185 (24 ) 128 Underwriting income (loss) $ 4,636 $ (461 ) $ 2,468 Allstate Protection generated underwriting income of $4.64 billion during 2006 compared to an underwriting loss of $461 million in 2005. The improvement was due to lower catastrophe losses, increased premiums earned, declines in auto and homeowners claim frequency excluding catastrophes and higher favorable reserve reestimates related to prior years including $223 million of favorable development relating to catastrophe losses, partially offset by the higher cost of the catastrophe reinsurance program and increased current year severity. For further discussion and quantification of the impact of reserve estimates and assumptions, see the Claims and Claims Expense Reserves section of the MD&A. Allstate Protection generated an underwriting loss of $461 million during 2005 compared to underwriting income of $2.47 billion in 2004. The decline was the result of increased catastrophe losses, lower favorable reserve reestimates related to prior years including $94 million of unfavorable development relating to catastrophe losses and increased current year claim severity, partly offset by increased premiums earned, declines in auto and homeowners claim frequency excluding catastrophes and lower operating costs. In 2005, claims and claims expense and the claims and claims expense ratio include the effect of $120 million or 0.4 points related to an accrual for a settlement of a worker classification lawsuit challenging our overtime exemption under California wage and hour laws ("accrual for litigation"). Claims and claims expense during 2005 includes estimated catastrophe losses of $5.00 billion, net of reinsurance and other recoveries, related to hurricanes Katrina, Rita and Wilma, and 2004 includes estimated catastrophe losses of $2.00 billion, net of recoveries from the FHCF, related to hurricanes Charley, Frances, Ivan, and Jeanne. These estimates include net losses on personal lines auto and property policies and net losses on commercial policies. For a further discussion of catastrophe losses, see page 62. 59 Loss ratios are a measure of profitability. Loss ratios by product, and expense and combined ratios by brand, are shown in the following table. These ratios are defined on page 45. Effect of Catastrophe Losses on the Loss Ratio 2006 2005 2004 2006 2005 2004 Allstate brand loss ratio: Standard auto 61.5 65.7 64.4 0.6 2.9 0.7 Non-standard auto 56.1 57.8 53.9 2.6 0.9 Auto 61.1 64.9 63.2 0.5 2.8 0.7 Homeowners 50.4 110.7 67.4 10.9 70.5 29.2 Other 52.1 91.7 84.6 (0.9 ) 35.3 27.7 Total Allstate brand loss ratio 57.8 78.2 66.3 2.8 21.8 9.8 Allstate brand expense ratio 24.7 23.5 23.9 Allstate brand combined ratio 82.5 101.7 90.2 Encompass brand loss ratio: Standard auto 60.0 66.9 61.3 (0.3 ) 1.7 0.5 Non-standard auto (Deerbrook) 76.5 67.2 75.8 1.0 0.8 0.6 Auto 61.3 67.0 63.1 (0.2 ) 1.7 0.6 Homeowners 58.6 77.8 63.7 17.3 30.6 16.4 Other 81.6 82.1 84.4 7.9 17.9 5.7 Total Encompass brand loss ratio 62.1 71.3 64.7 5.6 11.2 5.1 Encompass brand expense ratio 28.7 29.9 29.0 Encompass brand combined ratio 90.8 101.2 93.7 Total Allstate Protection loss ratio 58.1 77.7 66.2 3.0 21.0 9.5 Allstate Protection expense ratio 25.0 24.0 24.3 Allstate Protection combined ratio 83.1 101.7 90.5 Standard auto loss ratio decreased 4.2 points for the Allstate brand and 6.9 points for the Encompass brand in 2006 when compared to 2005 due to lower catastrophes, higher premiums earned in Allstate brand, lower claim frequency excluding catastrophes and favorable reserve reestimates related to prior years, partially offset by higher current year claim severity. Standard auto loss ratio increased 1.3 points for the Allstate brand and 5.6 points for the Encompass brand in 2005 when compared to 2004. The increases were due to higher catastrophe losses and higher current year claim severity more than offsetting higher premiums earned in Allstate brand and lower claim frequency excluding catastrophes. The Allstate brand loss ratio in 2005 also included the impact of an accrual for litigation of 0.6 points. The Encompass brand standard auto loss ratio in 2005 was also unfavorably impacted as a result of higher current year claim severity partially offset by lower claim frequency. Non-standard auto loss ratio for the Allstate brand decreased 1.7 points in 2006 when compared to 2005 due to lower catastrophes, lower claim frequency and favorable reserve reestimates related to prior years, partially offset by higher current year claim severity and lower premiums earned. Non-standard auto loss ratio for the Encompass brand increased 9.3 points in 2006 when compared to 2005 due to higher current year claim severity and lower premiums earned, partially offset by lower catastrophes and 60 lower claim frequency excluding catastrophes. Non-standard auto loss ratio for the Allstate brand increased 3.9 points in 2005 when compared to 2004 due to decreases in premiums earned, higher catastrophe losses and higher current year claim severity partly offset by lower claim frequency. The Allstate brand loss ratio in 2005 also included an accrual for litigation of 0.2 points. Non-standard auto loss ratio for the Encompass brand decreased 8.6 points in 2005 when compared to 2004 due to lower claim frequency, partially offset by higher current year claim severity. Auto loss ratio decreased 3.8 points for the Allstate brand and 5.7 points for the Encompass brand in 2006 when compared to 2005 due to lower catastrophes, higher premiums earned in Allstate brand, lower claim frequency excluding catastrophes and favorable reserve reestimates related to prior years, partially offset by higher current year claim severity. Auto loss ratio increased 1.7 points for the Allstate brand and 3.9 points for the Encompass brand in 2005 when compared to 2004. The increases were due to higher premiums earned in Allstate brand and lower claim frequency excluding catastrophes being more than offset by higher catastrophe losses and higher current year claim severity. The Allstate brand loss ratio in 2005 also included an accrual for litigation of 0.6 points. Homeowners loss ratio decreased 60.3 points for the Allstate brand and 19.2 points for the Encompass brand in 2006 when compared to 2005 due to lower catastrophes, higher premiums earned, lower claim frequency excluding catastrophes, and higher favorable Allstate brand reserve reestimates related to prior years, partially offset by higher current year claim severity and higher ceded earned premium for catastrophe reinsurance. Homeowners loss ratio increased 43.3 points for the Allstate brand and 14.1 points for the Encompass brand in 2005 when compared to 2004. The increases were due to higher catastrophe losses, unfavorable reserve reestimates related to prior years and higher current year claim severity partially offset by higher premiums earned and lower claim frequency excluding catastrophes. The Allstate brand loss ratio in 2005 also included an accrual for litigation of 0.2 points. Expense ratio for Allstate Protection increased 1.0 points in 2006 when compared to 2005 primarily due to increased restructuring and related charges due to a Voluntary Termination Offer ("VTO"), increased employee benefits and incentives, increased marketing and the impact of higher ceded premiums for catastrophe reinsurance. In 2005, the ratio decreased primarily due to a reduction in employee incentives due to lower financial results for 2005. 61 The impact of specific costs and expenses on the expense ratio is included in the following table. Allstate brand Encompass brand Allstate Protection 2006 2005 2004 2006 2005 2004 2006 2005 2004 Amortization of DAC 14.7 14.7 14.5 19.7 20.5 19.6 15.1 15.1 14.9 Other costs and expenses 9.4 8.7 9.2 8.7 9.1 9.0 9.3 8.7 9.2 Restructuring and related charges 0.6 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.3 0.4 0.6 0.2 0.2 Total expense ratio 24.7 23.5 23.9 28.7 29.9 29.0 25.0 24.0 24.3 The expense ratio for the standard auto and homeowners businesses generally approximates the total Allstate Protection expense ratio of 25.0 in 2006, 24.0 in 2005 and 24.3 in 2004. The expense ratio for the non-standard auto business generally is lower than the total Allstate Protection expense ratio due to lower agent commission rates and higher average premiums for non-standard auto as compared to standard auto. The Encompass brand DAC amortization is higher on average than Allstate brand DAC amortization due to higher commission rates. Allstate Protection underwriting income was impacted by restructuring charges. For a more detailed discussion of these charges, see Note 12 of the consolidated financial statements. Net income was favorably impacted in 2005 by adjustments of prior years' tax liabilities totaling $40 million. DAC We establish a DAC asset for costs that vary with and are primarily related to acquiring business, principally agents' remuneration, premium taxes, certain underwriting and direct mail solicitation expenses. For the Allstate Protection business, DAC is amortized to income consistent with the time frames in which premiums are earned. The balance of DAC for each product type at December 31, is included in the following table. Allstate brand Encompass brand Total Allstate Protection (in millions) 2006 2005 2006 2005 2006 2005 Standard auto $ 575 $ 554 $ 108 $ 113 $ 683 $ 667 Non-standard auto 47 55 3 3 50 58 Auto 622 609 111 116 733 725 Homeowners 470 464 62 65 532 529 Other personal lines 207 214 13 16 220 230 Total DAC $ 1,299 $ 1,287 $ 186 $ 197 $ 1,485 $ 1,484 Catastrophe Management Catastrophe Losses are an inherent risk of the property-liability insurance industry that have contributed, and will continue to contribute, to potentially material year-to-year fluctuations in our results of operations and financial position. We define a "catastrophe" as an event that produces pretax losses before reinsurance in excess of $1 million and involves multiple first party policyholders, or an event that produces a number of claims in excess of a preset, per-event threshold of average claims in a specific area, occurring within a certain amount of time following the event. Catastrophes are caused by various natural events including earthquakes, volcanoes, wildfires, tornadoes, hailstorms, hurricanes, tropical storms, high winds and winter storms. We are also exposed to certain human-made catastrophic events, such as certain acts of terrorism or industrial accidents. The nature and level of catastrophes in any period cannot be predicted. 62 Historical Catastrophe Experience Since the beginning of 1992, the average annual impact of catastrophes on our Property-Liability loss ratio was 7.2 points. However, this average does not reflect the impact of some of the more significant actions we have taken to limit our catastrophe exposure. Consequently, we think it is useful to consider the impact of catastrophes after excluding losses that are now partially or substantially covered by the California Earthquake Authority ("CEA"), FHCF or placed with a third party, such as hurricane coverage in Hawaii. The average annual impact of all catastrophes, excluding losses from Hurricanes Andrew and Iniki and losses from California earthquakes, on our Property-Liability loss ratio was 5.8 points since the beginning of 1992. Comparatively, the average annual impact of catastrophes on the homeowners loss ratio for the years 1992 through 2006 is shown in the following table. Average annual impact of catastrophes on the homeowners loss ratio Average annual impact of catastrophes on the homeowners loss ratio excluding losses from Hurricanes Andrew and Iniki, and losses from California earthquakes Hurricane exposure states 34.7 28.9 All other 21.4 14.6 Total 28.7 22.4 Over time we have limited our aggregate insurance exposure to catastrophe losses in certain regions of the country that are subject to high levels of natural catastrophes. Limitations include our participation in various state facilities, such as the CEA, which provides insurance for California earthquake losses; the FHCF, which provides reimbursements on certain qualifying Florida hurricane losses; and other state facilities, such as wind pools. However, the impact of these actions may be diminished by the growth in insured values, the effect of state insurance laws and regulations and by the effect of competitive considerations. In addition, in various states we are required to participate in assigned risk plans, reinsurance facilities and joint underwriting associations that provide insurance coverage to individuals or entities that otherwise are unable to purchase such coverage from private insurers. Because of our participation in these and other state facilities such as wind pools, we may be exposed to losses that surpass the capitalization of these facilities and/or to assessments from these facilities. Actions we have taken or are considering to attain an acceptable catastrophe exposure level in our property business include: removing wind coverage from certain policies and allowing our agencies to help customers apply for wind coverage through state facilities such as wind pools; changes in rates, deductibles and coverage; limitations on new business writings; changes to underwriting requirements, including limitations in coastal and adjacent counties; not offering continuing coverage to some existing policyholders; purchasing reinsurance or engaging in other forms of risk transfer arrangements; discontinuing coverage for certain types of residences; and/or withdrawing from certain geographic markets. In the normal course of business, we may supplement our claims processes by utilizing third party adjusters, appraisers, engineers, inspectors, other professionals and information sources to assess and settle catastrophe and non-catastrophe related claims. For example, our longstanding contract with Pilot 63 Catastrophe Services ("Pilot") for additional claims adjusters contributes to our ability to complete more timely settlement of catastrophe claims. Hurricanes We consider the greatest areas of potential catastrophe losses due to hurricanes to generally be major metropolitan centers in counties along the eastern and gulf coasts of the United States. Generally, the average premium on a property policy near these coasts is greater than other areas. We are addressing our risk of hurricane loss by, among other actions, purchasing additional reinsurance for specific states and on a countrywide basis for our personal lines property insurance, and in areas most exposed to hurricanes (for further information on our reinsurance program see the Property-Liability Claims and Claims Expense Reserves section of the MD&A); limiting personal homeowners new business writings in coastal areas in southern and eastern states; not offering continuing coverage on certain policies in coastal counties in New York and certain other states; and entering into Royal Palm 1 and Royal Palm 2. Our actions are expected to continue during 2007 in northeastern and certain other hurricane prone states. In January of 2007 the state of Florida enacted new property legislation which, among other actions, expands the capacity of the FHCF, prohibits excess profits for property insurers in the state, expands the time for non-renewal notification, requires carriers writing certain types of auto coverages in the state to also write homeowners coverage unless that carrier is affiliated with a carrier that writes homeowners insurance in that state, and expands policyholder eligibility for Citizens Property Insurance Corporation ("FL Citizens"). FL Citizens was created by the state to provide insurance to property owners unable to obtain coverage in the private insurance market. The comprehensive and extensive legislative changes essentially position FL Citizens to be a direct competitor to the private insurance property market participants. See Note 13 for a description of the ability of FL Citizens to assess participating insurance companies for its financial deficit. We are currently assessing the impact of this legislation on our catastrophe risk management strategy in the state of Florida. Earthquakes Actions taken related to our risk of earthquake loss include purchasing reinsurance on a countrywide basis and in the state of Kentucky for our personal lines property insurance; no longer offering new optional earthquake coverage in most states; removing optional earthquake coverage on approximately 250,000 property policies at December 31, 2006 (approximately 400,000 property policies at December 31, 2005) upon renewal in most states; and entering into arrangements to make earthquake coverage available through other insurers for new and renewal business. These arrangements with third party insurers include many of the approximately 170,000 renewal property customers at December 31, 2006 in the states of Alabama, Alaska, Arkansas, Illinois, Indiana, Missouri, Mississippi, Ohio, Oregon, South Carolina, Tennessee, Utah and Washington. By the end of 2007, we anticipate that we will have eliminated approximately 90% of our optional earthquake coverages countrywide, based on our policies in force at December 31, 2005. Allstate's premiums written attributable to optional earthquake coverage totaled approximately $33 million in 2006 ($60 million in 2005). While this is a countrywide strategy, we will continue to have optional earthquake coverage available in certain states due to regulatory and other reasons. We also will continue to have exposure to earthquake risk on certain policies and coverages that do not specifically exclude coverage for earthquake losses, including our auto policies, and to fires following earthquakes. Allstate policyholders in 64 the state of California are offered coverage through the CEA, a privately-financed, publicly-managed state agency created to provide insurance coverage for earthquake damage. Allstate is subject to assessments from the CEA under certain circumstances. Fires Following Earthquakes Actions taken related to our risk of loss from fires following earthquakes include changing homeowners underwriting requirements in California and purchasing additional reinsurance on a countrywide basis, in California and in Kentucky. Allstate Protection Outlook Allstate Protection premiums written in 2007 will be slightly higher than 2006 levels. We expect continued growth of Allstate brand auto premiums written due to increased PIF resulting from increases in the number of agencies representing us, advertising effectiveness and higher customer loyalty, being partially offset by the estimated effects of catastrophe management actions on homeowners and other property premiums, including the impacts of increased ceded premiums for catastrophe reinsurance totaling approximately $165 million during 2007. We plan to introduce our new non-standard auto product, Allstate Blue, in selective states during 2007. We anticipate that this new product will contribute favorably to the non-standard premiums written trends. We expect that volatility in the level of catastrophes we experience will contribute to variation in our underwriting results, however this volatility will be somewhat mitigated due to our catastrophe management actions including purchases of reinsurance. We expect our auto and homeowners frequencies, excluding catastrophes, during 2007 to be comparable with 2006 results and auto and homeowners severity increases to be consistent with relevant indices. We plan to continue to study the efficiencies of our operations and cost structure for additional areas where costs may be reduced. Any reductions in costs we achieve, however, may be offset by the costs of other new initiatives, such as increased expenditures for marketing and technology. DISCONTINUED LINES AND COVERAGES SEGMENT Overview The Discontinued Lines and Coverages segment includes results from insurance coverage that we no longer write and results for certain commercial and other businesses in run-off. Our exposure to asbestos, environmental and other discontinued lines claims is reported in this segment. We have assigned management of this segment to a designated group of professionals with expertise in claims handling, policy coverage interpretation and exposure identification. As part of its responsibilities, this group is also regularly engaged in policy buybacks, settlements and reinsurance assumed and ceded commutations. 65 Summarized underwriting results for the years ended December 31, are presented in the following table. (in millions) 2006 2005 2004 Premiums written $ 1 $ (2 ) $ 4 Premiums earned $ 3 $ 1 $ 6 Claims and claims expense (132 ) (167 ) (635 ) Other costs and expenses (10 ) (9 ) (9 ) Underwriting loss $ (139 ) $ (175 ) $ (638 ) Underwriting loss of $139 million in 2006 primarily related to an $86 million reestimate of asbestos reserves. Also contributing to the 2006 underwriting loss was a $10 million reestimate of environmental reserves and a $26 million increase in the allowance for future uncollectible reinsurance recoverables. The cost of administering claims settlements totaled $19 million, $18 million and $22 million for the years ended December 31, 2006, 2005 and 2004, respectively. During 2005, the underwriting loss was primarily due to reestimates of asbestos reserves totaling $139 million. During 2004, the underwriting loss was primarily due to reestimates of asbestos reserves totaling $463 million, and an increase of $136 million in the allowance for future uncollectible reinsurance. See the Property-Liability Claims and Claims Expense Reserves section of the MD&A for a more detailed discussion. Discontinued Lines and Coverages Outlook We may continue to experience asbestos losses in the future. These losses could be due to the potential adverse impact of new information relating to new and additional claims or the impact of resolving unsettled claims based on unanticipated events such as litigation or legislative, judicial and regulatory actions. Because of our annual "ground up" review, we believe that our reserves are appropriately established based on available information, technology, laws and regulations. We are somewhat encouraged that the pace of industry asbestos claim activity seems to be slowing, perhaps reflecting various recent state legislative and judicial actions with respect to medical criteria and increased legal scrutiny of the legitimacy of claims. PROPERTY-LIABILITY INVESTMENT RESULTS Net investment income increased 3.5% in 2006 when compared to 2005, after increasing 1.0% in 2005 when compared to 2004. These increases were due to higher income from partnerships and higher fixed income portfolio balances. 66 The following table presents the average pretax investment yields for the year ended December 31. 2006 (1) (3) 2005 (1) (3) 2004 (2) (3) Fixed income securities: tax-exempt 5.1 % 5.2 % 5.4 % Fixed income securities: tax-exempt equivalent 7.4 7.6 7.9 Fixed income securities: taxable 5.3 5.0 5.2 Equity securities 5.1 4.8 4.6 Mortgage loans 5.2 5.5 5.5 Total portfolio 5.2 5.0 5.1 (1) Pretax yield is calculated as investment income (including dividend income in the case of equity securities) divided by the average of the investment balances at the beginning and end of period and any interim quarters. (2) Pretax yield is calculated as investment income (including dividend income in the case of equity securities) divided by the average of the beginning and end of period investment balances. (3) Amortized cost basis is used to calculate the average investment balance for fixed income securities and mortgage loans. Cost is used for equity securities. Net realized capital gains and losses, after-tax were $227 million in 2006 compared to $339 million in 2005 and $397 million in 2004. The following table presents the factors driving the net realized capital gains and losses results. (in millions) 2006 2005 2004 Investment write-downs $ (26 ) $ (30 ) $ (46 ) Dispositions 451 516 697 Valuation of derivative instruments 43 10 10 Settlements of derivative instruments (120 ) 20 (69 ) Realized capital gains and losses, pretax 348 516 592 Income tax expense (121 ) (177 ) (195 ) Realized capital gains and losses, after-tax $ 227 $ 339 $ 397 For a further discussion of net realized capital gains and losses, see the Investments section of the MD&A. Property-Liability Investment Outlook We expect the level of dividends paid by Allstate Insurance Company ("AIC") to The Allstate Corporation in 2007 to increase from 2006 which may lead to a decline in portfolio balances and investment income. PROPERTY-LIABILITY CLAIMS AND CLAIMS EXPENSE RESERVES Underwriting results of Property-Liability are significantly influenced by estimates of property-liability claims and claims expense reserves. For a description of our reserve process, see Note 7 of the consolidated financial statements and for a further description of our reserving policies and the potential variability in our reserve estimates, see the Application of Critical Accounting Estimates section of the MD&A. These reserves are an estimate of amounts necessary to settle all outstanding claims, including IBNR claims, as of the reporting date. The facts and circumstances leading to our reestimate of reserves relate to revisions to the development factors used to predict how losses are likely to develop from the end of a reporting period 67 until all claims have been paid. Reestimates occur because actual losses are different than that predicted by the estimated development factors used in prior reserve estimates. At December 31, 2006, the impact of a reserve reestimation resulting in a one percent increase or decrease in net reserves would be a decrease or increase of approximately $108 million in net income. The table below shows total net reserves as of December 31, 2006, 2005 and 2004 for Allstate brand, Encompass brand and Discontinued Lines and Coverages lines of business. (in millions) 2006 2005 2004 Allstate brand $ 13,220 $ 15,423 $ 13,204 Encompass brand 1,236 1,331 1,230 Total Allstate Protection $ 14,456 $ 16,754 $ 14,434 Discontinued Lines and Coverages 2,154 2,177 2,327 Total Property-Liability $ 16,610 $ 18,931 $ 16,761 The table below shows reserves, net of reinsurance, representing the estimated cost of outstanding claims as they were recorded at the beginning of years 2006, 2005 and 2004, and the effect of reestimates in each year. 2006 2005 2004 (in millions) Jan 1 Reserves Reserve Reestimate (1) Jan 1 Reserves Reserve Reestimate (1) Jan 1 Reserves Reserve Reestimate (1) Allstate brand $ 15,423 $ (1,085 ) $ 13,204 $ (613 ) $ 12,866 $ (872 ) Encompass brand 1,331 (18 ) 1,230 (22 ) 1,277 7 Total Allstate Protection $ 16,754 $ (1,103 ) $ 14,434 $ (635 ) $ 14,143 $ (865 ) Discontinued Lines and Coverages 2,177 132 2,327 167 1,837 635 Total Property-Liability $ 18,931 $ (971 ) $ 16,761 $ (468 ) $ 15,980 $ (230 ) Reserve reestimates, after-tax $ (631 ) $ (304 ) $ (150 ) Net income 4,993 1,765 3,181 Reserve reestimates as a % of net income 12.6 % 17.2 % 4.7 % (1) Favorable reserve reestimates are shown in parentheses. 68 Allstate Protection The table below shows Allstate Protection net reserves representing the estimated cost of outstanding claims as they were recorded at the beginning of years 2006, 2005 and 2004, and the effect of reestimates in each year. 2006 2005 2004 (in millions) Jan 1 Reserves Reserve Reestimate Jan 1 Reserves Reserve Reestimate Jan 1 Reserves Reserve Reestimate Auto $ 10,460 $ (737 ) $ 10,228 $ (661 ) $ 10,419 $ (657 ) Homeowners 3,675 (244 ) 1,917 7 1,873 (169 ) Other Lines 2,619 (122 ) 2,289 19 1,851 (39 ) Total Allstate Protection $ 16,754 $ (1,103 ) $ 14,434 $ (635 ) $ 14,143 $ (865 ) Underwriting income (loss) 4,636 (461 ) 2,468 Reserve reestimates as a % of underwriting income (loss) 23.8 % 137.7 % 35.0 % Auto reserve reestimates in 2006, 2005 and 2004 were primarily the result of auto injury severity development that was better than expected and late reported loss development that was better than expected, primarily due to lower frequency trends in recent years. Homeowners reserve reestimates in 2006 were primarily due to favorable catastrophe reestimates including a decrease in the expected assessment from FL Citizens, late reported loss development that was better than expected and injury severity development that was better than expected. Unfavorable homeowner reserve reestimates in 2005 were primarily due to severity development that was greater than expected. In 2005, reestimates included $66 million related to 2004 hurricanes of which $31 million was the FL Citizens assessment that was accruable in 2005. These were offset primarily by late reported loss development that was better than expected. Homeowners reserve reestimates in 2004 were primarily due to late reported loss development that was better than expected. Other lines reserve reestimates in 2006 were primarily due to favorable catastrophe reestimates and the result of claim severity development different than anticipated in previous estimates. Other lines reserve reestimates in 2005 and 2004 were primarily the result of claim severity development different than anticipated in previous estimates. 69 Pending, new and closed claims for Allstate Protection, for the years ended December 31, are summarized in the following table. Number of Claims 2006 2005 2004 Auto Pending, beginning of year 569,334 551,211 569,549 New 5,256,600 5,615,440 5,367,891 Total closed (5,303,390 ) (5,597,317 ) (5,386,229 ) Pending, end of year 522,544 569,334 551,211 Homeowners Pending, beginning of year 197,326 84,910 62,080 New 835,900 1,329,164 995,569 Total closed (960,238 ) (1,216,748 ) (972,739 ) Pending, end of year 72,988 197,326 84,910 Other lines Pending, beginning of year 79,560 60,572 46,671 New 312,546 427,956 385,298 Total closed (349,852 ) (408,968 ) (371,397 ) Pending, end of year 42,254 79,560 60,572 Total Allstate Protection Pending, beginning of year 846,220 696,693 678,300 New 6,405,046 7,372,560 6,748,758 Total closed (6,613,480 ) (7,223,033 ) (6,730,365 ) Pending, end of year 637,786 846,220 696,693 We believe the net loss reserves for Allstate Protection exposures are appropriately established based on available facts, technology, laws and regulations. The following tables reflect the accident years to which the reestimates shown above are applicable for Allstate brand, Encompass brand and Discontinued Lines and Coverages lines of business. Favorable reserve reestimates are shown in these tables in parentheses. 70 2006 Prior year reserve reestimates (in millions) 1996 & Prior 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 Total Allstate brand $ 18 $ (8 ) $ (3 ) $ (5 ) $ (2 ) $ (22 ) $ (2 ) $ (48 ) $ (282 ) $ (731 ) $ (1,085 ) Encompass brand (6 ) (10 ) (22 ) 20 (18 ) Total Allstate Protection 18 (8 ) (3 ) (5 ) (2 ) (28 ) (2 ) (58 ) (304 ) (711 ) (1,103 ) Discontinued Lines and Coverages 132 132 Total Property-Liability $ 150 $ (8 ) $ (3 ) $ (5 ) $ (2 ) $ (28 ) $ (2 ) $ (58 ) $ (304 ) $ (711 ) $ (971 ) 2005 Prior year reserve reestimates (in millions) 1995 & Prior 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 Total Allstate brand $ 124 $ (5 ) $ (1 ) $ (17 ) $ 1 $ (15 ) $ (10 ) $ (43 ) $ (256 ) $ (391 ) $ (613 ) Encompass brand (2 ) (1 ) (6 ) (9 ) (4 ) (22 ) Total Allstate Protection 124 (5 ) (1 ) (17 ) 1 (17 ) (11 ) (49 ) (265 ) (395 ) (635 ) Discontinued Lines and Coverages 167 167 Total Property-Liability $ 291 $ (5 ) $ (1 ) $ (17 ) $ 1 $ (17 ) $ (11 ) $ (49 ) $ (265 ) $ (395 ) $ (468 ) 2004 Prior year reserve reestimates (in millions) 1994 & Prior 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 Total Allstate brand $ 131 $ 28 $ 11 $ (11 ) $ (26 ) $ (57 ) $ (102 ) $ (105 ) $ (192 ) $ (549 ) $ (872 ) Encompass brand (4 ) 8 10 2 9 (18 ) 7 Total Allstate Protection 127 28 11 (11 ) (26 ) (49 ) (92 ) (103 ) (183 ) (567 ) (865 ) Discontinued Lines and Coverages 635 635 Total Property-Liability $ 762 $ 28 $ 11 $ (11 ) $ (26 ) $ (49 ) $ (92 ) $ (103 ) $ (183 ) $ (567 ) $ (230 ) Allstate brand experienced $1,085 million and $613 million of favorable prior year reserve reestimates in 2006 and 2005, respectively. This was primarily due to auto injury severity development and late reported loss development that was better than expected and including favorable reserve reestimates of catastrophe losses in 2006 and unfavorable in 2005. These trends are primarily responsible for revisions to loss development factors, as previously described, used to predict how losses are likely to develop from the end of a reporting period until all claims have been paid. Because these trends cause actual losses to differ from those predicted by the estimated development factors used in prior reserve estimates, reserves are revised as actuarial studies validate new trends based on the indications of updated development factor calculations. The impact of these reestimates on the Allstate brand underwriting income (loss) is shown in the table below. (in millions) 2006 2005 2004 Reserve reestimates $ 1,085 $ 613 $ 872 Allstate brand underwriting income (loss) 4,451 (437 ) 2,340 Reserve reestimates as a % of underwriting income (loss) 24.4 % 140.3 % 37.3 % 71 Encompass brand Reserve reestimates in 2006 and 2005 were related to lower than anticipated claim settlement costs. Reserve reestimates in 2004 were related to higher than anticipated claim settlement costs. The impact of these reestimates on the Encompass brand underwriting income (loss) is shown in the table below. (in millions) 2006 2005 2004 Reserve reestimates $ 18 $ 22 $ (7 ) Encompass brand underwriting income (loss) 185 (24 ) 128 Reserve reestimates as a % of underwriting income (loss) 9.7 % 91.7 % (5.5 )% Discontinued Lines and Coverages We conduct an annual review in the third quarter of each year to evaluate and establish asbestos, environmental and other discontinued lines reserves. Reserves are recorded in the reporting period in which they are determined. Using established industry and actuarial best practices and assuming no change in the regulatory or economic environment, this detailed and comprehensive "ground up" methodology determines reserves based on assessments of the characteristics of exposure (e.g. claim activity, potential liability, jurisdiction, products versus non-products exposure) presented by individual policyholders. Reserve reestimates for the Discontinued Lines and Coverages, as shown in the table below, were increased primarily for asbestos in 2006 and 2005 and for asbestos and other discontinued lines in 2004. 2006 2005 2004 (in millions) Jan 1 Reserves Reserve Reestimate Jan 1 Reserves Reserve Reestimate Jan 1 Reserves Reserve Reestimate Asbestos Claims $ 1,373 $ 86 $ 1,464 $ 139 $ 1,079 $ 463 Environmental Claims 205 10 232 2 257 Other Discontinued Lines 599 36 631 26 501 172 Total Discontinued Lines and Coverages $ 2,177 $ 132 $ 2,327 $ 167 $ 1,837 $ 635 Underwriting (loss) income (139 ) (175 ) (638 ) Reserve reestimates as a % of underwriting (loss) income (95.0 )% (95.4 )% (99.5 )% Reserve additions for asbestos in 2006, 2005 and 2004, totaling $86 million, $139 million and $463 million, respectively, were primarily for products-related coverage. They were essentially a result of a continuing level of increased claim activity being reported by excess insurance policyholders with existing active claims, excess policyholders with new claims, and reestimates of liabilities for increased assumed reinsurance cessions, as ceding companies (other insurance carriers) also experienced increased claim activity. Increased claim activity over prior estimates has also resulted in an increased estimate for future claims reported. These trends are consistent with the trends of other carriers in the industry, which we believe are related to increased publicity and awareness of coverage, ongoing litigation, potential Congressional activity, and bankruptcy actions. 72 The table below summarizes reserves and claim activity for asbestos and environmental claims before (Gross) and after (Net) the effects of reinsurance for the past three years. 2006 2005 2004 (in millions, except ratios) Gross Net Gross Net Gross Net Asbestos claims Beginning reserves $ 2,205 $ 1,373 $ 2,427 $ 1,464 $ 1,583 $ 1,079 Incurred claims and claims expense 143 86 200 139 971 463 Claims and claims expense paid (150 ) (84 ) (422 ) (230 ) (127 ) (78 ) Ending reserves $ 2,198 $ 1,375 $ 2,205 $ 1,373 $ 2,427 $ 1,464 Annual survival ratio 14.7 16.4 5.2 6.0 19.1 18.8 3-year survival ratio 9.4 10.5 9.9 10.7 16.1 13.9 Environmental claims Beginning reserves $ 252 $ 205 $ 281 $ 232 $ 315 $ 257 Incurred claims and claims expense 22 10 3 2 1 Claims and claims expense paid (25 ) (21 ) (32 ) (29 ) (35 ) (25 ) Ending reserves $ 249 $ 194 $ 252 $ 205 $ 281 $ 232 Annual survival ratio 9.8 8.9 7.9 7.2 8.1 9.1 3-year survival ratio 8.1 7.7 5.2 6.0 4.3 5.0 Combined environmental and asbestos claims Annual survival ratio 14.0 14.8 5.4 6.1 16.7 16.4 3-year survival ratio 9.3 10.1 9.0 9.7 12.5 11.2 Percentage of IBNR in ending reserves 66.5 % 68.0 % 61.6 % The survival ratio is calculated by taking our ending reserves divided by payments made during the year. This is a commonly used but extremely simplistic and imprecise approach to measuring the adequacy of asbestos and environmental reserve levels. Many factors, such as mix of business, level of coverage provided and settlement procedures have significant impacts on the amount of environmental and asbestos claims and claims expense reserves, claim payments and the resultant ratio. As payments result in corresponding reserve reductions, survival ratios can be expected to vary over time. In 2006, the asbestos survival ratios improved due to a reduced level of claim payments. In 2005, the asbestos survival ratio declined due to an increase in claims paid, primarily due to commutations, policy buy-backs, and settlement agreements that, in turn caused reduced reserve levels. 73 The total commutations, policy buy-backs, and settlement agreements and the survival ratios for asbestos and environmental claims for 2006, 2005 and 2004 excluding these commutations, policy buy-backs, and settlement agreements, are represented in the following table. 2006 2005 2004 (in millions, except ratios) Gross Net Gross Net Gross Net Asbestos claims Commutations, policy buy-backs & settlement agreements $ 61 $ 30 $ 322 $ 176 $ 32 $ 22 Annual survival ratio 24.0 24.8 21.1 24.9 25.2 25.5 3-year survival ratio 22.9 25.1 24.7 26.8 31.7 28.4 Environmental claims Commutations, policy buy-backs & settlement agreements $ 7 $ 6 $ 13 $ 13 $ 22 $ 14 Annual survival ratio 13.5 12.7 13.7 13.1 21.7 20.7 3-year survival ratio 15.2 14.0 13.1 13.2 9.7 10.0 Combined environmental and asbestos claims Total commutations, policy buy-backs & settlement agreements $ 68 $ 36 $ 335 $ 189 $ 54 $ 36 Annual survival ratio 22.2 22.2 20.0 22.2 24.8 24.7 3-year survival ratio 21.8 22.8 22.6 23.6 25.6 22.6 Our three-year net average survival ratio excluding commutations, policy buy-backs, and settlement agreements is viewed to be another measure of current reserve adequacy. It reflects a more normalized survival ratio by measuring the impact over three years and by excluding from payments amounts no longer carried in the reserves and not viewed in this ratio as a continuing payment level. Now at 25.1 years for asbestos as of December 31, 2006, we consider it to represent a strong reserve position. A one-year increase in the three-year average asbestos survival ratio at December 31, 2006 would require an after-tax increase in reserves of approximately $36 million. Our net asbestos reserves by type of exposure and total reserve additions are shown in the following table. December 31, 2006 December 31, 2005 December 31, 2004 (in millions) Active Policy- holders Net Reserves % of Reserves Active Policy- holders Net Reserves % of Reserves Active Policy- holders Net Reserves % of Reserves Direct policyholders: Primary 47 $ 15 1 % 46 $ 18 1 % 52 $ 23 2 % Excess 340 214 16 333 180 13 322 297 20 Total 387 229 17 % 379 198 14 % 374 320 22 % Assumed reinsurance 203 15 215 16 222 15 IBNR claims 943 68 960 70 922 63 Total net reserves $ 1,375 100 % $ 1,373 100 % $ 1,464 100 % Total reserve additions $ 86 $ 139 $ 463 During the last three years, 132 direct primary and excess policyholders reported new claims, and 83 policyholders were closed, increasing the number of active policyholders by 49 during the period. The 49 74 increase comprised 8 from 2006, 5 from 2005 and 36 from 2004. The increase of 8 from 2006 included 31 new policyholders reporting new claims and the closing of 23 policyholders' claims. Reserve additions for asbestos for the year ended December 31, 2006, totaled $86 million and included the following factors: Direct primary insurance net reserves decreased by $3 million. We were not a significant direct primary insurer and did not insure any of the large asbestos manufacturers on a direct primary insurance basis. Direct excess insurance net reserves increased by $34 million as a result of revised estimates for two claims. Assumed reinsurance net reserves decreased by $12 million due to lower claim activity. The number of reported new claims is shown in the following table. Year ended December 31, 2006 Year ended December 31, 2005 Year ended December 31, 2004 New Claims (1) 245 256 361 (1) New claims are defined as the aggregate number of policyholders with claims reported by all ceding companies. IBNR net reserves decreased by $17 million. At December 31, 2006 IBNR represented 68% of total asbestos reserves, 2 points lower than at December 31, 2005. IBNR reserves are estimated to provide for probable future unfavorable reserve development of known claims and future reporting of additional unknown claims from current and new insurance policyholders and ceding companies. Our non-products case reserves represent approximately 5% of total asbestos case reserves. We do not anticipate significant changes in this percentage as insureds' retentions associated with excess insurance programs and assumed reinsurance exposure are seldom exceeded. We did not write direct primary insurance on policyholders with the potential for significant non-products-related loss exposure. For environmental exposures, a comprehensive "ground up" review, using processes similar to those used for the asbestos review, is also conducted in the third quarter of each year. The analysis performed produced a $10 million increase in 2006 and essentially no change in reserve estimates in 2005 or 2004. 75 Pending, new, total closed and closed without payment claims for asbestos and environmental exposures for the years ended December 31, are summarized in the following table. Number of Claims 2006 2005 2004 Asbestos Pending, beginning of year 8,806 8,630 8,210 New 1,220 1,635 1,959 Total closed (851 ) (1,459 ) (1,539 ) Pending, end of year 9,175 8,806 8,630 Closed without payment 596 829 805 Environmental Pending, beginning of year 4,896 5,775 6,100 New 612 689 1,125 Total closed (737 ) (1,568 ) (1,450 ) Pending, end of year 4,771 4,896 5,775 Closed without payment 513 1,115 1,006 Property-Liability Reinsurance Ceded For Allstate Protection, we utilize reinsurance to reduce exposure to catastrophe risk and manage capital and to support the required statutory surplus and the insurance financial strength ratings of certain subsidiaries such as Allstate Floridian Insurance Company ("AFIC") and Allstate New Jersey Insurance Company. We purchase significant reinsurance where we believe the greatest benefit may be achieved relative to our aggregate countrywide exposure. The price and terms of reinsurance and the credit quality of the reinsurer are considered in the purchase process, along with whether the price can be appropriately reflected in the costs that are considered in setting future rates charged to policyholders. We also participate in various reinsurance mechanisms, including industry pools and facilities, which are backed by the financial resources of the property-liability insurance company participants, and have historically purchased reinsurance to mitigate long-tail liability lines, including environmental, asbestos and other discontinued lines exposures. We retain primary liability as a direct insurer for all risks ceded to reinsurers. The impacts of reinsurance on our reserve for claims and claims expense at December 31 are summarized in the following table, net of allowances we have established for uncollectible amounts. Reserve for Property-Liability insurance claims and claims expense Reinsurance recoverables, net (in millions) 2006 2005 2006 2005 Industry pools and facilities $ 1,920 $ 2,811 $ 1,325 $ 2,241 Asbestos and environmental 2,447 2,457 930 1,003 Other including allowance for future uncollectible reinsurance recoverables 14,499 16,849 79 126 Total Property-Liability $ 18,866 $ 22,117 $ 2,334 $ 3,370 76 Reinsurance recoverables include an estimate of the amount of property-liability insurance claims and claims expense reserves that may be ceded under the terms of the reinsurance agreements, including incurred but not reported unpaid losses. We calculate our ceded reinsurance estimate based on the terms of each applicable reinsurance agreement, including an estimate of how IBNR losses will ultimately be ceded under the agreement. We also consider other limitations and coverage exclusions under our reinsurance agreements. Accordingly, our estimate of reinsurance recoverables is subject to similar risks and uncertainties as our estimate of reserve for property-liability claims and claims expense. We believe the recoverables are appropriately established; however, as our underlying reserves continue to develop, the amount ultimately recoverable may vary from amounts currently recorded. We regularly evaluate the reinsurers and the respective amounts recoverable, and a provision for uncollectible reinsurance is recorded if needed. The establishment of reinsurance recoverables and the related allowance for uncollectible reinsurance recoverables is also an inherently uncertain process involving estimates. Changes in estimates could result in additional changes to the Consolidated Statement of Operations. The allowance for uncollectible reinsurance relates to Discontinued Lines and Coverages reinsurance recoverables and was $235 million and $213 million at December 31, 2006 and 2005, respectively. These amounts represent 20.5% and 17.3%, respectively of the related reinsurance recoverable balances. The allowance is based upon our ongoing review of amounts outstanding, length of collection periods, changes in reinsurer credit standing, and other relevant factors. In addition, in the ordinary course of business, we may become involved in coverage disputes with certain of our reinsurers which may ultimately result in lawsuits and arbitrations brought by or against such reinsurers to determine the parties' rights and obligations under the various reinsurance agreements. We employ dedicated specialists to manage reinsurance collections and disputes. We also consider recent developments in commutation activity between reinsurers and cedants, and recent trends in arbitration and litigation outcomes in disputes between cedants and reinsurers in seeking to maximize our reinsurance recoveries. Adverse developments in the insurance industry have led to a decline in the financial strength of some of our reinsurance carriers, causing amounts recoverable from them and future claims ceded to them to be considered a higher risk. There has also been consolidation activity in the industry, which causes reinsurance risk across the industry to be concentrated among fewer companies. In addition, over the last several years the industry has increasingly segregated asbestos, environmental, and other discontinued lines exposures into separate legal entities with dedicated capital. Regulatory bodies in certain cases have supported these actions. We are unable to determine the impact, if any, that these developments will have on the collectibility of reinsurance recoverables in the future. 77 The largest reinsurance recoverable balances are shown in the following table at December 31, net of allowances we have established for uncollectible amounts. A.M. Best Financial Strength Rating Reinsurance recoverable on paid and unpaid claims, net (in millions) 2006 2005 Industry pools and facilities Michigan Catastrophic Claim Association ("MCCA") N/A $ 1,022 $ 1,043 New Jersey Unsatisfied Claim and Judgment Fund N/A 127 157 FHCF N/A 70 229 North Carolina Reinsurance Facility N/A 67 69 National Flood Insurance Program ("NFIP") N/A 33 743 Other 6 Total 1,325 2,241 Asbestos and environmental and Other Lloyd's of London ("Lloyd's") A 271 247 Employers Reinsurance Corporation A 85 91 Harper Insurance Limited N/A 67 57 Clearwater Insurance Company A 45 51 SCOR A 41 29 Other, including allowance for future uncollectible reinsurance recoverables 500 654 Total 1,009 1,129 Total Property-Liability $ 2,334 $ 3,370 The effects of reinsurance ceded on our property-liability premiums earned and claims and claims expense for the years ended December 31, are summarized in the following table. (in millions) 2006 2005 2004 Ceded property-liability premiums earned $ 1,113 $ 586 $ 399 Ceded property-liability claims and claims expense Industry pool and facilities FHCF $ 146 $ 197 $ 703 NFIP 32 3,298 171 MCCA 36 267 325 Other 71 73 96 Subtotal industry pools and facilities 285 3,835 1,295 Asbestos and environmental and other 178 182 304 Ceded property-liability claims and claims expense $ 463 $ 4,017 $ 1,599 For the years ended December 31, 2006 and 2005, ceded property-liability premiums earned increased $527 million and $187 million, respectively, when compared to prior years, as a result of amounts incurred for catastrophe reinsurance when compared to the prior year. 78 Ceded property-liability claims and claims expense decreased in 2006 primarily as a result of lower catastrophe loss experience, resulting in lower cessions to the FHCF and the NFIP and lower cessions to the MCCA. Ceded property-liability claims and claims expense increased in 2005 as a result of the 2005 and 2004 catastrophes, including cessions to the NFIP. Ceded property-liability claims and claims expense for asbestos and environmental and other claims were primarily the result of reserve reestimates. For further discussion see the Discontinued Lines and Coverages Segment and Property-Liability Claims and Claims Expense Reserves sections of our MD&A. For a detailed description of the MCCA, FHCF and Lloyd's, see Note 9 of the consolidated financial statements. At December 31, 2006, other than the recoverable balances listed above, no other amount due or estimated to be due from any single Property-Liability reinsurer was in excess of $30 million. Allstate sells and administers policies as a participant in the NFIP. Ceded premiums earned include $232 million, $199 million and $181 million, in 2006, 2005, and 2004, respectively, and ceded losses incurred include $32 million, $3.30 billion and $171 million, in 2006, 2005 and 2004, respectively, for this program. Under the arrangement, the Federal Government is obligated to pay all claims. The NFIP has no impact on our net income or financial position and is included net of ceded premiums and losses with our other personal lines business in our Consolidated Statements of Operations. We receive expense allowances from NFIP as reimbursement for underwriting administration, commission, claims management and adjuster fees. These policies are not included in any of our core business statistics such as PIF, new net premiums written, loss ratio, combined ratio or catastrophe losses. We enter into certain inter-company insurance and reinsurance transactions for the Property-Liability operations in order to maintain underwriting control and manage insurance risk among various legal entities. These reinsurance agreements have been approved by the appropriate regulatory authorities. All significant inter-company transactions have been eliminated in consolidation. An affiliate of the company, Allstate Texas Lloyd's ("ATL"), a syndicate insurance company, cedes 100% of its business net of reinsurance with external parties to AIC. At December 31, 2006 and 2005, ATL had $58 million and $250 million, respectively, of reinsurance recoverable primarily related to losses incurred from Hurricane Rita. Catastrophe Reinsurance Our personal lines catastrophe reinsurance program is designed, utilizing our risk management methodology, to address our exposure to catastrophes nationwide. Our program provides reinsurance protection to us for catastrophes including storms named or numbered by the National Weather Service, earthquakes and fires following earthquakes. As discussed below, our reinsurance program is comprised of agreements that provide coverage for the occurrence of certain qualifying catastrophes in specific states including New York, New Jersey, Connecticut and Texas ("multi-year"); other states along the southern and eastern coasts ("South-East") principally for hurricanes; in California for fires following earthquakes ("California fires following"); in New Jersey for losses in excess of the multi year agreement ("New Jersey excess") and in Kentucky for earthquakes and fires following earthquakes ("Kentucky"). Another reinsurance agreement provides coverage nationwide, excluding Florida, for the aggregate or sum of catastrophe losses in excess of an annual retention associated with storms named or numbered by the National Weather Service, earthquakes and fires following earthquakes ("aggregate excess"). During January 2007, we completed the renewal of our aggregate excess, South-East and New Jersey excess reinsurance contracts, opted to expand coverage in the existing multi-year contracts for New Jersey and Texas and added a new agreement covering Kentucky earthquake and fires following 79 earthquakes. These contracts will be effective June 1, 2007 to May 31, 2008, with the exception of the aggregate excess contract which is effective June 1, 2007 to May 31, 2009. The aggregate excess contract has a 5% retention by Allstate in the first year and a 20% retention by Allstate in the second year. We also expect to place contracts for the state of Florida later this year, once the state's recent legislative actions have been assessed, and should become effective on June 1, 2007 for the beginning of the hurricane catastrophe season. The Florida component of the reinsurance program is designed separately from the other components of the program to address the distinct needs of our separately capitalized legal entities in that state. The multi-year agreements have various retentions and limits designed commensurate with the amount of catastrophe risk, measured on an annual basis, in each covered state. A description of these retentions and limits appears in the following tables and charts. The multi-year, California fires following, New Jersey excess, South-East and Kentucky agreements cover qualifying losses related to a specific qualifying event in excess of the agreement's retention. Reinsurance recoveries under each agreement are equal to the qualifying losses in excess of the agreement's retention for a specific event multiplied by the percentage of reinsurance placed up to the agreement's occurrence limit. We estimate that the total annualized cost of all reinsurance programs will be approximately $770 million per year or $193 million per quarter, including an estimate for reinsurance coverage in Florida. This is compared to annualized cost of approximately $800 million per year during the 2006 hurricane season, for an estimated decrease of $30 million on an annualized basis due to lower expected cost of coverage in Florida. On a calendar year basis, we estimate a cost of $193 million per quarter during 2007, for a total of $770 million, including an estimate for reinsurance coverage in Florida. This represents an estimated increase of $165 million over the 2006 calendar year due to the effective dates of the contracts. During 2006, our actual costs were $73 million in the first quarter, $114 million in the second quarter, $211 in the third quarter and $209 million in the fourth quarter of 2006 for a total of $607 million during the year. We currently expect that a similar level of coverage will be purchased or renewed for the comparable 2008 period. The actual placement of the Florida program, contractual redeterminations and risk transfers of certain catastrophe and other liability exposures during 2007 may cause our total annualized cost to differ from our current estimates. We continue to aggressively seek to cover our reinsurance cost in premium rates. Through the end of 2006, we have submitted more than 350 rate filings in 29 states related to the cost of our reinsurance programs. Including rates approved in Florida and other states related to our reinsurance programs, rates currently effective reflect approximately 40% of the total cost of our reinsurance programs, and will be included in premiums written during 2007. We expect rates will be in effect which will reflect over 50% of the total cost of these reinsurance programs by the end of 2007, and be included in premiums written during 2008. Since the financial condition of the reinsurer is a critical deciding factor when entering into an agreement, the majority of the limits of these programs are placed with reinsurers who currently have an A.M. Best insurance financial strength rating of A+ or better. The remaining limits are placed with reinsurers who currently have an A.M. Best insurance financial strength rating no lower than A-, with three exceptions. Two of the three exceptions have a Standard and Poors rating of AA- and we will have collateral for the entire contract limit exposure for the third reinsurer which is not rated by either rating agency. Because of these ratings, we do not expect that our ability to cede losses in the future will be impaired. 80 The terms, retentions and limits for Allstate's catastrophe management reinsurance agreements in place as of June 1, 2007 are listed in the following table. (in millions) Effective Date % Placed Reinstatement Retention Per Occurrence Limit Coordinated coverage Aggregate excess (1) 6/1/2007 95 for year 1; 80 for year 2 None $ 2,000 $ 2,000 California fire following (2) 2/1/2006 95 2 limits over 28 month term, prepaid 520 1,500 Multi-year (3) : 6/1/2005 Connecticut 95 2 limits over remaining term, prepaid 129 200 New Jersey 95 1 reinstatement each contract year over 3-year term, premium required 140 300 New York (4) 90 2 limits over remaining term, prepaid 830 1,000 Texas (5) 95 2 limits over remaining term, prepaid 399 750 New Jersey excess (6) 6/1/2007 95 1 reinstatement, premium required 440 200 South-East (7) 6/1/2007 95 1 reinstatement premium required 500 500 Kentucky (8) 6/1/2007 95 1 reinstatement, premium required 10 40 Coordinated Coverage (1) Aggregate Excess This agreement has a one year term, effective 6/1/2007 to 5/31/2008, and a two year term, effective 6/1/2007 to 5/31/2009. It covers the aggregation of qualifying losses for storms named or numbered by the National Weather Service, earthquakes and fires following earthquakes for Allstate Protection personal lines auto and property business countrywide, except for Florida, in excess of $2 billion in aggregated losses per contract year. Losses recoverable if any, from our California fires following, multi-year, New Jersey excess, South-East and Kentucky agreements are excluded when determining the retention of this agreement. The one year contract is 15% placed or $.3 billion of the total $2 billion limit. The two year term contract is 80% placed or $1.6 billion of the total $2 billion limit leaving Allstate the option to place up to an additional 15% in year two. The aggregate excess agreement in effect for 6/1/2006 to 5/31/2007 was placed prior to the South-East agreement and accordingly did not provide for its consideration. The preliminary reinsurance premium is subject to redetermination for exposure changes. (2) California Fire Following Agreement This agreement is effective 2/1/2006 and expires 5/31/2008. This agreement covers Allstate Protection personal property excess catastrophe losses in California for fires following earthquakes. This agreement provides $1.5 billion of coverage for all qualifying losses with one reinstatement except when a qualifying loss occurrence exceeds $2 billion, then for 21 days no additional recovery can occur for any losses within the same seismic geographically affected area. The retention on this agreement is subject to remeasurement. 81 (3) Multi-year Agreements These agreements have been in effect since 6/1/2005 and cover the Allstate brand personal property excess catastrophe losses, expiring 5/31/2008. The retentions on these agreements are subject to annual remeasurements on their anniversary dates. The Company is planning to elect $100 million of additional coverage effective 6/1/2007 in the states of Texas and New Jersey. (4) Two separate reinsurance agreements provide coverage for catastrophe risks in the state of New York: AIC has a $512 retention and a $550 limit, and Allstate Indemnity Company ("AI") has a $318 retention and a $450 limit. (5) The Texas agreement is with ATL, a syndicate insurance company. ATL also has a 100% reinsurance agreement with AIC covering losses in excess of and/or not reinsured by the Texas agreement. (6) New Jersey Excess This agreement is effective 6/1/2007 for 1 year and covers Allstate Protection personal property catastrophe losses in excess of the New Jersey multi-year agreement. (7) South-East This agreement is effective 6/1/2007 for 1 year and covers Allstate Protection personal property excess catastrophe losses for storms named or numbered by the National Weather Service. This agreement covers personal property business in the states of Louisiana, Mississippi, Alabama, Georgia, South Carolina, North Carolina, Virginia, Maryland, Delaware, Pennsylvania and Rhode Island and the District of Columbia. The South-East agreement in effect for 6/1/2006 to 5/31/2007 did not cover business in Rhode Island, provided one reinstatement of $180 million of the $400 million limit placed and was 80% placed. The preliminary reinsurance premium is subject to redetermination for exposure changes. (8) Kentucky This agreement is effective 6/1/2007 for one-year and covers Allstate Protection's personal property excess catastrophe losses for earthquakes and fires following earthquakes. Highlights of certain other contract terms and conditions for all of Allstate's catastrophe management reinsurance agreements effective June 1, 2007 are listed in the following table. South-East Aggregate Excess Multi-year, New Jersey excess, California fires following and Kentucky Business Reinsured Personal Lines Property business Personal Lines Property and Auto business Personal Lines Property business Location (s) 11 states and Washington, DC Nationwide except Florida Each specific state Covered Losses 1 specific peril storms named or numbered by the National Weather Service 3 specific perils storms named or numbered by the National Weather Service, earthquakes, and fires following earthquakes Multi-year and New Jersey excess: multi-perils includes hurricanes and earthquakes California fires following: 1 specific peril fires following earthquakes Kentucky earthquakes and fires following earthquakes. Brands Reinsured Allstate Brand Encompass Brand Allstate Brand Encompass Brand Multi-year: Allstate Brand New Jersey excess, California fires following, Kentucky: Allstate Brand and Encompass Brand 82 Exclusions, other than typical market negotiated exclusions Automobile Terrorism Commercial Assessment exposure to CEA Terrorism Commercial Automobile Terrorism Commercial Loss Occurrence Sum of all qualifying losses from named or numbered storms by the National Weather Service over 96 hours Sum of all qualifying losses and sum of all qualifying occurrences (Aggregate) Losses over 96 hours from a named or numbered storm Losses over 168 hours for an earthquake Losses over 168 hours within a 336 hour period for fires following an earthquake Sum of all qualifying losses for a specific occurrence over 168 hours Windstorm related occurrences over 96 hours Riot related occurrences over 72 hours California fires following occurrences over 168 hours. No additional recovery can occur for any losses within the same seismic geographically affected area for an additional 336 hours when a qualifying loss exceeds $2 billion. Kentucky earthquake and fires following earthquake occurrences over 336 hours. Loss adjustment expenses included within ultimate net loss 10% of qualifying losses 10% of qualifying losses Multi-year and California fires following: actual expenses New Jersey excess and Kentucky: 10% of qualifying losses Currently, the Company has reinsurance programs in place that will be expiring May 31, 2007 including the aggregate excess, South-East and New Jersey excess which have similar retentions, limits and placement (South-East increased from 80% placed in 2006 to 95% placed in 2007) as described above. In addition, Allstate Floridian has in-force four separate reinsurance agreements effective June 1, 2006 for one year, and an excess of loss agreement effective June 1, 2005 expiring on May 31, 2007, all of which cover personal property excess catastrophe losses in Florida. These agreements, listed below, coordinate coverage with the FHCF. For both Royal Palm 1 and the Universal arrangement, we have agreed to share recoveries from the FHCF and certain of our reinsurance agreements, as these recoveries 83 pertain to policies included in these arrangements, in proportion to total losses and recoveries and limited to coverage available. We anticipate that we will have a similar agreement to share recoveries on the Royal Palm 2 agreement. FHCF Retention provides coverage on $100 million of losses in excess of $50 million and is 70% placed. FHCF Sliver provides coverage on 10% co-participation of the FHCF payout (estimated at $476 million), or $48 million, and is 100% placed. Excess of loss agreement provides 90% reimbursement for $900 million of Allstate Floridian's property catastrophe losses in excess of the FHCF retention and reimbursement. While the limit is $900 million, $200 million of this limit was acquired by Royal Palm. Excess of loss sliver provides coverage on half of Allstate's 10% retention on our existing excess of loss agreement, or $45 million (5% placed of $900 million limit), and is 100% placed. Additional excess of loss provides coverage on $200 million of losses in excess of the FHCF and our existing additional excess of loss agreement once $100 million has been reimbursed by the FHCF for prior event(s) and after recovery under the excess of loss agreement. This agreement is 95% placed, and is adjusted to only exclude policies reinsured by Universal. The FHCF provides 90% reimbursement on qualifying Allstate Floridian property losses up to an estimated combined maximum of $753 million in excess of a combined retention of $254 million for each of the two largest hurricanes and a retention of $85 million for all other hurricanes for the season beginning June 1, 2006 through May 31, 2007, as each of the four companies comprising Allstate Floridian has separate estimated reinsurance maximum reimbursements and limits. New property legislation enacted in 2007 added a temporary emergency additional coverage option ("TEACO") that is below the mandatory FHCF coverage retention and a temporary increase in coverage limits option ("TICL") that has optional layers of coverage with limits above the mandatory FHCF coverage limit. We are currently assessing the impacts of this legislation on our 2007 reinsurance program for the state. As of December 31, 2006 we have not ceded any losses related to 2006 catastrophic events. ALLSTATE FINANCIAL 2006 HIGHLIGHTS Net income increased 11.5% to $464 million in 2006 compared to $416 million in 2005. Allstate Financial gross margin increased 3.2% to $2.06 billion in 2006 compared to $2.00 billion in 2005. Gross margin, a measure that is not based on GAAP, is defined on page 91. Contractholder fund deposits totaled $10.48 billion for 2006 compared to $12.38 billion in 2005. Investments as of December 31, 2006 increased 1.0% from December 31, 2005 and net investment income increased 9.0% in 2006 compared to 2005. Deposits of Allstate Treasury-Linked Annuity contracts in 2006 totaled $883 million, a $546 million increase compared to 2005. Dividends of $675 million in 2006 were paid by Allstate Life Insurance Company ("ALIC") to its parent, AIC. On June 1, 2006, Allstate Financial completed the disposition of substantially all of its variable annuity business through reinsurance. Additionally, Allstate Financial transferred the loan protection business to the Allstate Protection segment effective January 1, 2006. These events resulted in a net reduction to Allstate Financial's income from operations, before income taxes, of $107 million when comparing 2006 to 2005, primarily due to the loss on disposition of operations for the sale of the variable annuity business and DAC amortization deceleration recognized in 2005 for variable annuities. The following table presents the differences between the 2006 and 2005 results of operations attributable to the variable annuity business and the impact of the absence of the loan protection business in 2006. 84 (in millions) 2006 2005 Change Favorable/(unfavorable) Life and annuity premiums and contract charges $ 136 $ 416 $ (280 ) Net investment income 17 51 (34 ) Periodic settlements and accruals on non-hedge derivative instruments (1) 1 4 (3 ) Contract benefits (13 ) (148 ) 135 Interest credited to contractholder funds (2) (21 ) (57 ) 36 Gross margin (4) 120 266 (146 ) Realized capital gains and losses (9 ) (11 ) 2 Amortization of DAC and DSI (3) (47 ) (53 ) 6 Operating costs and expenses (43 ) (163 ) 120 Loss on disposition of operations (89 ) (89 ) Income from operations before income tax expense $ (68 ) $ 39 $ (107 ) Investment margin $ (3 ) $ (2 ) $ (1 ) Benefit margin 13 5 8 Contract charges and fees 110 263 (153 ) Gross margin (4) $ 120 $ 266 $ (146 ) (1) Periodic settlements and accruals on non-hedge derivative instruments are reflected as a component of realized capital gains and losses on the Consolidated Statements of Operations. (2) For purposes of calculating gross margin, amortization of deferred sales inducements ("DSI") is excluded from interest credited to contractholder funds and aggregated with amortization of DAC due to the similarity in the substance of the two items. Amortization of DSI for variable annuities totaled $3 million and $6 million in 2006 and 2005, respectively. (3) Amortization deceleration of $55 million was recognized in 2005 for variable annuities. (4) Gross margin and its components are measures that are not based on GAAP. Gross margin, investment margin and benefit margin are defined on pages 91, 93 and 94, respectively. 85 ALLSTATE FINANCIAL SEGMENT Overview and Strategy The Allstate Financial segment is a major provider of life insurance, retirement and investment products, and supplemental accident and health insurance to individual and institutional customers. Allstate Financial's mission is to assist financial services professionals in meeting their clients' financial protection, retirement and investment needs by providing consumer-focused products delivered with reliable and efficient service. Our primary objectives are to improve Allstate Financial's return on equity and position it for profitable growth. In the near-term, this will require us to balance sales goals with new business return targets. Our actions to accomplish these objectives include improving returns on new business by increasing sales of Allstate Financial products through Allstate Agencies, increasing sales of life insurance products, and maintaining cost discipline through scale and efficiencies, while improving capital efficiency. The execution of our business strategies has and may continue to involve simplifying our business model, and focusing on those products and distribution relationships where we can secure strong leadership positions while generating acceptable returns and bringing to market a selection of innovative, consumer-focused products. We plan to continue offering a suite of products that protects consumers financially and helps them better prepare for retirement. Our retail products include deferred and immediate fixed annuities; interest-sensitive, traditional and variable life insurance; supplemental accident and health insurance; and funding agreements backing retail medium-term notes. Banking products and services are also offered to customers through the Allstate Bank. Individual retail products are sold through a variety of distribution channels including Allstate exclusive agencies, independent agents (including master brokerage agencies and workplace enrolling agents), and financial service firms such as banks, broker/dealers and specialized structured settlement brokers. Allstate Bank products can also be obtained directly through the Internet and a toll-free number. Our institutional product line consists primarily of funding agreements sold to unaffiliated trusts that use them to back medium-term notes issued to institutional and individual investors. 86 Summarized financial data for the years ended December 31 is presented in the following table. (in millions) 2006 2005 2004 Revenues Life and annuity premiums and contract charges $ 1,964 $ 2,049 $ 2,072 Net investment income 4,173 3,830 3,410 Realized capital gains and losses (77 ) 19 1 Total revenues 6,060 5,898 5,483 Costs and expenses Life and annuity contract benefits (1,570 ) (1,615 ) (1,618 ) Interest credited to contractholder funds (2,609 ) (2,403 ) (2,001 ) Amortization of DAC (626 ) (629 ) (591 ) Operating costs and expenses (468 ) (632 ) (634 ) Restructuring and related charges (24 ) (2 ) (5 ) Total costs and expenses (5,297 ) (5,281 ) (4,849 ) Loss on disposition of operations (92 ) (13 ) (24 ) Income tax expense (207 ) (188 ) (189 ) Income before cumulative effect of change in accounting principle, after-tax 464 416 421 Cumulative effect of change in accounting principle, after-tax (175 ) Net income $ 464 $ 416 $ 246 Investments $ 75,951 $ 75,233 $ 72,530 Life and annuity premiums and contract charges Premiums represent revenues generated from traditional life, immediate annuities with life contingencies, accident and health and other insurance products that have significant mortality or morbidity risk. Contract charges are revenues generated from interest-sensitive life, variable annuities, fixed annuities and institutional products for which deposits are classified as contractholder funds or separate accounts liabilities. Contract charges are assessed against the contractholder account values for maintenance, administration, cost of insurance and surrender prior to contractually specified dates. As a result, changes in contractholder funds are considered in the evaluation of growth and as indicators of future levels of revenues. Subsequent to the close of our reinsurance transaction with Prudential Financial Inc. ("Prudential") on June 1, 2006, variable annuity contract charges on the business subject to the transaction are fully reinsured to Prudential and presented net of reinsurance on the Consolidated Statements of Operations (see Note 3 of the consolidated financial statements). 87 The following table summarizes life and annuity premiums and contract charges by product. (in millions) 2006 2005 2004 Premiums Traditional life $ 281 $ 282 $ 337 Immediate annuities with life contingencies 278 197 316 Accident and health and other 340 439 392 Total premiums 899 918 1,045 Contract charges Interest-sensitive life 853 786 729 Fixed annuities 73 65 52 Variable annuities 139 280 246 Total contract charges 1,065 1,131 1,027 Life and annuity premiums and contract charges $ 1,964 $ 2,049 $ 2,072 Total premiums decreased 2.1% in 2006 compared to 2005. Excluding the impact of the transfer of the loan protection business to the Allstate Protection segment effective January 1, 2006, premiums increased 11.7% in 2006 compared to 2005. This increase in 2006 was attributable primarily to increased premiums on immediate annuities with life contingencies, due to certain pricing refinements and a more favorable pricing environment in 2006. Additionally, in 2006, excluding the impact of the transfer of the loan protection business, accident and health and other premiums increased $14 million due to increased sales of these products. Total premiums decreased 12.2% in 2005 compared to 2004 as lower premiums on immediate annuities with life contingencies and traditional life products more than offset higher premiums on accident, health and other premiums. Premiums on immediate annuities with life contingencies declined primarily as a result of pricing actions taken to improve our returns on new business and reflect our current expectations of mortality. Pricing changes led to a shift in our sales mix from immediate annuities with life contingencies to immediate annuities without life contingencies, which are accounted for as deposits rather than as premiums. The decline in traditional life premiums was primarily due to the absence of certain premiums in 2005 resulting from the disposal of our direct response distribution business in 2004. The increase in accident, health and other premiums was primarily attributable to higher underwriting retention. Contract charges declined 5.8% in 2006 compared to 2005. Excluding contract charges on variable annuities, substantially all of which are reinsured to Prudential effective June 1, 2006, contract charges increased 8.8% in 2006 compared to 2005. The increase was mostly due to higher contract charges on interest-sensitive life products resulting from growth of business in force. Contract charges on fixed annuities were slightly higher in 2006 due to increased surrender charges. Contract charges increased 10.1% in 2005 compared to 2004. The increase was due to higher contract charges on interest-sensitive life, variable annuities and, to a lesser extent, fixed annuities. The increase in the interest-sensitive life contract charges was attributable to in-force business growth resulting from deposits and credited interest more than offsetting surrenders and benefits. Higher variable annuity contract charges were primarily the result of higher account values and participation fees. Fixed annuity contract charges in 2005 reflect higher surrender charges compared with the prior year. 88 Contractholder funds represent interest-bearing liabilities arising from the sale of individual and institutional products, such as interest-sensitive life, fixed annuities, bank deposits and funding agreements. The balance of contractholder funds is equal to the cumulative deposits received and interest credited to the contractholder less cumulative contract maturities, benefits, surrenders, withdrawals and contract charges for mortality or administrative expenses The following table shows the changes in contractholder funds. (in millions) 2006 2005 (1) 2004 (1) Contractholder funds, beginning balance $ 60,040 $ 55,709 $ 47,071 Impact of adoption of SOP 03-1 (2) 421 Deposits Fixed annuities 6,007 5,926 7,322 Institutional products (funding agreements) 2,100 3,773 3,987 Interest-sensitive life 1,416 1,404 1,375 Variable annuity and life deposits allocated to fixed accounts 99 395 495 Bank and other deposits 856 883 701 Total deposits 10,478 12,381 13,880 Interest credited 2,666 2,404 1,991 Maturities, benefits, withdrawals and other adjustments Maturities of institutional products (2,726 ) (3,090 ) (2,518 ) Benefits (1,517 ) (1,348 ) (1,062 ) Surrenders and partial withdrawals (5,945 ) (4,734 ) (3,105 ) Contract charges (749 ) (698 ) (655 ) Net transfers to separate accounts (145 ) (339 ) (412 ) Fair value hedge adjustments 38 (289 ) 38 Other adjustments (109 ) 44 60 Total maturities, benefits, withdrawals and other adjustments (11,153 ) (10,454 ) (7,654 ) Contractholder funds, ending balance $ 62,031 $ 60,040 $ 55,709 (1) To conform to the current period presentation, certain prior period balances have been reclassified. (2) The increase in contractholder funds due to the adoption of Statement of Position No. 03-1, "Accounting and Reporting by Insurance Enterprises for Certain Nontraditional Long-Duration Contracts and for Separate Accounts" ("SOP 03-1") reflects the reclassification of certain products previously included as a component of separate accounts to contractholder funds, the reclassification of DSI from contractholder funds to other assets and the establishment of reserves for certain liabilities that are primarily related to income and other guarantees provided under fixed annuity, variable annuity and interest-sensitive life contracts. Contractholder funds increased 3.3% and 7.8% in 2006 and 2005, respectively. Average contractholder funds increased 5.5% in 2006 compared to 2005 and 13.1% in 2005 compared to 2004. The reduction in the rate at which contractholder funds grew was due primarily to lower contractholder deposits and increased contractholder surrenders and withdrawals. Contractholder deposits decreased 15.4% in 2006 compared to 2005 due to decreased deposits on funding agreements and, to a lesser extent, lower variable annuity and life deposits allocated to fixed accounts due to the disposition of substantially all of our variable annuity business through reinsurance effective June 1, 2006. These items were partially offset by higher fixed annuity deposits. Allstate Financial 89 prioritizes the allocation of fixed income investments to support sales of retail products having the best opportunity for sustainable growth and return while maintaining a retail market presence. Consequently, sales of institutional products may vary from period to period. In 2006, deposits on institutional products declined 44.3% compared to 2005. Higher fixed annuity deposits in 2006 were the result of a $546 million increase in deposits on Allstate Treasury-Linked Annuity contracts. This increase was partially offset by modest declines in deposits on traditional deferred annuities and market value adjusted annuities. These declines were in part impacted by our actions to improve new business returns and reduced consumer demand. Consumer demand for fixed annuities is influenced by market interest rates on short-term deposit products and equity market conditions, which can increase the relative attractiveness of competing investment alternatives. Contractholder deposits decreased 10.8% in 2005 compared to 2004 due to lower deposits on fixed annuities. Fixed annuity deposits declined 19.1% in 2005 as lower deposits on traditional deferred fixed annuities and market value adjusted annuities were partially offset by increased deposits on immediate annuities without life contingencies. The decline in fixed annuity deposits resulted from reduced consumer demand relative to other short-term deposit products due to increases in short-term interest rates without corresponding increases in longer term rates, and pricing actions to increase fixed annuity product returns. Institutional product deposits decreased 5.4% in 2005 compared to 2004. Surrenders and partial withdrawals on deferred fixed annuities, interest-sensitive life products and Allstate Bank products increased 25.6% in 2006 compared to 2005, while the withdrawal rate, based on the beginning of the period contractholder funds balance, increased to 13.9% for 2006 from 11.7% and 9.1%, for 2005 and 2004, respectively. The increase in the surrender rate in 2006 was influenced by multiple factors, including the relatively low interest rate environment during the last several years, which reduced reinvestment opportunities and increased the number of policies with little or no surrender charge protection. Also influencing the increase was our crediting rate strategies related to renewal business implemented to improve investment spreads on selected contracts. The increase in surrenders and partial withdrawals in 2006 is consistent with management's expectation that in the current interest rate environment and with a larger number of contractholders with relatively low or no surrender charges, more contractholders may choose to move their funds to competing investment alternatives. The aging of our in-force business may cause this trend to continue. Surrenders and partial withdrawals increased 52.5% in 2005 compared to 2004 driven mostly by higher surrenders of market value adjusted annuities due to a portion of these contracts entering a 30-45 day window in which there were no surrender charges or market value adjustments. The lack of surrender charges and market value adjustments combined with the interest rate environment, which included a relatively small difference between short-term and long-term interest rates, caused contractholders to choose competing short-term investment alternatives. Net investment income increased 9.0% in 2006 compared to 2005 and 12.3% in 2005 compared to 2004. The 2006 increase was due to increased investment yields and higher average portfolio balances. The higher portfolio yields were primarily due to increased yields on floating rate instruments resulting from higher short-term market interest rates and improved yields on assets supporting deferred fixed annuities. In 2005, the increase compared to 2004 was primarily the result of increased portfolio balances and, to a lesser extent, increased yields on floating rate assets due to higher short-term interest rates and increased income on partnership interests, partially offset by lower yields on fixed income securities. Higher average portfolio balances in both years resulted from the investment of cash flows from operating and financing activities related primarily to deposits from fixed annuities, funding agreements and interest-sensitive life policies. Investment balances as of December 31, 2006, increased 1.0% from December 31, 2005 and increased 3.7% as of December 31, 2005 compared to December 31, 2004. 90 Net income analysis is presented in the following table. (in millions) 2006 2005 2004 Life and annuity premiums and contract charges $ 1,964 $ 2,049 $ 2,072 Net investment income 4,173 3,830 3,410 Periodic settlements and accruals on non-hedge derivative instruments (1) 56 63 49 Contract benefits (1,570 ) (1,615 ) (1,618 ) Interest credited to contractholder funds (2) (2,561 ) (2,329 ) (1,956 ) Gross margin 2,062 1,998 1,957 Amortization of DAC and DSI (2) (3) (729 ) (545 ) (498 ) Operating costs and expenses (468 ) (632 ) (634 ) Restructuring and related charges (24 ) (2 ) (5 ) Income tax expense (265 ) (260 ) (269 ) Realized capital gains and losses, after-tax (50 ) 12 (3 ) DAC and DSI amortization relating to realized capital gains and losses, after-tax (3) 36 (103 ) (89 ) Reclassification of periodic settlements and accruals on non-hedge derivative instruments, after-tax (36 ) (40 ) (32 ) Loss on disposition of operations, after-tax (62 ) (12 ) (6 ) Cumulative effect of change in accounting principle, after-tax (175 ) Net income $ 464 $ 416 $ 246 (1) Periodic settlements and accruals on non-hedge derivative instruments are reflected as a component of realized capital gains and losses on the Consolidated Statements of Operations. (2) For purposes of calculating gross margin, amortization of DSI is excluded from interest credited to contractholder funds and aggregated with amortization of DAC due to the similarity in the substance of the two items. Amortization of DSI totaled $48 million, $74 million and $45 million in 2006, 2005 and 2004, respectively. (3) Amortization of DAC and DSI relating to realized capital gains and losses is analyzed separately because realized capital gains and losses may vary significantly between periods and obscure trends in our business. Amortization of DAC and DSI relating to realized capital gains and losses was $55 million, $(158) million and $(138) million in 2006, 2005 and 2004, respectively. Gross margin , a non-GAAP measure, is comprised of life and annuity premiums and contract charges, and net investment income, less contract benefits and interest credited to contractholder funds excluding amortization of DSI. Gross margin also includes periodic settlements and accruals on certain non-hedge derivative instruments (see additional discussion under " investment margin "). We use gross margin as a component of our evaluation of the profitability of Allstate Financial's life insurance and financial product portfolio. Additionally, for many of our products, including fixed annuities, variable life and annuities, and interest-sensitive life insurance, the amortization of DAC and DSI is determined based on actual and expected gross margin. Gross margin is comprised of three components that are utilized to further analyze the business: investment margin, benefit margin, and contract charges and fees. We believe gross margin and its components are useful to investors because they allow for the evaluation of income components separately and in the aggregate when reviewing performance. Gross margin, investment margin and benefit margin should not be considered as a substitute for net income and do not reflect the overall profitability of the business. Net income is the GAAP measure that is most directly comparable to these margins. Gross margin is reconciled to Allstate Financial's GAAP net income in the table above. 91 The components of gross margin are reconciled to the corresponding financial statement line items in the following table. 2006 (in millions) Investment Margin Benefit Margin Contract Charges and Fees Gross Margin Life and annuity premiums $ $ 899 $ $ 899 Contract charges 638 427 1,065 Net investment income 4,173 4,173 Periodic settlements and accruals on non-hedge derivative instruments (1) 56 56 Contract benefits (539 ) (1,031 ) (1,570 ) Interest credited to contractholder funds (2) (2,561 ) (2,561 ) $ 1,129 $ 506 $ 427 $ 2,062 2005 (in millions) Investment Margin Benefit Margin Contract Charges and Fees Gross Margin Life and annuity premiums $ $ 918 $ $ 918 Contract charges 631 500 1,131 Net investment income 3,830 3,830 Periodic settlements and accruals on non-hedge derivative instruments (1) 63 63 Contract benefits (530 ) (1,085 ) (1,615 ) Interest credited to contractholder funds (2) (2,329 ) (2,329 ) $ 1,034 $ 464 $ 500 $ 1,998 2004 (in millions) Investment Margin Benefit Margin Contract Charges and Fees Gross Margin Life and annuity premiums $ $ 1,045 $ $ 1,045 Contract charges 562 465 1,027 Net investment income 3,410 3,410 Periodic settlements and accruals on non-hedge derivative instruments (1) 49 49 Contract benefits (533 ) (1,085 ) (1,618 ) Interest credited to contractholder funds (2) (1,956 ) (1,956 ) $ 970 $ 522 $ 465 $ 1,957 (1) Periodic settlements and accruals on non-hedge derivative instruments are reflected as a component of realized capital gains and losses on the Consolidated Statements of Operations. (2) For purposes of calculating gross margin, amortization of DSI is excluded from interest credited to contractholder funds and aggregated with amortization of DAC due to the similarity in the substance of the two items. Amortization of DSI totaled $48 million, $74 million and $45 million for the years ended December 31, 2006, 2005 and 2004, respectively. Gross margin increased 3.2% in 2006 compared to 2005 due to increased investment and benefit margin, partially offset by lower contract charges and fees. The decline in contract charges and fees was driven by the absence of contract charges on variable annuities that were reinsured effective June 1, 92 2006 in conjunction with Allstate Financial's disposition of substantially all of its variable annuity business. Excluding the impact of the reinsurance of our variable annuity business and the transfer of the loan protection business to the Allstate Protection segment effective January 1, 2006, gross margin increased 12.1% in 2006 compared to 2005. Gross margin increased 2.1% in 2005 compared to 2004 due to higher investment margin and contract charges and fees, partially offset by lower benefit margin. Investment margin is a component of gross margin, both of which are non-GAAP measures. Investment margin represents the excess of net investment income and periodic settlements and accruals on certain non-hedge derivative instruments over interest credited to contractholder funds and the implied interest on life-contingent immediate annuities included in the reserve for life-contingent contract benefits. We utilize derivative instruments as economic hedges of investments or contractholder funds or to replicate fixed income securities. These instruments either do not qualify for hedge accounting or are not designated as hedges for accounting purposes. Such derivatives are accounted for at fair value, and reported in realized capital gains and losses. Periodic settlements and accruals on these derivative instruments are included as a component of gross margin, consistent with their intended use to enhance or maintain investment income and margin, and together with the economically hedged investments or product attributes (e.g., net investment income or interest credited to contractholders funds) or replicated investments, to appropriately reflect trends in product performance. Amortization of DSI is excluded from interest credited to contractholder funds for purposes of calculating investment margin. We use investment margin to evaluate Allstate Financial's profitability related to the difference between investment returns on assets supporting certain products and amounts credited to customers ("spread") during a fiscal period. Investment margin by product group is shown in the following table. (in millions) 2006 2005 2004 Annuities $ 771 $ 683 $ 623 Life insurance 223 219 212 Institutional products 126 122 121 Bank and other 9 10 14 Total investment margin $ 1,129 $ 1,034 $ 970 Investment margin increased 9.2% in 2006 compared to 2005 primarily due to improved yields on assets supporting deferred fixed annuities, crediting rate actions relating to renewal business and growth in contractholder funds. Investment margin increased 6.6% in 2005 compared to 2004 primarily due to growth in our fixed annuity business, partially offset by lower weighted average investment spreads on interest-sensitive life and immediate annuities. 93 The following table summarizes the annualized weighted average investment yield, interest crediting rates and investment spreads during 2006, 2005 and 2004. Weighted Average Investment Yield Weighted Average Interest Crediting Rate Weighted Average Investment Spreads 2006 2005 2004 2006 2005 2004 2006 2005 2004 Interest-sensitive life 6.2 % 6.3 % 6.5 % 4.7 % 4.8 % 4.7 % 1.5 % 1.5 % 1.8 % Deferred fixed annuities 5.7 5.5 5.8 3.7 3.8 4.1 2.0 1.7 1.7 Immediate fixed annuities with and without life contingencies 7.2 7.4 7.6 6.6 6.7 6.8 0.6 0.7 0.8 Institutional 6.0 4.6 3.1 5.0 3.6 2.1 1.0 1.0 1.0 Investments supporting capital, traditional life and other products 5.7 6.2 6.3 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A The following table summarizes the liabilities as of December 31 for these contracts and policies. (in millions) 2006 2005 2004 Immediate fixed annuities with life contingencies $ 8,144 $ 7,894 $ 7,720 Other life contingent contracts and other 4,642 4,588 4,034 Reserve for life-contingent contracts benefits $ 12,786 $ 12,482 $ 11,754 Interest-sensitive life $ 9,050 $ 8,842 $ 8,280 Deferred fixed annuities 35,533 33,890 31,390 Immediate fixed annuities without life contingencies 3,783 3,603 3,247 Institutional 12,467 12,431 11,279 Allstate Bank 773 882 840 Market value adjustments related to derivative instruments and other 425 392 673 Contractholder funds $ 62,031 $ 60,040 55,709 Benefit margin is a component of gross margin, both of which are non-GAAP measures. Benefit margin represents life and life-contingent immediate annuity premiums, cost of insurance contract charges and, prior to the disposal of substantially all of our variable annuity business through reinsurance, variable annuity contract charges for contract guarantees less contract benefits. Benefit margin excludes the implied interest on life-contingent immediate annuities, which is included in the calculation of investment margin. We use the benefit margin to evaluate Allstate Financial's underwriting performance, as it reflects the profitability of our products with respect to mortality or morbidity risk during a fiscal period. Benefit margin by product group is shown in the following table. (in millions) 2006 2005 2004 Life insurance $ 549 $ 544 $ 572 Annuities (43 ) (80 ) (50 ) Total benefit margin $ 506 $ 464 $ 522 94 Benefit margin increased 9.1% in 2006 compared to 2005. Benefit margin for 2005 includes $60 million of amounts that were classified as contract charges and fees beginning in 2006. Further, benefit margin for 2005 includes $29 million related to the loan protection business transferred to Allstate Protection beginning in 2006. Excluding these reclassifications, benefit margin increased 34.9% in 2006 compared to 2005 due primarily to improved life insurance mortality experience in 2006, and to a lesser extent, in force business growth. Benefit margin declined 11.1% in 2005 compared to 2004. Our life insurance and annuity business contributed equally to the decline in 2005. The decline in our annuity benefit margin was primarily driven by unfavorable mortality experience on immediate annuities with life contingencies and an increase in variable annuity contract benefits. The decline in our life insurance benefit margin was primarily due to the absence of margin on certain products resulting from the disposal of our direct response distribution business in the prior year and modestly unfavorable mortality experience on our traditional life business, partially offset by growth in our life insurance in force. Amortization of DAC and DSI , excluding amortization related to realized capital gains and losses, increased 33.8% in 2006 compared to 2005 primarily due to improved gross profits on investment contracts resulting from increased investment and benefit margin, and lower expenses. Additionally, DAC and DSI amortization for 2006 includes a write-off totaling $27 million for the present value of future profits related to a block of corporate owned life insurance policies that terminated due to the bankruptcy of the policyholder. Partially offsetting these increases was the significant reduction in amortization on the variable annuity contracts due to the disposition of this business effective June 1, 2006 through reinsurance. DAC and DSI amortization related to realized capital gains and losses, after-tax, changed by a favorable $139 million in 2006 compared to 2005. The impact of realized capital gains and losses on amortization of DAC and DSI is dependent upon the relationship between the assets that give rise to the gain or loss and the product liability supported by the assets. Fluctuations result from changes in the impact of realized capital gains and losses on actual and expected gross profits. The DAC and DSI assets were reduced by $726 million and $70 million, respectively, in 2006 as a result of the disposition of substantially all of Allstate Financial's variable annuity business. Amortization of DAC and DSI increased 9.4% in 2005 compared to 2004 as a result of higher gross margin. DAC and DSI amortization related to realized capital gains and losses, after-tax, increased $14 million in 2005 compared to 2004 primarily due to increased realized capital gains on investments supporting certain fixed annuities. 95 The changes in the DAC asset are summarized in the following tables. (in millions) Beginning balance December 31, 2005 Impact of Disposal of variable annuities Acquisition costs deferred Amortization charged to income (1) Amortization (acceleration) deceleration charged to income (2) Effect of unrealized capital gains and losses Ending balance December 31, 2006 Traditional life $ 598 $ $ 72 $ (59 ) $ $ $ 611 Interest-sensitive life 1,696 272 (223 ) (18 ) 47 1,774 Variable annuities 730 (726 ) 46 (46 ) 4 Investment contracts 1,085 362 (247 ) 16 13 1,229 Accident, health and other 209 70 (49 ) 230 Total $ 4,318 $ (726 ) $ 822 $ (624 ) $ (2 ) $ 60 $ 3,848 (in millions) Beginning balance December 31, 2004 Acquisition costs deferred Amortization charged to income (1) Amortization (acceleration) deceleration charged to income (2) Effect of unrealized capital gains and losses Ending balance December 31, 2005 Traditional life $ 581 $ 67 $ (50 ) $ $ $ 598 Interest-sensitive life 1,529 241 (143 ) (2 ) 71 1,696 Variable annuities 628 110 (106 ) 55 43 730 Investment contracts 594 347 (282 ) (51 ) 477 1,085 Accident, health and other 176 83 (50 ) 209 Total $ 3,508 $ 848 $ (631 ) $ 2 $ 591 $ 4,318 (1) The amortization of DAC for interest-sensitive life, variable annuities and investment contracts is proportionate to the recognition of gross profits, which include realized capital gains and losses. Fluctuations in amortization for these products may result as actual realized capital gains and losses differ from the amounts utilized in the determination of estimated gross profits. Amortization related to realized capital gains and losses was $50 million and $(126) million in 2006 and 2005, respectively. (2) Included as a component of amortization of DAC on the Consolidated Statements of Operations. Operating costs and expenses decreased 25.9% in 2006 compared to 2005 and declined slightly in 2005 compared to 2004. The following table summarizes operating costs and expenses. (in millions) 2006 2005 2004 Non-deferrable acquisition costs $ 175 $ 245 $ 256 Other operating costs and expenses 293 387 378 Total operating costs and expenses $ 468 $ 632 $ 634 Restructuring and related charges $ 24 $ 2 $ 5 Non-deferrable acquisition costs declined 28.6% in 2006 compared to 2005 due primarily to the transfer of the loan protection business to Allstate Protection effective January 1, 2006 and a reduction in non-deferrable commissions, which was primarily due to the disposal of substantially all of Allstate Financial's variable annuity business effective June 1, 2006. Non-deferrable acquisition costs related to the loan protection business amounted to $39 million in 2005. Other operating costs and expenses declined $94 million or 24.3% in 2006 compared to 2005. The disposition of substantially all of our variable annuity business through reinsurance and the transfer of the loan protection business resulted in $51 million of this reduction. The remaining decline relates to a $28 million charge in the prior year for an increase in a liability for future benefits of a previously 96 discontinued benefit plan, and expense savings initiatives, including the VTO. For more information on the VTO, see Note 12 to the Consolidated Financial Statements. Non-deferrable acquisition costs declined 4.3% in 2005 compared to 2004 as the prior year included a $15 million charge related to loss experience on certain credit insurance policies. The impact of this charge was partially offset by higher premium taxes and non-deferrable commissions in 2005. Other operating costs and expenses increased 2.4% in 2005 compared to 2004 primarily due to a $28 million increase in a liability for future benefits of a previously discontinued benefit plan, partially offset by lower employee and technology expenses. Restructuring and related charges for 2006 reflect costs related to the VTO. Net income was favorably impacted in 2006 and 2005 by adjustments to prior years' tax liabilities totaling $10 million and $19 million, respectively. These amounts are presented as a component of income tax expense in the Consolidated Statements of Operations. Net realized capital gains and losses are presented in the following table for the years ended December 31. (in millions) 2006 2005 2004 Investment write-downs $ (21 ) $ (24 ) $ (82 ) Dispositions (87 ) 88 131 Valuation of derivative instruments (17 ) (105 ) (55 ) Settlement of derivative instruments 48 60 7 Realized capital gains and losses, pretax (77 ) 19 1 Income tax (expense) benefit 27 (7 ) (4 ) Realized capital gains and losses, after-tax $ (50 ) $ 12 $ (3 ) For further discussion of realized capital gains and losses, see the Investments section of MD&A. Reinsurance Ceded We enter into reinsurance agreements with unaffiliated carriers to limit our risk of mortality losses. As of December 31, 2006 and 2005, 48% and 49%, respectively, of our face amount of life insurance in force was reinsured. As of December 31, 2006, for certain term life insurance policies, we ceded up to 90% of the mortality risk depending on the length of the term. Comparatively, as of December 31, 2005, for certain term life insurance, we ceded 25-90% of the mortality risk depending on the length of the term and policy premium guarantees. Additionally, we ceded substantially all of the risk associated with our variable annuity business and we cede 100% of the morbidity risk on substantially all of our long-term care contracts. Beginning in 2006, we increased our mortality risk retention to $5 million per individual life for certain insurance applications meeting certain criteria. Prior to 2006, but subsequent to October 1998, we ceded mortality risk on new life contracts that exceeded $2 million per individual life. For business sold prior to October 1998, we ceded mortality risk in excess of specific amounts up to $1 million per individual life. We retain primary liability as a direct insurer for all risks ceded to reinsurers. 97 The impacts of reinsurance on our reserve for life-contingent contract benefits and contractholder funds at December 31, are summarized in the following table. Reinsurance recoverable on paid and unpaid claims (in millions) 2006 2005 Annuities (1) $ 1,654 $ 172 Life insurance 1,225 1,123 Long-term care 518 412 Other 96 103 Total Allstate Financial $ 3,493 $ 1,810 (1) Reinsurance recoverables as of December 31, 2006 include $1.49 billion for general account reserves related to variable annuities. Substantially all of our variable annuity business was reinsured effective June 1, 2006. The estimation of reinsurance recoverables is impacted by the uncertainties involved in the establishment of reserves. Our reinsurance recoverables, summarized by reinsurer as of December 31, are shown in the following table. Reinsurance recoverable on paid and unpaid claims S&P Financial Strength Rating (in millions) 2006 2005 Prudential Insurance Company of America AA- $ 1,490 $ Employers Reassurance Corporation A+ 439 336 RGA Reinsurance Company AA- 295 262 Transamerica Life Group AA 233 185 Swiss Re Life and Health America, Inc. AA- 161 155 Paul Revere Life Insurance Company BBB+ 147 152 Scottish Re Group BB 127 123 Munich American Reassurance A+ 92 82 Manulife Insurance Company AAA 82 87 Mutual of Omaha Insurance AA- 79 76 Security Life of Denver AA 73 70 Triton Insurance Company NR 65 62 Lincoln National Life Insurance AA 59 55 American Health & Life Insurance Co. NR 50 50 Other (1) 101 115 Total $ 3,493 $ 1,810 (1) As of December 31, 2006 and 2005, the other category includes $74 million and $71 million, respectively, of recoverables due from reinsurers with an investment grade credit rating from S&P. We continuously monitor the creditworthiness of reinsurers in order to determine our risk of recoverability on an individual and aggregate basis, and a provision for uncollectible reinsurance is recorded if needed. No amounts have been deemed unrecoverable in the three-years ended December 31, 2006. 98 We enter into certain inter-company reinsurance transactions for the Allstate Financial operations in order to maintain underwriting control and manage insurance risk among various legal entities. These reinsurance agreements have been approved by the appropriate regulatory authorities. All significant inter-company transactions have been eliminated in consolidation. Allstate Financial Outlook We plan to continue to balance targeted improvements in return on equity with growth in sales and profitability. Initially, our actions to improve returns may reduce the price competitiveness of certain products, such as our fixed annuities, and slow or reduce the growth in sales and income. We expect that the near-term improvements in our returns will be generated mostly by improved capital efficiency and will later be accompanied by improved profitability. We plan to continue to maintain discipline over expenses and improve our operating efficiency. We plan to increase sales of our financial products by Allstate exclusive agencies by further tailoring products for our customers and making it easier for our agents to distribute Allstate Financial products. We expect to continue to prioritize the allocation of fixed income investments to support sales of products with the best sustainable growth and margins and to maintain a market presence for fixed annuity and life products in our retail distribution channels. Sales of our institutional products may vary as a result. We plan to develop and bring to market new innovative life insurance products or features designed to increase sales of this product line. INVESTMENTS An important component of our financial results is the return on our investment portfolios. Investment portfolios are segmented between the Property-Liability, Allstate Financial and Corporate and Other operations. The investment portfolios are managed based upon the nature of each respective business and its corresponding liability structure. Overview and Strategy The Property-Liability portfolio's investment strategy emphasizes safety of principal and consistent income generation, within a total return framework. This approach, which has produced competitive returns over time, is designed to ensure financial strength and stability for paying claims, while maximizing economic value and surplus growth. We employ a strategic asset allocation model, which takes into account the nature of the liabilities and risk tolerances, as well as the risk/return parameters of the various asset classes in which we invest. The model's recommended asset allocation, along with duration and liquidity considerations, guides our initial asset allocation. This is further adjusted based on our analysis of other potential market opportunities available. Portfolio performance is measured against outside benchmarks at target allocation weights. The Allstate Financial portfolio's investment strategy focuses on the need for risk-adjusted spread on the underlying liabilities while maximizing return on capital. We believe investment spread is maximized by selecting assets that perform favorably on a long-term basis and by disposing of certain assets to minimize the effect of downgrades and defaults. We believe this strategy maintains the investment margin necessary to sustain income over time. The portfolio management approach employs a combination of recognized market, analytical and proprietary modeling, including a strategic asset allocation model, as the primary basis for the allocation of interest sensitive, illiquid and credit assets as well as for 99 determining overall below investment grade exposure and diversification requirements. Within the ranges set by the strategic asset allocation model, tactical investment decisions are made in consideration of prevailing market conditions. The Corporate and Other portfolio's investment strategy balances the pursuit of competitive returns with the unique liquidity needs of the portfolio relative to the overall corporate capital structure. The portfolio is primarily invested in high quality, highly-liquid fixed income and short-term securities with additional investments in less liquid holdings in order to enhance overall returns. As a result of tactical decisions in each of the portfolios, we may sell securities during the period in which fair value has declined below amortized cost for fixed income securities or cost for equity securities. Portfolio monitoring, which includes identifying securities that are other-than-temporarily impaired and recognizing impairment on securities in an unrealized loss position for which we do not have the intent and ability to hold until recovery, are conducted regularly. For more information, see the Portfolio Monitoring section of the MD&A. Portfolio Composition The composition of the investment portfolios at December 31, 2006 is presented in the table below. Also see Notes 2 and 5 of the consolidated financial statements for investment accounting policies and additional information. Property-Liability Allstate Financial (3) Corporate and Other (3) Total (in millions) Percent to total Percent to total Percent to total Percent to total Fixed income securities (1) $ 32,791 78.7 % $ 63,956 84.2 % $ 1,573 73.4 % $ 98,320 82.1 % Equity securities (2) 7,153 17.2 538 0.7 86 4.0 7,777 6.5 Mortgage loans 649 1.5 8,818 11.6 9,467 7.9 Short-term 1,067 2.6 879 1.2 484 22.6 2,430 2.0 Other 3 1,760 2.3 1,763 1.5 Total $ 41,663 100.0 % $ 75,951 100.0 % $ 2,143 100.0 % $ 119,757 100.0 % (1) Fixed income securities are carried at fair value. Amortized cost basis for these securities was $31.96 billion, $62.37 billion and $1.45 billion for Property-Liability, Allstate Financial and Corporate and Other, respectively. (2) Equity securities are carried at fair value. Cost basis for these securities was $5.41 billion, $527 million, and $86 million for Property-Liability, Allstate Financial and Corporate and Other, respectively. (3) Balances reflect the elimination of related party investments between Allstate Financial and Corporate and Other. Total investments increased to $119.76 billion at December 31, 2006 from $118.30 billion at December 31, 2005, primarily due to positive cash flows from operating activities, increased net unrealized gains on equity securities and increased funds associated with securities lending, partially offset by the transfer of funds to Prudential in conjunction with the disposition of Allstate Financial's variable annuity business through reinsurance and decreased net unrealized gains on fixed income securities. The Property-Liability investment portfolio increased to $41.66 billion at December 31, 2006 from $39.57 billion at December 31, 2005, primarily due to positive cash flows from operating activities and increased net unrealized gains on equity securities, partially offset by dividends paid by AIC to The Allstate Corporation. The Allstate Financial investment portfolio increased to $75.95 billion at December 31, 2006, from $75.23 billion at December 31, 2005, primarily due to positive cash flows from operating activities, partially offset by payments totaling approximately $826 million related to the disposition through reinsurance of 100 substantially all of our variable annuity business, decreased net unrealized capital gains on fixed income securities and dividends of $675 million paid by ALIC to its parent, AIC. ALIC paid these dividends as a result of excess capital resulting from the disposition of substantially all of Allstate Financial's variable annuity business through reinsurance. The Corporate and Other investment portfolio decreased to $2.14 billion at December 31, 2006, from $3.49 billion at December 31, 2005, primarily due to cash flows used in financing activities, partially offset by proceeds from our debt issuance. For further information on our debt issuance, see the Capital Resources and Liquidity section of the MD&A. Total investments at amortized cost related to collateral received in connection with securities lending business activities, funds received in connection with securities repurchase agreements, and collateral posted by counterparties related to derivative transactions, increased to $4.14 billion at December 31, 2006, from $4.10 billion at December 31, 2005. We use different methodologies to estimate the fair value of publicly and non-publicly traded marketable investment securities and exchange traded and non-exchange traded derivative contracts. For a discussion of these methods, see the Application of Critical Accounting Estimates section of the MD&A. The following table shows total investments, categorized by the method used to determine fair value at December 31, 2006. Investments Derivative Contracts (1) (in millions) Carrying Value Percent to total Fair Value Fair value based on independent market quotations $ 92,833 77.5 % $ 129 Fair value based on models and other valuation methods 13,171 11.0 1,256 Mortgage loans, policy loans, bank loans and certain limited partnership and other investments, valued at cost, amortized cost and the equity method 13,753 11.5 Total $ 119,757 100.0 % $ 1,385 (1) Derivative fair value includes derivatives classified as assets and liabilities on the Consolidated Statements of Financial Position and excludes derivatives related to Allstate Financial products (see Note 6 of the consolidated financial statements). Fixed Income Securities See Note 5 of the consolidated financial statements for a table showing the amortized cost, unrealized gains, unrealized losses and fair value for each type of fixed income security for the years ended December 31, 2006 and 2005. Municipal bonds, including tax-exempt and taxable securities, totaled $25.61 billion and 96.7% were rated investment grade at December 31, 2006. Approximately 64.6% of the municipal bond portfolio was insured by eight bond insurers and accordingly have a Moody's equivalent rating of Aaa or Aa. The municipal bond portfolio at December 31, 2006 consisted of approximately 3,400 issues from approximately 2,300 issuers. The largest exposure to a single issuer was approximately 1% of the municipal bond portfolio. Corporate entities were the ultimate obligors of approximately 9.0% of the municipal bond portfolio. 101 Corporate bonds totaled $40.83 billion and 89.5% were rated investment grade at December 31, 2006. As of December 31, 2006, the portfolio contained $18.33 billion of privately placed corporate obligations or 44.9%, compared with $17.72 billion or 44.2% at December 31, 2005. Included within privately placed corporate obligations are bank loans, which are primarily senior secured corporate loans, and other non-publicly traded corporate obligations. Approximately $15.98 billion or 87.2% of the privately placed corporate obligations consisted of fixed rate privately placed securities. The primary benefits of fixed rate privately placed securities when compared to publicly issued securities may include generally higher yields, improved cash flow predictability through pro-rata sinking funds, and a combination of covenant and call protection features designed to better protect the holder against losses resulting from credit deterioration, reinvestment risk or fluctuations in interest rates. A disadvantage of fixed rate privately placed securities when compared to publicly issued securities is relatively reduced liquidity. At December 31, 2006, 88.0% of the privately placed securities were rated investment grade. Foreign government securities totaled $2.82 billion and 96.4% were rated investment grade at December 31, 2006. Mortgage-backed securities ("MBS") totaled $7.92 billion and 99.8% were rated investment grade at December 31, 2006. The credit risk associated with MBS is mitigated due to the fact that 64.7% of the portfolio consists of securities that were issued by, or have underlying collateral that is guaranteed by U.S. government agencies or U.S. government sponsored entities. The MBS portfolio is subject to interest rate risk since price volatility and the ultimate realized yield are affected by the rate of prepayment of the underlying mortgages. Commercial Mortgage Backed Securities ("CMBS") totaled $7.84 billion and 99.9% were rated investment grade at December 31, 2006. CMBS investments primarily represent pools of commercial mortgages, broadly diversified across property types and geographical area. The CMBS portfolio is subject to credit risk, but unlike other structured products, is generally not subject to prepayment risk due to protections within the underlying commercial mortgages, whereby borrowers are effectively restricted from prepaying their mortgages due to changes in interest rates. Credit defaults can result in credit directed prepayments. Approximately 72.2% of the CMBS portfolio had a Moody's rating of Aaa or a Standard & Poor's or Fitch rating of AAA, the highest rating categories, at December 31, 2006. Asset-backed securities ("ABS") totaled $9.21 billion and 98.6% were rated investment grade at December 31, 2006. Our ABS portfolio is subject to credit and interest rate risk. Credit risk is managed by monitoring the performance of the collateral. In addition, many of the securities in the ABS portfolio are credit enhanced with features such as over-collateralization, subordinated structures, reserve funds, guarantees and/or insurance. Approximately 66.4% of the ABS portfolio had a Moody's rating of Aaa or a Standard & Poor's or Fitch rating of AAA, the highest rating categories. A portion of the ABS portfolio is also subject to interest rate risk since, for example, price volatility and ultimate realized yield are affected by the rate of prepayment of the underlying assets. As of December 31, 2006, 86.5% of the portfolio was less sensitive to interest rate risk due to the payment terms or underlying collateral of the securities. The ABS portfolio includes bonds that are secured by a variety of asset types, predominately home equity loans, credit card receivables and auto loans as well as collateralized debt obligations that are predominately secured by corporate bonds and loans. We may utilize derivative financial instruments to help manage the exposure to interest rate risk from the fixed income securities portfolio. For a more detailed discussion of interest rate risk and our use of derivative financial instruments, see the Market Risk section of the MD&A and Note 6 of the consolidated financial statements. 102 At December 31, 2006, 94.6% of the consolidated fixed income securities portfolio was rated investment grade, which is defined as a security having a rating from The National Association of Insurance Commissioners ("NAIC") of 1 or 2; a rating of Aaa, Aa, A or Baa from Moody's or a rating of AAA, AA, A or BBB from Standard & Poor's, Fitch or Dominion or a rating of aaa, aa, a or bbb from A.M. Best; or a comparable internal rating if an externally provided rating is not available. The following table summarizes the credit quality of the fixed income securities portfolio at December 31, 2006. (in millions) Property-Liability Allstate Financial Corporate and Other Total NAIC Rating Moody's Equivalent Fair Value Percent to total Fair Value Percent to total Fair Value Percent to total Fair Value Percent to total 1 Aaa/Aa/A $ 28,449 86.8 % $ 44,276 69.2 % $ 1,483 94.3 % $ 74,208 75.5 % 2 Baa 2,329 7.1 16,363 25.6 50 3.1 18,742 19.1 3 Ba 777 2.4 2,466 3.9 3,243 3.3 4 B 905 2.7 764 1.2 1,669 1.7 5 Caa or lower 266 0.8 70 0.1 20 1.3 356 0.3 6 In or near default 65 0.2 17 20 1.3 102 0.1 Total $ 32,791 100.0 % $ 63,956 100.0 % $ 1,573 100.0 % $ 98,320 100.0 % Equity Securities Equity securities include common stocks, limited partnership investments, real estate investment trust equity investments and non-redeemable preferred stocks. The equity securities portfolio was $7.78 billion at December 31, 2006 compared to $6.16 billion at December 31, 2005. The increase is primarily attributable to positive cash flows from operations. Gross unrealized gains totaled $1.77 billion at December 31, 2006 compared to $1.31 billion at December 31, 2005. Gross unrealized losses totaled $20 million at December 31, 2006 compared to $22 million at December 31, 2005. Unrealized Gains and Losses See Note 5 of the consolidated financial statements for further disclosures regarding unrealized losses on fixed income and equity securities and factors considered in determining whether the securities are not other-than-temporarily impaired. The unrealized net capital gains on fixed income and equity securities at December 31, 2006 totaled $4.29 billion, a decrease of 103 $288 million since December 31, 2005. Gross unrealized gains and losses on fixed income securities by type and sector are provided in the table below. Gross unrealized At December 31, 2006 Amortized cost Fair value Gains Losses (in millions) Corporate: Consumer goods (cyclical and non-cyclical) $ 6,378 $ 95 $ (71 ) $ 6,402 Utilities 6,139 269 (59 ) 6,349 Banking 6,214 115 (55 ) 6,274 Financial services 5,635 69 (43 ) 5,661 Capital goods 3,948 68 (38 ) 3,978 Communications 2,903 70 (21 ) 2,952 Basic industry 2,293 40 (17 ) 2,316 Other 1,897 69 (16 ) 1,950 Energy 1,911 40 (24 ) 1,927 Transportation 1,870 69 (19 ) 1,920 Technology 1,075 19 (9 ) 1,085 Foreign Government 11 11 Total corporate fixed income portfolio 40,274 923 (372 ) 40,825 U.S. government and agencies 3,284 758 (9 ) 4,033 Municipal 24,665 1,003 (60 ) 25,608 Foreign government 2,489 333 (4 ) 2,818 Mortgage-backed securities 7,962 41 (87 ) 7,916 Commercial mortgage-backed securities 7,834 67 (64 ) 7,837 Asset-backed securities 9,202 40 (31 ) 9,211 Redeemable preferred stock 70 2 72 Total fixed income securities $ 95,780 $ 3,167 $ (627 ) $ 98,320 The consumer goods, utilities, banking, financial services, and capital goods sectors had the highest concentration of gross unrealized losses in our corporate fixed income securities portfolio at December 31, 2006. The gross unrealized losses in these sectors were primarily interest rate related and company specific. As of December 31, 2006, $342 million or 91.9% of the gross unrealized losses in the corporate fixed income portfolio and $251 million or 98.4% of the gross unrealized losses in the remaining fixed income securities were rated investment grade. Unrealized losses on investment grade securities are principally related to rising interest rates or changes in credit spreads since the securities were acquired. All securities in an unrealized loss position at December 31, 2006 were included in our portfolio monitoring process for determining which declines in value were not other-than-temporary. 104 The following table shows the composition by credit quality of the fixed income securities with gross unrealized losses at December 31, 2006. (in millions) NAIC Rating Moody's Equivalent Unrealized Loss Percent to Total Fair Value Percent to Total 1 Aaa/Aa/A $ (422 ) 67.3 % $ 24,198 74.2 % 2 Baa (171 ) 27.3 7,204 22.1 3 Ba (24 ) 3.8 826 2.5 4 B (7 ) 1.1 253 0.8 5 Caa or lower (3 ) 0.5 93 0.3 6 In or near default 25 0.1 Total $ (627 ) 100.0 % $ 32,599 100.0 % The table above includes 37 securities that have not yet received an NAIC rating, for which we have assigned a comparable internal rating, with a fair value totaling $373 million and an unrealized loss of $8 million. Due to lags between the funding of an investment, execution of final legal documents, filing with the Securities Valuation Office ("SVO") of the NAIC, and rating by the SVO, we will always have a small number of securities that have a pending rating. At December 31, 2006, $593 million, or 94.6%, of the gross unrealized losses were related to investment grade fixed income securities. Unrealized losses on investment grade securities principally relate to changes in interest rates or changes in sector-related credit spreads since the securities were acquired. As of December 31, 2006, $34 million of the gross unrealized losses were related to below investment grade fixed income securities. Of this amount, there were no significant unrealized loss positions (greater than or equal to 20% of amortized cost) for six or more consecutive months prior to December 31, 2006. Included among the securities rated below investment grade are both public and privately placed high-yield bonds and securities that were investment grade when originally acquired. We mitigate the credit risk of investing in below investment grade fixed income securities by limiting the percentage of our fixed income portfolio invested in such securities, through diversification of the portfolio, and active credit monitoring and portfolio management. The scheduled maturity dates for fixed income securities in an unrealized loss position at December 31, 2006 are shown below. Actual maturities may differ from those scheduled as a result of prepayments by the issuers. (in millions) Unrealized Loss Percent to Total Fair Value Percent to Total Due in one year or less $ (5 ) 0.8 % $ 673 2.1 % Due after one year through five years (96 ) 15.3 5,979 18.3 Due after five years through ten years (200 ) 31.9 8,330 25.6 Due after ten years (208 ) 33.2 9,358 28.7 Mortgage- and asset- backed securities (1) (118 ) 18.8 8,259 25.3 Total $ (627 ) 100.0 % $ 32,599 100.0 % (1) Because of the potential for prepayment, mortgage- and asset-backed securities are not categorized based on their contractual maturities. 105 The equity portfolio is comprised of securities in the following sectors. Gross unrealized (in millions) At December 31, 2006 Fair Value Cost Gains Losses Consumer goods (cyclical and non-cyclical) $ 1,003 $ 290 $ (7 ) $ 1,286 Technology 413 169 (4 ) 578 Financial services 625 263 (1 ) 887 Real estate 241 251 492 Capital goods 358 143 (2 ) 499 Banking 298 78 376 Communications 295 111 (2 ) 404 Energy 301 198 (3 ) 496 Basic industry 153 76 (1 ) 228 Utilities 128 54 182 Transportation 75 21 96 Other (1) 2,136 117 2,253 Total equities $ 6,026 $ 1,771 $ (20 ) $ 7,777 (1) Other consists primarily of limited partnership investments and index-based securities. At December 31, 2006, the consumer goods, technology and energy sectors had the highest concentration of gross unrealized losses in our equity portfolio, which were company and sector specific. We expect eventual recovery of these securities and the related sectors. All securities in an unrealized loss position at December 31, 2006 were included in our portfolio monitoring process for determining which declines in value were not other-than-temporary. Portfolio Monitoring We have a comprehensive portfolio monitoring process to identify and evaluate, on a case-by-case basis, fixed income and equity securities whose carrying value may be other-than-temporarily impaired. The process includes a quarterly review of all securities using a screening process to identify those securities whose fair value compared to amortized cost for fixed income securities or cost for equity securities is below established thresholds for certain time periods, or which are identified through other monitoring criteria such as ratings downgrades or payment defaults. The securities identified, in addition to other securities for which we may have a concern, are evaluated based on facts and circumstances for inclusion on our watch-list. As a result of approved programs involving the disposition of investments such as changes in duration and revisions to strategic asset allocations and liquidity actions, and certain dispositions anticipated by portfolio managers, we also conduct a portfolio review to recognize impairment on securities in an unrealized loss position for which we do not have the intent and ability to hold until recovery. All securities in an unrealized loss position at December 31, 2006 were included in our portfolio monitoring process for determining which declines in value were not other-than-temporary. 106 The following table summarizes fixed income and equity securities in a gross unrealized loss position according to significance, aging and investment grade classification. December 31, 2006 December 31, 2005 Fixed Income Fixed Income (in millions except number of issues) Investment Grade Below Investment Grade Equity Total Investment Grade Below Investment Grade Equity Total Category (i): Unrealized loss less than 20% of cost (1) Number of Issues 4,883 184 180 5,247 4,267 270 192 4,729 Fair Value $ 31,402 $ 1,193 $ 179 $ 32,774 $ 30,703 $ 1,293 $ 311 $ 32,307 Unrealized $ (593 ) $ (33 ) $ (14 ) $ (640 ) $ (540 ) $ (52 ) $ (17 ) $ (609 ) Category (ii): Unrealized loss greater than or equal to 20% of cost for a period of less than 6 consecutive months (1) Number of Issues 1 2 27 30 6 4 35 45 Fair Value $ $ 4 $ 9 $ 13 $ 40 $ 7 $ 10 $ 57 Unrealized $ $ (1 ) $ (4 ) $ (5 ) $ (11 ) $ (2 ) $ (4 ) $ (17 ) Category (iii): Unrealized loss greater than or equal to 20% of cost for a period of 6 or more consecutive months, but less than 12 consecutive months (1) Number of Issues 17 17 1 15 16 Fair Value $ $ $ 2 $ 2 $ $ 6 $ 2 $ 8 Unrealized $ $ $ (1 ) $ (1 ) $ $ (2 ) $ (1 ) $ (3 ) Category (iv): Unrealized loss greater than or equal to 20% of cost for twelve or more consecutive months (1) Number of Issues 4 4 2 2 Fair Value $ $ $ 1 $ 1 $ $ 8 $ $ 8 Unrealized $ $ $ (1 ) $ (1 ) $ $ (7 ) $ $ (7 ) Total Number of Issues 4,884 186 228 5,298 4,273 277 242 4,792 Total Fair Value $ 31,402 $ 1,197 $ 191 $ 32,790 $ 30,743 $ 1,314 $ 323 $ 32,380 Total Unrealized Losses $ (593 ) $ (34 ) $ (20 ) $ (647 ) $ (551 ) $ (63 ) $ (22 ) $ (636 ) (1) For fixed income securities, cost represents amortized cost. The largest individual unrealized loss was $4 million for category (i) and $1 million for category (ii) as of December 31, 2006. Categories (i) and (ii) have generally been adversely affected by overall economic conditions including interest rate increases and the market's evaluation of certain sectors. The degree to which and/or length of time that the securities have been in an unrealized loss position does not suggest that these securities pose a high risk of being other-than-temporarily impaired. Categories (iii) and (iv) have primarily been adversely affected by industry and issue specific conditions. All of the securities in these categories are monitored for impairment. We expect that the fair values of these securities will recover over time. 107 Whenever our initial analysis indicates that a fixed income security's unrealized loss of 20% or more for at least 36 months or any equity security's unrealized loss of 20% or more for at least 12 months is temporary, additional evaluations and management approvals are required to substantiate that a write-down is not appropriate. As of December 31, 2006, no securities met these criteria. The following table contains the individual securities with the largest unrealized losses as of December 31, 2006. No other fixed income or equity security had an unrealized loss greater than $2 million or 0.3% of the total unrealized loss on fixed income and equity securities. (in millions) Unrealized Loss Fair Value NAIC Rating Unrealized Loss Category Food Processing Company (1) $ (4 ) $ 16 N/A (i) Financial Institution (3 ) 47 1 (i) Food Processing Company (3 ) 32 2 (i) Gaming/Lodging Company (3 ) 31 3 (i) Auto Supplier (3 ) 17 3 (i) Government Securities (3 ) 141 1 (i) Energy service provider (3 ) 33 1 (i) Total $ (22 ) $ 317 (1) This loss was related to an equity security that does not receive a credit quality related rating from the NAIC. We monitor the quality of our fixed income portfolio by categorizing certain investments as "problem", "restructured" or "potential problem." Problem fixed income securities are securities in default with respect to principal or interest and/or securities issued by companies that have gone into bankruptcy subsequent to our acquisition of the security. Restructured fixed income securities have rates and terms that are not consistent with market rates or terms prevailing at the time of the restructuring. Potential problem fixed income securities are current with respect to contractual principal and/or interest, but because of other facts and circumstances, we have concerns regarding the borrower's ability to pay future principal and interest, which causes us to believe these securities may be classified as problem or restructured in the future. The following table summarizes problem, restructured and potential problem fixed income securities at December 31. 2006 2005 (in millions) Amortized cost Fair value Percent of total Fixed Income portfolio Amortized cost Fair value Percent of total Fixed Income portfolio Problem $ 65 $ 84 0.1 % $ 172 $ 188 0.2 % Restructured 33 33 33 34 Potential problem 139 149 0.2 178 191 0.2 Total net carrying value $ 237 $ 266 0.3 % $ 383 $ 413 0.4 % Cumulative write-downs recognized (1) $ 298 $ 304 (1) Cumulative write-downs recognized only reflects write-downs related to securities within the problem, potential problem and restructured categories. 108 We have experienced a decrease in the amortized cost of fixed income securities categorized as problem and potential problem as of December 31, 2006 compared to December 31, 2005. The decrease was primarily due to dispositions and the removal of securities upon improving conditions. We evaluated each of these securities through our portfolio monitoring process at December 31, 2006 and recorded write-downs when appropriate. We further concluded that any remaining unrealized losses on these securities were temporary in nature and that we have the intent and ability to hold the securities until recovery. While these balances may increase in the future, particularly if economic conditions are unfavorable, management expects that the total amount of securities in these categories will remain low relative to the total fixed income securities portfolio. Net Realized Capital Gains and Losses The following table presents the components of realized capital gains and losses and the related tax effect for the years ended December 31. (in millions) 2006 2005 2004 Investment write-downs $ (47 ) $ (55 ) $ (129 ) Dispositions 379 619 828 Valuation of derivative instruments 26 (95 ) (46 ) Settlement of derivative instruments (72 ) 80 (62 ) Realized capital gains and losses, pretax 286 549 591 Income tax expense (100 ) (189 ) (199 ) Realized capital gains and losses, after-tax $ 186 $ 360 $ 392 Dispositions in the above table include sales, losses recognized in anticipation of dispositions and other transactions such as calls and prepayments. We may sell impaired fixed income, cost or equity securities that were in an unrealized loss position at the previous reporting date in situations where new factors such as negative developments, subsequent credit deterioration, changing liquidity needs, and newly identified market opportunities cause a change in our previous intent to hold a security to recovery or maturity. The loss for the year ended December 31, 2006 on the settlement of derivative instruments was primarily driven by $111 million of realized losses from commodity-based excess return swaps and futures contracts. For portfolio diversification, we enter into commodity-based investments through the use of excess return swaps and futures contracts whose returns are tied to a commodity-based index which declined in value. A changing interest rate environment will drive changes in our portfolio duration targets at a tactical level. A duration target and range is established with an economic view of liabilities relative to a long-term portfolio view. Tactical duration adjustments within management's approved ranges are accomplished through both cash market transactions and derivative activities that generate realized gains and losses and through new purchases. As a component of our approach to managing portfolio duration, realized gains and losses on derivative instruments are most appropriately considered in conjunction with the unrealized gains and losses on the fixed income portfolio. This approach mitigates the impacts of general interest rate changes to the overall financial condition of the corporation. Dispositions included net realized gains on sales and other transactions such as calls and prepayments of $491 million and losses recorded in connection with anticipated dispositions of $112 million. The net realized gains on sales and other transactions were comprised of gross gains of $958 million and gross losses of $467 million. The $467 million in gross losses primarily consisted of $317 million from sales of fixed income securities and $143 million from sales of equity securities. 109 During our comprehensive portfolio reviews, we ascertain whether there are any approved programs involving the disposition of investments such as changes in duration, revision to strategic asset allocation and liquidity actions; and any dispositions anticipated by the portfolio managers resulting from their on-going comprehensive reviews of the portfolios. Upon approval of such programs, we identify a population of suitable investments, typically larger than needed to execute the disposition, from which specific securities are selected to sell. Due to our change in intent to hold until recovery, we recognize impairments, which are included in losses from dispositions, on any of these securities in an unrealized loss position. When the objectives of the programs are accomplished, any remaining securities are redesignated as intent to hold until recovery. For the year ended December 31, 2006, we recognized $112 million of losses related to a change in our intent to hold certain securities with unrealized losses until they recover in value. The change in our intent was driven by certain approved programs, including funding for the disposition through reinsurance of substantially all of Allstate Financial's variable annuity business, yield enhancement strategies for Allstate Financial, a liquidity strategy review for Corporate and Other segment, and changes to strategic asset allocations for Allstate Protection. These programs were completed during 2006. Additionally, ongoing comprehensive reviews of both the Allstate Protection and Allstate Financial portfolios resulted in the identification of anticipated dispositions by the portfolio managers. At December 31, 2006, the fair value of securities for which we did not have the intent to hold until recovery totaled $375 million. At December 31, 2005, the fair value of the securities for which we did not have the intent to hold until recovery totaled $14.37 billion. Approved programs involving the disposition of securities included liquidity needs to pay catastrophe claims, revisions to strategic asset allocations for Allstate Protection, and dispositions anticipated by the portfolio managers resulting from their on-going comprehensive reviews of the portfolios on which we recognized $208 million of losses during 2005. These objectives were accomplished during 2006. The ten largest losses from sales of individual securities for the year ended December 31, 2006 totaled $26 million with the largest loss being $4 million and the smallest loss being $2 million. One of the securities comprising the $26 million was in an unrealized loss position greater than or equal to 20% of amortized cost for fixed income securities or cost for equity securities for a period of less than six consecutive months. Our largest aggregate loss on dispositions and writedowns are shown in the following table by issuer and its affiliates. No other issuer together with its affiliates had an aggregated loss on dispositions and 110 writedowns greater than 0.6% of the total gross loss on dispositions and writedowns on fixed income and equity securities. (in millions) Fair Value at Disposition ("Proceeds") Loss on Dispositions (1) Write- downs December 31, 2006 Holdings (2) Net Unrealized Gain (Loss) Limited Partnership Investment Fund $ $ $ (6 ) $ 32 $ Household Product Retailer 43 (4 ) 30 Aircraft Securitized Trust (4 ) 2 Automobile Manufacturer 71 (4 ) 56 (1 ) Gaming/Lodging Company 49 (4 ) 64 (2 ) Pharmaceutical Company 17 (4 ) 83 5 Healthcare Provider 37 (4 ) 44 (2 ) Total $ 217 $ (20 ) $ (10 ) $ 311 $ (1) Dispositions include losses recognized in anticipation of dispositions. (2) Holdings include fixed income securities at amortized cost or equity securities at cost. The circumstances of the above losses are considered to be company specific and are not expected to have an effect on other holdings in our portfolios. Mortgage Loans Our mortgage loan portfolio which is primarily held in the Allstate Financial portfolio was $9.47 billion at December 31, 2006 and $8.75 billion at December 31, 2005, and comprised primarily of loans secured by first mortgages on developed commercial real estate. Geographical and property type diversification are key considerations used to manage our mortgage loan risk. We closely monitor our commercial mortgage loan portfolio on a loan-by-loan basis. Loans with an estimated collateral value less than the loan balance, as well as loans with other characteristics indicative of higher than normal credit risk, are reviewed by financial and investment management at least quarterly for purposes of establishing valuation allowances and placing loans on non-accrual status. The underlying collateral values are based upon either discounted property cash flow projections or a commonly used valuation method that utilizes a one-year projection of expected annual income divided by an expected rate of return. We had no net realized capital losses related to write-downs on mortgage loans for the years ended December 31, 2006 and 2005 and had $1 million for the year ended December 31, 2004. Short-Term Investments Our short-term investment portfolio was $2.43 billion and $3.47 billion at December 31, 2006 and 2005, respectively. We invest available cash balances primarily in taxable short-term securities having a final maturity date or redemption date of less than one year. As one of our business activities, we conduct securities lending, primarily as an investment yield enhancement, with third parties such as brokerage firms. We obtain collateral in an amount generally equal to 102% and 105% of the fair value of domestic and foreign securities, respectively, and monitor the market value of the securities loaned on a daily basis with additional collateral obtained as necessary. The cash we receive is invested in short-term and fixed income investments, and an offsetting liability is recorded in other liabilities and accrued expense. At December 31, 2006, the amount of securities lending collateral reinvested in short-term investments had a carrying value of $987 million. This compares to $650 million at December 31, 2005. 111 MARKET RISK Market risk is the risk that we will incur losses due to adverse changes in equity, interest, commodity, or currency exchange rates and prices. Our primary market risk exposures are to changes in interest rates and equity prices, although we also have a smaller exposure to changes in foreign currency exchange rates and commodity prices. The active management of market risk is integral to our results of operations. We may use the following approaches to manage exposure to market risk within defined tolerance ranges: 1) rebalancing existing asset or liability portfolios, 2) changing the character of investments purchased in the future and 3) using derivative instruments to modify the market risk characteristics of existing assets and liabilities or assets expected to be purchased. For a more detailed discussion of our use of derivative financial instruments, see Note 6 of the consolidated financial statements. Overview We generate substantial investible funds from our Property-Liability and Allstate Financial businesses. In formulating and implementing guidelines for investing funds, we seek to earn returns that enhance our ability to offer competitive rates and prices to customers while contributing to attractive and stable profits and long-term capital growth. Accordingly, our investment decisions and objectives are a function of the underlying risks and product profiles of each business. Investment policies define the overall framework for managing market and other investment risks, including accountability and control over risk management activities. Subsidiaries that conduct investment activities follow policies that have been approved by their respective boards of directors. These investment policies specify the investment limits and strategies that are appropriate given the liquidity, surplus, product profile and regulatory requirements of the subsidiary. Executive oversight and investment activities are conducted primarily through subsidiaries' boards of directors and investment committees. For Allstate Financial, its asset-liability management ("ALM") policies further define the overall framework for managing market and investment risks. ALM focuses on strategies to enhance yields, mitigate market risks and optimize capital to improve profitability and returns for Allstate Financial. Allstate Financial ALM activities follow asset-liability policies that have been approved by their respective boards of directors. These ALM policies specify limits, ranges and/or targets for investments that best meet Allstate Financial's business objectives in light of its product liabilities. We manage our exposure to market risk through the use of asset allocation, duration and value-at-risk limits, through the use of simulation and, as appropriate, through the use of stress tests. We have asset allocation limits that place restrictions on the total funds that may be invested within an asset class. We have duration limits on the Property-Liability and Allstate Financial investment portfolios and, as appropriate, on individual components of these portfolios. These duration limits place restrictions on the amount of interest rate risk that may be taken. Our value-at-risk limits are intended to restrict the potential loss in fair value that could arise from adverse movements in the fixed income, equity, and currency markets based on historical volatilities and correlations among market risk factors. Comprehensive day-to-day management of market risk within defined tolerance ranges occurs as portfolio managers buy and sell within their respective markets based upon the acceptable boundaries established by investment policies. For Allstate Financial, this day-to-day management is integrated with and informed by the activities of the ALM organization. This integration results in a prudent, methodical and effective adjudication of market risk and return, conditioned by the unique demands and dynamics of Allstate Financial's product liabilities and supported by the application of advanced risk technology and analytics. 112 Although we apply a similar overall philosophy to market risk, the underlying business frameworks and the accounting and regulatory environments differ considerably between the Property-Liability and Allstate Financial businesses affecting investment decisions and risk parameters. Interest rate risk is the risk that we will incur a loss due to adverse changes in interest rates. This risk arises from many of our primary activities, as we invest substantial funds in interest rate-sensitive assets and issue interest rate-sensitive liabilities. We manage the interest rate risk in our assets relative to the interest rate risk in our liabilities. One of the measures used to quantify this exposure is duration. Duration measures the price sensitivity of the assets and liabilities to changes in interest rates. For example, if interest rates increase 100 basis points, the fair value of an asset exhibiting a duration of 5 is expected to decrease in value by approximately 5%. At December 31, 2006, the difference between our asset and liability duration was approximately 0.23, compared to a 0.50 gap at December 31, 2005. A positive duration gap indicates that the fair value of our assets is more sensitive to interest rate movements than the fair value of our liabilities. Most of our duration gap originates from the Property-Liability operations, with the primary liabilities being auto and homeowners claims. In the management of investments supporting the Property-Liability business, we adhere to an objective of emphasizing safety of principal and consistency of income within a total return framework. This approach is designed to ensure our financial strength and stability for paying claims, while maximizing economic value and surplus growth. This objective generally results in a positive duration mismatch between the Property-Liability assets and liabilities. For the Allstate Financial business, we seek to invest premiums, contract charges and deposits to generate future cash flows that will fund future claims, benefits and expenses, and that will earn stable margins across a wide variety of interest rate and economic scenarios. In order to achieve this objective and limit interest rate risk for Allstate Financial, we adhere to a philosophy of managing the duration of assets and related liabilities. This philosophy may include using interest rate swaps, futures, forwards, caps, floors and swaptions to reduce the interest rate risk resulting from mismatches between existing assets and liabilities, and financial futures and other derivative instruments to hedge the interest rate risk of anticipated purchases and sales of investments and product sales to customers. We pledge and receive collateral on certain types of derivative contracts. For futures and option contracts traded on exchanges, we have pledged securities as margin deposits totaling $61 million as of December 31, 2006. For over-the-counter derivative transactions including interest rate swaps, foreign currency swaps, interest rate caps, interest rate floor agreements, and credit default swaps, master netting agreements are used. These agreements allow us to net payments due for transactions covered by the agreements, and when applicable, we are required to post collateral. As of December 31, 2006, we held $361 million of cash pledged by counterparties as collateral for over-the-counter instruments and pledged $10 million in securities as collateral to counterparties. To calculate the duration gap between assets and liabilities, we project asset and liability cash flows and calculate their net present value using a risk-free market interest rate adjusted for credit quality, sector attributes, liquidity and other specific risks. Duration is calculated by revaluing these cash flows at alternative interest rates and determining the percentage change in aggregate fair value. The cash flows used in this calculation include the expected maturity and repricing characteristics of our derivative financial instruments, all other financial instruments (as described in Note 6 of the consolidated financial statements), and certain other items including unearned premiums, property-liability claims and claims expense reserves, interest-sensitive liabilities and annuity liabilities. The projections include assumptions (based upon historical market experience and our experience) that reflect the effect of changing interest rates on the prepayment, lapse, leverage and/or option features of instruments, where applicable. Such 113 assumptions relate primarily to mortgage-backed securities, collateralized mortgage obligations, municipal housing bonds, callable municipal and corporate obligations, and fixed rate single and flexible premium deferred annuities. Additionally, the calculations include assumptions regarding the renewal of property-liability policies. Based upon the information and assumptions we use in this duration calculation, and interest rates in effect at December 31, 2006, we estimate that a 100 basis point immediate, parallel increase in interest rates ("rate shock") would decrease the net fair value of the assets and liabilities by approximately $1.76 billion, compared to $1.45 billion at December 31, 2005. Reflected in the duration calculation are the effects of a program that uses short futures to manage the Property-Liability interest rate risk exposures relative to duration targets. Based on contracts in place at December 31, 2006, we would recognize realized capital gains totaling $40 million in the event of a 100 basis point immediate, parallel interest rate increase and $40 million in realized capital losses in the event of a 100 basis point immediate, parallel interest rate decrease. The selection of a 100 basis point immediate parallel change in interest rates should not be construed as our prediction of future market events, but only as an illustration of the potential effect of such an event. There are $7.08 billion of assets supporting life insurance products such as traditional and interest-sensitive life that are not financial instruments. These assets and the associated liabilities have not been included in the above estimate. The $7.08 billion of assets excluded from the calculation has increased from the $7.04 billion reported at December 31, 2005 due to an increase in the in-force account value of interest-sensitive life products. Based on assumptions described above, in the event of a 100 basis point immediate increase in interest rates, the assets supporting life insurance products would decrease in value by $457 million, compared to a decrease of $456 million at December 31, 2005. To the extent that conditions differ from the assumptions we used in these calculations, duration and rate shock measures could be significantly impacted. Additionally, our calculations assume that the current relationship between short-term and long-term interest rates (the term structure of interest rates) will remain constant over time. As a result, these calculations may not fully capture the effect of non-parallel changes in the term structure of interest rates and/or large changes in interest rates. Equity price risk is the risk that we will incur losses due to adverse changes in the general levels of the equity markets. At December 31, 2006, we held approximately $5.87 billion in common stocks and $2.99 billion in other securities with equity risk (including primarily convertible securities, limited partnership funds, non-redeemable preferred securities and equity-linked notes), compared to approximately $4.97 billion in common stocks and $2.30 billion in other equity investments at December 31, 2005. Approximately 100.0% and 53.5% of these totals, respectively, represented assets of the Property-Liability operations at December 31, 2006, compared to approximately 100.0% and 58.4%, respectively, at December 31, 2005. Additionally, we had $750 million in short Standard & Poor's 500 Composite Price Index ("S&P 500") futures at December 31, 2006 with a fair value of $3 million. At December 31, 2006, our portfolio of common stocks and other securities with equity risk had a beta of approximately 1.02, compared to a beta of approximately 0.96 at December 31, 2005. Beta represents a widely used methodology to describe, quantitatively, an investment's market risk characteristics relative to an index such as the S&P 500. Based on the beta analysis, we estimate that if the S&P 500 decreases by 10%, the fair value of our equity investments will decrease by approximately 10.2%. Likewise, we estimate that if the S&P 500 increases by 10%, the fair value of our equity investments will increase by approximately 10.2%. Based upon the information and assumptions we used to calculate beta at December 31, 2006, we estimate that an immediate decrease in the S&P 500 of 10% would decrease the net fair value of our equity investments identified above by approximately $824 million, compared to $695 million at December 31, 2005. Reflected in the equity calculation are the 114 effects of a program that uses short futures to manage Property-Liability equity risk exposures relative to equity targets. Based on contracts in place at December 31, 2006, we would recognize realized capital gains totaling $75 million in the event of a 10% immediate decrease in the S&P 500 and capital losses totaling $75 million in the event of a 10% immediate increase in the S&P 500. The selection of a 10% immediate decrease in the S&P 500 should not be construed as our prediction of future market events, but only as an illustration of the potential effect of such an event. The beta of our common stocks and other securities with equity risk was determined by comparing the monthly total returns of these investments to monthly total returns of the S&P 500 over a three-year historical period. Since beta is historically based, projecting future price volatility using this method involves an inherent assumption that historical volatility and correlation relationships between stocks and the composition of our portfolio will not change in the future. Therefore, the illustrations noted above may not reflect our actual experience if future volatility and correlation relationships differ from the historical relationships. At December 31, 2006 and 2005, we had separate accounts assets related to variable annuity and variable life contracts with account values totaling $16.17 billion and $15.24 billion, respectively. Equity risk exists for contract charges based on separate account balances and guarantees for death and/or income benefits provided by our variable products. In 2006, we disposed of substantially all of the variable annuity business through a reinsurance agreement with Prudential as described in Note 3 of the consolidated financial statements, and therefore mitigated this aspect of our risk. Equity risk for our variable life business relates to contract charges and policyholder benefits. Total variable life contract charges for 2006 and 2005 were $86 million and $79 million, respectively. Separate account liabilities related to variable life contracts were $826 million and $721 million in December 31, 2006 and 2005, respectively. At December 31, 2006 and 2005 we had approximately $3.47 billion and $2.72 billion, respectively, in equity-indexed annuity liabilities that provide customers with interest crediting rates based on the performance of the S&P 500. We hedge the risk associated with these liabilities through the purchase and sale of equity-indexed options and futures, interest rate swaps, and eurodollar futures, maintaining risk within specified value-at-risk limits. Foreign currency exchange rate risk is the risk that we will incur economic losses due to adverse changes in foreign currency exchange rates. This risk primarily arises from our foreign equity investments, including real estate funds and our Canadian operations. We also have funding agreement programs and a small amount of fixed income securities that are denominated in foreign currencies, but we use derivatives to effectively hedge the foreign currency risk of these funding agreements and securities. At December 31, 2006 and 2005, we had approximately $1.02 billion and $1.17 billion, respectively, in funding agreements denominated in foreign currencies. At December 31, 2006, we had approximately $637 million in foreign currency denominated equity securities and an additional $559 million net investment in our foreign subsidiaries. These amounts were $538 million and $601 million, respectively, at December 31, 2005. The foreign currency exposure is almost entirely in the Property-Liability business. Based upon the information and assumptions we used at December 31, 2006, we estimate that a 10% immediate unfavorable change in each of the foreign currency exchange rates that we are exposed to would decrease the value of our foreign currency denominated instruments by approximately $120 million, compared with an estimated $114 million decrease at December 31, 2005. The selection of a 10% immediate decrease in all currency exchange rates should not be construed as our prediction of future market events, but only as an illustration of the potential effect of such an event. Our currency 115 exposure is diversified across 21 currencies, compared to 23 currencies at December 31, 2005. Our largest individual currency exchange exposures at December 31, 2006 were to the Canadian dollar (44.8%) and the Euro (20.9%). The largest individual currency exchange exposures at December 31, 2005 were to the Canadian dollar (50.7%) and the Euro (17.5%). Our primary regional exposure is to Western Europe, approximately 33.4% at December 31, 2006, compared to 29.5% at December 31, 2005. The modeling technique we use to report our currency exposure does not take into account correlation among foreign currency exchange rates. Even though we believe it is very unlikely that all of the foreign currency exchange rates that we are exposed to would simultaneously decrease by 10%, we nonetheless stress test our portfolio under this and other hypothetical extreme adverse market scenarios. Our actual experience may differ from these results because of assumptions we have used or because significant liquidity and market events could occur that we did not foresee. Commodity price risk is the risk that we will incur economic losses due to adverse changes in the prices of commodities. This risk arises from our commodity linked investments, such as the Goldman Sachs Commodity Index a broad based, oil dominated index. At December 31, 2006 and 2005, we had approximately $572 million and $221 million exposure to the index, respectively. This exposure is almost entirely within Property-Liability. Based upon the information and assumptions available at December 31, 2006, we estimate that a 10% immediate unfavorable change to the commodity index would decrease the value of our commodity investments by $57 million, compared with an estimated $21 million decrease at December 31, 2005. The selection of a 10% immediate decrease in commodity prices should not be construed as our prediction of future market events, but only as an illustration of the potential effect of such an event. PENSION PLANS We have defined benefit pension plans, which cover most full-time and certain part-time employees and employee-agents. In September 2006, the Financial Accounting Standards Board issued Statement of Financial Accounting Standard ("SFAS") No. 158. For further information on SFAS No. 158, see Note 2 of the consolidated financial statements. See Note 16 of the consolidated financial statements for a complete discussion of these plans and their effect on the consolidated financial statements. Also during 2006, the federal government enacted the Pension Protection Act of 2006 (the "Act") which changes the manner in which pension funding is determined. The new rules are effective for funding beginning in 2008. We are currently reviewing the implications of the Act, but do not expect it to have a material impact on funding. Our obligations have not changed as a result of these developments. The pension and other postretirement plans may be amended or terminated at any time. Any revisions could result in significant changes to our obligations and our obligation to fund the plans. As provided for in SFAS No. 87 "Employers' Accounting for Pensions," the market-related value component of expected returns recognizes plan equity losses and gains over a five-year period, which we believe is consistent with the long-term nature of pension obligations. As a result, the effect of changes in fair value on our net periodic pension cost may be experienced in periods subsequent to those in which the fluctuations actually occur. Net periodic pension cost in 2007 is estimated to be $262 million based on current assumptions. Net periodic pension cost increased in 2006 and 2005 principally due to decreases in the weighted average discount rate assumption which is based on long-term interest rates, the impact of unfavorable investment returns from prior periods on the market-related value of assets, and the amortization of 116 actuarial losses. In each of the years 2006, 2005 and 2004, net pension cost included non-cash settlement charges primarily resulting from lump sum distributions made to agents and in 2006 due to higher lump sum payments made to Allstate employees. Settlement charges are expected to continue in the future as we settle our remaining agent pension obligations by making lump sum distributions to agents. Amounts recorded for pension cost and accumulated other comprehensive income are significantly affected by fluctuations in the returns on plan assets and the amortization of unrecognized actuarial gains and losses. Plan assets sustained net losses in prior periods primarily due to declines in equity markets. These asset losses, combined with all other unrecognized actuarial gains and losses, resulted in amortization of net actuarial loss (and additional net periodic pension cost) of $143 million in 2006 and $135 million in 2005. We anticipate that the unrealized loss for our pension plans will exceed 10% of the greater of the projected benefit obligations or the market-related value of assets during the foreseeable future, resulting in additional amortization and net periodic pension cost. In conjunction with the recognition of the net actuarial loss in accumulated other comprehensive income, upon adoption of SFAS No. 158, we recorded a deferred tax asset of $574 million. The deferred tax asset will be amortized in conjunction with the net actuarial losses over the remaining service period of active employees expected to receive benefits. Although realization is not assured, we believe it is more likely than not that the deferred tax assets will be realized based on the assumption that certain levels of income will be achieved. See Note 14 of the consolidated financial statements for further information on deferred tax assets. Amounts recorded for net periodic pension cost and accumulated other comprehensive income are also significantly affected by changes in the assumptions used to determine the weighted average discount rate and the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets. The weighted average discount rate is based on rates at which expected pension benefits attributable to past employee service could effectively be settled on a present value basis at the measurement date. We develop the assumed weighted average discount rate by utilizing the weighted average yield of a theoretical dedicated portfolio derived from bonds available in the Lehman corporate bond universe having ratings of at least "AA" by Standard & Poor's or at least "Aa" by Moody's on the measurement date with cash flows that match expected plan benefit requirements. Significant changes in discount rates, such as those caused by changes in the yield curve, the mix of bonds available in the market, the duration of selected bonds and expected benefit payments, may result in volatility in pension cost and accumulated other comprehensive income. Holding other assumptions constant, a hypothetical decrease of 100 basis points in the weighted average discount rate would result in an increase of $55 million in net periodic pension cost and a $423 million increase in the underfunded liability of our pension plans recorded as accumulated other comprehensive income after-tax as of October 31, 2006, our most recent measurement date, versus an increase of $58 million in net periodic pension cost and a $1.08 billion increase in the minimum pension liability after-tax as of October 31, 2005. A hypothetical increase of 100 basis points in the weighted average discount rate would decrease net periodic pension cost by $48 million and would decrease the underfunded liability of our pension plans recorded as accumulated other comprehensive income after-tax by $353 million as of October 31, 2006, versus a decrease in net periodic pension cost of $45 million and a $6 million decrease in the minimum pension liability after-tax as of October 31, 2005. This non-symmetrical range results from the non-linear relationship between discount rates and pension obligations, and changes in the amortization of unrealized net actuarial gains and losses. The expected long-term rate of return on plan assets reflects the average rate of earnings expected on plan assets. While this rate reflects long-term assumptions and is consistent with long-term historical returns, sustained changes in the market or changes in the mix of plan assets may lead to revisions in 117 the assumed long-term rate of return on plan assets that may result in variability of pension cost. Differences between the actual return on plan assets and the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets are a component of unrecognized gains or losses, which may be amortized as a component of net actuarial gains and losses and recorded in accumulated other comprehensive income. As a result, the effect of changes in fair value on our pension cost may be experienced in results of operation in periods subsequent to those in which the fluctuations actually occur. Holding other assumptions constant, a hypothetical decrease of 100 basis points in the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets would result in an increase of $42 million in pension cost at October 31, 2006, compared to an increase in pension cost of $38 million at October 31, 2005. A hypothetical increase of 100 basis points in the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets would result in a decrease in net periodic pension cost of $42 million at October 31, 2006, compared to a decrease in pension cost of $38 million at October 31, 2005. CAPITAL RESOURCES AND LIQUIDITY Capital Resources consist of shareholders' equity and debt, representing funds deployed or available to be deployed to support business operations or for general corporate purposes. The following table summarizes our capital resources at December 31. (in millions) 2006 2005 2004 Common stock, retained earnings and other shareholders' equity items $ 20,855 $ 18,104 $ 19,208 Accumulated other comprehensive income 991 2,082 2,615 Total shareholders' equity 21,846 20,186 21,823 Debt 4,662 5,300 5,334 Total capital resources $ 26,508 $ 25,486 $ 27,157 Ratio of debt to shareholders' equity 21.3 % 26.3 % 24.4 % Ratio of debt to capital resources 17.6 % 20.8 % 19.6 % Shareholders' equity increased in 2006, due to net income which was partly offset by share repurchases, dividends paid to shareholders, decreases in unrealized net capital gains on investments, and the recognition of the net funded status of pension and other post retirement benefit obligations recognized with the adoption of SFAS No. 158. Shareholders' equity declined in 2005 when compared to 2004, due to net income being offset by share repurchases, decreases in unrealized net capital gains on investments and dividends paid to shareholders. SFAS No. 158 requires that all previously unrecognized actuarial gains and losses and prior service cost be recognized as a component of accumulated other comprehensive income, net of tax. The net funded status of pension and other post retirement benefit obligations as of December 31, 2006 decreased shareholders' equity by $1.11 billion, and increased the ratio of debt to shareholders' equity and the ratio of debt to capital resources by 1.0 points and 0.7 points, respectively. As shown in the table below, our financial ratings were not impacted by this adoption. For further information on SFAS No. 158, see Notes 2 and 16 of the consolidated financial statements and the Pension Plans section of the MD&A. Share repurchases We completed our $4.00 billion share repurchase program that commenced in January 2005 during November 2006, and commenced a $3.00 billion share repurchase program that is expected to be completed by March 31, 2008. As of December 31, 2006, this program had $2.79 billion remaining. 118 Since 1995, we have acquired 368 million shares of our common stock at a cost of $14.16 billion, primarily as part of various stock repurchase programs. We have reissued 91 million shares since 1995, primarily associated with our equity incentive plans, the 1999 acquisition of American Heritage Life Investment Corporation ("AHL") and the 2001 redemption of certain mandatorily redeemable preferred securities. The impact of our repurchase programs on total shares outstanding since 1995 has been a net reduction of 274 million shares or 30.6%. Debt decreased in 2006, primarily due to net decreases in long-term debt and short-term debt consisting of commercial paper borrowings. Long-term debt decreased due to the December 1, 2006 repayment of $550 million of 5.375% Senior Notes in accordance with their scheduled maturity. We also elected to redeem our $200 million of 7.83% junior subordinated debentures due in 2045, thereby triggering the redemption of 200,000 shares of the 7.83% mandatorily redeemable preferred securities of subsidiary trust ("trust preferred securities") originally issued by Allstate Financing II, an unconsolidated variable interest entity ("VIE"). The debentures and trust preferred securities were redeemed at a price of 103.915% plus accrued and unpaid interest. In 2006, we also purchased a headquarters office building previously owned by a consolidated synthetic lease VIE for $78 million, further reducing long-term debt. These redemptions were made from available sources of liquidity including the issuance in March 2006 of $650 million of 5.95% Senior Notes due 2036, utilizing the registration statement filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission ("SEC") in August 2003. Debt decreased in 2005, primarily due to decreases in long-term debt partially offset by increased commercial paper borrowings. In May 2005, we issued $800 million of 5.55% Senior Notes due 2035, utilizing the registration statement filed with the SEC in August 2003. The proceeds of this issuance were used for general corporate purposes including to fund the repayment of a portion of the $900 million of 7 7 / 8 % Senior Notes due 2005, which were repaid at their scheduled maturity, May 1, 2005. In July 2005, we liquidated our consolidated investment management VIE. As a result of the liquidation, long-term debt decreased by $279 million. At December 31, 2006, there were no outstanding commercial paper borrowings. Financial Ratings and Strength The following table summarizes our debt, commercial paper and insurance financial strength ratings at December 31, 2006. Moody's Standard & Poor's A.M. Best The Allstate Corporation (senior long-term debt) A1 A+ a The Allstate Corporation (commercial paper) P-1 A-1 AMB-1 Allstate Insurance Company (insurance financial strength) Aa2 AA A+ Allstate Life Insurance Company ("ALIC") (insurance financial strength) Aa2 AA A+ Our ratings are influenced by many factors including our operating and financial performance, asset quality, liquidity, asset/liability management, overall portfolio mix, financial leverage (i.e., debt), exposure to risks such as catastrophes and the current level of operating leverage. Allstate's domestic property-liability and life insurance subsidiaries prepare their statutory basis financial statements in conformity with accounting practices prescribed or permitted by the insurance department of the applicable state of domicile. Statutory surplus is a measure that is often used as a basis for determining dividend paying capacity, operating leverage and premium growth capacity, and it is also reviewed by rating agencies in determining their ratings. As of December 31, 2006, AIC's statutory surplus is approximately $19.1 billion compared to $14.8 billion at December 31, 2005. 119 The ratio of net premiums written to statutory surplus is a common measure of operating leverage used in the property-casualty insurance industry and serves as an indicator of a company's premium growth capacity. Ratios in excess of 3 to 1 are typically considered outside the usual range by insurance regulators and rating agencies. AIC's premium to surplus ratio was 1.4x on December 31, 2006 compared to 1.8x in the prior year. We have distinct groups of subsidiaries licensed to sell property and casualty insurance in New Jersey and Florida that maintain separate group ratings. The ratings of these groups are influenced by the risks that relate specifically to each group. Many mortgage companies require property owners to have insurance from an insurance carrier with a secure financial strength rating from an accredited rating agency. Allstate New Jersey Insurance Company and Encompass Insurance Company of New Jersey, which write auto and homeowners insurance, are rated A- by A.M. Best. Allstate New Jersey Insurance Company also has a Demotech rating of A". Allstate Floridian, which writes primarily property insurance, has an A.M. Best rating of B+ with a negative outlook. AFIC and its subsidiary, Allstate Floridian Indemnity Company, also have Demotech financial stability ratings of A'. Encompass Floridian Insurance Company and Encompass Floridian Indemnity Company, both subsidiaries of AFIC, have Demotech financial stability ratings of A. State laws specify regulatory actions if an insurer's risk-based capital ("RBC"), a measure of an insurer's solvency, falls below certain levels. The NAIC has a standard formula for annually assessing RBC. The formula for calculating RBC for property-liability companies takes into account asset and credit risks but places more emphasis on underwriting factors for reserving and pricing. The formula for calculating RBC for life insurance companies takes into account factors relating to insurance, business, asset and interest rate risks. At December 31, 2006, the RBC for each of our domestic insurance companies was above levels that would require regulatory actions. The NAIC has also developed a set of financial relationships or tests known as the Insurance Regulatory Information System to assist state regulators in monitoring the financial condition of insurance companies and identifying companies that require special attention or actions by insurance regulatory authorities. The NAIC analyzes financial data provided by insurance companies using prescribed ratios, each with defined "usual ranges". Generally, regulators will begin to monitor an insurance company if its ratios fall outside the usual ranges for four or more of the ratios. If an insurance company has insufficient capital, regulators may act to reduce the amount of insurance it can issue. The ratios of our domestic insurance companies are within these ranges. 120 Liquidity Sources and Uses Our potential sources of funds principally include activities shown in the following table. Property- Liability Allstate Financial Corporate and Other Receipt of insurance premiums X X Allstate Financial contractholder fund deposits X Reinsurance recoveries X X Receipts of principal, interest and dividends on investments X X X Sales of investments X X X Funds from investment repurchase agreements, securities lending, dollar roll, commercial paper and lines of credit agreements X X X Inter-company loans X X X Capital contributions from parent X X Dividends from subsidiaries X X Tax refunds/settlements X Funds from periodic issuance of additional securities X Funds from the settlement of our benefit plans X Our potential uses of funds principally include activities shown in the following table. Property- Liability Allstate Financial Corporate and Other Payment of claims and related expenses X Payment of contract benefits, maturities, surrenders and withdrawals X Reinsurance cessions and payments X X Operating costs and expenses X X X Purchase of investments X X X Repayment of investment repurchase agreements, securities lending, dollar roll, commercial paper and lines of credit agreements X X X Payment or repayment of inter-company loans X X X Capital contributions to subsidiaries X X Dividends to shareholders/parent company X X X Tax payments/settlements X X Share repurchases X Debt service expenses and repayment X X Settlement payments of employee and agent benefit plans X X The following table summarizes consolidated cash flow activities by business segment. Property-Liability Allstate Financial Corporate and Other Consolidated (in millions) 2006 2005 2004 2006 2005 2004 2006 2005 2004 2006 2005 2004 Net cash provided by (used in): Operating activities $ 2,454 $ 2,872 $ 4,092 $ 2,589 $ 2,502 $ 1,916 $ 12 $ 231 $ (540 ) $ 5,055 $ 5,605 $ 5,468 Investing activities (1,257 ) 421 (1,903 ) (2,074 ) (4,854 ) (8,039 ) 1,412 (718 ) (781 ) (1,919 ) (5,151 ) (10,723 ) Financing activities (344 ) 370 49 (152 ) 2,498 6,506 (2,510 ) (3,423 ) (1,252 ) (3,006 ) (555 ) 5,303 Net increase (decrease) in consolidated cash $ 130 $ (101 ) $ 48 121 Property-Liability Lower cash provided by operating activities for Property-Liability in 2006, compared to 2005, was primarily due to higher claim payments related to the prior year hurricanes, partially offset by increased premiums. Lower operating cash flows of the Property-Liability business in 2005, compared to 2004, were primarily due to increased claim payments, partially offset by increased premiums and collections of reinsurance and other recoverables related to catastrophes. Claim payments increased as a result of Hurricanes Katrina, Rita and Wilma in 2005. Cash flows used in investing activities increased in 2006 compared to 2005, primarily due to higher investment purchases, partially offset by proceeds from sales of securities. Cash provided by investing activities increased in 2005 primarily as a result of increased proceeds from sales of securities, partially offset by lower operating cash flows and higher dividends paid by AIC to its parent. Cash flows used in financing activities increased in 2006 compared to 2005, primarily due to the repayment of short-term debt. Cash provided by financing activities in 2005 was the result of borrowing under our commercial paper program. Cash flows were impacted by dividends paid by AIC to its parent, The Allstate Corporation, totaling $1.01 billion, $3.86 billion and $2.49 billion in 2006, 2005 and 2004, respectively. During 2007, AIC will be able to pay a total of $4.92 billion in dividends. For a description of limitations on the payment of these dividends, see Note 15 of the consolidated financial statements. Allstate Financial Higher operating cash flows for Allstate Financial in 2006, compared to 2005, primarily related to higher investment income. Higher operating cash flows for Allstate Financial in 2005, compared to 2004, primarily related to higher investment income, partially offset by lower life and annuity premiums. Cash flows used in investing activities decreased in 2006 primarily due to decreased net cash provided by financing activities, partially offset by the investment of higher operating cash flows. Cash flows used in investing activities in 2006 also include the settlements related to the disposition through reinsurance of substantially all our variable annuity business. Cash flows used in investing activities decreased in 2005 due to lower cash provided by financing in 2005, compared to 2004, increased proceeds from sales of securities and higher investment collections, partially offset by the investment of higher operating cash flows. Cash used in financing activities increased in 2006 as a result of lower contractholder fund deposits and higher surrenders and partial withdrawals. Lower cash flows provided by financing activities in 2005, compared to 2004, were primarily due to higher surrenders of market value adjusted annuities, lower deposits on fixed annuities and institutional products, and increased maturities of institutional products. For quantification of the changes in contractholder funds, see the Allstate Financial Segment section of the MD&A. A portion of the Allstate Financial product portfolio, primarily fixed annuity and interest-sensitive life insurance products, is subject to surrender and withdrawal at the discretion of contractholders. The 122 following table summarizes Allstate Financial's liabilities for these products by their contractual withdrawal provisions at December 31, 2006. (in millions) 2006 Not subject to discretionary withdrawal $ 16,850 Subject to discretionary withdrawal with adjustments: Specified surrender charges (1) 26,173 Market value (2) 10,001 Subject to discretionary withdrawal without adjustments 9,007 Total Contractholder funds (3) $ 62,031 (1) Includes $9.23 billion of liabilities with a contractual surrender charge of less than 5% of the account balance. (2) Approximately $8.99 billion of the contracts with market value adjusted surrenders have a 30-45 day period during which there is no surrender charge or market value adjustment including approximately $1.87 billion with a period commencing during 2007. (3) Includes approximately $1.37 billion of contractholder funds on variable annuities reinsured to Prudential effective June 1, 2006. To ensure we have the appropriate level of liquidity in this segment, we perform actuarial tests on the impact to cash flows of policy surrenders and other actions under various scenarios. Depending upon the years in which certain policy types were sold with specific surrender provisions, the Allstate Financial cash flow could vary due to higher surrender of policies exiting their surrender charge periods. Corporate and Other Fluctuations in the Corporate and Other operating cash flows, were primarily due to the timing of intercompany settlements. Investing activities primarily relate to activity in the portfolio of Kennett Capital, Inc. ("Kennett Capital"). Financing cash flows of the Corporate and Other segment reflect actions such as fluctuations in short-term debt, repayment of debt, proceeds from the issuance of debt, dividends to shareholders of The Allstate Corporation and share repurchases; therefore, financing cash flows are affected when we increase or decrease the level of these activities. We have established external sources of short-term liquidity that include a commercial paper program, lines-of-credit, dollar rolls and repurchase agreements. In the aggregate, at December 31, 2006, these sources could provide over $3.89 billion of additional liquidity. For additional liquidity, we can also issue new insurance contracts, incur additional debt and sell assets from our investment portfolio. The liquidity of our investment portfolio varies by type of investment. For example, $18.33 billion of privately placed corporate obligations that represent 15.3% of the consolidated investment portfolio, and $9.47 billion of mortgage loans that represent 7.9% of the consolidated investment portfolio, generally are considered to be less liquid than many of our other types of investments, such as our U.S. government and agencies, municipal and public corporate fixed income security portfolios. The sources of liquidity for The Allstate Corporation include but are not limited to dividends from AIC and $1.75 billion of investments at Kennett Capital. We have access to additional borrowing to support liquidity as follows: A commercial paper program with a borrowing limit of $1.00 billion to cover short-term cash needs. As of December 31, 2006, there were no balances outstanding and therefore the remaining borrowing capacity was $1.00 billion; however, the outstanding balance fluctuates daily. A five-year revolving credit facility expiring in 2009 totaling $1.00 billion to cover short-term liquidity requirements. This facility contains an increase provision that would make up to an additional $500 million available for borrowing provided the increased portion could be fully syndicated at a later date among existing or new lenders. Although the right to borrow under the 123 facility is not subject to a minimum rating requirement, the costs of maintaining the facility and borrowing under it are based on the ratings of our senior, unsecured, nonguaranteed long-term debt. There were no borrowings under this line of credit during 2006. The total amount outstanding at any point in time under the combination of the commercial paper program and the credit facility cannot exceed the amount that can be borrowed under the credit facility. A universal shelf registration statement filed with the SEC in May 2006. We can use it to issue an unspecified amount of debt securities, common stock (including 278 million shares of treasury stock as of December 31, 2006), preferred stock, depositary shares, warrants, stock purchase contracts, stock purchase units and securities of subsidiaries. The specific terms of any securities we issue under this registration statement will be provided in the applicable prospectus supplements. We have not yet issued any securities under this registration statement. Our only financial covenant exists with respect to our credit facility and our synthetic lease VIE obligations. The covenant requires that we not exceed a 37.5% debt to capital resources ratio as defined in the agreements. This ratio at December 31, 2006 was 18.4%. For quantification of the synthetic lease VIE obligations, see Note 11 of the consolidated financial statements. We closely monitor and manage our liquidity through long- and short-term planning that is integrated throughout the corporation, the business segments and investments. Allstate Financial manages the duration of assets and related liabilities through its ALM organization, using a dynamic process that addresses liquidity utilizing the investment portfolio, and components of the portfolio as appropriate, which is routinely subjected to stress testing. Allstate Protection's underwriting cash transactions comprise millions of small transactions that make it possible to statistically determine reasonable expectations of patterns of liquidity, which are subject to volatility from unpredictable catastrophe losses. Property-Liability monitors the duration of its assets and liabilities and maintains a portfolio of highly liquid fixed income and equity securities, including short-term investments, exchange-traded common stock, municipal bonds, corporate bonds, and U.S. government and government agency securities in order to address the variability of its cash flows. Discontinued Lines and Coverages' liabilities are expected to be paid over many years and do not present a significant liquidity risk. Allstate Financial and Property-Liability also have access to funds from our commercial paper program. During 2006, ALIC issued an intercompany note in the amount of $500 million payable to its parent, AIC, on demand and, in any event, by March 30, 2007. ALIC used the funds to accelerate purchases of investments based on its outlook of the availability of acceptable investments in the beginning of 2007. ALIC will repay the loan with funds generated in the normal course of business, primarily by sales, investment income and cash collected from investment calls and maturities. The impacts of this loan are eliminated in consolidation. Certain remote events and circumstances could constrain our liquidity. Those events and circumstances include, for example, a catastrophe resulting in extraordinary losses, a downgrade in our long-term debt rating of A1, A+ and a (from Moody's, Standard & Poor's and A.M. Best, respectively) to non-investment grade status of below Baa3/BBB-/bb, a downgrade in AIC's financial strength rating from Aa2, AA and A+ (from Moody's, Standard & Poor's and A.M. Best, respectively) to below Baa/BBB/A-, or a downgrade in ALIC's financial strength ratings from Aa2, AA and A+ (from Moody's, Standard & Poor's and A.M. Best, respectively) to below Aa3/AA-/A-. The rating agencies also consider the interdependence of our individually rated entities, therefore, a rating change in one entity could potentially affect the ratings of other related entities. 124 Contractual Obligations and Commitments Our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2006 and the payments due by period are shown in the following table. (in millions) Total Less than 1 year 1-3 years 4-5 years Over 5 years Liabilities for collateral and repurchase agreements (1) $ 4,144 $ 4,144 $ $ $ Commercial paper Contractholder funds (2) 80,375 9,850 24,174 13,530 32,821 Reserve for life-contingent contract benefits (3) 32,309 1,191 3,465 2,320 25,333 Long-term debt (4) 9,423 281 1,313 495 7,334 Capital lease obligations (4) 85 12 24 17 32 Operating leases (4) 824 208 289 164 163 Unconditional purchase obligations (4) 612 246 255 88 23 Defined benefit pension plans and other postretirement benefit plans (4) (5) 6,328 199 279 291 5,559 Reserve for property-liability insurance claims and claims expense (6) 18,866 8,171 5,831 2,178 2,686 Other liabilities and accrued expenses (7) (8) 4,751 4,578 108 25 40 Total Contractual Cash Obligations $ 157,717 $ 28,880 $ 35,738 $ 19,108 $ 73,991 (1) Liabilities for collateral and repurchase agreements are typically fully secured with cash. We manage our short-term liquidity position to ensure the availability of a sufficient amount of liquid assets to extinguish short-term liabilities as they come due in the normal course of business. (2) Contractholder funds represent interest-bearing liabilities arising from the sale of products such as interest-sensitive life, fixed annuities, including immediate annuities without life contingencies, bank deposits and institutional products. These amounts reflect estimated cash payments to be made to policyholders and contractholders. Certain of these contracts, such as immediate annuities without life contingencies and institutional products, involve payment obligations where the amount and timing of the payment is essentially fixed and determinable. These amounts relate to (i) policies or contracts where we are currently making payments and will continue to do so and (ii) contracts where the timing of payments has been determined by the contract. Other contracts, such as interest-sensitive life and fixed deferred annuities, involve payment obligations where the amount and timing of future payments is uncertain. For these contracts and bank deposits, the Company is not currently making payments and will not make payments until (i) the occurrence of an insurable event, such as death, or (ii) the occurrence of a payment triggering event, such as the surrender of or partial withdrawal on a policy or deposit contract, which is outside of the control of the Company. We have estimated the timing of payments related to these contracts based on historical experience and our expectation of future payment patterns. Uncertainties relating to these liabilities include mortality, customer lapse and withdrawal activity, and estimated additional deposits for interest-sensitive life contracts, which may significantly impact both the timing and amount of future payments. Such cash outflows reflect adjustments for the estimated timing of mortality, retirement, and other appropriate factors, but are undiscounted with respect to interest. As a result, the sum of the cash outflows shown for all years in the table exceeds the corresponding liability amount of $62.03 billion included in the Consolidated Statements of Financial Position as of December 31, 2006 for contractholder funds. The liability amount in the Consolidated Statements of Financial Position reflects the discounting for interest as well as adjustments for the timing of other factors as described above. (3) The reserve for life-contingent contract benefits relates primarily to traditional life and immediate annuities with life contingencies and reflects the present value of estimated cash payments to be made to policyholders and contractholders. Immediate annuities with life contingencies include (i) contracts where we are currently making payments and will continue to do so until the occurrence of a specific event such as death and (ii) contracts where the timing of a portion of the payments has been determined by the contract. Other contracts, such as traditional life and supplemental accident and health insurance, involve payment obligations where the amount and timing of future payments is uncertain. For these contracts, the Company is not currently making payments and will not make payments until (i) the occurrence of an insurable event, such as death or illness, or (ii) the occurrence of a payment triggering event, such as a surrender of a policy or contract, which is outside of the control of the Company. We have estimated the timing of cash outflows related to these contracts based on historical experience and our expectation of future payment patterns. Uncertainties relating to these liabilities include mortality, morbidity, expenses, customer lapse and withdrawal activity, and renewal premium for life policies, which may significantly impact both the timing and amount of future payments. Such cash outflows reflect adjustments for the estimated timing of mortality, 125 retirement, and other appropriate factors, but are undiscounted with respect to interest. As a result, the sum of the cash outflows shown for all years in the table exceeds the corresponding liability amount of $12.79 billion included in the Consolidated Statements of Financial Position as of December 31, 2006 for reserve for life-contingent contract benefits. The liability amount in the Consolidated Statements of Financial Position reflects the discounting for interest as well as adjustments for the timing of other factors as described above. (4) Our payment obligations relating to long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating leases, unconditional purchase obligations and pension contributions are managed within the structure of our intermediate to long-term liquidity management program. Amount differs from the balance presented on the Consolidated Statements of Financial Position as of December 31, 2006 because the long-term debt amount above includes interest. (5) The pension plans' obligations in the next 12 months represent our planned contributions, and the remaining years' contributions are projected based on the average remaining service period using the current underfunded status of the plans. The OPEB plans' obligations are estimated based on the expected benefits to be paid. These liabilities are discounted with respect to interest, and as a result the sum of the cash outflows shown for all years in the table of $6.33 billion exceeds the corresponding liability amount of $1.88 billion included in other liabilities and accrued expenses on the Consolidated Statements of Financial Position. (6) Reserve for property-liability insurance claims and claims expense are an estimate of amounts necessary to settle all outstanding claims, including claims that have been incurred but not reported as of the balance sheet date. We have estimated the timing of these payments based on our historical experience and our expectation of future payment patterns. However, the timing of these payments may vary significantly from the amounts shown above, especially for those claims that have been incurred but not reported. The reserve for property-liability insurance claims and claims expense includes loss reserves related to asbestos and environmental claims as of December 31, 2006, of $2.20 billion and $249 million, respectively. (7) Other liabilities primarily include accrued expenses and certain benefit obligations and claim payments and other checks outstanding. Certain of these long-term liabilities are discounted with respect to interest, as a result the sum of the cash outflows shown for all years in the table exceeds the corresponding liability amount of $4.73 billion. (8) Balance sheet liabilities not included in the table above include unearned and advance premiums of $11.05 billion and deferred tax liabilities netted in the net deferred tax asset of $224 million. These items were excluded as they do not meet the definition of a contractual liability as we are not contractually obligated to pay these amounts to third parties. Rather, they represent an accounting mechanism that allows us to present our financial statements on an accrual basis. In addition, other liabilities of $289 million were not included in the table above because they did not represent a contractual obligation or the amount and timing of their eventual payment was sufficiently uncertain. Our contractual commitments as of December 31, 2006 and the payments due by period are shown in the following table. (in millions) Total Less than 1 year 1-3 years 4-5 years Over 5 years Other Commitments Conditional (1) $ 708 $ 671 $ 37 $ $ Other Commitments Unconditional (1) 1,463 90 851 465 57 Total Commitments $ 2,171 $ 761 $ 888 $ 465 $ 57 (1) Represents investment commitments such as private placements and mortgage loans. We have agreements in place for services we conduct, generally at cost, between subsidiaries relating to insurance, reinsurance, loans and capitalization. All material inter-company transactions have appropriately been eliminated in consolidation. Inter-company transactions among insurance subsidiaries and affiliates have been approved by the appropriate departments of insurance as required. For a more detailed discussion of our off-balance sheet arrangements, see Note 6 of the consolidated financial statements. 126 ENTERPRISE RISK MANAGEMENT Allstate has been working on enterprise risk management ("ERM") for five years, establishing processes and infrastructure to effectively manage risk within our tolerances while optimizing returns. We have a senior management advisory committee called the Enterprise Risk & Return Council ("ERRC") which is responsible for overseeing risks on an integrated basis across subsidiaries and various areas of responsibility within Allstate. In the vision of the ERRC, enterprise risk management is a disciplined, holistic, and interactive approach to risk that is conducted under an overall framework which: Provides additional insight when setting strategy across the Allstate enterprise Identifies potential events that could have a significant impact on Allstate Manages risk and optimizes our overall profile consistent with Allstate's risk appetite Provides greater assurance of achieving Allstate's objectives Allows Allstate to achieve a return commensurate with the risks taken Risk management is primarily executed within the business unit where the risk is undertaken. Effective risk management requires an infrastructure that includes appropriate governance policies, stochastic modeling software, tolerances and limits; consistent risk management practices, which include risk identification, evaluation, prioritization, treatment and monitoring; and effective communication and reporting. Managers in the various business units are responsible for managing, measuring, evaluating, and reporting risks as appropriate in their respective areas and that are within the risk appetite of the overall enterprise. This would include items such as establishing risk oversight committees that develop and monitor appropriate tolerances and the measurement of exposure to any catastrophe; managing the impacts to invested assets and liabilities related to changes in interest rates and equity markets through value at risk, duration and convexity metrics; and evaluating risks related to credit exposures through a credit value at risk measurement. As appropriate, consistent enterprise-wide measurement standards and limits are applied to these key risks and are integrated into such processes as strategic and financial planning, capital management, and enterprise risk reporting. Business unit measures and practices are aligned with the overall enterprise standards. For the enterprise, we are utilizing an internally developed enterprise stochastic model as a significant component in our determination of an appropriate level of economic capital needed, given a defined tolerance for risk. Economic capital modeling capabilities enable us to more fully understand and optimize risk/reward tradeoffs across the portfolio of businesses and various risks. The economic capital model accounts for the unique and specific nature and interaction of the risks inherent in our various businesses. Future plans include further refinements to our modeling capabilities to provide more insight to optimizing enterprise return with an acceptable risk profile by proactively exploiting risk reduction and risk enhancing opportunities. Over time, this effort should provide additional insight into the marginal risk return choices in such areas as capital management; strategic asset allocation in our investment portfolio; product mix and choices of risk transfer options for state, regional, or countrywide catastrophe exposure management. REGULATION AND LEGAL PROCEEDINGS We are subject to extensive regulation and we are involved in various legal and regulatory actions, all of which have an effect on specific aspects of our business. For a detailed discussion of the legal and regulatory actions in which we are involved, see Note 13 of the consolidated financial statements. PENDING ACCOUNTING STANDARDS As of December 31, 2006, there are several pending accounting standards that we have not implemented either because the standard has not been finalized or the implementation date has not yet 127 occurred. For a discussion of these pending standards, see Note 2 of the consolidated financial statements. The effect of implementing certain accounting standards on our financial results and financial condition is often based in part on market conditions at the time of implementation of the standard and other factors we are unable to determine prior to implementation. For this reason, we are sometimes unable to estimate the effect of certain pending accounting standards until the relevant authoritative body finalizes these standards or until we implement them. 128 
