CIK: 899051
Company Name: ALLSTATE CORP
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2011-02-24


Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Page Overview 27 2010 Highlights 27 Consolidated Net Income (Loss) 28 Application of Critical Accounting Estimates 28 Property-Liability 2010 Highlights 41 Property-Liability Operations 42 Allstate Protection Segment 44 Discontinued Lines and Coverages Segment 56 Property-Liability Investment Results 57 Property-Liability Claims and Claims Expense Reserves 58 Allstate Financial 2010 Highlights 69 Allstate Financial Segment 69 Investments 2010 Highlights 79 Investments 79 Market Risk 109 Pension Plans 112 Deferred Taxes 114 Capital Resources and Liquidity 2010 Highlights 114 Capital Resources and Liquidity 115 Enterprise Risk and Return Management 121 Regulation and Legal Proceedings 122 Pending Accounting Standards 122 26 OVERVIEW The following discussion highlights significant factors influencing the consolidated financial position and results of operations of The Allstate Corporation (referred to in this document as "we", "our", "us", the "Company" or "Allstate"). It should be read in conjunction with the 5-year summary of selected financial data, consolidated financial statements and related notes found under Part II, Item 6 and Item 8 contained herein. Further analysis of our insurance segments is provided in the Property-Liability Operations (which includes the Allstate Protection and the Discontinued Lines and Coverages segments) and in the Allstate Financial Segment sections of Management's Discussion and Analysis ("MD&A"). The segments are consistent with the way in which we use financial information to evaluate business performance and to determine the allocation of resources. Allstate is focused on three priorities in 2011: improve our operating results; grow our businesses profitably; and differentiate ourselves from the competition by reinventing our business. The most important factors we monitor to evaluate the financial condition and performance of our company include: For Allstate Protection: premium written, the number of policies in force ("PIF"), retention, price changes, claim frequency (rate of claim occurrence per policy in force) and severity (average cost per claim), catastrophes, loss ratio, expenses, underwriting results, and sales of all products and services; For Allstate Financial: benefit and investment spread, amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs ("DAC"), expenses, operating income, net income, invested assets, and premiums and contract charges; For Investments: credit quality/experience, realized capital gains and losses, investment income, unrealized capital gains and losses, stability of long-term returns, total returns, cash flows, and asset and liability duration; and For financial condition: liquidity, parent holding company level of deployable invested assets, financial strength ratings, operating leverage, debt leverage, book value per share, and return on equity. 2010 HIGHLIGHTS Consolidated net income was $928 million in 2010 compared to $854 million in 2009. Net income per diluted share was $1.71 in 2010 compared to $1.58 in 2009. Property-Liability net income was $1.05 billion in 2010 compared to $1.54 billion in 2009. The Property-Liability combined ratio was 98.1 in 2010 compared to 96.2 in 2009. Allstate Financial had net income of $58 million in 2010 compared to a net loss of $483 million in 2009. Total revenues were $31.40 billion in 2010 compared to $32.01 billion in 2009. Property-Liability premiums earned in 2010 totaled $25.96 billion, a decrease of 0.9% from $26.19 billion in 2009. Net realized capital losses were $827 million in 2010 compared to $583 million in 2009. Investments as of December 31, 2010 totaled $100.48 billion, an increase of 0.7% from $99.83 billion as of December 31, 2009. Net investment income in 2010 was $4.10 billion, a decrease of 7.7% from $4.44 billion in 2009. Book value per diluted share (ratio of shareholders' equity to total shares outstanding and dilutive potential shares outstanding) was $35.32 as of December 31, 2010, an increase of 14.5% from $30.84 as of December 31, 2009. For the twelve months ended December 31, 2010, return on the average of beginning and ending period shareholders' equity was 5.2%, a decrease of 0.6 points from 5.8% for the twelve months ended December 31, 2009. As of December 31, 2010, we had $19.02 billion in capital. This total included $3.84 billion in deployable invested assets at the parent holding company level. 27 CONSOLIDATED NET INCOME (LOSS) ($ in millions) For the years ended December 31, 2010 2009 2008 Revenues Property-liability insurance premiums $ 25,957 $ 26,194 $ 26,967 Life and annuity premiums and contract charges 2,168 1,958 1,895 Net investment income 4,102 4,444 5,622 Realized capital gains and losses: Total other-than-temporary impairment losses (937 ) (2,376 ) (3,735 ) Portion of loss recognized in other comprehensive income (64 ) 457 Net other-than-temporary impairment losses recognized in earnings (1,001 ) (1,919 ) (3,735 ) Sales and other realized capital gains and losses 174 1,336 (1,355 ) Total realized capital gains and losses (827 ) (583 ) (5,090 ) Total revenues 31,400 32,013 29,394 Costs and expenses Property-liability insurance claims and claims expense (18,951 ) (18,746 ) (20,064 ) Life and annuity contract benefits (1,815 ) (1,617 ) (1,612 ) Interest credited to contractholder funds (1,807 ) (2,126 ) (2,411 ) Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs (4,034 ) (4,754 ) (4,679 ) Operating costs and expenses (3,281 ) (3,007 ) (3,273 ) Restructuring and related charges (30 ) (130 ) (23 ) Interest expense (367 ) (392 ) (351 ) Total costs and expenses (30,285 ) (30,772 ) (32,413 ) Gain (loss) on disposition of operations 11 7 (6 ) Income tax (expense) benefit (198 ) (394 ) 1,346 Net income (loss) $ 928 $ 854 $ (1,679 ) Property-Liability $ 1,054 $ 1,543 $ 228 Allstate Financial 58 (483 ) (1,721 ) Corporate and Other (184 ) (206 ) (186 ) Net income (loss) $ 928 $ 854 $ (1,679 ) APPLICATION OF CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America ("GAAP") requires management to adopt accounting policies and make estimates and assumptions that affect amounts reported in the consolidated financial statements. The most critical estimates include those used in determining: Fair value of financial assets Impairment of fixed income and equity securities Deferred policy acquisition costs amortization Reserve for property-liability insurance claims and claims expense estimation Reserve for life-contingent contract benefits estimation In making these determinations, management makes subjective and complex judgments that frequently require estimates about matters that are inherently uncertain. Many of these policies, estimates and related judgments are common in the insurance and financial services industries; others are specific to our businesses and operations. It is reasonably likely that changes in these estimates could occur from period to period and result in a material impact on our consolidated financial statements. A brief summary of each of these critical accounting estimates follows. For a more detailed discussion of the effect of these estimates on our consolidated financial statements, and the judgments and assumptions related to these 28 estimates, see the referenced sections of this document. For a complete summary of our significant accounting policies, see Note 2 of the consolidated financial statements. Fair value of financial assets Fair value is defined as the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. We categorize our financial assets measured at fair value into a three-level hierarchy based on the observability of inputs to the valuation techniques as follows: Level 1: Financial asset values are based on unadjusted quoted prices for identical assets in an active market that we can access. Level 2: Financial asset values are based on the following: (a) Quoted prices for similar assets in active markets; (b) Quoted prices for identical or similar assets in markets that are not active; or (c) Valuation models whose inputs are observable, directly or indirectly, for substantially the full term of the asset. Level 3: Financial asset values are based on prices or valuation techniques that require inputs that are both unobservable and significant to the overall fair value measurement. Unobservable inputs reflect our estimates of the assumptions that market participants would use in valuing the financial assets. Observable inputs are inputs that reflect the assumptions market participants would use in valuing financial assets that are developed based on market data obtained from independent sources. In the absence of sufficient observable inputs, unobservable inputs reflect our estimates of the assumptions market participants would use in valuing financial assets and are developed based on the best information available in the circumstances. The degree of management judgment involved in determining fair values is inversely related to the availability of market observable information. We are responsible for the determination of fair value of financial assets and the supporting assumptions and methodologies. We gain assurance on the overall reasonableness and consistent application of valuation input assumptions, valuation methodologies and compliance with accounting standards for fair value determination through the execution of various processes and controls designed to ensure that our financial assets are appropriately valued. We monitor fair values received from third parties and those derived internally on an ongoing basis. We employ independent third-party valuation service providers, broker quotes and internal pricing methods to determine fair values. We obtain or calculate only one single quote or price for each financial instrument. Valuation service providers typically obtain data about market transactions and other key valuation model inputs from multiple sources and, through the use of proprietary models, produce valuation information in the form of a single fair value for individual securities for which a fair value has been requested under the terms of our agreements. For certain equity securities, valuation service providers provide market quotations for completed transactions on the measurement date. For other security types, fair values are derived from the valuation service providers' proprietary valuation models. The inputs used by the valuation service providers include, but are not limited to, market prices from recently completed transactions and transactions of comparable securities, interest rate yield curves, credit spreads, liquidity spreads, currency rates, and other information, as applicable. Credit and liquidity spreads are typically implied from completed transactions and transactions of comparable securities. Valuation service providers also use proprietary discounted cash flow models that are widely accepted in the financial services industry and similar to those used by other market participants to value the same financial instruments. The valuation models take into account, among other things, market observable information as of the measurement date, as described above, as well as the specific attributes of the security being valued including its term, interest rate, credit rating, industry sector, and where applicable, collateral quality and other issue or issuer specific information. Executing valuation models effectively requires seasoned professional judgment and experience. In cases where market transactions or other market observable data is limited, the extent to which judgment is applied varies inversely with the availability of market observable information. For certain of our financial assets measured at fair value, where our valuation service providers cannot provide fair value determinations, we obtain a single non-binding price quote from a broker familiar with the security who, similar to our valuation service providers, may consider transactions or activity in similar securities among other information. The brokers providing price quotes are generally from the brokerage divisions of leading financial institutions with market making, underwriting and distribution expertise regarding the security subject to valuation. The fair value of certain financial assets, including privately placed corporate fixed income securities, auction rate securities ("ARS") backed by student loans, equity-indexed notes, and certain free-standing derivatives, for which our valuation service providers or brokers do not provide fair value determinations, is determined using valuation methods 29 and models widely accepted in the financial services industry. Internally developed valuation models, which include inputs that may not be market observable and as such involve some degree of judgment, are considered appropriate for each class of security to which they are applied. Our internal pricing methods are primarily based on models using discounted cash flow methodologies that develop a single best estimate of fair value. Our models generally incorporate inputs that we believe are representative of inputs other market participants would use to determine fair value of the same instruments, including yield curves, quoted market prices of comparable securities, published credit spreads, and other applicable market data. Additional inputs that are used include internally-derived assumptions such as liquidity premium and credit ratings, as well as instrument-specific characteristics that include, but are not limited to, coupon rate, expected cash flows, sector of the issuer, and call provisions. Our internally assigned credit ratings are developed at a more detailed level than externally published ratings and allow for a more precise match of these ratings to other market observable valuation inputs, such as credit and sector spreads, when performing these valuations. Due to the existence of non-market observable inputs, such as liquidity premiums, judgment is required in developing these fair values. As a result, the fair value of these financial assets may differ from the amount actually received to sell an asset in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. Moreover, the use of different valuation assumptions may have a material effect on the financial assets' fair values. For the majority of our financial assets measured at fair value, all significant inputs are based on market observable data and significant management judgment does not affect the periodic determination of fair value. The determination of fair value using discounted cash flow models involves management judgment when significant model inputs are not based on market observable data. However, where market observable data is available, it takes precedence, and as a result, no range of reasonably likely inputs exists from which the basis of a sensitivity analysis could be constructed. There is one primary situation where a discounted cash flow model utilizes a significant input that is not market observable, and it relates to the determination of fair value for our ARS backed by student loans. The significant input utilized is the anticipated date liquidity will return to this market (that is, when auction failures will cease). Determination of this assumption allows for matching to market observable inputs when performing these valuations. The following table displays the sensitivity of reasonably likely changes in the anticipated date liquidity will return to the student loan ARS market as of December 31, 2010. The selection of these hypothetical scenarios represents an illustration of the estimated potential proportional effect of alternate assumptions and should not be construed as either a prediction of future events or an indication that it would be reasonably likely that all securities would be similarly affected. ($ in millions) ARS backed by student loans at fair value $ 1,230 Percentage change in fair value resulting from: Decrease in the anticipated date liquidity will return to this market by six months 1.1 % Increase in the anticipated date liquidity will return to this market by six months (1.1 )% We believe our most significant exposure to changes in fair value is due to market risk. Our exposure to changes in market conditions is discussed fully in the Market Risk section of the MD&A. We employ specific control processes to determine the reasonableness of the fair value of our financial assets. Our processes are designed to ensure that the values received or internally estimated are accurately recorded and that the data inputs and the valuation techniques utilized are appropriate, consistently applied, and that the assumptions are reasonable and consistent with the objective of determining fair value. For example, on a continuing basis, we assess the reasonableness of individual security values received from valuation service providers and those derived from internal models that exceed certain thresholds as compared to previous values received from those valuation service providers or derived from internal models. In addition, we may validate the reasonableness of fair value by comparing information obtained from our valuation service providers to other third party valuation sources for selected securities. We perform ongoing price validation procedures such as back-testing of actual sales, which corroborate the various inputs used in internal pricing models to market observable data. When fair value determinations are expected to be more variable, we validate them through reviews by members of management who have relevant expertise and who are independent of those charged with executing investment transactions. 30 We also perform an analysis to determine whether there has been a significant decrease in the volume and level of activity for the asset when compared to normal market activity, and if so, whether transactions may not be orderly. Among the indicators we consider in determining whether a significant decrease in the volume and level of market activity for a specific asset has occurred include the level of new issuances in the primary market, trading volume in the secondary market, level of credit spreads over historical levels, bid-ask spread, and price consensuses among market participants and sources. If evidence indicates that prices are based on transactions that are not orderly, we place little, if any, weight on the transaction price and will estimate fair value using an internal pricing model. As of December 31, 2010 and 2009, we did not alter fair values provided by our valuation service providers or brokers or substitute them with an internal pricing model. The following table identifies fixed income and equity securities and short-term investments as of December 31, 2010 by source of fair value determination: ($ in millions) Fair value Percent to total Fair value based on internal sources $ 7,971 9.1 % Fair value based on external sources (1) 79,731 90.9 Total $ 87,702 100.0 % (1) Includes $4.20 billion that are valued using broker quotes. For more detailed information on our accounting policy for the fair value of financial assets and the financial assets by level in the fair value hierarchy, see Notes 2 and 5 of the consolidated financial statements. Impairment of fixed income and equity securities For investments classified as available for sale, the difference between fair value and amortized cost for fixed income securities and cost for equity securities, net of certain other items and deferred income taxes (as disclosed in Note 4), is reported as a component of accumulated other comprehensive income on the Consolidated Statements of Financial Position and is not reflected in the operating results of any period until reclassified to net income upon the consummation of a transaction with an unrelated third party or when a write-down is recorded due to an other-than-temporary decline in fair value. We have a comprehensive portfolio monitoring process to identify and evaluate each fixed income and equity security whose carrying value may be other-than-temporarily impaired. For each fixed income security in an unrealized loss position, we assess whether management with the appropriate authority has made the decision to sell or whether it is more likely than not we will be required to sell the security before recovery of the amortized cost basis for reasons such as liquidity, contractual or regulatory purposes. If a security meets either of these criteria, the security's decline in fair value is considered other than temporary and is recorded in earnings. If we have not made the decision to sell the fixed income security and it is not more likely than not we will be required to sell the fixed income security before recovery of its amortized cost basis, we evaluate whether we expect to receive cash flows sufficient to recover the entire amortized cost basis of the security. We use our best estimate of future cash flows expected to be collected from the fixed income security discounted at the security's original or current effective rate, as appropriate, to calculate a recovery value and determine whether a credit loss exists. The determination of cash flow estimates is inherently subjective and methodologies may vary depending on facts and circumstances specific to the security. All reasonably available information relevant to the collectability of the security, including past events, current conditions, and reasonable and supportable assumptions and forecasts, are considered when developing the estimate of cash flows expected to be collected. That information generally includes, but is not limited to, the remaining payment terms of the security, prepayment speeds, foreign exchange rates, the financial condition and future earnings potential of the issue or issuer, expected defaults, expected recoveries, the value of underlying collateral, vintage, geographic concentration, available reserves or escrows, current subordination levels, third party guarantees and other credit enhancements. Other information, such as industry analyst reports and forecasts, sector credit ratings, financial condition of the bond insurer for insured fixed income securities, and other market data relevant to the realizability of contractual cash flows, may also be considered. The estimated fair value of collateral will be used to estimate recovery value if we determine that the security is dependent on the liquidation of collateral for ultimate settlement. If the estimated recovery value is less than the amortized cost of the security, a credit loss exists and an other-than-temporary impairment for the difference between the estimated recovery value and amortized cost is recorded in earnings. The portion of the unrealized loss related to factors other than credit remains classified in accumulated other comprehensive income. If we determine that the fixed income security does not have sufficient cash 31 flow or other information to estimate a recovery value for the security, we may conclude that the entire decline in fair value is deemed to be credit related and the loss is recorded in earnings. There are a number of assumptions and estimates inherent in evaluating impairments of equity securities and determining if they are other than temporary, including: 1) our ability and intent to hold the investment for a period of time sufficient to allow for an anticipated recovery in value; 2) the length of time and extent to which the fair value has been less than cost; 3) the financial condition, near-term and long-term prospects of the issue or issuer, including relevant industry specific market conditions and trends, geographic location and implications of rating agency actions and offering prices; and 4) the specific reasons that a security is in an unrealized loss position, including overall market conditions which could affect liquidity. Once assumptions and estimates are made, any number of changes in facts and circumstances could cause us to subsequently determine that a fixed income or equity security is other-than-temporarily impaired, including: 1) general economic conditions that are worse than previously forecasted or that have a greater adverse effect on a particular issuer or industry sector than originally estimated; 2) changes in the facts and circumstances related to a particular issue or issuer's ability to meet all of its contractual obligations; and 3) changes in facts and circumstances that result in changes to management's intent to sell or result in our assessment that it is more likely than not we will be required to sell before recovery of the amortized cost basis of a fixed income security or causes a change in our ability or intent to hold an equity security until it recovers in value. Changes in assumptions, facts and circumstances could result in additional charges to earnings in future periods to the extent that losses are realized. The charge to earnings, while potentially significant to net income, would not have a significant effect on shareholders' equity, since our securities are designated as available for sale and carried at fair value and as a result, any related unrealized loss, net of deferred income taxes and related DAC, deferred sales inducement costs ("DSI") and reserves for life-contingent contract benefits, would already be reflected as a component of accumulated other comprehensive income in shareholders' equity. The determination of the amount of other-than-temporary impairment is an inherently subjective process based on periodic evaluation of the factors described above. Such evaluations and assessments are revised as conditions change and new information becomes available. We update our evaluations regularly and reflect changes in other-than-temporary impairments in results of operations as such evaluations are revised. The use of different methodologies and assumptions in the determination of the amount of other-than-temporary impairments may have a material effect on the amounts presented within the consolidated financial statements. For additional detail on investment impairments, see Note 4 of the consolidated financial statements. Deferred policy acquisition costs amortization We incur significant costs in connection with acquiring insurance policies and investment contracts. In accordance with GAAP, costs that vary with and are primarily related to acquiring insurance policies and investment contracts are deferred and recorded as an asset on the Consolidated Statements of Financial Position. DAC related to property-liability contracts is amortized into income as premiums are earned, typically over periods of six or twelve months. The amortization methodology for DAC related to Allstate Financial policies and contracts includes significant assumptions and estimates. DAC related to traditional life insurance is amortized over the premium paying period of the related policies in proportion to the estimated revenues on such business. Significant assumptions relating to estimated premiums, investment returns, as well as mortality, persistency and expenses to administer the business are established at the time the policy is issued and are generally not revised during the life of the policy. The assumptions for determining the timing and amount of DAC amortization are consistent with the assumptions used to calculate the reserve for life-contingent contract benefits. Any deviations from projected business in force resulting from actual policy terminations differing from expected levels and any estimated premium deficiencies may result in a change to the rate of amortization in the period such events occur. Generally, the amortization periods for these policies approximates the estimated lives of the policies. The recovery of DAC is dependent upon the future profitability of the business. We periodically review the adequacy of reserves and recoverability of DAC for these policies on an aggregate basis using actual experience. We aggregate all traditional life insurance products and immediate annuities with life contingencies in the analysis. In the event actual experience is significantly adverse compared to the original assumptions and a premium deficiency is determined to exist, any remaining unamortized DAC balance must be expensed to the extent not recoverable and a premium deficiency reserve may be required if the remaining DAC balance is insufficient to absorb the deficiency. In 2010 and 2009, our reviews concluded that no premium deficiency adjustments were necessary, primarily due to projected profit from traditional life insurance more than offsetting the projected losses in immediate 32 annuities with life contingencies. In 2008, for traditional life insurance and immediate annuities with life contingencies, an aggregate premium deficiency of $336 million pre-tax ($219 million after-tax) resulted primarily from a study indicating that the annuitants on certain life-contingent contracts are projected to live longer than we anticipated when the contracts were issued and, to a lesser degree, a reduction in the related investment portfolio yield. The deficiency was recorded through a reduction in DAC. DAC related to interest-sensitive life, fixed annuities and other investment contracts is amortized in proportion to the incidence of the total present value of gross profits, which includes both actual historical gross profits ("AGP") and estimated future gross profits ("EGP") expected to be earned over the estimated lives of the contracts. The amortization is net of interest on the prior period DAC balance using rates established at the inception of the contracts. Actual amortization periods generally range from 15-30 years; however, incorporating estimates of the rate of customer surrenders, partial withdrawals and deaths generally results in the majority of the DAC being amortized during the surrender charge period, which is typically 10-20 years for interest-sensitive life and 5-10 years for fixed annuities. The cumulative DAC amortization is reestimated and adjusted by a cumulative charge or credit to results of operations when there is a difference between the incidence of actual versus expected gross profits in a reporting period or when there is a change in total EGP. AGP and EGP consist primarily of the following components: contract charges for the cost of insurance less mortality costs and other benefits (benefit margin); investment income and realized capital gains and losses less interest credited (investment margin); and surrender and other contract charges less maintenance expenses (expense margin). The principal assumptions for determining the amount of EGP are investment returns, including capital gains and losses on assets supporting contract liabilities, interest crediting rates to contractholders, and the effects of persistency, mortality, expenses, and hedges if applicable, and these assumptions are reasonably likely to have the greatest impact on the amount of DAC amortization. Changes in these assumptions can be offsetting and we are unable to reasonably predict their future movements or offsetting impacts over time. Each reporting period, DAC amortization is recognized in proportion to AGP for that period adjusted for interest on the prior period DAC balance. This amortization process includes an assessment of AGP compared to EGP, the actual amount of business remaining in force and realized capital gains and losses on investments supporting the product liability. The impact of realized capital gains and losses on amortization of DAC depends upon which product liability is supported by the assets that give rise to the gain or loss. If the AGP is greater than EGP in the period, but the total EGP is unchanged, the amount of DAC amortization will generally increase, resulting in a current period decrease to earnings. The opposite result generally occurs when the AGP is less than the EGP in the period, but the total EGP is unchanged. However, when DAC amortization or a component of gross profits for a quarterly period is potentially negative (which would result in an increase of the DAC balance) as a result of negative AGP, the specific facts and circumstances surrounding the potential negative amortization are considered to determine whether it is appropriate for recognition in the consolidated financial statements. Negative amortization is only recorded when the increased DAC balance is determined to be recoverable based on facts and circumstances. Negative amortization was not recorded for certain fixed annuities during 2010, 2009 and 2008 periods in which significant capital losses were realized on their related investment portfolio. For products whose supporting investments are exposed to capital losses in excess of our expectations which may cause periodic AGP to become temporarily negative, EGP and AGP utilized in DAC amortization may be modified to exclude the excess capital losses. Annually, we review and update all assumptions underlying the projections of EGP, including investment returns, comprising investment income and realized capital gains and losses, interest crediting rates, persistency, mortality, expenses and the effect of any hedges. At each reporting period, we assess whether any revisions to assumptions used to determine DAC amortization are required. These reviews and updates may result in amortization acceleration or deceleration, which are commonly referred to as "DAC unlocking". If the update of assumptions causes total EGP to increase, the rate of DAC amortization will generally decrease, resulting in a current period increase to earnings. A decrease to earnings generally occurs when the assumption update causes the total EGP to decrease. Over the past three years, our most significant DAC assumption updates that resulted in a change to EGP and the amortization of DAC have been revisions to expected future investment returns, primarily realized capital losses, mortality, expenses and the number of contracts in force or persistency. The following table provides the effect on DAC 33 amortization of changes in assumptions relating to the gross profit components of investment margin, benefit margin and expense margin during the years ended December 31. ($ in millions) 2010 2009 2008 Investment margin $ 15 $ (399 ) $ (303 ) Benefit margin (45 ) 129 35 Expense margin 42 (7 ) (59 ) Net deceleration (acceleration) $ 12 $ (277 ) $ (327 ) In 2010, DAC amortization deceleration related to changes in the investment margin component of EGP primarily related to interest-sensitive life insurance and was due to higher than previously projected investment income and lower interest credited, partially offset by higher projected realized capital losses. The acceleration related to benefit margin was primarily due to lower projected renewal premium (which is also expected to reduce persistency) on interest-sensitive life insurance, partially offset by higher than previously projected revenues associated with variable life insurance due to appreciation in the underlying separate account valuations. The deceleration related to expense margin resulted from current and expected expense levels lower than previously projected. DAC amortization acceleration related to changes in the investment margin component of EGP in the first quarter of 2009 was primarily due to an increase in the level of expected realized capital losses in 2009 and 2010. The deceleration related to benefit margin was due to more favorable projected life insurance mortality. The acceleration related to expense margin resulted from current and expected expense levels higher than previously projected. DAC amortization acceleration related to changes in the investment margin component of EGP in 2008 was primarily due to the level of realized capital losses impacting actual gross profits in 2008 and the impact of realized capital losses on expected gross profits in 2009. The deceleration related to benefit margin was due to more favorable projected life insurance mortality. The acceleration related to expense margin resulted from current and expected expense levels higher than previously projected. The following table displays the sensitivity of reasonably likely changes in assumptions included in the gross profit components of investment margin or benefit margin to amortization of the DAC balance as of December 31, 2010. ($ in millions) December 31, 2010 Increase/(reduction) in DAC Increase in future investment margins of 25 basis points $ 70 Decrease in future investment margins of 25 basis points $ (78 ) Decrease in future life mortality by 1% $ 19 Increase in future life mortality by 1% $ (20 ) Any potential changes in assumptions discussed above are measured without consideration of correlation among assumptions. Therefore, it would be inappropriate to add them together in an attempt to estimate overall variability in amortization. For additional detail related to DAC, see the Allstate Financial Segment section of this document. Reserve for property-liability insurance claims and claims expense estimation Reserves are established to provide for the estimated costs of paying claims and claims expenses under insurance policies we have issued. Property-Liability underwriting results are significantly influenced by estimates of property-liability insurance claims and claims expense reserves. These reserves are an estimate of amounts necessary to settle all outstanding claims, including claims that have been incurred but not reported ("IBNR"), as of the financial statement date. Characteristics of reserves Reserves are established independently of business segment management for each business segment and line of business based on estimates of the ultimate cost to settle claims, less losses that have been paid. The significant lines of business are auto, homeowners, and other lines for Allstate Protection, and asbestos, environmental, and other discontinued lines for Discontinued Lines and Coverages. Allstate Protection's claims are typically reported promptly with relatively little reporting lag between the date of occurrence and the date the loss is reported. Auto and homeowners liability losses generally take an average of about two years to settle, while auto physical damage, homeowners property and other personal lines have an average settlement time of less than one year. Discontinued Lines and Coverages involve long-tail losses, such as those related to asbestos and environmental claims, which often involve substantial reporting lags and extended times to settle. 34 Reserves are the difference between the estimated ultimate cost of losses incurred and the amount of paid losses as of the reporting date. Reserves are estimated for both reported and unreported claims, and include estimates of all expenses associated with processing and settling all incurred claims. We update most of our reserve estimates quarterly and as new information becomes available or as events emerge that may affect the resolution of unsettled claims. Changes in prior year reserve estimates (reserve reestimates), which may be material, are determined by comparing updated estimates of ultimate losses to prior estimates, and the differences are recorded as property-liability insurance claims and claims expense in the Consolidated Statements of Operations in the period such changes are determined. Estimating the ultimate cost of claims and claims expenses is an inherently uncertain and complex process involving a high degree of judgment and is subject to the evaluation of numerous variables. The actuarial methods used to develop reserve estimates Reserve estimates are derived by using several different actuarial estimation methods that are variations on one primary actuarial technique. The actuarial technique is known as a "chain ladder" estimation process in which historical loss patterns are applied to actual paid losses and reported losses (paid losses plus individual case reserves established by claim adjusters) for an accident year or a report year to create an estimate of how losses are likely to develop over time. An accident year refers to classifying claims based on the year in which the claims occurred. A report year refers to classifying claims based on the year in which the claims are reported. Both classifications are used to prepare estimates of required reserves for payments to be made in the future. The key assumptions affecting our reserve estimates comprise data elements including claim counts, paid losses, case reserves, and development factors calculated with this data. In the chain ladder estimation technique, a ratio (development factor) is calculated which compares current period results to results in the prior period for each accident year. A three-year or two-year average development factor, based on historical results, is usually multiplied by the current period experience to estimate the development of losses of each accident year into the next time period. The development factors for the future time periods for each accident year are compounded over the remaining future periods to calculate an estimate of ultimate losses for each accident year. The implicit assumption of this technique is that an average of historical development factors is predictive of future loss development, as the significant size of our experience data base achieves a high degree of statistical credibility in actuarial projections of this type. The effects of inflation are implicitly considered in the reserving process, the implicit assumption being that a multi-year average development factor includes an adequate provision. Occasionally, unusual aberrations in loss patterns are caused by external and internal factors such as changes in claim reporting, settlement patterns, unusually large losses, process changes, legal or regulatory changes, and other influences. In these instances, analyses of alternate development factor selections are performed to evaluate the effect of these factors and actuarial judgment is applied to make appropriate development factor assumptions needed to develop a best estimate of ultimate losses. How reserve estimates are established and updated Reserve estimates are developed at a very detailed level, and the results of these numerous micro-level best estimates are aggregated to form a consolidated reserve estimate. For example, over one thousand actuarial estimates of the types described above are prepared each quarter to estimate losses for each line of insurance, major components of losses (such as coverages and perils), major states or groups of states and for reported losses and IBNR. The actuarial methods described above are used to analyze the settlement patterns of claims by determining the development factors for specific data elements that are necessary components of a reserve estimation process. Development factors are calculated quarterly for data elements such as claim counts reported and settled, paid losses, and paid losses combined with case reserves. The calculation of development factors from changes in these data elements also impacts claim severity trends, which is a common industry reference used to explain changes in reserve estimates. The historical development patterns for these data elements are used as the assumptions to calculate reserve estimates. Often, several different estimates are prepared for each detailed component, incorporating alternative analyses of changing claim settlement patterns and other influences on losses, from which we select our best estimate for each component, occasionally incorporating additional analyses and actuarial judgment, as described above. These micro-level estimates are not based on a single set of assumptions. Actuarial judgments that may be applied to these components of certain micro-level estimates generally do not have a material impact on the consolidated level of reserves. Moreover, this detailed micro-level process does not permit or result in a compilation of a company-wide roll up to generate a range of needed loss reserves that would be meaningful. Based on our review of these estimates, our best estimate of required reserves for each state/line/coverage component is recorded for each accident year, and the required reserves for each component are summed to create the reserve balance carried on our Consolidated Statements of Financial Position. 35 Reserves are reestimated quarterly, by combining historical results with current actual results to calculate new development factors. This process incorporates the historic and latest actual trends, and other underlying changes in the data elements used to calculate reserve estimates. New development factors are likely to differ from previous development factors used in prior reserve estimates because actual results (claims reported or settled, losses paid, or changes to case reserves) occur differently than the implied assumptions contained in the previous development factor calculations. If claims reported, paid losses, or case reserve changes are greater or less than the levels estimated by previous development factors, reserve reestimates increase or decrease. When actual development of these data elements is different than the historical development pattern used in a prior period reserve estimate, a new reserve is determined. The difference between indicated reserves based on new reserve estimates and recorded reserves (the previous estimate) is the amount of reserve reestimate and is recognized as an increase or decrease in property-liability insurance claims and claims expense in the Consolidated Statements of Operations. Total Property-liability reserve reestimates, after-tax, as a percent of net income in 2010, 2009 and 2008 were 11.1%, 8.5%, and (6.6)%, respectively. For Property-Liability, the 3-year average of reserve reestimates as a percentage of total reserves was a favorable 0.2%, for Allstate Protection, the 3-year average of reserve estimates was a favorable 0.4% and for Discontinued Lines and Coverages, the 3-year average of reserve reestimates was an unfavorable 1.2%, each of these results being consistent within a reasonable actuarial tolerance for our respective businesses. A more detailed discussion of reserve reestimates is presented in the Property-Liability Claims and Claims Expense Reserves section of this document. The following table shows net claims and claims expense reserves by operating segment and line of business as of December 31: ($ in millions) 2010 2009 2008 Allstate Protection Auto $ 11,034 $ 10,606 $ 10,220 Homeowners 2,442 2,399 2,824 Other lines 2,141 2,145 2,207 Total Allstate Protection 15,617 15,150 15,251 Discontinued Lines and Coverages Asbestos 1,100 1,180 1,228 Environmental 201 198 195 Other discontinued lines 478 500 508 Total Discontinued Lines and Coverages 1,779 1,878 1,931 Total Property-Liability $ 17,396 $ 17,028 $ 17,182 Allstate Protection reserve estimates Factors affecting reserve estimates Reserve estimates are developed based on the processes and historical development trends as previously described. These estimates are considered in conjunction with known facts and interpretations of circumstances and factors including our experience with similar cases, actual claims paid, differing payment patterns and pending levels of unpaid claims, loss management programs, product mix and contractual terms, changes in law and regulation, judicial decisions, and economic conditions. When we experience changes of the type previously mentioned, we may need to apply actuarial judgment in the determination and selection of development factors considered more reflective of the new trends, such as combining shorter or longer periods of historical results with current actual results to produce development factors based on two-year, three-year, or longer development periods to reestimate our reserves. For example, if a legal change is expected to have a significant impact on the development of claim severity for a coverage which is part of a particular line of insurance in a specific state, actuarial judgment is applied to determine appropriate development factors that will most accurately reflect the expected impact on that specific estimate. Another example would be when a change in economic conditions is expected to affect the cost of repairs to damaged autos or property for a particular line, coverage, or state, actuarial judgment is applied to determine appropriate development factors to use in the reserve estimate that will most accurately reflect the expected impacts on severity development. As claims are reported, for certain liability claims of sufficient size and complexity, the field adjusting staff establishes case reserve estimates of ultimate cost, based on their assessment of facts and circumstances related to each individual claim. For other claims which occur in large volumes and settle in a relatively short time frame, it is not practical or efficient to set case reserves for each claim, and a statistical case reserve is set for these claims based on estimation techniques previously described. In the normal course of business, we may also supplement our claims 36 processes by utilizing third party adjusters, appraisers, engineers, inspectors, and other professionals and information sources to assess and settle catastrophe and non-catastrophe related claims. Historically, the case reserves set by the field adjusting staff have not proven to be an entirely accurate estimate of the ultimate cost of claims. To provide for this, a development reserve is estimated using previously described processes, and allocated to pending claims as a supplement to case reserves. Typically, the case and supplemental development reserves comprise about 90% of total reserves. Another major component of reserves is IBNR. Typically, IBNR comprises about 10% of total reserves. Generally, the initial reserves for a new accident year are established based on severity assumptions for different business segments, lines and coverages based on historical relationships to relevant inflation indicators, and reserves for prior accident years are statistically determined using processes previously described. Changes in auto current year claim severity are generally influenced by inflation in the medical and auto repair sectors of the economy. We mitigate these effects through various loss management programs. Injury claims are affected largely by medical cost inflation while physical damage claims are affected largely by auto repair cost inflation and used car prices. For auto physical damage coverages, we monitor our rate of increase in average cost per claim against a weighted average of the Maintenance and Repair price index and the Parts and Equipment price index. We believe our claim settlement initiatives, such as improvements to the claim review and settlement process, the use of special investigative units to detect fraud and handle suspect claims, litigation management and defense strategies, as well as various other loss management initiatives underway, contribute to the mitigation of injury and physical damage severity trends. Changes in homeowners current year claim severity are generally influenced by inflation in the cost of building materials, the cost of construction and property repair services, the cost of replacing home furnishings and other contents, the types of claims that qualify for coverage, deductibles and other economic and environmental factors. We employ various loss management programs to mitigate the effect of these factors. As loss experience for the current year develops for each type of loss, it is monitored relative to initial assumptions until it is judged to have sufficient statistical credibility. From that point in time and forward, reserves are reestimated using statistical actuarial processes to reflect the impact actual loss trends have on development factors incorporated into the actuarial estimation processes. Statistical credibility is usually achieved by the end of the first calendar year; however, when trends for the current accident year exceed initial assumptions sooner, they are usually determined to be credible, and reserves are increased accordingly. The very detailed processes for developing reserve estimates, and the lack of a need and existence of a common set of assumptions or development factors, limits aggregate reserve level testing for variability of data elements. However, by applying standard actuarial methods to consolidated historic accident year loss data for major loss types, comprising auto injury losses, auto physical damage losses and homeowner losses, we develop variability analyses consistent with the way we develop reserves by measuring the potential variability of development factors, as described in the section titled "Potential Reserve Estimate Variability" below. Causes of reserve estimate uncertainty Since reserves are estimates of unpaid portions of claims and claims expenses that have occurred, including IBNR losses, the establishment of appropriate reserves, including reserves for catastrophes, requires regular reevaluation and refinement of estimates to determine our ultimate loss estimate. At each reporting date, the highest degree of uncertainty in estimates of losses arises from claims remaining to be settled for the current accident year and the most recent preceding accident year. The greatest degree of uncertainty exists in the current accident year because the current accident year contains the greatest proportion of losses that have not been reported or settled but must be estimated as of the current reporting date. Most of these losses relate to damaged property such as automobiles and homes, and medical care for injuries from accidents. During the first year after the end of an accident year, a large portion of the total losses for that accident year are settled. When accident year losses paid through the end of the first year following the initial accident year are incorporated into updated actuarial estimates, the trends inherent in the settlement of claims emerge more clearly. Consequently, this is the point in time at which we tend to make our largest reestimates of losses for an accident year. After the second year, the losses that we pay for an accident year typically relate to claims that are more difficult to settle, such as those involving serious injuries or litigation. Private passenger auto insurance provides a good illustration of the uncertainty of future loss estimates: our typical annual percentage payout of reserves for an accident year is approximately 45% in the first year after the end of the accident year, 20% in the second year, 15% in the third year, 10% in the fourth year, and the remaining 10% thereafter. 37 Reserves for catastrophe losses Property-Liability claims and claims expense reserves also include reserves for catastrophe losses. Catastrophe losses are an inherent risk of the property-liability insurance industry that have contributed, and will continue to contribute, to potentially material year-to-year fluctuations in our results of operations and financial position. We define a "catastrophe" as an event that produces pre-tax losses before reinsurance in excess of $1 million and involves multiple first party policyholders, or an event that produces a number of claims in excess of a preset, per-event threshold of average claims in a specific area, occurring within a certain amount of time following the event. Catastrophes are caused by various natural events including high winds, winter storms, tornadoes, hailstorms, wildfires, tropical storms, hurricanes, earthquakes and volcanoes. We are also exposed to man-made catastrophic events, such as certain acts of terrorism or industrial accidents. The nature and level of catastrophes in any period cannot be predicted. The estimation of claims and claims expense reserves for catastrophes also comprises estimates of losses from reported claims and IBNR, primarily for damage to property. In general, our estimates for catastrophe reserves are based on claim adjuster inspections and the application of historical loss development factors as described previously. However, depending on the nature of the catastrophe, as noted above, the estimation process can be further complicated. For example, for hurricanes, complications could include the inability of insureds to promptly report losses, limitations placed on claims adjusting staff affecting their ability to inspect losses, determining whether losses are covered by our homeowners policy (generally for damage caused by wind or wind driven rain) or specifically excluded coverage caused by flood, estimating additional living expenses, and assessing the impact of demand surge, exposure to mold damage, and the effects of numerous other considerations, including the timing of a catastrophe in relation to other events, such as at or near the end of a financial reporting period, which can affect the availability of information needed to estimate reserves for that reporting period. In these situations, we may need to adapt our practices to accommodate these circumstances in order to determine a best estimate of our losses from a catastrophe. As an example, in 2005 to complete an estimate for certain areas affected by Hurricane Katrina and not yet inspected by our claims adjusting staff, or where we believed our historical loss development factors were not predictive, we relied on analysis of actual claim notices received compared to total PIF, as well as visual, governmental and third party information, including aerial photos, area observations, and data on wind speed and flood depth to the extent available. Potential reserve estimate variability The aggregation of numerous micro-level estimates for each business segment, line of insurance, major components of losses (such as coverages and perils), and major states or groups of states for reported losses and IBNR forms the reserve liability recorded in the Consolidated Statements of Financial Position. Because of this detailed approach to developing our reserve estimates, there is not a single set of assumptions that determine our reserve estimates at the consolidated level. Given the numerous micro-level estimates for reported losses and IBNR, management does not believe the processes that we follow will produce a statistically credible or reliable actuarial reserve range that would be meaningful. Reserve estimates, by their very nature, are very complex to determine and subject to significant judgment, and do not represent an exact determination for each outstanding claim. Accordingly, as actual claims, and/or paid losses, and/or case reserve results emerge, our estimate of the ultimate cost to settle will be different than previously estimated. To develop a statistical indication of potential reserve variability within reasonably likely possible outcomes, an actuarial technique (stochastic modeling) is applied to the countrywide consolidated data elements for paid losses and paid losses combined with case reserves separately for injury losses, auto physical damage losses, and homeowners losses excluding catastrophe losses. Based on the combined historical variability of the development factors calculated for these data elements, an estimate of the standard error or standard deviation around these reserve estimates is calculated within each accident year for the last eleven years for each type of loss. The variability of these reserve estimates within one standard deviation of the mean (a measure of frequency of dispersion often viewed to be an acceptable level of accuracy) is believed by management to represent a reasonable and statistically probable measure of potential variability. Based on our products and coverages, historical experience, the statistical credibility of our extensive data and stochastic modeling of actuarial chain ladder methodologies used to develop reserve estimates, we estimate that the potential variability of our Allstate Protection reserves, excluding reserves for catastrophe losses, within a reasonable probability of other possible outcomes, may be approximately plus or minus 4%, or plus or minus $425 million in net income. A lower level of variability exists for auto injury losses, which comprise approximately 75% of reserves, due to their relatively stable development patterns over a longer duration of time required to settle claims. Other types of losses, such as auto physical damage, homeowners losses and other losses, which comprise about 25% of reserves, tend to have greater variability but are settled in a much shorter period of time. Although this evaluation reflects most reasonably likely outcomes, it is possible the final outcome may fall below or above these amounts. Historical variability of reserve estimates is reported in the Property-Liability Claims and Claims Expense Reserves section of this document. 38 Adequacy of reserve estimates We believe our net claims and claims expense reserves are appropriately established based on available methodology, facts, technology, laws and regulations. We calculate and record a single best reserve estimate, in conformance with generally accepted actuarial standards, for each line of insurance, its components (coverages and perils) and state, for reported losses and for IBNR losses, and as a result we believe that no other estimate is better than our recorded amount. Due to the uncertainties involved, the ultimate cost of losses may vary materially from recorded amounts, which are based on our best estimates. Discontinued Lines and Coverages reserve estimates Characteristics of Discontinued Lines exposure We continue to receive asbestos and environmental claims. Asbestos claims relate primarily to bodily injuries asserted by people who were exposed to asbestos or products containing asbestos. Environmental claims relate primarily to pollution and related clean-up costs. Our exposure to asbestos, environmental and other discontinued lines claims arises principally from assumed reinsurance coverage written during the 1960s through the mid-1980s, including reinsurance on primary insurance written on large U.S. companies, and from direct excess insurance written from 1972 through 1985, including substantial excess general liability coverages on large U.S. companies. Additional exposure stems from direct primary commercial insurance written during the 1960s through the mid-1980s. Other discontinued lines exposures primarily relate to general liability and product liability mass tort claims, such as those for medical devices and other products. In 1986, the general liability policy form used by us and others in the property-liability industry was amended to introduce an "absolute pollution exclusion," which excluded coverage for environmental damage claims, and to add an asbestos exclusion. Most general liability policies issued prior to 1987 contain annual aggregate limits for product liability coverage. General liability policies issued in 1987 and thereafter contain annual aggregate limits for product liability coverage and annual aggregate limits for all coverages. Our experience to date is that these policy form changes have limited the extent of our exposure to environmental and asbestos claim risks. Our exposure to liability for asbestos, environmental and other discontinued lines losses manifests differently depending on whether it arises from assumed reinsurance coverage, direct excess insurance or direct primary commercial insurance. The direct insurance coverage we provided that covered asbestos, environmental and other discontinued lines was substantially "excess" in nature. Direct excess insurance and reinsurance involve coverage written by us for specific layers of protection above retentions and other insurance plans. The nature of excess coverage and reinsurance provided to other insurers limits our exposure to loss to specific layers of protection in excess of policyholder retention on primary insurance plans. Our exposure is further limited by the significant reinsurance that we had purchased on our direct excess business. Our assumed reinsurance business involved writing generally small participations in other insurers' reinsurance programs. The reinsured losses in which we participate may be a proportion of all eligible losses or eligible losses in excess of defined retentions. The majority of our assumed reinsurance exposure, approximately 85%, is for excess of loss coverage, while the remaining 15% is for pro-rata coverage. Our direct primary commercial insurance business did not include coverage to large asbestos manufacturers. This business comprises a cross section of policyholders engaged in many diverse business sectors located throughout the country. How reserve estimates are established and updated We conduct an annual review in the third quarter to evaluate and establish asbestos, environmental and other discontinued lines reserves. Changes to reserves are recorded in the reporting period in which they are determined. Using established industry and actuarial best practices and assuming no change in the regulatory or economic environment, this detailed and comprehensive methodology determines asbestos reserves based on assessments of the characteristics of exposure (i.e. claim activity, potential liability, jurisdiction, products versus non-products exposure) presented by individual policyholders, and determines environmental reserves based on assessments of the characteristics of exposure (i.e. environmental damages, respective shares of liability of potentially responsible parties, appropriateness and cost of remediation) to pollution and related clean-up costs. The number and cost of these claims is affected by intense advertising by trial lawyers seeking asbestos plaintiffs, and entities with asbestos exposure seeking bankruptcy protection as a result of asbestos liabilities, initially causing a delay in the reporting of claims, often followed by an acceleration and an increase in claims and claims expenses as settlements occur. After evaluating our insureds' probable liabilities for asbestos and/or environmental claims, we evaluate our insureds' coverage programs for such claims. We consider our insureds' total available insurance coverage, including 39 the coverage we issued. We also consider relevant judicial interpretations of policy language and applicable coverage defenses or determinations, if any. Evaluation of both the insureds' estimated liabilities and our exposure to the insureds depends heavily on an analysis of the relevant legal issues and litigation environment. This analysis is conducted by our specialized claims adjusting staff and legal counsel. Based on these evaluations, case reserves are established by claims adjusting staff and actuarial analysis is employed to develop an IBNR reserve, which includes estimated potential reserve development and claims that have occurred but have not been reported. As of December 31, 2010 and 2009, IBNR was 60.1% and 62.3%, respectively, of combined asbestos and environmental reserves. For both asbestos and environmental reserves, we also evaluate our historical direct net loss and expense paid and incurred experience to assess any emerging trends, fluctuations or characteristics suggested by the aggregate paid and incurred activity. Other Discontinued Lines and Coverages The following table shows reserves for other discontinued lines which provide for remaining loss and loss expense liabilities related to business no longer written by us, other than asbestos and environmental, as of December 31. ($ in millions) 2010 2009 2008 Other mass torts $ 188 $ 201 $ 177 Workers' compensation 116 122 130 Commercial and other 174 177 201 Other discontinued lines $ 478 $ 500 $ 508 Other mass torts describes direct excess and reinsurance general liability coverage provided for cumulative injury losses other than asbestos and environmental. Workers' compensation and commercial and other include run-off from discontinued direct primary, direct excess and reinsurance commercial insurance operations of various coverage exposures other than asbestos and environmental. Reserves are based on considerations similar to those previously described, as they relate to the characteristics of specific individual coverage exposures. Potential reserve estimate variability Establishing Discontinued Lines and Coverages net loss reserves for asbestos, environmental and other discontinued lines claims is subject to uncertainties that are much greater than those presented by other types of claims. Among the complications are lack of historical data, long reporting delays, uncertainty as to the number and identity of insureds with potential exposure and unresolved legal issues regarding policy coverage; unresolved legal issues regarding the determination, availability and timing of exhaustion of policy limits; plaintiffs' evolving and expanding theories of liability; availability and collectability of recoveries from reinsurance; retrospectively determined premiums and other contractual agreements; estimates of the extent and timing of any contractual liability; the impact of bankruptcy protection sought by various asbestos producers and other asbestos defendants; and other uncertainties. There are also complex legal issues concerning the interpretation of various insurance policy provisions and whether those losses are covered, or were ever intended to be covered, and could be recoverable through retrospectively determined premium, reinsurance or other contractual agreements. Courts have reached different and sometimes inconsistent conclusions as to when losses are deemed to have occurred and which policies provide coverage; what types of losses are covered; whether there is an insurer obligation to defend; how policy limits are determined; how policy exclusions and conditions are applied and interpreted; and whether clean-up costs represent insured property damage. Our reserves for asbestos and environmental exposures could be affected by tort reform, class action litigation, and other potential legislation and judicial decisions. Environmental exposures could also be affected by a change in the existing federal Superfund law and similar state statutes. There can be no assurance that any reform legislation will be enacted or that any such legislation will provide for a fair, effective and cost-efficient system for settlement of asbestos or environmental claims. We believe these issues are not likely to be resolved in the near future, and the ultimate costs may vary materially from the amounts currently recorded resulting in material changes in loss reserves. Historical variability of reserve estimates is demonstrated in the Property-Liability Claims and Claims Expense Reserves section of this document. Adequacy of reserve estimates Management believes its net loss reserves for environmental, asbestos and other discontinued lines exposures are appropriately established based on available facts, technology, laws, regulations, and assessments of other pertinent factors and characteristics of exposure (i.e. claim activity, potential liability, jurisdiction, products versus non-products exposure) presented by individual policyholders, assuming no change in the legal, legislative or economic environment. Due to the uncertainties and factors described above, management believes it is not practicable to develop a meaningful range for any such additional net loss reserves that may be required. 40 Further discussion of reserve estimates For further discussion of these estimates and quantification of the impact of reserve estimates, reserve reestimates and assumptions, see Notes 7 and 13 to the consolidated financial statements and the Property-Liability Claims and Claims Expense Reserves section of this document. Reserve for life-contingent contract benefits estimation Due to the long term nature of traditional life insurance, life-contingent immediate annuities and voluntary health products, benefits are payable over many years; accordingly, the reserves are calculated as the present value of future expected benefits to be paid, reduced by the present value of future expected net premiums. Long-term actuarial assumptions of future investment yields, mortality, morbidity, policy terminations and expenses are used when establishing the reserve for life-contingent contract benefits payable under these insurance policies. These assumptions, which for traditional life insurance are applied using the net level premium method, include provisions for adverse deviation and generally vary by characteristics such as type of coverage, year of issue and policy duration. Future investment yield assumptions are determined based upon prevailing investment yields as well as estimated reinvestment yields. Mortality, morbidity and policy termination assumptions are based on our experience and industry experience. Expense assumptions include the estimated effects of inflation and expenses to be incurred beyond the premium-paying period. These assumptions are established at the time the policy is issued, are consistent with assumptions for determining DAC amortization for these policies, and are generally not changed during the policy coverage period. However, if actual experience emerges in a manner that is significantly adverse relative to the original assumptions, adjustments to DAC or reserves may be required resulting in a charge to earnings which could have a material adverse effect on our operating results and financial condition. We periodically review the adequacy of reserves and recoverability of DAC for these policies on an aggregate basis using actual experience. In the event actual experience is significantly adverse compared to the original assumptions and a premium deficiency is determined to exist, any remaining unamortized DAC balance must be expensed to the extent not recoverable and the establishment of a premium deficiency reserve may be required. In 2010 and 2009, our reviews concluded that no premium deficiency adjustments were necessary, primarily due to profit from traditional life insurance more than offsetting the projected losses in immediate annuities with life contingencies. In 2008, for traditional life insurance and immediate annuities with life contingencies, an aggregate premium deficiency of $336 million pre-tax ($219 million after-tax) resulted primarily from a study indicating that the annuitants on certain life-contingent contracts are projected to live longer than we anticipated when the contracts were issued and, to a lesser degree, a reduction in the related investment portfolio yield. The deficiency was recorded through a reduction in DAC. We will continue to monitor the experience of our traditional life insurance and immediate annuities. We anticipate that mortality, investment and reinvestment yields, and policy terminations are the factors that would be most likely to require premium deficiency adjustments to these reserves or related DAC. For further detail on the reserve for life-contingent contract benefits, see Note 8 of the consolidated financial statements. PROPERTY-LIABILITY 2010 HIGHLIGHTS Premiums written, an operating measure that is defined and reconciled to premiums earned in the Property-Liability Operations section of the MD&A, decreased 0.2% to $25.91 billion in 2010 from $25.97 billion in 2009. Allstate brand standard auto premiums written increased 0.5% to $15.84 billion in 2010 from $15.76 billion in 2009. Allstate brand homeowners premiums written increased 2.1% to $5.75 billion in 2010 from $5.64 billion in 2009. Encompass brand premiums written decreased 17.5% to $1.10 billion in 2010 from $1.33 billion in 2009. Premium operating measures and statistics contributing to overall Allstate brand standard auto premiums written increase were the following: 1.5% decrease in PIF as of December 31, 2010 compared to December 31, 2009 2.1% increase in the six month policy term average gross premium before reinsurance to $443 in 2010 from $434 in 2009 0.2 point decrease in the six month renewal ratio to 88.7% in 2010 compared to 88.9% in 2009 0.2% decrease in new issued applications in 2010 compared to 2009 Premium operating measures and statistics contributing to overall Allstate brand homeowners premiums written increase were the following: 4.1% decrease in PIF as of December 31, 2010 compared to December 31, 2009 6.8% increase in the twelve month policy term average gross premium before reinsurance to $943 in 2010 from $883 in 2009 0.3 point increase in the twelve month renewal ratio to 88.4% in 2010 compared to 88.1% in 2009 3.6% decrease in new issued applications in 2010 compared to 2009 $27 million decrease in catastrophe reinsurance costs to $534 million in 2010 from $561 million in 2009 41 Factors comprising the Allstate brand standard auto loss ratio increase of 1.4 points to 70.7 in 2010 from 69.3 in 2009 were the following: 2.0% increase in standard auto claim frequency for property damage in 2010 compared to 2009 6.2% increase in standard auto claim frequency for bodily injury in 2010 compared to 2009 0.5% decrease in auto paid claim severities for property damage in 2010 compared to 2009 0.3% decrease in auto paid claim severities for bodily injury in 2010 compared to 2009 Factors comprising the Allstate brand homeowners loss ratio, which includes catastrophes, increase of 2.5 points to 82.1 in 2010 from 79.6 in 2009 were the following: 2.3 point increase in the effect of catastrophe losses to 31.3 points in 2010 compared to 29.0 points in 2009 1.1% decrease in homeowner claim frequency, excluding catastrophes, in 2010 compared to 2009 1.6% increase in paid claim severity, excluding catastrophes, in 2010 compared to 2009 Factors comprising the $138 million increase in catastrophe losses to $2.21 billion in 2010 compared to $2.07 billion in 2009 were the following: 90 events with losses of $2.37 billion in 2010 compared to 82 events with losses of $2.24 billion in 2009 $163 million favorable prior year reserve reestimates in 2010 compared to $169 million favorable reserve reestimates in 2009 Factors comprising prior year reserve reestimates of $159 million favorable in 2010 compared to $112 million favorable in 2009 included: prior year reserve reestimates related to auto, homeowners and other personal lines in 2010 contributed $179 million favorable, $23 million favorable and $15 million unfavorable, respectively, compared to prior year reserve reestimates in 2009 of $57 million favorable, $168 million favorable and $89 million unfavorable, respectively prior year reestimates in 2010 are attributable to favorable prior year catastrophe reestimates and severity development that was better than expected, partially offset by litigation settlements Property-Liability underwriting income was $495 million in 2010 compared to $995 million in 2009. Underwriting income, a measure not based on GAAP, is defined below. Property-Liability investments as of December 31, 2010 were $35.05 billion, an increase of 1.5% from $34.53 billion as of December 31, 2009. Net investment income was $1.19 billion in 2010, a decrease of 10.5% from $1.33 billion in 2009. Net realized capital losses were $321 million in 2010 compared to $168 million in 2009. PROPERTY-LIABILITY OPERATIONS Overview Our Property-Liability operations consist of two business segments: Allstate Protection and Discontinued Lines and Coverages. Allstate Protection comprises two brands, the Allstate brand and Encompass brand. Allstate Protection is principally engaged in the sale of personal property and casualty insurance, primarily private passenger auto and homeowners insurance, to individuals in the United States and Canada. Discontinued Lines and Coverages includes results from insurance coverage that we no longer write and results for certain commercial and other businesses in run-off. These segments are consistent with the groupings of financial information that management uses to evaluate performance and to determine the allocation of resources. Underwriting income, a measure that is not based on GAAP and is reconciled to net income below, is calculated as premiums earned, less claims and claims expense ("losses"), amortization of DAC, operating costs and expenses and restructuring and related charges, as determined using GAAP. We use this measure in our evaluation of results of operations to analyze the profitability of the Property-Liability insurance operations separately from investment results. It is also an integral component of incentive compensation. It is useful for investors to evaluate the components of income separately and in the aggregate when reviewing performance. Net income is the GAAP measure most directly comparable to underwriting income. Underwriting income should not be considered as a substitute for net income and does not reflect the overall profitability of the business. The table below includes GAAP operating ratios we use to measure our profitability. We believe that they enhance an investor's understanding of our profitability. They are calculated as follows: Claims and claims expense ("loss") ratio the ratio of claims and claims expense to premiums earned. Loss ratios include the impact of catastrophe losses. Expense ratio the ratio of amortization of DAC, operating costs and expenses, and restructuring and related charges to premiums earned. Combined ratio the ratio of claims and claims expense, amortization of DAC, operating costs and expenses, and restructuring and related charges to premiums earned. The combined ratio is the sum of the loss ratio and the 42 expense ratio. The difference between 100% and the combined ratio represents underwriting income as a percentage of premiums earned, or underwriting margin. We have also calculated the following impacts of specific items on the GAAP operating ratios because of the volatility of these items between fiscal periods. Effect of catastrophe losses on combined ratio the percentage of catastrophe losses included in claims and claims expense to premiums earned. This ratio includes prior year reserve reestimates of catastrophe losses. Effect of prior year reserve reestimates on combined ratio the percentage of prior year reserve reestimates included in claims and claims expense to premiums earned. This ratio includes prior year reserve reestimates of catastrophe losses. Effect of restructuring and related charges on combined ratio the percentage of restructuring and related charges to premiums earned. Effect of Discontinued Lines and Coverages on combined ratio the ratio of claims and claims expense and other costs and expenses in the Discontinued Lines and Coverages segment to Property-Liability premiums earned. The sum of the effect of Discontinued Lines and Coverages on the combined ratio and the Allstate Protection combined ratio is equal to the Property-Liability combined ratio. 43 Summarized financial data, a reconciliation of underwriting income to net income, and GAAP operating ratios for our Property-Liability operations are presented in the following table. ($ in millions, except ratios) 2010 2009 2008 Premiums written $ 25,907 $ 25,971 $ 26,584 Revenues Premiums earned $ 25,957 $ 26,194 $ 26,967 Net investment income 1,189 1,328 1,674 Realized capital gains and losses (321 ) (168 ) (1,858 ) Total revenues 26,825 27,354 26,783 Costs and expenses Claims and claims expense (18,951 ) (18,746 ) (20,064 ) Amortization of DAC (3,678 ) (3,789 ) (3,975 ) Operating costs and expenses (2,800 ) (2,559 ) (2,742 ) Restructuring and related charges (33 ) (105 ) (22 ) Total costs and expenses (25,462 ) (25,199 ) (26,803 ) Gain on disposition of operations 5 Income tax (expense) benefit (314 ) (612 ) 248 Net income $ 1,054 $ 1,543 $ 228 Underwriting income $ 495 $ 995 $ 164 Net investment income 1,189 1,328 1,674 Income tax expense on operations (426 ) (558 ) (401 ) Realized capital gains and losses, after-tax (207 ) (222 ) (1,209 ) Gain on disposition of operations, after-tax 3 Net income $ 1,054 $ 1,543 $ 228 Catastrophe losses (1) $ 2,207 $ 2,069 $ 3,342 GAAP operating ratios Claims and claims expense ratio 73.0 71.6 74.4 Expense ratio 25.1 24.6 25.0 Combined ratio 98.1 96.2 99.4 Effect of catastrophe losses on combined ratio (1) 8.5 7.9 12.4 Effect of prior year reserve reestimates on combined ratio (1) (0.6 ) (0.4 ) 0.7 Effect of restructuring and related charges on combined ratio 0.1 0.4 0.1 Effect of Discontinued Lines and Coverages on combined ratio 0.1 0.1 0.1 (1) Prior year reserve reestimates included in catastrophe losses totaled $163 million favorable in 2010, $169 million favorable in 2009 and $125 million unfavorable in 2008. ALLSTATE PROTECTION SEGMENT Overview and strategy The Allstate Protection segment sells primarily private passenger auto and homeowners insurance to individuals through Allstate Exclusive Agencies and directly through call centers and the internet under the Allstate brand. We also sell auto and homeowners insurance through independent agencies under both the Allstate brand and the Encompass brand. Our operating priorities for the Protection segment include achieving profitable market share growth for our auto business as well as earning acceptable returns on our homeowners business. Key goals include: Improving customer loyalty and retention Deepening customer product relationships Improving competitive position through pricing sophistication, claims efficiency and expense management 44 Investing in the effectiveness and reach of our multiple distribution channels Maintaining a strong capital foundation through risk management and effective resource allocation Our customer-focused strategy for the Allstate brand aligns targeted marketing, product innovation, distribution effectiveness, and pricing toward acquiring and retaining an increased share of our target customers, which generally refers to consumers who want to purchase multiple products from one insurance provider including auto, homeowners and financial products, who have better retention and potentially present more favorable prospects for profitability over the course of their relationships with us. The Allstate brand utilizes marketing delivered to target customers to promote our strategic priorities, with messaging that continues to communicate affordability and ease of doing business with Allstate, as well as the importance of having proper coverage by highlighting our comprehensive product and coverage options. At Allstate we differentiate ourselves from competitors by offering a comprehensive range of innovative product options and features as well as product customization, including Allstate Your Choice Auto with options such as accident forgiveness, safe driving deductible rewards and a safe driving bonus. We will continue to focus on developing and introducing products and services that benefit today's consumers and further differentiate Allstate and enhance the customer experience. We will deepen customer relationships through value-added customer interactions and expanding our presence in households with multiple products by providing financial protection for customer needs. Within our multiple distribution channels we are undergoing a focused effort to enhance our capabilities by implementing uniform processes and standards to elevate the level and consistency of our customer experience. We continue to enhance technology to integrate our distribution channels, improve customer service, facilitate the introduction of new products and services and reduce infrastructure costs related to supporting agencies and handling claims. These actions and others are designed to optimize the effectiveness of our distribution and service channels by increasing the productivity of the Allstate brand's exclusive agencies and our direct channel. Our pricing and underwriting strategies and decisions, made in conjunction within a program called Strategic Risk Management, are designed to enhance both our competitive position and our profit potential. Pricing sophistication, which underlies our Strategic Risk Management program, uses a number of risk evaluation factors including insurance scoring, to the extent permissible by regulations, based on information that is obtained from credit reports. Our updated auto risk evaluation pricing model was implemented for 9 states in 2010 and these implementations will continue in other states throughout 2011. Our pricing strategy involves marketplace pricing and underwriting decisions that are based on these risk evaluation models and an evaluation of competitors. We will also continue to provide a range of discounts to attract more target customers. For Allstate brand auto and homeowners business, we continue to improve our mix of customers towards those customers that have better retention and thus potentially present more favorable prospects for profitability over the course of their relationships with us. For homeowners, we will address rate adequacy and improve underwriting and claim effectiveness. Our strategy for the Encompass brand includes enhancing our premier package policy (providing customers with the ability to simplify their insurance needs by consolidating their coverage into one policy, with one bill, one premium and one renewal date) to appeal to customers with broad personal lines coverage needs and that value an independent agent. Additionally, Encompass is focused on increasing distribution effectiveness and improving agency technology interfaces to become the package carrier of choice for aligned agencies to generate stable, consistent earnings growth. The Allstate Protection segment also includes a separate organization called Emerging Businesses which comprises Business Insurance (commercial products for small business owners), Consumer Household (specialty products including motorcycle, boat, renters and condominium insurance policies), Allstate Dealer Services (insurance and non-insurance products sold primarily to auto dealers), Allstate Roadside Services (retail and wholesale roadside assistance products) and Ivantage (insurance agency). Premiums written by Emerging Businesses, through all channels including the direct channel, were $2.43 billion in 2010. We expect to accelerate profitable growth in Emerging Businesses during 2011. We continue to manage our property catastrophe exposure in order to provide our shareholders an acceptable return on the risks assumed in our property business and to reduce the variability of our earnings, while providing protection to our customers. Our property business includes personal homeowners, commercial property and other property lines. As of December 31, 2010, we continue to be within our goal to have no more than a 1% likelihood of exceeding annual aggregate catastrophe losses by $2 billion, net of reinsurance, from hurricanes and earthquakes, based on modeled assumptions and applications currently available. The use of different assumptions and updates to industry models could materially change the projected loss. 45 Property catastrophe exposure management includes purchasing reinsurance to provide coverage for known exposure to hurricanes, earthquakes, wildfires, fires following earthquakes and other catastrophes. We are also working for changes in the regulatory environment, including recognizing the need for and improving appropriate risk based pricing and promoting the creation of government sponsored, privately funded solutions for mega-catastrophes. While the actions that we take will be primarily focused on reducing the catastrophe exposure in our property business, we also consider their impact on our ability to market our auto lines. Pricing of property products is typically intended to establish returns that we deem acceptable over a long-term period. Losses, including losses from catastrophic events and weather-related losses (such as wind, hail, lightning and freeze losses not meeting our criteria to be declared a catastrophe) are accrued on an occurrence basis within the policy period. Therefore, in any reporting period, loss experience from catastrophic events and weather-related losses may contribute to negative or positive underwriting performance relative to the expectations we incorporated into the products' pricing. We pursue rate increases where indicated using a newly re-designed methodology that appropriately addresses the changing costs of losses from catastrophes such as severe weather and the net cost of reinsurance. Allstate Protection outlook Allstate Protection will emphasize attracting and retaining our target customers while maintaining pricing discipline. We expect that volatility in the level of catastrophes we experience will contribute to variation in our underwriting results; however, this volatility will be mitigated due to our catastrophe management actions, including the purchase of reinsurance. We will continue to study the efficiencies of our operations and cost structure for additional areas where costs may be reduced. Premiums written , an operating measure, is the amount of premiums charged for policies issued during a fiscal period. Premiums earned is a GAAP measure. Premiums are considered earned and are included in the financial results on a pro-rata basis over the policy period. The portion of premiums written applicable to the unexpired terms of the policies is recorded as unearned premiums on our Consolidated Statements of Financial Position. Since the Allstate brand policy periods are typically 6 months for auto and 12 months for homeowners, and the Encompass standard auto and homeowners policy periods are typically 12 months and non-standard auto policy periods are typically 6 months, rate changes will generally be recognized in premiums earned over a period of 6 to 24 months. The following table shows the unearned premium balance as of December 31 and the timeframe in which we expect to recognize these premiums as earned. ($ in millions) % earned after 2010 2009 90 days 180 days 270 days 360 days Allstate brand: Standard auto $ 4,103 $ 4,060 72.8 % 97.7 % 99.4 % 100.0 % Non-standard auto 239 250 69.5 % 95.4 % 99.0 % 100.0 % Homeowners 3,259 3,193 43.5 % 75.6 % 94.2 % 100.0 % Other personal lines (1) 1,276 1,295 40.0 % 69.7 % 87.9 % 94.8 % Total Allstate brand 8,877 8,798 57.3 % 85.6 % 95.9 % 99.2 % Encompass brand: Standard auto 327 399 44.0 % 75.7 % 94.2 % 100.0 % Non-standard auto 1 4 75.9 % 100.0 % 100.0 % 100.0 % Homeowners 206 233 44.0 % 76.0 % 94.3 % 100.0 % Other personal lines (1) 47 52 43.8 % 75.7 % 94.3 % 100.0 % Total Encompass brand 581 688 44.1 % 75.8 % 94.2 % 100.0 % Allstate Protection unearned premiums $ 9,458 $ 9,486 56.5 % 85.0 % 95.8 % 99.3 % (1) Other personal lines include commercial, condominium, renters, involuntary auto and other personal lines. 46 A reconciliation of premiums written to premiums earned is shown in the following table. ($ in millions) 2010 2009 2008 Premiums written: Allstate Protection $ 25,906 $ 25,972 $ 26,584 Discontinued Lines and Coverages 1 (1 ) Property-Liability premiums written 25,907 25,971 26,584 Decrease in unearned premiums 19 200 383 Other 31 23 Property-Liability premiums earned $ 25,957 $ 26,194 $ 26,967 Premiums earned: Allstate Protection $ 25,955 $ 26,195 $ 26,967 Discontinued Lines and Coverages 2 (1 ) Property-Liability $ 25,957 $ 26,194 $ 26,967 Premiums written by brand are shown in the following table. ($ in millions) Allstate brand Encompass brand Allstate Protection 2010 2009 2008 2010 2009 2008 2010 2009 2008 Standard auto $ 15,842 $ 15,763 $ 15,918 $ 644 $ 800 $ 1,025 $ 16,486 $ 16,563 $ 16,943 Non-standard auto 883 927 1,018 6 22 40 889 949 1,058 Homeowners 5,753 5,635 5,639 357 408 471 6,110 6,043 6,110 Other personal lines 2,331 2,317 2,358 90 100 115 2,421 2,417 2,473 Total $ 24,809 $ 24,642 $ 24,933 $ 1,097 $ 1,330 $ 1,651 $ 25,906 $ 25,972 $ 26,584 Allstate brand premiums written, excluding Allstate Canada, by the direct channel increased 19.8% to $745 million in 2010 from $622 million in 2009, reflecting an impact by profitability management actions taken in New York, Florida, California and North Carolina, following a 25.4% increase from $496 million in 2008. The direct channel includes call centers and the internet. Premiums earned by brand are shown in the following tables. ($ in millions) Allstate brand Encompass brand Allstate Protection 2010 2009 2008 2010 2009 2008 2010 2009 2008 Standard auto $ 15,814 $ 15,735 $ 15,957 $ 716 $ 907 $ 1,091 $ 16,530 $ 16,642 $ 17,048 Non-standard auto 896 939 1,055 9 27 45 905 966 1,100 Homeowners 5,693 5,633 5,758 385 444 503 6,078 6,077 6,261 Other personal lines 2,348 2,402 2,434 94 108 124 2,442 2,510 2,558 Total $ 24,751 $ 24,709 $ 25,204 $ 1,204 $ 1,486 $ 1,763 $ 25,955 $ 26,195 $ 26,967 Premium operating measures and statistics that are used to analyze the business are calculated and described below. Measures and statistics presented for Allstate brand exclude Allstate Canada, loan protection and specialty auto. PIF: Policy counts are based on items rather than customers. A multi-car customer would generate multiple item (policy) counts, even if all cars were insured under one policy. Average premium-gross written: Gross premiums written divided by issued item count. Gross premiums written include the impacts from discounts and surcharges, and exclude the impacts from mid-term premium adjustments, ceded reinsurance premiums, and premium refund accruals. Allstate brand average gross premiums represent the appropriate policy term for each line, which is 6 months for standard and non-standard auto and 12 months for homeowners. Encompass brand average gross premiums represent the appropriate policy term for each line, which is 12 months for standard auto and homeowners and 6 months for non-standard auto. Renewal ratio: Renewal policies issued during the period, based on contract effective dates, divided by the total policies issued 6 months prior for standard and non-standard auto (12 months prior for Encompass brand standard auto) or 12 months prior for homeowners. 47 New issued applications: Item counts of automobiles or homeowners insurance applications for insurance policies that were issued during the period. Does not include automobiles that are added by existing customers. Net items added to existing policies: Net increases in insured cars by policy endorsement activity. Standard auto premiums written totaled $16.49 billion in 2010, a decrease of 0.5% from $16.56 billion in 2009, following a 2.2% decrease in 2009 from $16.94 billion in 2008. Allstate brand Encompass brand Standard Auto 2010 2009 2008 2010 2009 2008 PIF (thousands) 17,484 17,744 17,924 689 859 1,090 Average premium-gross written (1) $ 443 $ 434 $ 427 $ 979 $ 972 $ 961 Renewal ratio (%) (1) 88.7 88.9 88.9 69.2 69.6 73.9 (1) Policy term is six months for Allstate brand and twelve months for Encompass brand. Allstate brand standard auto premiums written totaled $15.84 billion in 2010, an increase of 0.5% from $15.76 billion in 2009, following a 1.0% decrease in 2009 from $15.92 billion in 2008. Contributing to the Allstate brand standard auto premiums written increase were the following: decrease in PIF as of December 31, 2010 compared to December 31, 2009, due to fewer policies available to renew and a 0.7% decrease in net items added to existing policies to 1,498 thousand from 1,509 thousand, reflecting industry economic trends for declines in the number of cars per household 0.2% decrease in new issued applications on a countrywide basis to 2,025 thousand in 2010 from 2,029 thousand in 2009 impacted by decreases in Florida and California, due in part to rate actions that were approved in 2009 in these markets and other actions to improve profitability. Excluding Florida and California, new issued applications on a countrywide basis increased 12.9% to 1,606 thousand in 2010 from 1,423 thousand in 2009. New issued application increased in 40 states, most of which offer an auto discount (the Preferred Package Discount) for our target customer. increased average gross premium in 2010 compared to 2009, primarily due to rate changes, partially offset by customers electing to lower coverage levels of their policy 0.2 point decrease in the renewal ratio in 2010 compared to 2009, reflects profit management actions in California, New York and Georgia as well as the effects of the direct channel which has a lower renewal ratio. Excluding these items the renewal ratio had a 0.3 point increase. Allstate brand standard auto premiums written decreased in 2009 compared to 2008. Contributing to the Allstate brand standard auto premiums written decrease in 2009 compared to 2008 were the following: decrease in PIF as of December 31, 2009 compared to December 31, 2008, due to fewer policies available to renew and a 10.1% decrease in net items added to existing policies to 1,509 thousand from 1,678 thousand, reflecting industry economic trends for declines in the number of cars per household 12.3% increase in new issued applications on a countrywide basis to 2,029 thousand in 2009 from 1,807 thousand in 2008 increase in average gross premium in 2009 compared to 2008, primarily due to rate changes, partially offset by customers electing to change coverage levels of their policy The level of Encompass premiums written continues to be impacted by comprehensive actions designed to improve Encompass brand profitability, which will continue through 2011. Some of the actions contributing to the Encompass brand standard auto premiums written decrease in 2010 compared to 2009 were the following: Implemented rate increases where indicated Strengthened underwriting guidelines Revised renewal down payment requirements Terminated relationships with certain independent agencies Non-renewal of underperforming business segments Discontinued writing the Special Value product (middle market auto product focused on segment auto) and Deerbrook (non-standard auto) in certain states Non-renewal of property in Florida 48 These actions have allowed Encompass to position itself with aligned agencies as the package policy carrier of choice for customers with broad personal lines coverage needs in order to drive stable, consistent earnings growth over time. Rate changes that are indicated based on loss trend analysis to achieve a targeted return will continue to be pursued. The following table shows the rate changes that were approved for standard auto and does not include rating plan enhancements, including the introduction of discounts and surcharges, that result in no change in the overall rate level in the state. These rate changes do not reflect initial rates filed for insurance subsidiaries initially writing business in a state. # of States Countrywide (%) (1) State Specific (%) (2)(3) 2010 2009 2010 2009 2010 2009 Allstate brand (4) 45 (5) 36 1.4 4.6 2.2 7.2 Encompass brand 24 36 1.4 7.3 2.7 9.3 (1) Represents the impact in the states where rate changes were approved during 2010 and 2009, respectively, as a percentage of total countrywide prior year-end premiums written. (2) Represents the impact in the states where rate changes were approved during 2010 and 2009, respectively, as a percentage of its respective total prior year-end premiums written in those states. (3) Based on historical premiums written in those states, rate changes approved for standard auto totaled $218 million in 2010 compared to $784 million in 2009. (4) Includes Washington D.C. (5) Includes targeted rate decreases in certain markets to improve our competitive position for target customers. Non-standard auto premiums written totaled $889 million in 2010, a decrease of 6.3% from $949 million in 2009, following a 10.3% decrease in 2009 from $1.06 billion in 2008. Allstate brand Encompass brand Non-Standard Auto 2010 2009 2008 2010 2009 2008 PIF (thousands) 640 719 745 5 20 39 Average premium-gross written (6 months) $ 624 $ 616 $ 624 $ 426 $ 476 $ 479 Renewal ratio (%) (6 months) 71.4 72.5 73.7 46.9 67.1 68.3 Allstate brand non-standard auto premiums written totaled $883 million in 2010, a decrease of 4.7% from $927 million in 2009, following a 8.9% decrease in 2009 from $1.02 billion in 2008. Contributing to the Allstate brand non-standard auto premiums written decrease in 2010 compared to 2009 were the following: decrease in PIF as of December 31, 2010 compared to December 31, 2009, due to a decline in the number of policies available to renew and fewer new issued applications 14.9% decrease in new issued applications to 309 thousand in 2010 from 363 thousand in 2009 increase in average gross premium in 2010 compared to 2009 1.1 point decrease in the renewal ratio in 2010 compared to 2009 Allstate brand non-standard auto premiums written decreased in 2009 compared to 2008. Contributing to the Allstate brand non-standard auto premiums written decrease in 2009 compared to 2008 were the following: decrease in PIF as of December 31, 2009 compared to December 31, 2008, due to new business production that was insufficient to offset declines in the renewal ratio and polices available to renew 10.7% increase in new issued applications to 363 thousand in 2009 from 328 thousand in 2008 decrease in average gross premium in 2009 compared to 2008 decrease in the renewal ratio in 2009 compared to 2008 Rate changes that are indicated based on loss trend analysis to achieve a targeted return will continue to be pursued. The following table shows the rate changes that were approved for non-standard auto and does not include rating plan enhancements, including the introduction of discounts and surcharges, that result in no change in the 49 overall rate level in the state. These rate changes do not reflect initial rates filed for insurance subsidiaries initially writing business in a state. # of States Countrywide (%) (1) State Specific (%) (2) (3) 2010 2009 2010 2009 2010 2009 Allstate brand 11 (4) 11 4.6 2.6 9.6 6.5 Encompass brand 1 0.9 31.7 (1) Represents the impact in the states where rate changes were approved during 2010 and 2009, respectively, as a percentage of total countrywide prior year-end premiums written. (2) Represents the impact in the states where rate changes were approved during 2010 and 2009, respectively, as a percentage of its respective total prior year-end premiums written in those states. (3) Based on historical premiums written in those states, rate changes approved for non-standard auto totaled $41 million in 2010 compared to $25 million in 2009. (4) Includes Washington D.C. Homeowners premiums written totaled $6.11 billion in 2010, an increase of 1.1% from $6.04 billion in 2009, following a 1.1% decrease in 2009 from $6.11 billion in 2008. Excluding the cost of catastrophe reinsurance, premiums written increased 0.6% in 2010 compared to 2009. For a more detailed discussion on reinsurance, see the Property-Liability Claims and Claims Expense Reserves section of the MD&A and Note 9 of the consolidated financial statements. Allstate brand Encompass brand Homeowners 2010 2009 2008 2010 2009 2008 PIF (thousands) 6,690 6,973 7,255 314 371 446 Average premium-gross written (12 months) $ 943 $ 883 $ 861 $ 1,298 $ 1,265 $ 1,206 Renewal ratio (%) (12 months) 88.4 88.1 87.0 78.1 78.9 80.6 Allstate brand homeowners premiums written totaled $5.75 billion in 2010, an increase of 2.1% from $5.64 billion in 2009, following a 2009 comparable to 2008. Contributing to the Allstate brand homeowners premiums written increase in 2010 compared to 2009 were the following: decrease in PIF of 4.1% as of December 31, 2010 compared to December 31, 2009, following a 3.9% decrease as of December 31, 2009 compared to December 31, 2008, due to fewer policies available to renew and fewer new issued applications 3.6% decrease in new issued applications to 536 thousand in 2010 from 556 thousand in 2009. Our Castle Key Indemnity Company subsidiary continues to have a favorable impact on new issued applications, due to a 2008 regulatory consent decree to sell 50,000 new homeowners policies in Florida by November 2011. Excluding Florida, new issued applications on a countrywide basis decreased 12.4% to 487 thousand in 2010 from 556 thousand in 2009. increase in average gross premium in 2010 compared to 2009, primarily due to rate changes 0.3 point increase in the renewal ratio in 2010 compared to 2009 decrease in the net cost of our catastrophe reinsurance program in 2010 compared to 2009 As of December 31, 2010, an increased Home and Auto discount is now available in 40 states. This has successfully shifted our mix of new business towards target customers. Actions taken to manage our catastrophe exposure in areas with known exposure to hurricanes, earthquakes, wildfires, fires following earthquakes and other catastrophes have had an impact on our new business writings and retention for homeowners insurance, and this impact will continue in 2011, although to a lesser degree. For a more detailed discussion on exposure management actions, see the Catastrophe Management section of the MD&A. Allstate brand homeowners premiums written in 2009 were comparable to 2008. Contributing to the Allstate brand homeowners premiums written in 2009 compared to 2008 were the following: decrease in PIF as of December 31, 2009 compared to December 31, 2008, due to fewer policies available to renew and fewer new issued applications 6.4% decrease in new issued applications to 556 thousand in 2009 from 594 thousand in 2008 increase in average gross premium in 2009 compared to 2008, primarily due to rate increases, partially offset by the impact of reduced PIF in catastrophe management areas with higher average gross premiums and a state insurance department initiated rate reduction in California 50 increase in the renewal ratio in 2009 compared to 2008 in part driven by less non-renewal activity in coastal states that are more susceptible to major catastrophes decrease in the net cost of our catastrophe reinsurance program Rate changes that are indicated based on loss trend analysis to achieve a targeted return will continue to be pursued. The following table shows the rate changes that were approved for homeowners, including rate changes approved based on our net cost of reinsurance, and does not include rating plan enhancements, including the introduction of discounts and surcharges, that result in no change in the overall rate level in the state. # of States Countrywide (%) (1) State Specific (%) (2) (3) 2010 2009 2010 2009 2010 2009 Allstate brand (4) 32 40 7.0 8.4 10.0 10.7 Encompass brand (4) 23 36 0.7 4.4 1.4 5.9 (1) Represents the impact in the states where rate changes were approved during 2010 and 2009, respectively, as a percentage of total countrywide prior year-end premiums written. (2) Represents the impact in the states where rate changes were approved during 2010 and 2009, respectively, as a percentage of its respective total prior year-end premiums written in those states. (3) Based on historical premiums written in those states, rate changes approved for homeowners totaled $424 million in 2010 compared to $534 million in 2009. (4) Includes Washington D.C. Underwriting results are shown in the following table. ($ in millions) 2010 2009 2008 Premiums written $ 25,906 $ 25,972 $ 26,584 Premiums earned $ 25,955 $ 26,195 $ 26,967 Claims and claims expense (18,923 ) (18,722 ) (20,046 ) Amortization of DAC (3,678 ) (3,789 ) (3,975 ) Other costs and expenses (2,795 ) (2,552 ) (2,735 ) Restructuring and related charges (33 ) (105 ) (22 ) Underwriting income $ 526 $ 1,027 $ 189 Catastrophe losses $ 2,207 $ 2,069 $ 3,342 Underwriting income (loss) by line of business Standard auto (1) $ 692 $ 987 $ 1,247 Non-standard auto 74 76 136 Homeowners (335 ) (125 ) (1,175 ) Other personal lines (1) 95 89 (19 ) Underwriting income $ 526 $ 1,027 $ 189 Underwriting income (loss) by brand Allstate brand $ 569 $ 1,022 $ 220 Encompass brand (43 ) 5 (31 ) Underwriting income $ 526 $ 1,027 $ 189 (1) During 2008, $45 million of IBNR losses were reclassified from standard auto to other personal lines to be consistent with the recording of excess liability policies' premiums and losses. Allstate Protection experienced underwriting income of $526 million in 2010 compared to $1.03 billion in 2009, primarily due to decreases in standard auto underwriting income and increases in homeowners underwriting losses, partially offset by increases in other personal lines underwriting income. Standard auto underwriting income decreased 29.9% to an underwriting income of $692 million in 2010 from an underwriting income of $987 million in 2009 primarily due to increases in auto claim frequency and expenses and a $25 million litigation settlement, partially offset by favorable reserve reestimates and decreases in catastrophe losses. Homeowners underwriting loss increased $210 million to an underwriting loss of $335 million in 2010 from an underwriting loss of $125 million in 2009 primarily due to a $75 million unfavorable prior year reserve reestimate related to a litigation settlement and increases in 51 expenses and catastrophe losses, including prior year reestimates for catastrophes, partially offset by average earned premiums increasing faster than loss costs. Other personal lines underwriting income increased 6.7% to an underwriting income of $95 million in 2010 from an underwriting income of $89 million in 2009 primarily due to lower unfavorable reserve reestimates. For further discussion and quantification of the impact of reserve estimates and assumptions, see the Application of Critical Accounting Estimates and Property-Liability Claims and Claims Expense Reserves sections of the MD&A. Allstate Protection experienced underwriting income of $1.03 billion during 2009 compared to $189 million in 2008 primarily due to decreases in homeowners underwriting loss, partially offset by decreases in standard auto underwriting income. Homeowners underwriting loss decreased 89.4% to an underwriting loss of $125 million in 2009 from an underwriting loss of $1.18 billion in 2008, primarily due to lower catastrophes losses, partially offset by increases in homeowner claim frequency and claim severities excluding catastrophes. Standard auto underwriting income decreased 20.9% to $987 million in 2009 from $1.25 billion in 2008, primarily due to increases in auto claim frequency and lower premiums earned. Catastrophe losses in 2010 were $2.21 billion as detailed in the table below. This compares to catastrophe losses in 2009 of $2.07 billion. We define a "catastrophe" as an event that produces pre-tax losses before reinsurance in excess of $1 million and involves multiple first party policyholders, or an event that produces a number of claims in excess of a preset, per-event threshold of average claims in a specific area, occurring within a certain amount of time following the event. Catastrophes are caused by various natural events including high winds, winter storms, tornadoes, hailstorms, wildfires, tropical storms, hurricanes, earthquakes and volcanoes. We are also exposed to man-made catastrophic events, such as certain acts of terrorism or industrial accidents. The nature and level of catastrophes in any future period cannot be reliably predicted. Catastrophe losses related to events that occurred by the size of the event are shown in the following table. ($ in millions) 2010 Number of events Claims and claims expense Combined ratio impact Average catastrophe loss per event Size of catastrophe Greater than $250 million 1 1.1 % $ 355 16.1 % 1.4 $ 355 $101 million to $250 million 4 4.4 610 27.6 2.3 153 $50 million to $100 million 8 8.9 511 23.2 2.0 64 Less than $50 million 77 85.6 894 40.5 3.4 12 Total 90 100.0 % 2,370 107.4 9.1 26 Prior year reserve reestimates (163 ) (7.4 ) (0.6 ) Total catastrophe losses $ 2,207 100.0 % 8.5 Catastrophe losses incurred by the type of event are shown in the following table. ($ in millions) 2010 2009 2008 Number of events Number of events Number of events Hurricanes/Tropical storms $ 15 1 $ 48 1 $ 1,381 5 Tornadoes 174 7 384 4 628 19 Wind/Hail 1,908 74 1,561 67 960 81 Wildfires 15 1 83 5 169 9 Other events 258 7 162 5 79 9 Prior year reserve reestimates (163 ) (169 ) 125 Total catastrophe losses $ 2,207 90 $ 2,069 82 $ 3,342 123 52 Combined ratio Loss ratios are a measure of profitability. Loss ratios by product, and expense and combined ratios by brand, are shown in the following table. These ratios are defined in the Property-Liability Operations section of the MD&A. Loss ratio (2) Effect of catastrophe losses on the loss ratio Effect of pre-tax reserve reestimates on the combined ratio 2010 2009 2008 2010 2009 2008 2010 2009 2008 Allstate brand loss ratio: Standard auto 70.7 69.3 68.1 1.0 1.2 1.5 (0.9 ) (0.3 ) 0.1 Non-standard auto 67.2 67.1 62.3 0.3 0.7 0.9 (3.6 ) (1.6 ) (0.1 ) Homeowners 82.1 79.6 96.3 31.3 29.0 46.5 (0.3 ) (2.6 ) 2.1 Other personal lines 66.4 67.3 69.3 7.2 7.0 10.6 0.7 3.5 0.6 Total Allstate brand loss ratio 72.8 71.4 74.4 8.5 8.1 12.6 (0.7 ) (0.5 ) 0.6 Allstate brand expense ratio 24.9 24.5 24.7 Allstate brand combined ratio 97.7 95.9 99.1 Encompass brand loss ratio: Standard auto (1) 75.4 75.4 66.3 0.8 0.3 0.9 0.7 (4.2 ) Non-standard auto 100.0 74.1 88.9 (11.1 ) Homeowners 74.3 66.0 76.4 23.1 14.6 27.8 (1.3 ) (4.3 ) 0.4 Other personal lines (1) 73.4 75.9 112.9 4.3 1.9 8.9 (1.1 ) 5.6 33.1 Total Encompass brand loss ratio 75.1 72.6 73.0 8.2 4.7 9.1 (0.5 ) (0.7 ) (0.2 ) Encompass brand expense ratio 28.5 27.1 28.8 Encompass brand combined ratio 103.6 99.7 101.8 Allstate Protection loss ratio 72.9 71.5 74.3 8.5 7.9 12.4 (0.7 ) (0.5 ) 0.6 Allstate Protection expense ratio 25.1 24.6 25.0 Allstate Protection combined ratio 98.0 96.1 99.3 (1) During 2008, $45 million of IBNR losses were reclassified from standard auto to other personal lines to be consistent with the recording of excess liability policies' premiums and losses. (2) Ratios are calculated using the premiums earned for the respective line of business. Standard auto loss ratio for the Allstate brand increased 1.4 points in 2010 compared to 2009 due to higher claim frequency and a $25 million litigation settlement, partially offset by favorable reserve reestimates and lower catastrophe losses. The increase is primarily driven by increases in Florida and New York, which have higher loss ratios than the countrywide average. In 2010, claim frequencies in the bodily injury and physical damage coverages have increased compared to 2009, but remain within historical norms. Bodily injury and physical damage coverages severity results increased in line with historical Consumer Price Index ("CPI") trends. Standard auto loss ratio for the Allstate brand increased 1.2 points in 2009 compared to 2008 due to higher claim frequencies. In 2009, claim frequencies in the physical damage and bodily injury coverages have returned to historical norms following exceptionally low levels in 2008. Bodily injury severity results in 2009 increased in line with historical CPI trends. Claims severity decreased in 2009 for the physical damage coverages, partially offsetting the increased frequencies. Non-standard auto loss ratio for the Allstate brand increased 0.1 point in 2010 compared to 2009 due to higher claim frequencies, partially offset by higher favorable reserve reestimates and lower catastrophe losses. Bodily injury and physical damage coverages severity results increased in line with historical CPI trends. Non-standard auto loss ratio for the Allstate brand increased 4.8 points in 2009 compared to 2008 due to higher claim frequencies. Claim frequencies increased for both physical damage and casualty coverages in 2009 compared to 2008. Bodily injury severity results in 2009 increased in line with historical CPI trends. Claims severity decreased in 2009 for the physical damage coverages, partially offsetting the increased frequencies. Homeowners loss ratio for the Allstate brand increased 2.5 points to 82.1 in 2010 from 79.6 in 2009 due to a $75 million unfavorable prior year reserve reestimate related to a litigation settlement and higher catastrophe losses including prior year reserve reestimates for catastrophes, partially offset by average earned premiums increasing faster than loss costs. Homeowners loss ratio for the Allstate brand decreased 16.7 points to 79.6 in 2009 from 96.3 in 2008 due to lower catastrophe losses, partially offset by higher frequencies excluding catastrophes and severities. Frequencies excluding catastrophes increased in 2009 compared to 2008, in part, due to inclement weather in 2009, including an 53 increase in freeze related claims, driven by winter weather in the first quarter of 2009. Theft claims also drove part of the increase in frequencies in 2009 compared to 2008. In 2009, homeowner claims severity, excluding catastrophes, increased compared to 2008. Expense ratio for Allstate Protection increased 0.5 points in 2010 compared to 2009. Restructuring costs decreased 0.3 points in 2010 compared to 2009, driven by prior year costs associated with claim office consolidations, reorganization of Business Insurance and technology prioritization and efficiency efforts. Excluding restructuring, the expense ratio for Allstate Protection increased 0.8 points in 2010 compared to 2009, driven by additional marketing expenses and increases in net costs of employee benefits, partially offset by reduced guaranty fund accrual levels and improved operational efficiencies. The expense ratio for Allstate Protection decreased 0.4 points in 2009 compared to 2008 primarily due to the impact of lower earned premium offset by improved operational efficiencies and more focused spending, particularly on technology, and decreases in the net cost of benefits due to favorable investment results. The impact of specific costs and expenses on the expense ratio are included in the following table. Allstate brand Encompass brand Allstate Protection 2010 2009 2008 2010 2009 2008 2010 2009 2008 Amortization of DAC 14.0 14.2 14.4 18.3 18.5 19.9 14.2 14.5 14.7 Other costs and expenses 10.8 9.9 10.2 9.7 8.3 8.9 10.8 9.7 10.2 Restructuring and related charges 0.1 0.4 0.1 0.5 0.3 0.1 0.4 0.1 Total expense ratio 24.9 24.5 24.7 28.5 27.1 28.8 25.1 24.6 25.0 The expense ratio for the standard auto and homeowners businesses generally approximates the total Allstate Protection expense ratio. The expense ratio for the non-standard auto business generally is lower than the total Allstate Protection expense ratio due to lower agent commission rates and higher average premiums for non-standard auto as compared to standard auto. The Encompass brand DAC amortization is higher on average than Allstate brand DAC amortization due to higher commission rates. DAC We establish a DAC asset for costs that vary with and are primarily related to acquiring business, principally agents' remuneration, premium taxes, certain underwriting costs and direct mail solicitation expenses. For the Allstate Protection business, DAC is amortized to income over the period in which premiums are earned. The balance of DAC for each product type as of December 31 is included in the following table. ($ in millions) Allstate brand Encompass brand Allstate Protection 2010 2009 2010 2009 2010 2009 Standard auto $ 541 $ 542 $ 55 $ 68 $ 596 $ 610 Non-standard auto 25 35 25 35 Homeowners 437 426 36 42 473 468 Other personal lines 276 290 7 7 283 297 Total DAC $ 1,279 $ 1,293 $ 98 $ 117 $ 1,377 $ 1,410 Catastrophe management Historical catastrophe experience Since the beginning of 1992, the average annual impact of catastrophes on our Property-Liability loss ratio was 7.5 points. However, this average does not reflect the impact of some of the more significant actions we have taken to limit our catastrophe exposure. Consequently, it is useful to consider the impact of catastrophes after excluding losses that are now partially or substantially covered by the California Earthquake Authority ("CEA"), the Florida Hurricane Catastrophe Fund ("FHCF") or placed with a third party, such as hurricane coverage in Hawaii. The average annual impact of all catastrophes, excluding losses from Hurricanes Andrew and Iniki and losses from California earthquakes, on our Property-Liability loss ratio was 6.5 points since the beginning of 1992. 54 Comparatively, the average annual impact of catastrophes on the homeowners loss ratio for the years 1992 through 2010 is shown in the following table. Average annual impact of catastrophes on the homeowners loss ratio Average annual impact of catastrophes on the homeowners loss ratio excluding losses from hurricanes Andrew and Iniki, and losses from California earthquakes Florida 97.9 47.5 Other hurricane exposure states 28.2 28.0 Total hurricane exposure states 33.8 29.6 All other 23.9 19.2 Total 29.2 24.8 Over time, we have limited our aggregate insurance exposure to catastrophe losses in certain regions of the country that are subject to high levels of natural catastrophes. Limitations include our participation in various state facilities, such as the CEA, which provides insurance for California earthquake losses; the FHCF, which provides reimbursements to participating insurers for certain qualifying Florida hurricane losses; and other state facilities, such as wind pools. However, the impact of these actions may be diminished by the growth in insured values, and the effect of state insurance laws and regulations. In addition, in various states we are required to participate in assigned risk plans, reinsurance facilities and joint underwriting associations that provide insurance coverage to individuals or entities that otherwise are unable to purchase such coverage from private insurers. Because of our participation in these and other state facilities such as wind pools, we may be exposed to losses that surpass the capitalization of these facilities and to assessments from these facilities. We continue to take actions to maintain an appropriate level of exposure to catastrophic events, including the following: We have increased our utilization of wind storm pools. For example, in Texas we are ceding significant wind exposure related to insured property located in wind pool eligible areas along the coast including the Galveston Islands. We have ceased writing new homeowners business in California. We will continue to renew current policyholders and have a renewal ratio of approximately 92% in California. Encompass Floridian Insurance Company and Encompass Floridian Indemnity Company ceased providing property insurance in the State of Florida. We ceased offering renewals on certain homeowners insurance policies in New York in certain down-state geographical locations. The level of non-renewals in New York is limited by state statute. Hurricanes We consider the greatest areas of potential catastrophe losses due to hurricanes generally to be major metropolitan centers in counties along the eastern and gulf coasts of the United States. Usually, the average premium on a property policy near these coasts is greater than in other areas. However, average premiums are not considered commensurate with the inherent risk of loss. In addition and as explained in Note 13 of the consolidated financial statements, in various states Allstate is subject to assessments from assigned risk plans, reinsurance facilities and joint underwriting associations providing insurance for wind related property losses. We have addressed our risk of hurricane loss by, among other actions, purchasing reinsurance for specific states and on a countrywide basis for our personal lines property insurance in areas most exposed to hurricanes; limiting personal homeowners new business writings in coastal areas in southern and eastern states; and not offering continuing coverage on certain policies in coastal counties in certain states. We continue to seek appropriate returns for the risks we write. This may require further actions, similar to those already taken, in geographies where we are not getting appropriate returns. However, we may maintain or opportunistically increase our presence in areas where we achieve adequate returns and do not materially increase our hurricane risk. Earthquakes Actions taken to reduce our exposure from earthquake coverage are substantially complete. These actions included purchasing reinsurance on a countrywide basis and in the state of Kentucky; no longer offering new optional earthquake coverage in most states; removing optional earthquake coverage upon renewal in most states; and entering into arrangements in many states to make earthquake coverage available through other insurers for new and renewal business. 55 We expect to retain approximately 30,000 PIF with earthquake coverage due to regulatory and other reasons. We also will continue to have exposure to earthquake risk on certain policies that do not specifically exclude coverage for earthquake losses, including our auto policies, and to fires following earthquakes. Allstate policyholders in the state of California are offered coverage through the CEA, a privately-financed, publicly-managed state agency created to provide insurance coverage for earthquake damage. Allstate is subject to assessments from the CEA under certain circumstances as explained in Note 13 of the consolidated financial statements. Fires Following Earthquakes Actions taken related to our risk of loss from fires following earthquakes include changing homeowners underwriting requirements in California and purchasing reinsurance for Kentucky and purchasing nationwide occurrence reinsurance excluding Florida and New Jersey. Wildfires Actions we are taking to reduce our risk of loss from wildfires include changing homeowners underwriting requirements in certain states and purchasing nationwide occurrence reinsurance. Catastrophe losses related to the Southern California wildfires occurred during 2009 and 2008 and totaled $76 million and $166 million, respectively. Reinsurance A description of our current catastrophe reinsurance program appears in Note 9 of the consolidated financial statements and a description of program changes as of June 1, 2011 appears in the Property-Liability Claims and Claims Expense Reserves section of the MD&A. DISCONTINUED LINES AND COVERAGES SEGMENT Overview The Discontinued Lines and Coverages segment includes results from insurance coverage that we no longer write and results for certain commercial and other businesses in run-off. Our exposure to asbestos, environmental and other discontinued lines claims is reported in this segment. We have assigned management of this segment to a designated group of professionals with expertise in claims handling, policy coverage interpretation, exposure identification and reinsurance collection. As part of its responsibilities, this group is also regularly engaged in policy buybacks, settlements and reinsurance assumed and ceded commutations. Summarized underwriting results for the years ended December 31 are presented in the following table. ($ in millions) 2010 2009 2008 Premiums written $ 1 $ (1 ) $ Premiums earned $ 2 $ (1 ) $ Claims and claims expense (28 ) (24 ) (18 ) Operating costs and expenses (5 ) (7 ) (7 ) Underwriting loss $ (31 ) $ (32 ) $ (25 ) Underwriting losses of $31 million in 2010 related to an $18 million unfavorable reestimate of environmental reserves and a $5 million unfavorable reestimate of asbestos reserves, partially offset by a $4 million favorable reestimate of other reserves, primarily as a result of our annual review using established industry and actuarial best practices. The cost of administering claims settlements totaled $13 million for each of the years ended December 31, 2010, 2009 and 2008. Underwriting losses of $32 million in 2009 were primarily related to a $13 million unfavorable reestimate of environmental reserves and a $28 million unfavorable reestimate of other reserves, partially offset by an $8 million favorable reestimate of asbestos reserves, primarily as a result of our annual review using established industry and actuarial best practices. Underwriting losses of $25 million in 2008 primarily related to an $8 million unfavorable reestimate of asbestos reserves and a $13 million unfavorable reestimate of other reserves as a result of our annual 2008 review, partially offset by a $16 million reduction of our allowance for future uncollectible reinsurance. See the Property-Liability Claims and Claims Expense Reserves section of the MD&A for a more detailed discussion. 56 Discontinued Lines and Coverages outlook We may continue to experience asbestos and/or environmental losses in the future. These losses could be due to the potential adverse impact of new information relating to new and additional claims or the impact of resolving unsettled claims based on unanticipated events such as litigation or legislative, judicial and regulatory actions. Environmental losses may also increase as the result of additional funding for environmental site cleanup. Because of our annual grounds up review, we believe that our reserves are appropriately established based on available information, technology, laws and regulations. We continue to be encouraged that the pace of industry asbestos claim activity has slowed, perhaps reflecting various state legislative and judicial actions with respect to medical criteria and increased legal scrutiny of the legitimacy of claims. PROPERTY-LIABILITY INVESTMENT RESULTS Net investment income decreased 10.5% or $139 million to $1.19 billion in 2010 from $1.33 billion in 2009, after decreasing 20.7% in 2009 compared to 2008. The 2010 decrease was primarily due to lower yields and duration shortening actions taken to protect the portfolio from rising interest rates, partially offset by higher average investment balances. The 2009 decrease was primarily due to reduced portfolio yields, actions to shorten duration and maintain additional liquidity in the portfolio, lower average investment balances and capital contributions to Allstate Life Insurance Company ("ALIC"). The following table presents the average pre-tax investment yields for the year ended December 31. 2010 (1) (2) 2009 (1) (2) 2008 (1) (2) Fixed income securities: tax-exempt 4.9 % 5.1 % 5.1 % Fixed income securities: tax-exempt equivalent 7.1 7.4 7.4 Fixed income securities: taxable 3.5 4.1 5.6 Equity securities 2.3 2.1 3.0 Mortgage loans 5.7 4.7 6.1 Limited partnership interests (3) (4) 3.1 1.5 2.6 Total portfolio (4) 3.8 4.2 4.8 (1) Pre-tax yield is calculated as investment income (including dividend income in the case of equity securities) divided by the average of the investment balances at the beginning and end of period and interim quarters. (2) Amortized cost basis is used to calculate the average investment balance for fixed income securities and mortgage loans. Cost is used for equity securities. Cost or the equity method of accounting basis is used for limited partnership interests. (3) Beginning in the fourth quarter of 2008, income from limited partnerships accounted for on the equity method of accounting ("EMA LP") is reported in realized capital gains and losses and is therefore excluded from the determination of pre-tax investment yields on limited partnership interests. EMA LP income for periods prior to the fourth quarter of 2008 is reported in net investment income and included in the determination of pre-tax investment yields on limited partnership interests. For periods beginning with the fourth quarter of 2008, EMA LP's have been removed from the yield calculation. (4) To conform to the current period presentation, prior periods have been reclassified. Net realized capital gains and losses are presented in the following table. ($ in millions) 2010 2009 2008 Impairment write-downs $ (295 ) $ (534 ) $ (638 ) Change in intent write-downs (62 ) (89 ) (501 ) Net other-than-temporary impairment losses recognized in earnings (357 ) (623 ) (1,139 ) Sales 455 611 (635 ) Valuation of derivative instruments (331 ) 52 (296 ) Settlements of derivative instruments (143 ) (203 ) 289 EMA limited partnership income 55 (5 ) (77 ) Realized capital gains and losses, pre-tax (321 ) (168 ) (1,858 ) Income tax benefit (expense) 114 (54 ) 649 Realized capital gains and losses, after-tax $ (207 ) $ (222 ) $ (1,209 ) For a further discussion of net realized capital gains and losses, see the Investments section of the MD&A. 57 PROPERTY-LIABILITY CLAIMS AND CLAIMS EXPENSE RESERVES Property-Liability underwriting results are significantly influenced by estimates of property-liability claims and claims expense reserves. For a description of our reserve process, see Note 7 of the consolidated financial statements and for a further description of our reserving policies and the potential variability in our reserve estimates, see the Application of Critical Accounting Estimates section of the MD&A. These reserves are an estimate of amounts necessary to settle all outstanding claims, including IBNR claims, as of the reporting date. The facts and circumstances leading to our reestimates of reserves relate to revisions to the development factors used to predict how losses are likely to develop from the end of a reporting period until all claims have been paid. Reestimates occur because actual losses are likely different than that predicted by the estimated development factors used in prior reserve estimates. As of December 31, 2010, the impact of a reserve reestimation corresponding to a one percent increase or decrease in net reserves would be a decrease or increase of approximately $113 million in net income. The table below shows total net reserves as of December 31 for Allstate brand, Encompass brand and Discontinued Lines and Coverages lines of business. ($ in millions) 2010 2009 2008 Allstate brand $ 14,696 $ 14,123 $ 14,118 Encompass brand 921 1,027 1,133 Total Allstate Protection 15,617 15,150 15,251 Discontinued Lines and Coverages 1,779 1,878 1,931 Total Property-Liability $ 17,396 $ 17,028 $ 17,182 The tables below show reserves, net of reinsurance, representing the estimated cost of outstanding claims as they were recorded at the beginning of years 2010, 2009 and 2008, and the effect of reestimates in each year. ($ in millions) January 1 reserves 2010 2009 2008 Allstate brand $ 14,123 $ 14,118 $ 13,456 Encompass brand 1,027 1,133 1,129 Total Allstate Protection 15,150 15,251 14,585 Discontinued Lines and Coverages 1,878 1,931 2,075 Total Property-Liability $ 17,028 $ 17,182 $ 16,660 ($ in millions, except ratios) 2010 2009 2008 Reserve reestimate (1) Effect on combined ratio Reserve reestimate (1) Effect on combined ratio Reserve reestimate (1) Effect on combined ratio Allstate brand $ (181 ) (0.7 ) $ (126 ) (0.5 ) $ 155 0.6 Encompass brand (6 ) (10 ) (3 ) Total Allstate Protection (187 ) (0.7 ) (136 ) (0.5 ) 152 0.6 Discontinued Lines and Coverages 28 0.1 24 0.1 18 0.1 Total Property-Liability $ (159 ) (0.6 ) $ (112 ) (0.4 ) $ 170 0.7 Reserve reestimates, after-tax $ (103 ) $ (73 ) $ 111 Net income (loss) $ 928 $ 854 $ (1,679 ) Reserve reestimates as a % of net income (loss) 11.1 % 8.5 % (6.6 )% (1) Favorable reserve reestimates are shown in parentheses. 58 Allstate Protection The tables below show Allstate Protection net reserves representing the estimated cost of outstanding claims as they were recorded at the beginning of years 2010, 2009 and 2008, and the effect of reestimates in each year. ($ in millions) January 1 reserves 2010 2009 2008 Auto $ 10,606 $ 10,220 $ 10,175 Homeowners 2,399 2,824 2,279 Other personal lines 2,145 2,207 2,131 Total Allstate Protection $ 15,150 $ 15,251 $ 14,585 ($ in millions, except ratios) 2010 2009 2008 Reserve reestimate Effect on combined ratio Reserve reestimate Effect on combined ratio Reserve reestimate Effect on combined ratio Auto $ (179 ) (0.7 ) $ (57 ) (0.2 ) $ (27 ) (0.1 ) Homeowners (23 ) (0.1 ) (168 ) (0.6 ) 124 0.5 Other personal lines 15 0.1 89 0.3 55 0.2 Total Allstate Protection $ (187 ) (0.7 ) $ (136 ) (0.5 ) $ 152 0.6 Underwriting income $ 526 $ 1,027 $ 189 Reserve reestimates as a % of underwriting income 35.6 % 13.2 % (80.4 )% Auto reserve reestimates in 2010 and 2009 were primarily due to claim severity development that was better than expected. 2010 was also impacted by a litigation settlement. Auto reserve reestimates in 2008 were primarily the result of a $45 million reclassification of IBNR losses from standard auto to other personal lines to be consistent with the recording of excess liability policies' premiums and losses. Favorable homeowners reserve reestimates in 2010 were primarily due to favorable catastrophe reserve reestimates, partially offset by a litigation settlement. Favorable homeowners reserve reestimates in 2009 were primarily due to favorable reserve reestimates from Hurricanes Ike and Gustav and a catastrophe related subrogation recovery. Unfavorable homeowners reserve reestimates in 2008 were primarily due to litigation filed in conjunction with a Louisiana deadline for filing suits related to Hurricane Katrina. Other personal lines reserve reestimates in 2010 and 2009 were primarily the result of loss development different than anticipated in previous estimates. Other personal lines reserve reestimates in 2008 were primarily the result of a $45 million reclassification of IBNR losses from standard auto to other personal lines to be consistent with the recording of excess liability policies' premiums and losses. 59 Pending, new and closed claims for Allstate Protection, for the years ended December 31, are summarized in the following table. Number of claims 2010 2009 2008 Auto Pending, beginning of year 540,424 566,394 551,598 New 5,571,199 5,482,941 5,323,072 Total closed (5,621,164 ) (5,508,911 ) (5,308,276 ) Pending, end of year 490,459 540,424 566,394 Homeowners Pending, beginning of year 59,685 74,772 80,229 New 991,962 997,954 1,242,007 Total closed (1,000,616 ) (1,013,041 ) (1,247,464 ) Pending, end of year 51,031 59,685 74,772 Other personal lines Pending, beginning of year 36,537 41,001 39,951 New 282,137 278,978 301,363 Total closed (285,286 ) (283,442 ) (300,313 ) Pending, end of year 33,388 36,537 41,001 Total Allstate Protection Pending, beginning of year 636,646 682,167 671,778 New 6,845,298 6,759,873 6,866,442 Total closed (6,907,066 ) (6,805,394 ) (6,856,053 ) Pending, end of year 574,878 636,646 682,167 We believe the net loss reserves for Allstate Protection exposures are appropriately established based on available facts, technology, laws and regulations. The following tables reflect the accident years to which the reestimates shown above are applicable for Allstate brand, Encompass brand and Discontinued Lines and Coverages lines of business. Favorable reserve reestimates are shown in parentheses. 2010 Prior year reserve reestimates ($ in millions) 2000 & prior 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 Total Allstate brand $ 262 $ (1 ) $ (7 ) $ (18 ) $ (15 ) $ (51 ) $ (106 ) $ (86 ) $ (45 ) $ (114 ) $ (181 ) Encompass brand 1 1 1 2 6 (6 ) (1 ) (10 ) (6 ) Total Allstate Protection 263 (1 ) (6 ) (17 ) (13 ) (45 ) (106 ) (92 ) (46 ) (124 ) (187 ) Discontinued Lines and Coverages 28 28 Total Property-Liability $ 291 $ (1 ) $ (6 ) $ (17 ) $ (13 ) $ (45 ) $ (106 ) $ (92 ) $ (46 ) $ (124 ) $ (159 ) 2009 Prior year reserve reestimates ($ in millions) 1999 & prior 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 Total Allstate brand $ 247 $ 46 $ 58 $ 44 $ 37 $ 85 $ 74 $ (149 ) $ (151 ) $ (417 ) $ (126 ) Encompass brand 3 1 3 6 5 10 8 (7 ) (39 ) (10 ) Total Allstate Protection 247 49 59 47 43 90 84 (141 ) (158 ) (456 ) (136 ) Discontinued Lines and Coverages 24 24 Total Property-Liability $ 271 $ 49 $ 59 $ 47 $ 43 $ 90 $ 84 $ (141 ) $ (158 ) $ (456 ) $ (112 ) 60 2008 Prior year reserve reestimates ($ in millions) 1998 & prior 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 Total Allstate brand $ 56 $ (7 ) $ 9 $ 34 $ 1 $ (5 ) $ 13 $ 152 $ (71 ) $ (27 ) $ 155 Encompass brand 2 2 (1 ) 2 1 (1 ) 10 (20 ) 2 (3 ) Total Allstate Protection 58 (7 ) 11 33 3 (4 ) 12 162 (91 ) (25 ) 152 Discontinued Lines and Coverages 18 18 Total Property-Liability $ 76 $ (7 ) $ 11 $ 33 $ 3 $ (4 ) $ 12 $ 162 $ (91 ) $ (25 ) $ 170 Allstate brand prior year reserve reestimates were $181 million favorable in 2010, $126 million favorable in 2009 and $155 million unfavorable in 2008, respectively. In 2010, this was primarily due to favorable catastrophe reserve reestimates and severity development that was better than expected, partially offset by litigation settlements. The increased reserves in accident years 2000 & prior is due to the litigation settlements of $100 million, a reclassification of injury reserves to older years and reserve strengthening. In 2009, this was primarily due to favorable reserve reestimates from Hurricanes Ike and Gustav and a catastrophe related subrogation recovery. The shift of reserves to older accident years is attributable to a reallocation of reserves related to employee postretirement benefits to more accident years, and a reclassification of injury and 2008 non-injury reserves to older years. In 2008, this was primarily due to litigation filed in conjunction with a Louisiana deadline for filing suits related to Hurricane Katrina. These trends are primarily responsible for revisions to loss development factors, as previously described, used to predict how losses are likely to develop from the end of a reporting period until all claims have been paid. Because these trends cause actual losses to differ from those predicted by the estimated development factors used in prior reserve estimates, reserves are revised as actuarial studies validate new trends based on the indications of updated development factor calculations. The impact of these reestimates on the Allstate brand underwriting income is shown in the table below. ($ in millions) 2010 2009 2008 Reserve reestimates $ (181 ) $ (126 ) $ 155 Allstate brand underwriting income 569 1,022 220 Reserve reestimates as a % of underwriting income 31.8 % 12.3 % (70.5 )% Encompass brand Reserve reestimates in 2010, 2009 and 2008 were related to lower than anticipated claim settlement costs. The impact of these reestimates on the Encompass brand underwriting (loss) income is shown in the table below. ($ in millions) 2010 2009 2008 Reserve reestimates $ (6 ) $ (10 ) $ (3 ) Encompass brand underwriting (loss) income (43 ) 5 (31 ) Reserve reestimates as a % of underwriting (loss) income 14.0 % 200.0 % 9.7 % Discontinued Lines and Coverages We conduct an annual review in the third quarter of each year to evaluate and establish asbestos, environmental and other discontinued lines reserves. Reserves are recorded in the reporting period in which they are determined. Using established industry and actuarial best practices and assuming no change in the regulatory or economic environment, this detailed and comprehensive grounds up methodology determines reserves based on assessments of the characteristics of exposure (e.g. claim activity, potential liability, jurisdiction, products versus non-products exposure) presented by policyholders. 61 Reserve reestimates for the Discontinued Lines and Coverages, as shown in the table below, were increased primarily for environmental in 2010 and other discontinued lines in both 2009 and 2008. ($ in millions) 2010 2009 2008 January 1 reserves Reserve reestimate January 1 reserves Reserve reestimate January 1 reserves Reserve reestimate Asbestos Claims $ 1,180 $ 5 $ 1,228 $ (8 ) $ 1,302 $ 8 Environmental Claims 198 18 195 13 232 Other Discontinued Lines 500 5 508 19 541 10 Total Discontinued Lines and coverages $ 1,878 $ 28 $ 1,931 $ 24 $ 2,075 $ 18 Underwriting loss $ (31 ) $ (32 ) $ (25 ) Reserve reestimates as a % of underwriting loss (90.3 )% (75.0 )% (72.0 )% Reserve additions for asbestos in 2010 totaling $5 million were primarily for products related coverage. Asbestos reserves reestimates in 2009 were $8 million favorable. Reserve additions for asbestos in 2008 totaling $8 million were primarily for products-related coverage and were a result of a continuing level of increased claim activity being reported by excess and primary insurance policyholders with existing active claims, excess policyholders with new claims, and reestimates of liabilities for increased assumed reinsurance cessions, as ceding companies (other insurance carriers) also experienced increased claim activity. Higher claim activity over prior estimates has also resulted in an increased estimate for future claims reported. These trends are consistent with the trends of other carriers in the industry, which we believe are related to increased publicity and awareness of coverage, ongoing litigation and bankruptcy actions. The reserve additions for environmental in 2010 and 2009 were primarily related to site-specific remediations where the clean-up cost estimates and responsibility for the clean-up were more fully determined. Normal environmental claim activity resulted in essentially no change in estimated reserves for 2008. IBNR now represents 62% of total net environmental reserves, 3 points lower than as of December 31, 2009. 62 The table below summarizes reserves and claim activity for asbestos and environmental claims before (Gross) and after (Net) the effects of reinsurance for the past three years. ($ in millions, except ratios) 2010 2009 2008 Gross Net Gross Net Gross Net Asbestos claims Beginning reserves $ 1,780 $ 1,180 $ 1,933 $ 1,228 $ 2,053 $ 1,302 Incurred claims and claims expense (7 ) 5 (3 ) (8 ) 4 8 Claims and claims expense paid (118 ) (85 ) (150 ) (40 ) (124 ) (82 ) Ending reserves $ 1,655 $ 1,100 $ 1,780 $ 1,180 $ 1,933 $ 1,228 Annual survival ratio 14.0 12.9 11.9 11.5 15.4 15.1 3-year survival ratio 12.6 12.2 12.4 12.9 13.4 14.4 Environmental claims Beginning reserves $ 247 $ 198 $ 250 $ 195 $ 340 $ 232 Incurred claims and claims expense 19 18 16 13 (34 ) Claims and claims expense paid (18 ) (15 ) (19 ) (10 ) (56 ) (37 ) Ending reserves $ 248 $ 201 $ 247 $ 198 $ 250 $ 195 Annual survival ratio 13.8 13.4 12.7 12.1 4.5 5.2 3-year survival ratio 8.0 8.7 7.1 7.5 6.8 7.0 Combined environmental and asbestos claims Annual survival ratio 14.0 13.0 12.0 11.6 12.1 12.0 3-year survival ratio 11.7 11.6 11.4 11.7 12.1 12.6 Percentage of IBNR in ending reserves 60.1 % 62.3 % 63.8 % The survival ratio is calculated by taking our ending reserves divided by payments made during the year. This is a commonly used but extremely simplistic and imprecise approach to measuring the adequacy of asbestos and environmental reserve levels. Many factors, such as mix of business, level of coverage provided and settlement procedures have significant impacts on the amount of environmental and asbestos claims and claims expense reserves, claim payments and the resultant ratio. As payments result in corresponding reserve reductions, survival ratios can be expected to vary over time. The 2009 net survival ratios in the table above have been adjusted to remove the claims and claims expense paid of $63 million for asbestos and $7 million for environmental attributable to commutation activity related to three reinsurers. In both 2010 and 2009, the asbestos net 3-year survival ratio decreased due to lower reserve levels as the result of loss settlements. The environmental net 3-year survival ratio increased in both 2010 and 2009 due to lower average annual payments. 63 Our net asbestos reserves by type of exposure and total reserve additions are shown in the following table. ($ in millions) December 31, 2010 December 31, 2009 December 31, 2008 Active policy- holders Net reserves % of reserves Active policy- holders Net reserves % of reserves Active policy- holders Net reserves % of reserves Direct policyholders: Primary 51 $ 17 1 % 51 $ 19 1 % 54 $ 21 2 % Excess 319 261 24 318 256 22 330 216 17 Total 370 278 25 369 275 23 384 237 19 Assumed reinsurance 165 15 176 15 205 17 IBNR 657 60 729 62 786 64 Total net reserves $ 1,100 100 % $ 1,180 100 % $ 1,228 100 % Total reserve additions $ 5 $ (8 ) $ 8 During the last three years, 56 direct primary and excess policyholders reported new claims, and claims of 79 policyholders were closed, decreasing the number of active policyholders by 23 during the period. The 23 decrease comprised 1 from 2010, (15) from 2009 and (9) from 2008. The increase of 1 from 2010 included 21 new policyholders reporting new claims and the closing of 20 policyholders' claims. IBNR net reserves decreased by $72 million. As of December 31, 2010 IBNR represented 60% of total net asbestos reserves, 2 points lower than as of December 31, 2009. IBNR provides for reserve development of known claims and future reporting of additional unknown claims from current and new policyholders and ceding companies. Pending, new, total closed and closed without payment claims for asbestos and environmental exposures for the years ended December 31, are summarized in the following table. Number of claims 2010 2009 2008 Asbestos Pending, beginning of year 8,252 8,780 9,256 New 788 814 601 Total closed (619 ) (1,342 ) (1,077 ) Pending, end of year 8,421 8,252 8,780 Closed without payment 336 469 800 Environmental Pending, beginning of year 4,114 4,603 4,747 New 498 389 291 Total closed (315 ) (878 ) (435 ) Pending, end of year 4,297 4,114 4,603 Closed without payment 181 416 307 Property-Liability reinsurance ceded For Allstate Protection, we utilize reinsurance to reduce exposure to catastrophe risk and manage capital, and to support the required statutory surplus and the insurance financial strength ratings of certain subsidiaries such as Castle Key Insurance Company and Allstate New Jersey Insurance Company. We purchase significant reinsurance to manage our aggregate countrywide exposure to an acceptable level. The price and terms of reinsurance and the credit quality of the reinsurer are considered in the purchase process, along with whether the price can be appropriately reflected in the costs that are considered in setting future rates charged to policyholders. We also participate in various reinsurance mechanisms, including industry pools and facilities, which are backed by the financial resources of the property-liability insurance company market participants, and have historically purchased reinsurance to mitigate long-tail liability lines, including environmental, asbestos and other discontinued lines exposures. We retain primary liability as a direct insurer for all risks ceded to reinsurers. 64 The impacts of reinsurance on our reserve for claims and claims expense as of December 31 are summarized in the following table, net of allowances we have established for uncollectible amounts. ($ in millions) Reserve for property-liability insurance claims and claims expense Reinsurance recoverables, net 2010 2009 2010 2009 Industry pools and facilities $ 1,990 $ 2,000 $ 1,419 $ 1,408 Asbestos and environmental 1,903 2,027 628 683 Other including allowance for future uncollectible reinsurance recoverables 15,575 15,140 105 121 Total Property-Liability $ 19,468 $ 19,167 $ 2,152 $ 2,212 Reinsurance recoverables include an estimate of the amount of property-liability insurance claims and claims expense reserves that may be ceded under the terms of the reinsurance agreements, including incurred but not reported unpaid losses. We calculate our ceded reinsurance estimate based on the terms of each applicable reinsurance agreement, including an estimate of how IBNR losses will ultimately be ceded under the agreement. We also consider other limitations and coverage exclusions under our reinsurance agreements. Accordingly, our estimate of reinsurance recoverables is subject to similar risks and uncertainties as our estimate of reserve for property-liability claims and claims expense. We believe the recoverables are appropriately established; however, as our underlying reserves continue to develop, the amount ultimately recoverable may vary from amounts currently recorded. We regularly evaluate the reinsurers and the respective amounts recoverable, and a provision for uncollectible reinsurance is recorded if needed. The establishment of reinsurance recoverables and the related allowance for uncollectible reinsurance is also an inherently uncertain process involving estimates. Changes in estimates could result in additional changes to the Consolidated Statements of Operations. The allowance for uncollectible reinsurance relates to Discontinued Lines and Coverages reinsurance recoverables and was $142 million as of both December 31, 2010 and 2009. This amount represents 17.6% and 16.2% of the related reinsurance recoverable balances as of December 31, 2010 and 2009, respectively. The allowance is based upon our ongoing review of amounts outstanding, length of collection periods, changes in reinsurer credit standing, and other relevant factors. In addition, in the ordinary course of business, we may become involved in coverage disputes with certain of our reinsurers which may ultimately result in lawsuits and arbitrations brought by or against such reinsurers to determine the parties' rights and obligations under the various reinsurance agreements. We employ dedicated specialists to manage reinsurance collections and disputes. We also consider recent developments in commutation activity between reinsurers and cedants, and recent trends in arbitration and litigation outcomes in disputes between cedants and reinsurers in seeking to maximize our reinsurance recoveries. Adverse developments in the insurance industry have led to a decline in the financial strength of some of our reinsurance carriers, causing amounts recoverable from them and future claims ceded to them to be considered a higher risk. There has also been consolidation activity in the industry, which causes reinsurance risk across the industry to be concentrated among fewer companies. In addition, over the last several years the industry has increasingly segregated asbestos, environmental, and other discontinued lines exposures into separate legal entities with dedicated capital. Regulatory bodies in certain cases have supported these actions. We are unable to determine the impact, if any, that these developments will have on the collectability of reinsurance recoverables in the future. 65 The largest reinsurance recoverable balances are shown in the following table as of December 31, net of the allowance we have established for uncollectible amounts. Standard & Poor's financial strength rating (1) Reinsurance recoverable on paid and unpaid claims, net ($ in millions) 2010 2009 Industry pools and facilities Michigan Catastrophic Claim Association ("MCCA") N/A $ 1,243 $ 1,173 North Carolina Reinsurance Facility N/A 65 60 New Jersey Unsatisfied Claim and Judgment Fund N/A 55 66 FHCF N/A 41 53 Other 15 56 Total 1,419 1,408 Asbestos, Environmental and Other Lloyd's of London ("Lloyd's") A+ 183 190 Westport Insurance Corporation (formerly Employers Reinsurance Corporation) A+ 56 77 New England Reinsurance Corporation N/A 37 37 R&Q Reinsurance Company N/A 34 28 Clearwater Insurance Company BB+ 30 34 St. Paul Fire and Marine Insurance Company AA- 19 21 Other, including allowance for future uncollectible reinsurance recoverables 374 417 Total 733 804 Total Property-Liability $ 2,152 $ 2,212 (1) N/A reflects no rating available. The effects of reinsurance ceded on our property-liability premiums earned and claims and claims expense for the years ended December 31 are summarized in the following table. ($ in millions) 2010 2009 2008 Ceded property-liability premiums earned $ 1,092 $ 1,056 $ 1,139 Ceded property-liability claims and claims expense Industry pool and facilities FHCF $ 10 $ 47 $ 28 National Flood Insurance Program 50 111 344 MCCA 142 133 148 Other 64 59 60 Subtotal industry pools and facilities 266 350 580 Asbestos, Environmental and Other 5 65 40 Ceded property-liability claims and claims expense $ 271 $ 415 $ 620 For the year ended December 31, 2010, ceded property-liability premiums earned increased $36 million when compared to prior year, primarily due to the adoption of accounting guidance related to the consolidation of variable interest entities, which resulted in the consolidation of two insurance company affiliates, Allstate Texas Lloyds and Allstate County Mutual Insurance Company. For the year ended December 31, 2009, ceded property-liability premiums earned decreased $83 million when compared to prior year, primarily as a result of favorable market conditions which were reflected in our catastrophe reinsurance pricing. 66 Ceded property-liability claims and claims expense decreased in 2010 and 2009 primarily due to amounts ceded to National Flood Insurance Program. For a detailed description of the MCCA, FHCF and Lloyd's, see Note 9 of the consolidated financial statements. As of December 31, 2010, other than the recoverable balances listed above, no other amount due or estimated to be due from any single Property-Liability reinsurer was in excess of $17 million. We enter into certain intercompany insurance and reinsurance transactions for the Property-Liability operations in order to maintain underwriting control and manage insurance risk among various legal entities. These reinsurance agreements have been approved by the appropriate regulatory authorities. All significant intercompany transactions have been eliminated in consolidation. Catastrophe reinsurance Our catastrophe reinsurance program was designed, utilizing our risk management methodology, to address our exposure to catastrophes nationwide. Our program provides reinsurance protection for catastrophes including storms named or numbered by the National Weather Service, fires following earthquakes, earthquakes and wildfires including California wildfires. These reinsurance agreements are part of our catastrophe management strategy, which is intended to provide our shareholders an acceptable return on the risks assumed in our property business, and to reduce variability of earnings, while providing protection to our customers. While our catastrophe management strategy remains substantially unchanged we have redesigned our catastrophe reinsurance program in 2011. Our new reinsurance program continues to support our goal to have no more than a 1% likelihood of exceeding annual aggregate catastrophe losses by $2 billion, net of reinsurance, from hurricanes and earthquakes, based on modeled assumptions and applications currently available. Since the 2006 inception of Allstate's catastrophe reinsurance program, our exposure to wind loss has been materially reduced and we have nearly eliminated our exposure to earthquake loss. Our redesigned program for 2011 responds to these exposure changes by including coverage for multiple perils, in addition to hurricanes and earthquakes, in all but one of the contracts comprising the program. In addition, the per occurrence structure effective June 1, 2011 facilitates the program's administration while providing greater potential with respect to loss recovery. The new program, as described below, provides $3.25 billion of reinsurance coverage, above the retention, with reinstatements of limits. It includes a Per Occurrence Excess Catastrophe Reinsurance agreement reinsuring our personal lines property and auto excess catastrophe losses resulting from multiple perils, including those perils currently reinsured under our existing program, in every state other than New Jersey and Florida. For June 1, 2011 to May 31, 2012, the program consists of two agreements: a Per Occurrence Excess Catastrophe Reinsurance agreement providing coverage in six layers and a Top and Drop Excess Catastrophe Reinsurance agreement which includes Coverage A and Coverage B. The Per Occurrence Excess Catastrophe Reinsurance agreement provides an initial $3.25 billion per occurrence limit in excess of a $500 million retention and after the Company has incurred $250 million in losses "otherwise recoverable." The $250 million in losses otherwise recoverable applies once each contract year to the First Layer only and losses from multiple qualifying occurrences can apply to this $250 million threshold in excess of $500 million per occurrence. The Top and Drop Excess Catastrophe Reinsurance agreement provides $250 million of reinsurance limits which may be used for Coverage A, Coverage B, or a combination of both. Coverage A reinsures the "Top" of the program and provides 50% of $500 million excess of a $3.25 billion retention. Coverage B allows the program limit to "Drop" and provides reinsurance for $250 million in limits excess of a $750 million retention and after the Company has incurred $500 million in losses "otherwise recoverable" under the agreement. Losses from multiple qualifying occurrences, in excess of $750 million per occurence, can apply to this $500 million threshold. The New Jersey and Florida components of the reinsurance program are designed separately from the other components of the program to address the distinct needs of our separately capitalized legal entities in those states. New Jersey catastrophe losses will be reinsured under a newly placed per occurrence agreement and under existing agreements which expire respectively on May 31, 2012 and 2013. The Florida component will be placed in May of 2011. Allstate Protection's separate reinsurance programs in Pennsylvania and Kentucky will continue to address exposures 67 unique to those states. A description of the catastrophe reinsurance treaties that will reinsure Allstate Protection as of June 1, 2011 follows: Nationwide excluding Florida and New Jersey The Per Occurrence Excess Catastrophe Reinsurance agreement reinsures personal lines property and auto excess catastrophe losses caused by multiple perils under Six Layers of coverage as follows: First Layer $250 million limit in excess of a $500 million retention and after an initial $250 million in losses "otherwise recoverable" has been satisfied, 1 reinstatement Second Layer $250 million limit in excess of a $750 million retention, 1 reinstatement Third Layer $500 million limit in excess of a $1 billion retention, 1 reinstatement Fourth Layer $750 million limit in excess of a $1.5 billion retention, 1 reinstatement Fifth Layer $1 billion limit in excess of a $2.25 billion retention, 1 reinstatement Sixth Layer $500 million limit in excess of a $3.25 billion retention Coverage for the First through the Fifth Layers are 95% placed. Each Layer comprises three contracts, each contract providing one third of the total limit and expiring as of May 31, 2012, 2013 and 2014, respectively. Coverage for the 6 th Layer is 47.5% placed and, unlike the other layers, does not have a reinstatement limit. Reinsurance premium is subject to redetermination for exposure changes at each anniversary. The Top and Drop Excess Catastrophe Reinsurance agreement reinsures personal lines property and auto excess catastrophe losses caused by multiple perils. The reinsurance limit may be used for Coverage A, Coverage B or a combination of both and is not subject to reinstatement. Coverage A of the Top and Drop provides 47.5% of $500 million in limits in excess of a $3.25 billion retention. Coverage B provides 95% of $250 million in limits in excess of a $750 million retention. In addition to this retention, the Company must incur $500 million in losses, "otherwise recoverable", under Coverage B during the contract year before Coverage B attaches. Losses from multiple qualifying occurrences can apply to this $500 million threshold. Coverage B essentially is a third limit for the Second Layer of the Per Occurrence Excess Catastrophe Reinsurance agreement described above. For June 1, 2011 to May 31, 2012, the placement of the Top and Drop Excess Catastrophe Reinsurance agreement consists of an annual contract and a three year term contract which in the aggregate provide 47.5% of the $500 million Coverage A limit and 95% of the $250 million Coverage B limit. For June 1, 2012 to May 31, 2013, the three year term contract provides 12.66% of Coverage A's and 25% of Coverage B's placement and for June 1, 2013 to May 31, 2014, it provides 6% of Coverage A's and 12.66% of Coverage B's placement. Reinsurance premium is subject to redetermination for exposure changes. New Jersey The Excess Catastrophe Reinsurance contract reinsures personal lines property excess catastrophe losses in New Jersey caused by multiple perils. The newly placed contract is effective June 1, 2011 to May 31, 2014 and provides 32% of $400 million of limits excess of a $150 million retention and includes one reinstatement per contract year. In addition, the existing New Jersey agreement consisting of two contracts each providing two Layers of coverage will remain in place. The agreement expiring May 31, 2012 provides a First Layer of 31% of $300 million of limits in excess of a $200 million retention, and a Second Layer of 26% of $200 million of limits in excess of a $500 million retention. The agreement expiring May 31, 2013 provides a First Layer of 32% of $300 million of limits in excess of a $184 million retention and a Second Layer of 42% of $200 million in limits excess of a $484 million retention. Each Layer includes one reinstatement per contract year. The reinsurance premium and retention are subject to redetermination for exposure changes at each anniversary. Pennsylvania The Excess Catastrophe Reinsurance Contract reinsures personal lines property losses in Pennsylvania caused by multiple perils. This agreement will remain in effect until May 31, 2012 and provides 95% of $100 million of limits in excess of a $100 million retention with two limits being available for the remaining term of the contract. The reinsurance premium and retention are not subject to redetermination for exposure changes. Kentucky The Earthquake Excess Catastrophe Reinsurance Contract reinsures personal lines property losses in Kentucky caused by earthquakes or fires following earthquakes. The agreement is effective June 1, 2011 for three years and provides 95% of $25 million of limits in excess of a $5 million retention. The agreement provides three limits over its three year term subject to two limits being available in any one contract year. The reinsurance premium and retention are not subject to redetermination for exposure changes. 68 The redesigned catastrophe reinsurance program for 2011 will require the cancellation of the contracts comprising the 2010 program with the exception of the Pennsylvania agreement which has one year remaining on its three year term and the New Jersey agreement which has two years remaining on its three year term. The current Kentucky and Texas agreements will expire respectively on May 31, 2011 and June 17, 2011. See Note 9 for further details of the existing 2010 program. We estimate that the total annualized cost of all catastrophe reinsurance programs for the year beginning June 1, 2011 will be approximately $550 million compared to $560 million annualized cost for the year beginning June 1, 2010. The total cost of our catastrophe reinsurance programs in 2010 was $593 million compared to $626 million in 2009. We continue to attempt to capture our reinsurance cost in premium rates as allowed by state regulatory authorities. ALLSTATE FINANCIAL 2010 HIGHLIGHTS Net income was $58 million in 2010 compared to net loss of $483 million in 2009. Premiums and contract charges on underwritten products, including traditional life, interest-sensitive life and accident and health insurance, totaled $2.03 billion in 2010, an increase of 12.2% or $221 million from $1.81 billion in 2009. Net realized capital losses totaled $517 million in 2010 compared to $431 million in 2009. During 2010, amortization deceleration (credit to income) of $12 million was recorded related to our annual comprehensive review of the DAC and DSI balances and assumptions for our interest-sensitive life, fixed annuities and other investment contracts. This compares to DAC and DSI amortization acceleration (charge to income) of $322 million in 2009. Investments as of December 31, 2010 totaled $61.58 billion, reflecting a decrease in carrying value of $634 million from $62.22 billion as of December 31, 2009. Net investment income decreased 6.9% to $2.85 billion in 2010 from $3.06 billion in 2009. Contractholder funds as of December 31, 2010 totaled $48.19 billion, reflecting a decrease of $4.39 billion from $52.58 billion as of December 31, 2009. ALLSTATE FINANCIAL SEGMENT Overview and strategy The Allstate Financial segment is a major provider of life insurance, retirement and investment products, and voluntary accident and health insurance. We serve our customers through Allstate exclusive agencies, workplace distribution and non-proprietary distribution channels. Allstate Financial's strategic vision is to reinvent protection and retirement for the consumer and its purpose is to create financial value on a standalone basis and to add strategic value to the organization. To fulfill its purpose, Allstate Financial's primary objectives are to deepen relationships with Allstate customers by adding financial services to their suite of products with Allstate, dramatically expand Allstate Benefits (our workplace distribution business) and improve profitability by decreasing earnings volatility, increasing our returns, and improving our capital position. Allstate Financial brings value to The Allstate Corporation (the "Corporation") in three principal ways: through profitable growth of Allstate Financial, improving the economics of the Protection business through increased customer loyalty and renewal rates by cross selling Allstate Financial products to existing customers, and by bringing new customers to Allstate. We continue to shift our mix of products in force by decreasing spread based products, principally fixed annuities and institutional products, and through growth of underwritten products having mortality or morbidity risk, principally life insurance and accident and health products. In addition to focusing on higher return markets, products, and distribution channels, Allstate Financial continues to emphasize capital efficiency and enterprise risk and return management strategies and actions. Allstate Financial's strategy provides a platform to profitably grow its business. Based upon Allstate's strong financial position and brand, we have a unique opportunity to cross-sell to our customers. Through our Allstate exclusive agencies we will leverage the trusted customer relationships to serve those who are looking for assistance in meeting their protection and retirement needs by providing them with the information, products and services that they need. Our employer relationships through Allstate Benefits also afford opportunities to offer additional Allstate products. Our products include interest-sensitive, traditional and variable life insurance; fixed annuities such as deferred and immediate annuities; voluntary accident and health insurance; and funding agreements backing medium-term notes, which we offer on an opportunistic basis. Banking products and services have been offered to customers through the Allstate Bank. Our products are sold through multiple distribution channels including Allstate exclusive agencies, which include exclusive financial specialists, independent agents (including master brokerage agencies and workplace enrolling agents), and specialized structured settlement brokers. Our institutional product line consists primarily of funding agreements sold to unaffiliated trusts that use them to back medium-term notes issued to institutional and 69 individual investors. On February 8, 2011, we announced that we had reached an agreement to sell substantially all of the deposits of Allstate Bank to Discover Bank and our plans to enter into a multi-year distribution and marketing agreement whereby Discover Bank will provide banking products and services to Allstate customers in the future. Allstate Financial does not intend to originate banking products or services after the transaction closes, which is expected to be by mid-year 2011, pending regulatory approval. Allstate Financial outlook We plan to continue to increase sales of underwritten insurance products and tailor the focus of product offerings to better serve the needs of everyday Americans. Our growth initiatives will be focused on increasing the number of customers served through our proprietary and Allstate Benefits (workplace distribution) channels. We will continue to focus on improving returns and reducing our concentration in spread based products resulting in net reductions in contractholder funds obligations. We expect lower investment spread due to reduced contractholder funds and the continuing low interest rate environment. As interest rates remain below the aggregate portfolio yield, the amount by which the low interest rate environment will reduce our investment spread is contingent on our ability to maintain the portfolio yield and lower interest crediting rates on spread based products, which could be limited by market conditions, regulatory minimum rates or contractual minimum rate guarantees, and may not match the timing or magnitude of changes in asset yields. Also, a significant amount of our invested assets are used to support our capital and non-spread based products, which do not provide this offsetting opportunity. Summary analysis Summarized financial data for the years ended December 31 is presented in the following table. ($ in millions) 2010 2009 2008 Revenues Life and annuity premiums and contract charges $ 2,168 $ 1,958 $ 1,895 Net investment income 2,853 3,064 3,811 Realized capital gains and losses (517 ) (431 ) (3,127 ) Total revenues 4,504 4,591 2,579 Costs and expenses Life and annuity contract benefits (1,815 ) (1,617 ) (1,612 ) Interest credited to contractholder funds (1,807 ) (2,126 ) (2,411 ) Amortization of DAC (356 ) (965 ) (704 ) Operating costs and expenses (469 ) (430 ) (520 ) Restructuring and related charges 3 (25 ) (1 ) Total costs and expenses (4,444 ) (5,163 ) (5,248 ) Gain (loss) on disposition of operations 6 7 (6 ) Income tax (expense) benefit (8 ) 82 954 Net income (loss) $ 58 $ (483 ) $ (1,721 ) Investments as of December 31 $ 61,582 $ 62,216 $ 61,499 Net income in 2010 was $58 million compared to a net loss of $483 million in 2009. The favorable change of $541 million was primarily due to lower amortization of DAC, decreased interest credited to contractholder funds and higher premiums and contract charges, partially offset by lower net investment income, higher contract benefits and increased net realized capital losses. Net loss was $483 million in 2009 compared to $1.72 billion in 2008. The improvement of $1.24 billion in 2009 compared to 2008 was primarily due to lower net realized capital losses and, to a lesser extent, decreased interest credited to contractholder funds and operating costs and expenses, partially offset by lower net investment income, higher amortization of DAC and a $142 million increase in the valuation allowance relating to the deferred tax asset on capital losses that was recorded in the first quarter of 2009. This valuation allowance was released in connection with our adoption of new OTTI accounting guidance on April 1, 2009; however, the release was recorded as an increase to retained income and therefore did not reverse the amount recorded in income tax expense. 70 Analysis of revenues Total revenues decreased 1.9% or $87 million in 2010 compared to 2009 due to lower net investment income and higher net realized capital losses, partially offset by higher premiums and contract charges. Total revenues increased 78.0% or $2.01 billion in 2009 compared to 2008 primarily due to a $2.70 billion decrease in net realized capital losses, partially offset by a $747 million decline in net investment income. Life and annuity premiums and contract charges Premiums represent revenues generated from traditional life insurance, immediate annuities with life contingencies, and accident and health insurance products that have significant mortality or morbidity risk. Contract charges are revenues generated from interest-sensitive and variable life insurance and fixed annuities for which deposits are classified as contractholder funds or separate account liabilities. Contract charges are assessed against the contractholder account values for maintenance, administration, cost of insurance and surrender prior to contractually specified dates. The following table summarizes life and annuity premiums and contract charges by product for the years ended December 31. ($ in millions) 2010 2009 2008 Underwritten products Traditional life insurance premiums $ 420 $ 407 $ 399 Accident and health insurance premiums 621 460 412 Interest-sensitive life insurance contract charges 991 944 896 Subtotal 2,032 1,811 1,707 Annuities Immediate annuities with life contingencies premiums 97 102 132 Other fixed annuity contract charges 39 45 56 Subtotal 136 147 188 Life and annuity premiums and contract charges (1) $ 2,168 $ 1,958 $ 1,895 (1) Total contract charges include contract charges related to the cost of insurance totaling $637 million, $616 million and $595 million in 2010, 2009 and 2008, respectively. Total premiums and contract charges increased 10.7% in 2010 compared to 2009 primarily due to higher sales of accident and health insurance through Allstate Benefits, with a significant portion of the increase resulting from sales to employees of one large company, and higher contract charges on interest-sensitive life insurance products resulting from a shift in the mix of policies in force to contracts with higher cost of insurance rates and policy administration fees. In addition, increased traditional life insurance premiums in 2010 were primarily due to lower reinsurance premiums resulting from higher retention, partially offset by lower renewal premiums and decreased sales. Total premiums and contract charges increased 3.3% in 2009 compared to 2008 due to higher sales of accident and health insurance through Allstate Benefits and higher contract charges on interest-sensitive life insurance products resulting from increases in certain policy administration fees, partially offset by lower sales of immediate annuities with life contingencies. Contractholder funds represent interest-bearing liabilities arising from the sale of individual and institutional products, such as interest-sensitive life insurance, fixed annuities, funding agreements and bank deposits. The balance of contractholder funds is equal to the cumulative deposits received and interest credited to the contractholder less 71 cumulative contract maturities, benefits, surrenders, withdrawals and contract charges for mortality or administrative expenses. The following table shows the changes in contractholder funds for the years ended December 31. ($ in millions) 2010 2009 2008 Contractholder funds, beginning balance $ 52,582 $ 58,413 $ 61,975 Deposits Fixed annuities 932 1,964 3,802 Institutional products (funding agreements) 4,158 Interest-sensitive life insurance 1,512 1,438 1,404 Bank and other deposits 994 1,178 1,038 Total deposits 3,438 4,580 10,402 Interest credited 1,794 2,025 2,405 Maturities, benefits, withdrawals and other adjustments Maturities and retirements of institutional products (1,833 ) (4,773 ) (8,599 ) Benefits (1,552 ) (1,588 ) (1,710 ) Surrenders and partial withdrawals (5,203 ) (5,172 ) (5,313 ) Contract charges (983 ) (918 ) (870 ) Net transfers from separate accounts 11 11 19 Fair value hedge adjustments for institutional products (196 ) 25 (56 ) Other adjustments (1) 137 (21 ) 160 Total maturities, benefits, withdrawals and other adjustments (9,619 ) (12,436 ) (16,369 ) Contractholder funds, ending balance $ 48,195 $ 52,582 $ 58,413 (1) The table above illustrates the changes in contractholder funds, which are presented gross of reinsurance recoverables on the Consolidated Statements of Financial Position. The table above is intended to supplement our discussion and analysis of revenues, which are presented net of reinsurance on the Consolidated Statements of Operations. As a result, the net change in contractholder funds associated with products reinsured to third parties is reflected as a component of the other adjustments line. Contractholder funds decreased 8.3%, 10.0% and 5.8% in 2010, 2009 and 2008, respectively. Average contractholder funds decreased 9.2% in 2010 compared to 2009 and 7.8% in 2009 compared to 2008. Contractholder deposits decreased 24.9% in 2010 compared to 2009 primarily due to lower deposits on fixed annuities. Deposits on fixed annuities decreased 52.5% in 2010 compared to 2009 due to our strategic decision to discontinue distributing fixed annuities through banks and broker-dealers and our goal to reduce our concentration in spread based products and improve returns on new business. Contractholder deposits decreased 56.0% in 2009 compared to 2008 because there were no issuances of institutional products in 2009 compared to $4.16 billion in 2008 and due to lower deposits on fixed annuities in 2009. Sales of our institutional products vary from period to period based on management's assessment of market conditions, investor demand and operational priorities such as our focus beginning in 2009 on reducing our concentration in spread based products. Deposits on fixed annuities decreased 48.3% in 2009 compared to 2008 due to pricing actions to improve returns on new business and reduce our concentration in spread based products. Maturities and retirements of institutional products decreased 61.6% to $1.83 billion in 2010 from $4.77 billion in 2009. During 2009, we retired all of our remaining outstanding extendible institutional market obligations totaling $1.45 billion. In addition, 2009 included the redemption of $1.39 billion of institutional product liabilities in conjunction with cash tender offers. Maturities and retirements of institutional products decreased 44.5% to $4.77 billion in 2009 from $8.60 billion in 2008. The decrease was primarily due to lower retirements of extendible institutional market obligations in 2009 compared to 2008, partially offset by the redemption in 2009 of institutional product liabilities in accordance with the cash tender offers. Surrenders and partial withdrawals on deferred fixed annuities, interest-sensitive life insurance products and Allstate Bank products (including maturities of certificates of deposit) increased 0.6% to $5.20 billion in 2010 from $5.17 billion in 2009, and decreased 2.7% in 2009 from $5.31 billion in 2008. In 2010, the increase was primarily due to higher surrenders and partial withdrawals on fixed annuities, partially offset by lower surrenders and partial withdrawals on Allstate Bank products. In 2009, the decrease was due to lower surrenders and partial withdrawals on traditional fixed annuities, partially offset by higher surrenders and partial withdrawals on market value adjusted 72 annuities and interest-sensitive life insurance. The surrender and partial withdrawal rate on deferred fixed annuities, interest-sensitive life insurance products and Allstate Bank products, based on the beginning of year contractholder funds, was 12.2% in 2010 compared to 11.8% in 2009 and 12.2% in 2008. Net investment income decreased 6.9% or $211 million to $2.85 billion in 2010 from $3.06 billion in 2009 primarily due to lower yields, reduced average investment balances and risk reduction actions. Net investment income decreased 19.6% or $747 million to $3.06 billion in 2009 from $3.81 billion in 2008. The decline was primarily due to lower yields, actions to shorten duration and maintain additional liquidity in the portfolio, along with reduced average investment balances resulting primarily from reduced contractholder obligations. Net realized capital gains and losses are presented in the following table for the years ended December 31. ($ in millions) 2010 2009 2008 Impairment write-downs $ (501 ) $ (1,021 ) $ (1,256 ) Change in intent write-downs (142 ) (268 ) (1,247 ) Net other-than-temporary impairment losses recognized in earnings (643 ) (1,289 ) (2,503 ) Sales 219 638 178 Valuation of derivative instruments (94 ) 315 (985 ) Settlements of derivative instruments (31 ) 41 197 EMA limited partnership income 32 (136 ) (14 ) Realized capital gains and losses, pre-tax (517 ) (431 ) (3,127 ) Income tax benefit 180 14 1,093 Realized capital gains and losses, after-tax $ (337 ) $ (417 ) $ (2,034 ) For further discussion of realized capital gains and losses, see the Investments section of the MD&A. Analysis of costs and expenses Total costs and expenses decreased 13.9% or $719 million in 2010 compared to 2009 primarily due to lower amortization of DAC and interest credited to contractholder funds, partially offset by higher contract benefits. Total costs and expenses decreased 1.6% or $85 million in 2009 compared to 2008 primarily due to lower interest credited to contractholder funds and operating costs and expenses, partially offset by higher amortization of DAC and restructuring and related charges. Life and annuity contract benefits increased 12.2% or $198 million in 2010 compared to 2009 primarily due to higher contract benefits on accident and health insurance and interest-sensitive life insurance products, partially offset by lower contract benefits on immediate annuities with life contingencies. Higher contract benefits on accident and health insurance were proportionate to growth in premiums. The increase in contract benefits on interest-sensitive life insurance was primarily due to the reestimation of reserves for certain secondary guarantees on universal life insurance policies and higher mortality experience resulting from an increase in average claim size and higher incidence of claims. Lower contract benefits on immediate annuities with life contingencies were due to the reestimation of reserves for benefits payable to certain annuitants to reflect current contractholder information. The reserve reestimations utilized more refined policy level information and assumptions in the second quarter of 2010. The increase in reserves for certain secondary guarantees on universal life insurance policies resulted in a charge to contract benefits of $68 million and a related reduction in amortization of DAC of $50 million. The decrease in reserves for immediate annuities resulted in a credit to contract benefits of $26 million. The net impact was an increase to income of $8 million, pre-tax. Life and annuity contract benefits increased 0.3% or $5 million in 2009 compared to 2008 due to higher contract benefits on life insurance products and accident and health insurance business, partially offset by lower contract benefits on annuities. The increase in contract benefits on life insurance products was primarily due to higher mortality experience on interest-sensitive life insurance products resulting from an increase in claim experience and policy growth while higher contract benefits on accident and health insurance business was proportionate to growth in premiums. The decrease in contract benefits for annuities was due to improved mortality experience and the impact of lower sales of immediate annuities with life contingencies. We analyze our mortality and morbidity results using the difference between premiums and contract charges earned for the cost of insurance and life and annuity contract benefits excluding the portion related to the implied interest on immediate annuities with life contingencies ("benefit spread"). This implied interest totaled $549 million, $558 million and $552 million in 2010, 2009 and 2008, respectively. 73 The benefit spread by product group is disclosed in the following table for the years ended December 31. ($ in millions) 2010 2009 2008 Life insurance $ 282 $ 363 $ 363 Accident and health insurance 252 196 177 Annuities (25 ) (33 ) (62 ) Total benefit spread $ 509 $ 526 $ 478 Benefit spread decreased 3.2% or $17 million in 2010 compared to 2009. The decrease was primarily due to higher mortality experience on interest-sensitive life insurance, reestimations of reserves that increased contract benefits for interest-sensitive life insurance and decreased contract benefits for immediate annuities, partially offset by growth in accident and health insurance sold through Allstate Benefits. Benefit spread increased 10.0% or $48 million in 2009 compared to 2008 primarily due to improved mortality experience on annuities and higher premiums on accident and health insurance business sold through Allstate Benefits. Interest credited to contractholder funds decreased 15.0% or $319 million in 2010 compared to 2009 primarily due to lower average contractholder funds and management actions to reduce interest crediting rates on deferred fixed annuities and interest-sensitive life insurance. In addition, the decline in 2010 also reflects lower amortization of DSI. Amortization of DSI in 2010 was $27 million compared to $129 million in 2009. The decline in amortization of DSI in 2010 was primarily due to a $46 million decrease in amortization relating to realized capital gains and losses and a $38 million reduction in amortization acceleration for changes in assumptions. Interest credited to contractholder funds decreased 11.8% or $285 million in 2009 compared to 2008 primarily due to lower average contractholder funds and, to a lesser extent, decreased weighted average interest crediting rates on deferred fixed annuities and institutional products, partially offset by higher amortization of DSI. Amortization of DSI in 2009 and 2008 was $129 million and $53 million, respectively. The increase primarily relates to an unfavorable change in amortization relating to realized capital gains and losses of $132 million, partially offset by a $32 million decline in amortization acceleration due to changes in assumptions, which in 2009 and 2008 increased interest credited to contractholder funds by $38 million and $70 million, respectively. In order to analyze the impact of net investment income and interest credited to contractholders on net income, we monitor the difference between net investment income and the sum of interest credited to contractholder funds and the implied interest on immediate annuities with life contingencies, which is included as a component of life and annuity contract benefits on the Consolidated Statements of Operations ("investment spread"). The investment spread by product group is shown in the following table for the years ended December 31. ($ in millions) 2010 2009 2008 Annuities and institutional products $ 179 $ 126 $ 460 Life insurance 35 3 48 Allstate Bank products 31 30 22 Accident and health insurance 18 16 12 Net investment income on investments supporting capital 234 205 306 Total investment spread $ 497 $ 380 $ 848 Investment spread increased 30.8% or $117 million in 2010 compared to 2009 as lower net investment income was more than offset by decreased interest credited to contractholder funds, which includes lower amortization of DSI. Excluding amortization of DSI, investment spread increased 2.9% or $15 million in 2010 compared to 2009. Investment spread declined 55.2% or $468 million in 2009 compared to 2008. These declines reflect lower net investment income, partially offset by decreased interest credited to contractholder funds. 74 To further analyze investment spreads, the following table summarizes the weighted average investment yield on assets supporting product liabilities and capital, interest crediting rates and investment spreads for 2010, 2009 and 2008. Weighted average investment yield Weighted average interest crediting rate Weighted average investment spreads 2010 2009 2008 2010 2009 2008 2010 2009 2008 Interest-sensitive life insurance 5.5 % 5.5 % 6.0 % 4.4 % 4.6 % 4.6 % 1.1 % 0.9 % 1.4 % Deferred fixed annuities and institutional products 4.4 4.5 5.2 3.2 3.4 3.7 1.2 1.1 1.5 Immediate fixed annuities with and without life contingencies 6.4 6.3 6.8 6.4 6.5 6.5 (0.2 ) 0.3 Investments supporting capital, traditional life and other products 3.7 3.7 5.3 n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a The following table summarizes our product liabilities as of December 31 and indicates the account value of those contracts and policies in which an investment spread is generated. ($ in millions) 2010 2009 2008 Immediate fixed annuities with life contingencies $ 8,696 $ 8,454 $ 8,355 Other life contingent contracts and other 4,786 4,456 4,526 Reserve for life-contingent contract benefits $ 13,482 $ 12,910 $ 12,881 Interest-sensitive life insurance $ 10,675 $ 10,276 $ 9,957 Deferred fixed annuities 29,367 32,194 33,766 Immediate fixed annuities without life contingencies 3,799 3,869 3,894 Institutional products 2,650 4,370 8,974 Allstate Bank products 1,091 1,085 949 Market value adjustments related to fair value hedges and other 613 788 873 Contractholder funds $ 48,195 $ 52,582 $ 58,413 The following table summarizes the weighted average guaranteed crediting rates and weighted average current crediting rates for certain fixed annuities and interest-sensitive life contracts where management has the ability to change the crediting rate, subject to a contractual minimum. Other products, including equity-indexed, variable and immediate annuities, equity-indexed and variable life, institutional products and Allstate Bank products totaling $13.74 billion of contractholder funds, have been excluded from the analysis because management does not have the ability to change the crediting rate or the minimum crediting rate is not considering meaningful in this context. ($ in millions) As of December 31, 2010 Weighted average guaranteed crediting rates Weighted average current crediting rates Contractholder funds Annuities with annual crediting rate resets 3.06 % 3.08 % $ 12,718 Annuities with multi-year rate guarantees: (1) Resetable in next 12 months 1.62 4.37 2,597 Resetable after 12 months 1.76 3.98 8,503 Interest-sensitive life 3.99 4.46 10,637 (1) These contracts include interest rate guarantee periods which are typically 5 or 6 years. 75 Amortization of DAC decreased 63.1% or $609 million in 2010 compared to 2009 and increased 37.1% or $261 million in 2009 compared to 2008. The components of amortization of DAC are summarized in the following table for the years ended December 31. ($ in millions) 2010 2009 2008 Amortization of DAC before amortization relating to realized capital gains and losses and changes in assumptions and premium deficiency $ (326 ) $ (472 ) $ (556 ) (Amortization) accretion relating to realized capital gains and losses (42 ) (216 ) 515 Amortization deceleration (acceleration) for changes in assumptions ("DAC unlocking") 12 (277 ) (327 ) Amortization charge relating to premium deficiency (336 ) Total amortization of DAC $ (356 ) $ (965 ) $ (704 ) The decrease of $609 million in 2010 was primarily due to a favorable change in amortization acceleration/deceleration for changes in assumptions, lower amortization relating to realized capital gains and losses, a decreased amortization rate on fixed annuities and lower amortization from decreased benefit spread on interest-sensitive life insurance due to the reestimation of reserves. The increase of $261 million in 2009 compared to 2008 was primarily due to an unfavorable change in amortization relating to realized capital gains and losses, partially offset by the absence of additional amortization recorded in 2008 in connection with a premium deficiency assessment, lower amortization resulting from decreased investment spread on deferred fixed annuities, and a decline in amortization acceleration due to changes in assumptions. The impact of realized capital gains and losses on amortization of DAC is dependent upon the relationship between the assets that give rise to the gain or loss and the product liability supported by the assets. Fluctuations result from changes in the impact of realized capital gains and losses on actual and expected gross profits. In 2010, DAC amortization relating to realized capital gains and losses resulted primarily from realized capital gains on derivatives and sales of fixed income securities. In 2009, DAC amortization relating to realized capital gains and losses resulted primarily from realized capital gains on derivatives. Additionally, DAC amortization in 2010 and 2009 reflects our decision in the second half of 2009 not to recapitalize DAC for credit or derivative losses on investments supporting certain fixed annuities following concerns that an increase in the level of expected realized capital losses may reduce EGP and adversely impact the product DAC recoverability. In 2008, DAC accretion resulted primarily from realized capital losses on derivatives and other-than-temporary impairment losses. Our annual comprehensive review of the profitability of our products to determine DAC balances for our interest-sensitive life, fixed annuities and other investment contracts covers assumptions for investment returns, including capital gains and losses, interest crediting rates to policyholders, the effect of any hedges, persistency, mortality and expenses in all product lines. In the first quarter of 2010, the review resulted in a deceleration of DAC amortization (credit to income) of $12 million. Amortization deceleration of $45 million related to variable life insurance and was primarily due to appreciation in the underlying separate account valuations. Amortization acceleration of $32 million related to interest-sensitive life insurance and was primarily due to an increase in projected realized capital losses and lower projected renewal premium (which is also expected to reduce persistency), partially offset by lower expenses. In 2009, our annual comprehensive review resulted in the acceleration of DAC amortization (charge to income) of $277 million. $289 million related to fixed annuities, of which $210 million was attributable to market value adjusted annuities, and $18 million related to variable life insurance. Partially offsetting these amounts was amortization deceleration (credit to income) for interest-sensitive life insurance of $30 million. The principal assumption impacting fixed annuity amortization acceleration was an increase in the level of expected realized capital losses in 2009 and 2010. For interest-sensitive life insurance, the amortization deceleration was due to a favorable change in our mortality assumptions, partially offset by increased expected capital losses. In 2008, DAC amortization acceleration for changes in assumptions recorded in connection with comprehensive reviews of the DAC balances resulted in an increase to amortization of DAC of $327 million. The principle assumption impacting the amortization acceleration in 2008 was the level of realized capital losses impacting actual gross profits in 2008 and the impact of realized capital losses on EGP in 2009. During the fourth quarter of 2008, our assumptions for EGP were impacted by a view of higher impairments in our investment portfolio. 76 During 2008, indicators emerged that suggested a study of mortality experience for our immediate annuities with life contingences was warranted. At the same time, the underlying profitability of the traditional life insurance business deteriorated due to lower investment returns and growth. For traditional life insurance and immediate annuities with life contingencies, an aggregate premium deficiency of $336 million resulted primarily from the experience study indicating that the annuitants on certain life contingent contracts are projected to live longer than we anticipated when the contracts were issued and, to a lesser degree, a reduction in the related investment portfolio yield. The deficiency was recorded through a reduction in DAC. There was no similar charge to income recorded in 2010 or 2009. The changes in the DAC asset are detailed in the following table. ($ in millions) Traditional life and accident and health Interest-sensitive life insurance Fixed annuities Other Total 2010 2009 2010 2009 2010 2009 2010 2009 2010 2009 Beginning balance $ 650 $ 595 $ 2,246 $ 2,449 $ 1,159 $ 4,037 $ 5 $ 8 $ 4,060 $ 7,089 Acquisition costs deferred 156 162 275 230 52 103 483 495 Impact of adoption of new OTTI accounting before unrealized impact (1) (6 ) (170 ) (176 ) Impact of adoption of new OTTI accounting effect of unrealized capital gains and losses (2) 6 170 176 Amortization of DAC before amortization relating to realized capital gains and losses and changes in assumptions (3) (113 ) (107 ) (140 ) (176 ) (71 ) (186 ) (2 ) (3 ) (326 ) (472 ) Accretion (amortization) relating to realized capital gains and losses (3) 15 (4 ) (57 ) (212 ) (42 ) (216 ) Amortization deceleration (acceleration) for changes in assumptions ("DAC unlocking") (3) 13 12 (1 ) (289 ) 12 (277 ) Effect of unrealized capital gains and losses (4) (144 ) (265 ) (651 ) (2,294 ) (795 ) (2,559 ) Ending balance $ 693 $ 650 $ 2,265 $ 2,246 $ 431 $ 1,159 $ 3 $ 5 $ 3,392 $ 4,060 (1) The adoption of new OTTI accounting guidance resulted in an adjustment to DAC to reverse previously recorded DAC accretion related to realized capital losses that were reclassified to other comprehensive income upon adoption on April 1, 2009. The adjustment was recorded as a reduction of the DAC balance and retained income. (2) The adoption of new OTTI accounting guidance resulted in an adjustment to DAC due to the change in unrealized capital gains and losses that occurred upon adoption on April 1, 2009 when previously recorded realized capital losses were reclassified to other comprehensive income. The adjustment was recorded as an increase of the DAC balance and unrealized capital gains and losses. (3) Included as a component of amortization of DAC on the Consolidated Statements of Operations. (4) Represents the change in the DAC adjustment for unrealized capital gains and losses. The DAC adjustment balance was $75 million and $870 million as of December 31, 2010 and 2009, respectively, and represents the amount by which the amortization of DAC would increase or decrease if the unrealized gains and losses in the respective product portfolios were realized. Recapitalization of DAC is limited to the originally deferred policy acquisition costs plus interest. Operating costs and expenses increased 9.1% or $39 million in 2010 compared to 2009 and decreased 17.3% or $90 million in 2009 compared to 2008. The following table summarizes operating costs and expenses. ($ in millions) 2010 2009 2008 Non-deferrable acquisition costs $ 168 $ 156 $ 153 Other operating costs and expenses 301 274 367 Total operating costs and expenses $ 469 $ 430 $ 520 Restructuring and related charges $ (3 ) $ 25 $ 1 Non-deferrable acquisition costs increased 7.7% or $12 million in 2010 compared to 2009 primarily due to higher non-deferrable commissions related to accident and health insurance business sold through Allstate Benefits. Other operating costs and expenses increased 9.9% or $27 million in 2010 compared to 2009 primarily due to higher product development, marketing and technology costs, increased litigation expenses, lower reinsurance expense allowances resulting from higher retention and increases in the net cost of employee benefits. In 2010, these increased costs were partially offset by our expense reduction actions, which resulted in lower employee, professional services and sales support expenses. 77 Non-deferrable acquisition costs increased 2.0% or $3 million in 2009 compared to 2008 primarily due to higher non-deferrable commissions related to accident and health insurance business sold through Allstate Benefits. Other operating costs and expenses decreased 25.3% or $93 million in 2009 compared to 2008 primarily due to our expense reduction actions, which resulted in lower employee, professional services and sales support expenses. During 2009, restructuring and related charges of $25 million were recorded in connection with our previously announced plan to improve efficiency and narrow our focus of product offerings. In accordance with this plan, among other actions, we eliminated approximately 1,000 workforce positions relative to December 31, 2008 levels through a combination of attrition, position elimination and outsourcing. This reduction reflected approximately 30% of Allstate Financial's work force at the time the plan was initiated. Through our actions completed as of December 31, 2010, we anticipate that we will exceed our targeted annual savings of $90 million beginning in 2011. Income tax expense of $8 million was recognized for 2010 compared to income tax benefits of $82 million and $954 million in 2009 and 2008, respectively. Income tax benefit for 2009 included expense of $142 million attributable to an increase in the valuation allowance relating to the deferred tax asset on capital losses recorded in the first quarter of 2009. This valuation allowance was released in connection with the adoption of new OTTI accounting guidance on April 1, 2009; however, the release was recorded as an increase to retained income and therefore did not reverse the amount recorded in income tax benefit. Reinsurance ceded We enter into reinsurance agreements with unaffiliated reinsurers to limit our risk of mortality and morbidity losses. In addition, Allstate Financial has used reinsurance to effect the acquisition or disposition of certain blocks of business. We retain primary liability as a direct insurer for all risks ceded to reinsurers. As of December 31, 2010 and 2009, 45% and 47%, respectively, of our face amount of life insurance in force was reinsured. Additionally, we ceded substantially all of the risk associated with our variable annuity business and we cede 100% of the morbidity risk on substantially all of our long-term care contracts. Our reinsurance recoverables, summarized by reinsurer as of December 31, are shown in the following table. ($ in millions) Standard & Poor's Financial Strength Rating (3) Reinsurance recoverable on paid and unpaid benefits 2010 2009 Prudential Insurance Company of America AA- $ 1,633 $ 1,507 Employers Reassurance Corporation A+ 853 745 Transamerica Life Group AA- 402 374 RGA Reinsurance Company AA- 360 352 Swiss Re Life and Health America, Inc. A+ 210 200 Paul Revere Life Insurance Company A- 140 146 Scottish Re Group (1) N/A 136 137 Munich American Reassurance AA- 124 119 Mutual of Omaha Insurance AA- 98 101 Security Life of Denver A 79 91 Manulife Insurance Company AA- 68 71 Lincoln National Life Insurance AA- 64 65 Triton Insurance Company N/A 58 61 American Health & Life Insurance Co. N/A 50 51 Other (2) 125 123 Total $ 4,400 $ 4,143 (1) The reinsurance recoverable on paid and unpaid benefits related to the Scottish Re Group as of December 31, 2010 comprised $73 million related to Scottish Re Life Corporation and $63 million related to Scottish Re (U.S.), Inc. The reinsurance recoverable on paid and unpaid benefits related to the Scottish Re Group as of December 31, 2009 comprised $74 million related to Scottish Re Life Corporation and $63 million related to Scottish Re (U.S.), Inc. (2) As of December 31, 2010 and 2009, the other category includes $106 million and $100 million, respectively, of recoverables due from reinsurers with an investment grade credit rating from Standard & Poor's ("S&P"). (3) N/A reflects no rating available. Certain of our reinsurers experienced rating downgrades in 2010 by S&P, including Security Life of Denver and Manulife Insurance Company. We continuously monitor the creditworthiness of reinsurers in order to determine our risk 78 of recoverability on an individual and aggregate basis, and a provision for uncollectible reinsurance is recorded if needed. No amounts have been deemed unrecoverable in the three-years ended December 31, 2010. We enter into certain intercompany reinsurance transactions for the Allstate Financial operations in order to maintain underwriting control and manage insurance risk among various legal entities. These reinsurance agreements have been approved by the appropriate regulatory authorities. All significant intercompany transactions have been eliminated in consolidation. INVESTMENTS 2010 HIGHLIGHTS Investments as of December 31, 2010 totaled $100.48 billion, an increase of 0.7% from $99.83 billion as of December 31, 2009. Unrealized net capital gains totaled $1.39 billion as of December 31, 2010, improving from unrealized net capital losses of $2.32 billion as of December 31, 2009. As of December 31, 2010, the fair value for our below investment grade fixed income securities with gross unrealized losses totaled $3.29 billion compared to $3.51 billion as of December 31, 2009. The gross unrealized losses for these securities totaled $1.08 billion as of December 31, 2010, an improvement of 40.4% from $1.81 billion as of December 31, 2009. Net investment income was $4.10 billion in 2010, a decrease of 7.7% from $4.44 billion in 2009. Net realized capital losses were $827 million in 2010 compared to net realized capital losses of $583 million in 2009. Derivative net realized capital losses totaled $601 million in 2010 compared to net realized capital gains of $205 million in 2009. Derivative net realized capital losses in 2010 resulted primarily from our risk management actions. During 2010, our fixed income and mortgage loan portfolio generated $10.19 billion of cash flows from interest and maturities. INVESTMENTS Overview and strategy The return on our investment portfolios is an important component of our financial results. Investment portfolios are segmented between the Property-Liability, Allstate Financial and Corporate and Other operations. While taking into consideration the investment portfolio in aggregate, we manage the underlying portfolios based upon the nature of each respective business and its corresponding liability structure. We employ a strategic asset allocation approach which uses models that consider the nature of the liabilities and risk tolerances, as well as the risk and return parameters of the various asset classes in which we invest. This asset allocation is informed by our global economic and market outlook, as well as other inputs and constraints, including diversification effects, duration, liquidity and capital considerations. Within the ranges set by the strategic asset allocation model, tactical investment decisions are made in consideration of prevailing market conditions. We continue to manage risks associated with interest rates, credit and credit spreads, equity markets, and real estate and municipal bonds. The Property-Liability portfolio's investment strategy emphasizes protection of principal and consistent income generation, within a total return framework. This approach, which has produced competitive returns over the long term, is designed to ensure financial strength and stability for paying claims, while maximizing economic value and surplus growth. The Allstate Financial portfolio's investment strategy focuses on the total return of assets needed to support the underlying liabilities, asset-liability management and achieving an appropriate return on capital. The Corporate and Other portfolio's investment strategy balances the pursuit of competitive returns with the unique liquidity needs of the portfolio in relation to the overall corporate capital structure. The portfolio is primarily invested in high quality, liquid fixed income and short-term securities with additional investments in less liquid holdings in order to enhance overall returns. Risk mitigation We continue to focus our strategic risk mitigation efforts towards managing interest rate, credit and credit spreads, equity and real estate and municipal bond investment risks, while our return optimization efforts focus on investing in new opportunities to generate income and capital appreciation. As a result, during 2010 we took the following actions: Reduced our municipal bond exposure by 25.3% or $5.48 billion of amortized cost primarily through targeted dispositions, prepayments and scheduled maturities. 79 Reduced our commercial real estate exposure by 18.7% or $2.31 billion of amortized cost primarily through targeted dispositions and principal repayments from borrowers. Maintained hedges to protect our portfolio, primarily against interest rate spikes and equity price declines, which performed consistently with our positions in relation to the movement in the underlying market indices. The resulting realized capital losses from our interest rate and equity hedges were offset by the increase in fair value of our fixed income and equity securities, which is reflected in other comprehensive income ("OCI"). Investments outlook For 2011, we expect the U.S. and other developed economies to recover at a moderate pace, with greater growth in developing and emerging countries. These increasing growth expectations should move equity prices higher. Expected tightening of monetary policy will drive interest rates moderately higher. With expected growth in the economy, credit markets should continue to improve, but challenges will remain in certain segments such as municipal bonds. As a result, we plan to focus on the following priorities: Optimizing our allocation of assets to align with changes in Allstate Financial's liabilities. Continuing to explore global investments in areas of emerging opportunity with higher prospects for growth. Managing the impact of gradually rising rates on our fixed income portfolio. Continuing to favor credit risk, while managing our municipal exposure. As a result of these actions and market conditions: Invested assets and income are expected to decline in line with reductions in contractholder obligations for the Allstate Financial segment. Our risk and return optimization actions will allow us to maintain portfolio yields comparable to 2010. Portfolio composition The composition of the investment portfolios as of December 31, 2010 is presented in the table below. Also see Notes 2 and 4 of the consolidated financial statements for investment accounting policies and additional information. Property- Liability (5) Allstate Financial (5) Corporate and Other (5) Total ($ in millions) Percent to total Percent to total Percent to total Percent to total Fixed income securities (1) $ 27,413 78.2 % $ 49,934 81.1 % $ 2,265 58.8 % $ 79,612 79.2 % Equity securities (2) 4,578 13.1 233 0.4 4,811 4.8 Mortgage loans 18 0.1 6,661 10.8 6,679 6.6 Limited partnership interests (3) 2,506 7.1 1,274 2.1 36 0.9 3,816 3.8 Short-term (4) 430 1.2 1,297 2.1 1,552 40.3 3,279 3.3 Other 103 0.3 2,183 3.5 2,286 2.3 Total $ 35,048 100.0 % $ 61,582 100.0 % $ 3,853 100.0 % $ 100,483 100.0 % (1) Fixed income securities are carried at fair value. Amortized cost basis for these securities was $27.38 billion, $49.19 billion and $2.22 billion for Property-Liability, Allstate Financial and Corporate and Other, respectively. (2) Equity securities are carried at fair value. Cost basis for these securities was $4.04 billion and $185 million for Property-Liability and Allstate Financial, respectively. (3) We have commitments to invest in additional limited partnership interests totaling $740 million and $731 million for Property-Liability and Allstate Financial, respectively. (4) Short-term investments are carried at fair value. Amortized cost basis for these investments was $430 million, $1.30 billion and $1.55 billion for Property-Liability, Allstate Financial and Corporate and Other, respectively. (5) Balances reflect the elimination of related party investments between segments. Total investments increased to $100.48 billion as of December 31, 2010, from $99.83 billion as of December 31, 2009, primarily due to higher valuations for fixed income securities, partially offset by net reductions in contractholder obligations. Valuations of fixed income securities are typically driven by a combination of changes in relevant risk-free interest rates and credit spreads over the period. Risk-free interest rates are typically defined as the yield on U.S. Treasury securities, whereas credit spread is the additional yield on fixed income securities above the risk-free rate that market participants require to compensate them for assuming credit, liquidity and/or prepayment risks. The increase in valuation of fixed income securities during 2010 was mainly due to declining risk-free interest rates and tightening of credit spreads in certain sectors. 80 The Property-Liability investment portfolio increased to $35.05 billion as of December 31, 2010, from $34.53 billion as of December 31, 2009, primarily due to higher valuations for equity and fixed income securities and positive operating cash flows, partially offset by dividends paid by Allstate Insurance Company ("AIC") to its parent, The Allstate Corporation. The Allstate Financial investment portfolio decreased to $61.58 billion as of December 31, 2010, from $62.22 billion as of December 31, 2009, primarily due to net reductions in contractholder obligations of $4.39 billion, partially offset by higher valuations for fixed income securities. The Corporate and Other investment portfolio increased to $3.85 billion as of December 31, 2010, from $3.09 billion as of December 31, 2009, primarily due to dividends of $1.30 billion paid by AIC to the Corporation and higher valuations for fixed income securities, partially offset by dividends paid to shareholders, interest paid on debt and share repurchases. Fixed income securities by type are listed in the table below. ($ in millions) Fair value as of December 31, 2010 Percent to total investments Fair value as of December 31, 2009 Percent to total investments U.S. government and agencies $ 8,596 8.6 % $ 7,536 7.6 % Municipal 15,934 15.9 21,280 21.3 Corporate 37,655 37.5 33,115 33.2 Foreign government 3,158 3.1 3,197 3.2 Residential mortgage-backed securities ("RMBS") 7,993 7.9 7,987 8.0 Commercial mortgage-backed securities ("CMBS") 1,994 2.0 2,586 2.6 Asset-backed securities ("ABS") 4,244 4.2 3,026 3.0 Redeemable preferred stock 38 39 Total fixed income securities $ 79,612 79.2 % $ 78,766 78.9 % As of December 31, 2010, 91.6% of the consolidated fixed income securities portfolio was rated investment grade, which is defined as a security having a rating of Aaa, Aa, A or Baa from Moody's, a rating of AAA, AA, A or BBB from S&P, Fitch, Dominion, or Realpoint, a rating of aaa, aa, a, or bbb from A.M. Best, or a comparable internal rating if an externally provided rating is not available. 81 The following table summarizes the fair value and unrealized net capital gains and losses for fixed income securities by credit rating as of December 31, 2010. ($ in millions) Aaa Aa A Fair value Unrealized gain/(loss) Fair value Unrealized gain/(loss) Fair value Unrealized gain/(loss) U.S. government and agencies $ 8,596 $ 276 $ $ $ $ Municipal Tax exempt 1,384 81 4,357 76 2,454 (7 ) Taxable 193 (2 ) 2,619 (18 ) 1,110 (38 ) ARS 893 (51 ) 61 (6 ) 113 (16 ) Corporate Public 1,604 21 2,771 98 7,939 367 Privately placed 936 14 1,881 50 3,917 169 Foreign government 1,766 257 479 22 537 36 RMBS U.S. government sponsored entities ("U.S. Agency") 4,728 147 Prime residential mortgage-backed securities ("Prime") 434 4 71 (1 ) 197 2 Alt-A residential mortgage-backed securities ("Alt-A") 40 (2 ) 62 (6 ) 102 (5 ) Subprime residential mortgage-backed securities ("Subprime") 88 (3 ) 297 (67 ) 89 (23 ) CMBS 1,134 42 241 (9 ) 151 (18 ) ABS Collateralized debt obligations ("CDO") 30 (1 ) 628 (14 ) 481 (44 ) Consumer and other asset-backed securities ("Consumer and other ABS") 1,343 22 405 3 363 Redeemable preferred stock 1 2 Total fixed income securities $ 23,169 $ 805 $ 13,873 $ 128 $ 17,455 $ 423 Baa Ba or lower Total Fair value Unrealized gain/(loss) Fair value Unrealized gain/(loss) Fair value Unrealized gain/(loss) U.S. government and agencies $ $ $ $ $ 8,596 $ 276 Municipal Tax exempt 1,342 (46 ) 577 (85 ) 10,114 19 Taxable 495 (74 ) 137 (47 ) 4,554 (179 ) ARS 101 (14 ) 98 (20 ) 1,266 (107 ) Corporate Public 8,917 402 1,909 69 23,140 957 Privately placed 6,241 174 1,540 31 14,515 438 Foreign government 376 22 3,158 337 RMBS U.S. Agency 4,728 147 Prime 8 517 (5 ) 1,227 Alt-A 39 (4 ) 406 (96 ) 649 (113 ) Subprime 98 (24 ) 817 (433 ) 1,389 (550 ) CMBS 331 (100 ) 137 (134 ) 1,994 (219 ) ABS CDO 282 (72 ) 489 (70 ) 1,910 (201 ) Consumer and other ABS 198 25 (5 ) 2,334 20 Redeemable preferred stock 30 1 5 38 1 Total fixed income securities $ 18,458 $ 265 $ 6,657 $ (795 ) $ 79,612 $ 826 Municipal bonds , including tax exempt, taxable and ARS securities, totaled $15.93 billion as of December 31, 2010 with an unrealized net capital loss of $267 million. As of December 31, 2010, 45.8% or $7.29 billion of our municipal bond portfolio is insured by nine bond insurers and 45.7% of these securities have a credit rating of Aaa or Aa. 47.8% of our insured municipal bond portfolio was insured by National Public Finance Guarantee Corporation, Inc., 22.7% by Ambac Assurance Corporation, 21.7% by Assured Guaranty Municipal Corporation and 3.3% by Assured Guaranty Ltd. Given the effects of the economic crisis on bond insurers, the value inherent in this insurance has declined. We believe the fair value of our insured municipal bond 82 portfolio substantially reflects the decline in the value of the insurance, and further related valuation declines, if any, are not expected to be material. Our practice for acquiring and monitoring municipal bonds is predominantly based on the underlying credit quality of the primary obligor. We currently expect to receive all contractual cash flows from the primary obligor and are not relying on bond insurers for payments. Included in our municipal bond holdings as of December 31, 2010 are $925 million of municipal securities which are not rated by third party credit rating agencies, but are rated by the National Association of Insurance Commissioners ("NAIC") and are also internally rated. These holdings include $490 million of below investment grade municipal bonds, most of which were purchased to provide the opportunity to achieve incremental returns. Our initial investment decisions and ongoing monitoring procedures for these securities are based on a thorough due diligence process which includes, but is not limited to, an assessment of the credit quality, sector, structure, and liquidity risks of each issue. ARS totaled $1.27 billion with an unrealized net capital loss of $107 million as of December 31, 2010. Our holdings primarily have a credit rating of Aaa. $1.23 billion of our holdings are collateralized by pools of student loans for which at least 85% of the collateral was insured by the U.S. Department of Education at the time we purchased the security. As of December 31, 2010, $840 million of our ARS backed by student loans was 100% insured by the U.S. Department of Education, $223 million was 90% to 99% insured and $118 million was 80% to 89% insured. All of our student loan ARS holdings are experiencing failed auctions and we receive the failed auction rate or, for those which contain maximum reset rate formulas, we receive the contractual maximum rate. We anticipate that failed auctions may persist and most of our holdings will continue to pay the failed auction rate or, for those that contain maximum rate reset formulas, the maximum rate. Auctions continue to be conducted as scheduled for each of the securities. Corporate bonds , including publicly traded and privately placed, totaled $37.66 billion as of December 31, 2010 with an unrealized net capital gain of $1.40 billion. Privately placed securities primarily consist of corporate issued senior debt securities that are in unregistered form or are directly negotiated with the borrower. 53.7% of the privately placed corporate securities in our portfolio are rated by an independent rating agency and substantially all are rated by the NAIC. Our portfolio of privately placed securities is broadly diversified by issuer, industry sector and country. The portfolio is made up of 576 issuers. Privately placed corporate obligations contain structural security features such as financial covenants and call protections that provide investors greater protection against credit deterioration, reinvestment risk or fluctuations in interest rates than those typically found in publicly registered debt securities. Additionally, investments in these securities are made after extensive due diligence of the issuer, typically including direct discussions with senior management and on-site visits to company facilities. Ongoing monitoring includes direct periodic dialog with senior management of the issuer and continuous monitoring of operating performance and financial position. Every issue not rated by an independent rating agency is internally rated with a formal rating affirmation at least once a year. Foreign government securities totaled $3.16 billion, with 100% rated investment grade, as of December 31, 2010. Of these securities, 44.1% are backed by the U.S. government, 18.7% are in Canadian governmental securities held in our Canadian subsidiary and the remaining 37.2% are highly diversified in other foreign governments. RMBS, CMBS and ABS are structured securities that are primarily collateralized by residential and commercial real estate loans and other consumer or corporate borrowings. The cash flows from the underlying collateral paid to the securitization trust are generally applied in a pre-determined order and are designed so that each security issued by the trust, typically referred to as a "class", qualifies for a specific original rating. For example, the "senior" portion or "top" of the capital structure, or rating class, which would originally qualify for a rating of Aaa typically has priority in receiving principal repayments on the underlying collateral and retains this priority until the class is paid in full. In a sequential structure, underlying collateral principal repayments are directed to the most senior rated Aaa class in the structure until paid in full, after which principal repayments are directed to the next most senior Aaa class in the structure until it is paid in full. Senior Aaa classes generally share any losses from the underlying collateral on a pro-rata basis after losses are absorbed by classes with lower original ratings. The payment priority and class subordination included in these securities serves as credit enhancement for holders of the senior or top portions of the structures. These securities continue to retain the payment priority features that existed at the origination of the securitization trust. Other forms of credit enhancement may include structural features embedded in the securitization trust, such as overcollateralization, excess spread and bond insurance. The underlying collateral can have fixed interest rates, variable interest rates (such as adjustable rate mortgages ("ARM")) or may contain features of both fixed and variable rate mortgages. RMBS , including U.S. Agency, Prime, Alt-A and Subprime, totaled $7.99 billion, with 78.2% rated investment grade, as of December 31, 2010. The RMBS portfolio is subject to interest rate risk, but unlike other fixed income securities, is 83 additionally subject to significant prepayment risk from the underlying residential mortgage loans. The credit risk associated with our RMBS portfolio is mitigated due to the fact that 59.2% of the portfolio consists of securities that were issued by or have underlying collateral guaranteed by U.S. government agencies. The unrealized net capital loss of $516 million as of December 31, 2010 was the result of wider credit spreads than at initial purchase on the non-U.S. Agency portion of our RMBS portfolio, largely due to higher risk premiums caused by macroeconomic conditions and credit market deterioration, including the impact of lower real estate valuations, which began to show signs of stabilization in certain geographic areas in 2010. The following table shows our RMBS portfolio as of December 31, 2010 based upon vintage year of the issuance of the securities. ($ in millions) U.S. Agency Prime Alt-A Subprime Total RMBS Fair value Unrealized gain/(loss) Fair value Unrealized gain/(loss) Fair value Unrealized gain/(loss) Fair value Unrealized gain/(loss) Fair value Unrealized gain/(loss) 2010 $ 538 $ $ 221 $ 6 $ 63 $ 2 $ $ $ 822 $ 8 2009 753 12 81 1 8 842 13 2008 737 16 737 16 2007 434 8 242 6 101 (59 ) 315 (184 ) 1,092 (229 ) 2006 310 10 212 188 (20 ) 397 (155 ) 1,107 (165 ) 2005 618 23 191 (14 ) 134 (13 ) 416 (134 ) 1,359 (138 ) Pre-2005 1,338 78 280 1 155 (23 ) 261 (77 ) 2,034 (21 ) Total $ 4,728 $ 147 $ 1,227 $ $ 649 $ (113 ) $ 1,389 $ (550 ) $ 7,993 $ (516 ) Prime are collateralized by residential mortgage loans issued to prime borrowers. As of December 31, 2010, $913 million of the Prime had fixed rate underlying collateral and $314 million had variable rate underlying collateral. Alt-A includes securities collateralized by residential mortgage loans issued to borrowers who do not qualify for prime financing terms due to high loan-to-value ratios or limited supporting documentation, but have stronger credit profiles than subprime borrowers. As of December 31, 2010, $473 million of the Alt-A had fixed rate underlying collateral and $176 million had variable rate underlying collateral. Subprime includes securities collateralized by residential mortgage loans issued to borrowers that cannot qualify for Prime or Alt-A financing terms due in part to weak or limited credit history. It also includes securities that are collateralized by certain second lien mortgages regardless of the borrower's credit history. The Subprime portfolio consisted of $1.13 billion and $260 million of first lien and second lien securities, respectively. As of December 31, 2010, $659 million of the Subprime had fixed rate underlying collateral and $730 million had variable rate underlying collateral. CMBS totaled $1.99 billion, with 93.1% rated investment grade, as of December 31, 2010. The CMBS portfolio is subject to credit risk, but unlike certain other structured securities, is generally not subject to prepayment risk due to protections within the underlying commercial mortgage loans. Of the CMBS investments, 94.8% are traditional conduit transactions collateralized by commercial mortgage loans, broadly diversified across property types and geographical area. The remainder consists of non-traditional CMBS such as small balance transactions, large loan pools and single borrower transactions. The following table shows our CMBS portfolio as of December 31, 2010 based upon vintage year of the underlying collateral. ($ in millions) Fair value Unrealized gain/(loss) 2010 $ 22 $ (1 ) 2007 276 (17 ) 2006 598 (166 ) 2005 315 (40 ) Pre-2005 783 5 Total CMBS $ 1,994 $ (219 ) The unrealized net capital loss of $219 million as of December 31, 2010 on our CMBS portfolio was the result of wider credit spreads than at initial purchase, largely due to the macroeconomic conditions and credit market deterioration, including the impact of lower real estate valuations, which began to show signs of stabilization in certain geographic areas in 2010. While CMBS spreads tightened during 2009 and 2010, credit spreads in most rating classes remain wider than at initial purchase, which is particularly evident in our 2005-2007 vintage year CMBS. 84 ABS , including CDO and Consumer and other ABS, totaled $4.24 billion, with 87.9% rated investment grade, as of December 31, 2010. Credit risk is managed by monitoring the performance of the underlying collateral. Many of the securities in the ABS portfolio have credit enhancement with features such as overcollateralization, subordinated structures, reserve funds, guarantees and/or insurance. The unrealized net capital loss of $181 million as of December 31, 2010 on our ABS portfolio was the result of wider credit spreads than at initial purchase. CDO totaled $1.91 billion, with 74.4% rated investment grade, as of December 31, 2010. CDO consist primarily of obligations collateralized by high yield and investment grade corporate credits including $1.48 billion of cash flow collateralized loan obligations ("CLO") with unrealized losses of $80 million. The remaining $434 million of securities consisted of synthetic CDO, trust preferred CDO, market value CDO, project finance CDO, collateralized bond obligations and other CLO with unrealized losses of $121 million. Cash flow CLO are structures collateralized primarily by below investment grade senior secured corporate loans. The underlying collateral is actively managed by external managers that monitor the collateral's performance and is well diversified across industries and among issuers. A transaction will typically issue notes with various capital structure classes (i.e. Aaa, Aa, A, etc.) as well as equity-like tranches. In general, these securities are structured with overcollateralization ratios and performance is impacted primarily by defaults and recoveries of the underlying collateral within the structures, which reduce overcollateralization ratios over time. A violation of the senior overcollateralization test could result in an event of default of the structure which would give the controlling class, generally defined as the majority of the senior lenders, certain rights, including the ability to divert cash flows or liquidate the underlying portfolio to pay off the senior liabilities. Consumer and other ABS totaled $2.33 billion, with 98.9% rated investment grade, as of December 31, 2010. Consumer and other ABS consists of $1.49 billion of auto and $847 million of other ABS with unrealized gains of $10 million and $10 million, respectively. Equity securities Equity securities include common stocks, exchange traded funds, non-redeemable preferred stocks and real estate investment trust equity investments. The equity securities portfolio was $4.81 billion as of December 31, 2010 compared to $5.02 billion as of December 31, 2009. Net unrealized gains totaled $583 million as of December 31, 2010 compared to $179 million as of December 31, 2009. Mortgage loans Our mortgage loan portfolio, which is primarily held in the Allstate Financial portfolio, totaled $6.68 billion as of December 31, 2010, compared to $7.94 billion as of December 31, 2009, and primarily comprises loans secured by first mortgages on developed commercial real estate. Key considerations used to manage our exposure include property type and geographic diversification by state and metropolitan area. We recognized $65 million of realized capital losses related to net increases in the valuation allowance on impaired mortgage loans in 2010, primarily due to deteriorating debt service coverage resulting from a decrease in occupancy and the risk associated with refinancing near-term maturities due to declining underlying collateral valuations. We recognized $97 million of realized capital losses related to net increases in the valuation allowance on impaired loans in 2009. For further detail on our mortgage loan portfolio, see Note 4 to the consolidated financial statements. Limited partnership interests consist of investments in private equity/debt funds, real estate funds, hedge funds and tax credit funds. The limited partnership interests portfolio is well diversified across a number of characteristics including fund sponsors, vintage years, strategies, geography (including international), and company/property types. The following table presents information about our limited partnership interests as of December 31, 2010. ($ in millions) Private equity/debt funds Real estate funds Hedge funds Tax credit funds Total Cost method of accounting ("Cost") $ 937 $ 320 $ 83 $ 8 $ 1,348 Equity method of accounting ("EMA") 658 309 1,266 235 2,468 Total $ 1,595 $ 629 $ 1,349 $ 243 $ 3,816 Number of sponsors 90 41 12 7 Number of individual funds 142 86 104 7 Largest exposure to single fund $ 49 $ 34 $ 87 $ 50 85 Our aggregate limited partnership exposure represented 3.8% and 2.8% of total invested assets as of December 31, 2010 and 2009, respectively. The following table shows the results from our limited partnership interests by fund type and accounting classification for the years ended December 31. ($ in millions) 2010 2009 Cost EMA Total income Impairment write-downs (1) Cost EMA Total income Impairment write-downs (1) Private equity/debt funds $ 40 $ 76 $ 116 $ (9 ) $ 16 $ (61 ) $ (45 ) $ (79 ) Real estate funds 2 (34 ) (32 ) (35 ) 1 (181 ) (180 ) (223 ) Hedge funds 47 47 (2 ) 101 101 (6 ) Tax credit funds (2 ) (2 ) Total $ 40 $ 89 $ 129 $ (46 ) $ 17 $ (141 ) $ (124 ) $ (308 ) (1) Impairment write-downs related to Cost limited partnerships were $45 million and $297 million in 2010 and 2009, respectively. Impairment write-downs related to EMA limited partnerships were $1 million and $11 million in 2010 and 2009, respectively. Limited partnership interests, excluding impairment write-downs, produced income of $129 million in 2010 compared to losses of $124 million in 2009. Income on EMA limited partnerships is recognized on a delay due to the availability of the related financial statements. The recognition of income on hedge funds is primarily on a one-month delay and the income recognition on private equity/debt funds, real estate funds and tax credit funds are generally on a three-month delay. Income on Cost limited partnerships is recognized only upon receipt of amounts distributed by the partnerships. Short-term investments Our short-term investment portfolio was $3.28 billion and $3.06 billion as of December 31, 2010 and 2009, respectively. Other investments Our other investments as of December 31, 2010 primarily comprise $1.14 billion of policy loans, $439 million of certain derivatives and $363 million of bank loans. Policy loans are carried at the unpaid principal balances. Bank loans are primarily senior secured corporate loans and are carried at amortized cost. For further detail on our use of derivatives, see the Net Realized Capital Gains and Losses section of the MD&A and Note 6 of the consolidated financial statements. Unrealized net capital gains totaled $1.39 billion as of December 31, 2010 compared to unrealized net capital losses of $2.32 billion as of December 31, 2009. The improvement since December 31, 2009 for fixed income securities was primarily a result of declining risk-free interest rates and tightening of credit spreads in certain sectors. The 86 improvement for equity securities was primarily due to improved equity valuations. The following table presents unrealized net capital gains and losses, pre-tax and after-tax as of December 31. ($ in millions) 2010 2009 U.S. government and agencies $ 276 $ 203 Municipal (267 ) (403 ) Corporate 1,395 345 Foreign government 337 291 RMBS (516 ) (1,500 ) CMBS (219 ) (925 ) ABS (181 ) (488 ) Redeemable preferred stock 1 Fixed income securities (1) 826 (2,477 ) Equity securities 583 179 Derivatives (22 ) (23 ) Unrealized net capital gains and losses, pre-tax 1,387 (2,321 ) Amounts recognized for: Insurance reserves (2) (41 ) DAC and DSI (3) 97 990 Amounts recognized 56 990 Deferred income taxes (508 ) 461 Unrealized net capital gains and losses, after-tax $ 935 $ (870 ) (1) Unrealized net capital gains and losses for fixed income securities as of December 31, 2010 and 2009 comprise $(293) million and $(679) million, respectively, related to unrealized net capital losses on fixed income securities with other-than-temporary impairment and $1.12 billion and $(1.80) billion, respectively, related to other unrealized net capital gains and losses. (2) The insurance reserves adjustment represents the amount by which the reserve balance would increase if the net unrealized gains in the applicable product portfolios were realized and reinvested at current lower interest rates, resulting in a premium deficiency. Although we evaluate premium deficiencies on the combined performance of our life insurance and immediate annuities with life contingencies, the adjustment primarily relates to structured settlement annuities with life contingencies, in addition to annuity buy-outs and certain payout annuities with life contingencies. (3) The DAC and DSI adjustment balance represents the amount by which the amortization of DAC and DSI would increase or decrease if the unrealized gains or losses in the respective product portfolios were realized. Only the unrealized net capital gains and losses on the Allstate Financial fixed annuity and interest-sensitive life product portfolios are used in this calculation. The DAC and DSI adjustment balance, subject to limitations, is determined by applying the DAC and DSI amortization rate to unrealized net capital gains or losses. Recapitalization of the DAC and DSI balances is limited to the originally deferred costs plus interest. The unrealized net capital gains for the fixed income portfolio totaled $826 million and comprised $3.26 billion of gross unrealized gains and $2.43 billion of gross unrealized losses as of December 31, 2010. This is compared to unrealized net capital losses for the fixed income portfolio totaling $2.48 billion, comprised of $2.47 billion of gross unrealized gains and $4.95 billion of gross unrealized losses as of December 31, 2009. 87 Gross unrealized gains and losses as of December 31, 2010 on fixed income securities by type and sector are provided in the table below. Gross unrealized Amortized cost as a percent of par value (2) Fair value as a percent of par value (2) ($ in millions) Par value (1) Amortized cost Fair value Gains Losses Corporate: Banking $ 4,378 $ 4,282 $ 118 $ (154 ) $ 4,246 97.8 % 97.0 % Utilities 6,209 6,227 433 (58 ) 6,602 100.3 106.3 Consumer goods (cyclical and non-cyclical) 6,236 6,318 305 (53 ) 6,570 101.3 105.4 Financial services 3,619 3,553 141 (36 ) 3,658 98.2 101.1 Capital goods 3,862 3,867 238 (34 ) 4,071 100.1 105.4 Transportation 1,911 1,925 99 (29 ) 1,995 100.7 104.4 Basic industry 1,726 1,750 91 (14 ) 1,827 101.4 105.9 Technology 1,613 1,641 72 (14 ) 1,699 101.7 105.3 Energy 2,455 2,480 136 (9 ) 2,607 101.0 106.2 Communications 2,139 2,117 115 (9 ) 2,223 99.0 103.9 FDIC guaranteed 721 724 3 727 100.4 100.8 Other 1,502 1,376 65 (11 ) 1,430 91.6 95.2 Total corporate fixed income portfolio 36,371 36,260 1,816 (421 ) 37,655 99.7 103.5 U.S. government and agencies 8,904 8,320 327 (51 ) 8,596 93.4 96.5 Municipal 20,323 16,201 379 (646 ) 15,934 79.7 78.4 Foreign government 3,270 2,821 347 (10 ) 3,158 86.3 96.6 RMBS 9,231 8,509 216 (732 ) 7,993 92.2 86.6 CMBS 2,227 2,213 58 (277 ) 1,994 99.4 89.5 ABS 4,796 4,425 113 (294 ) 4,244 92.3 88.5 Redeemable preferred stock 38 37 1 38 97.4 100.0 Total fixed income securities $ 85,160 $ 78,786 $ 3,257 $ (2,431 ) $ 79,612 92.5 93.5 (1) Included in par value are zero-coupon securities that are generally purchased at a deep discount to the par value that is received at maturity. These primarily included corporate, U.S. government and agencies, municipal and foreign government zero-coupon securities with par value of $723 million, $1.70 billion, $5.82 billion and $1.36 billion, respectively. (2) Excluding the impact of zero-coupon securities, the percentage of amortized cost to par value would be 100.1% for corporates, 101.8% for U.S. government and agencies, 99.6% for municipals and 103.7% for foreign governments. Similarly, excluding the impact of zero-coupon securities, the percentage of fair value to par value would be 103.9% for corporates, 103.2% for U.S. government and agencies, 98.8% for municipals and 109.7% for foreign governments. The banking, utilities, consumer goods, financial services and capital goods sectors had the highest concentration of gross unrealized losses in our corporate fixed income securities portfolio as of December 31, 2010. In general, credit spreads remain wider than at initial purchase for most of the securities with gross unrealized losses in these categories. The unrealized net capital gain for the equity portfolio totaled $583 million and comprised $646 million of gross unrealized gains and $63 million of gross unrealized losses as of December 31, 2010. This is compared to an unrealized net capital gain for the equity portfolio totaling $179 million, comprised of $381 million of gross unrealized gains and $202 million of gross unrealized losses as of December 31, 2009. 88 Gross unrealized gains and losses as of December 31, 2010 on equity securities are provided in the table below. Gross unrealized Amortized cost Fair value ($ in millions) Gains Losses Consumer goods (cyclical and non-cyclical) $ 832 $ 102 $ (16 ) $ 918 Banking 303 50 (13 ) 340 Financial services 349 35 (11 ) 373 Technology 370 54 (6 ) 418 Communications 217 37 (6 ) 248 Utilities 119 7 (4 ) 122 Capital goods 265 43 (3 ) 305 Energy 311 64 (1 ) 374 Basic industry 220 66 (1 ) 285 Real estate 110 11 (1 ) 120 Transportation 61 11 (1 ) 71 Other (1) 1,071 166 1,237 Total equity securities $ 4,228 $ 646 $ (63 ) $ 4,811 (1) Other consists primarily of index-based securities. Within the equity portfolio, the losses were primarily concentrated in consumer goods, banking, financial services, technology and communications sectors. The unrealized losses in these sectors were company and sector specific. As of December 31, 2010, we have the intent and ability to hold our equity securities with unrealized losses until recovery. We have a comprehensive portfolio monitoring process to identify and evaluate each fixed income and equity security that may be other-than-temporarily impaired. The process includes a quarterly review of all securities to identify instances where the fair value of a security compared to its amortized cost (for fixed income securities) or cost (for equity securities) is below established thresholds. The process also includes the monitoring of other impairment indicators such as ratings, ratings downgrades and payment defaults. The securities identified, in addition to other securities for which we may have a concern, are evaluated based on facts and circumstances for inclusion on our watch-list. All investments in an unrealized loss position as of December 31, 2010 were included in our portfolio monitoring process for determining whether declines in value were other than temporary. The extent and duration of a decline in fair value for fixed income securities have become less indicative of actual credit deterioration with respect to an issue or issuer. While we continue to use declines in fair value and the length of time a security is in an unrealized loss position as indicators of potential credit deterioration, our determination of whether a security's decline in fair value is other than temporary has placed greater emphasis on our analysis of the underlying credit and collateral and related estimates of future cash flows. The following table summarizes the fair value and gross unrealized losses of fixed income securities by type and investment grade classification as of December 31, 2010. ($ in millions) Investment grade Below investment grade Total Fair value Unrealized losses Fair value Unrealized losses Fair value Unrealized losses U.S. government and agencies $ 2,081 $ (51 ) $ $ $ 2,081 $ (51 ) Municipal 6,226 (480 ) 619 (166 ) 6,845 (646 ) Corporate 7,049 (356 ) 937 (65 ) 7,986 (421 ) Foreign government 287 (10 ) 287 (10 ) RMBS 1,320 (150 ) 1,202 (582 ) 2,522 (732 ) CMBS 858 (143 ) 135 (134 ) 993 (277 ) ABS 1,676 (161 ) 399 (133 ) 2,075 (294 ) Total $ 19,497 $ (1,351 ) $ 3,292 $ (1,080 ) $ 22,789 $ (2,431 ) We have experienced declines in the fair values of fixed income securities primarily due to wider credit spreads resulting from higher risk premiums since the time of initial purchase, largely due to macroeconomic conditions and credit market deterioration, including the impact of lower real estate valuations, which began to show signs of 89 stabilization in certain geographic areas in 2010. Consistent with their ratings, our portfolio monitoring process indicates that investment grade securities have a low risk of default. Securities rated below investment grade, comprising securities with a rating of Ba, B and Caa or lower, have a higher risk of default. As of December 31, 2010, 68% of our below investment grade gross unrealized losses were concentrated in RMBS, specifically Alt-A and Subprime, CMBS and ABS, specifically cash flow CLO. The fair value of these securities totaled $1.39 billion, an increase of 7.8%, compared to $1.29 billion as of December 31, 2009, due to improved valuations resulting from tighter credit spreads driven by lower risk premiums. Gross unrealized losses on these securities totaled $736 million as of December 31, 2010, a decrease of 42.6%, compared to $1.28 billion as of December 31, 2009, due to improved valuations, impairment write-downs, sales and principal collections, partially offset by the downgrade of certain securities to below investment grade during 2010. Fair values for our structured securities are obtained from third-party valuation service providers and are subject to review as disclosed in our Application of Critical Accounting Estimates. In accordance with GAAP, when fair value is less than the amortized cost of a security and we have not made the decision to sell the security and it is not more likely than not we will be required to sell the security before recovery of its amortized cost basis, we evaluate if we expect to receive cash flows sufficient to recover the entire amortized cost basis of the security. We calculate the estimated recovery value by discounting our best estimate of future cash flows at the security's original or current effective rate, as appropriate, and compare this to the amortized cost of the security. If we do not expect to receive cash flows sufficient to recover the entire amortized cost basis of the security, the credit loss component of the impairment is recorded in earnings, with the remaining amount of the unrealized loss related to other factors ("non-credit-related") recognized in OCI. The non-credit-related unrealized losses for our structured securities, including our below investment grade Alt-A, Subprime, CMBS and cash flow CLO, are heavily influenced by risk factors other than those related to our best estimate of future cash flows. The difference between these securities' original or current effective rates and the yields implied by their fair value indicates that a higher risk premium is included in the valuation of these securities than existed at initial issue or purchase. This risk premium represents the return that a market participant requires as compensation to assume the risk associated with the uncertainties regarding the future performance of the underlying collateral. The risk premium is comprised of: default risk, which reflects the probability of default and the uncertainty related to collection of contractual principal and interest; liquidity risk, which reflects the risk associated with exiting the investment in an illiquid market, both in terms of timeliness and cost; and volatility risk, which reflects the potential valuation volatility during an investor's holding period. Other factors reflected in the risk premium include the costs associated with underwriting, monitoring and holding these types of complex securities. Certain aspects of the default risk are included in the development of our best estimate of future cash flows, as appropriate. Other aspects of the risk premium are considered to be temporary in nature and are expected to reverse over the remaining lives of the securities as future cash flows are received. Other-than-temporary impairment assessment for below investment grade Alt-A and Subprime RMBS As of December 31, 2010, the fair value of our below investment grade Alt-A securities with gross unrealized losses totaled $288 million, a decrease of 7.4% compared to $311 million as of December 31, 2009. As of December 31, 2010, gross unrealized losses for our below investment grade Alt-A portfolio totaled $116 million, a decrease of 45.3% compared to $212 million as of December 31, 2009. The improvement over prior year was primarily due to improved valuations resulting from lower risk premiums, impairment write-downs and principal collections. For our below investment grade Alt-A securities with gross unrealized gains of $20 million, we have recognized cumulative write-downs in earnings totaling $45 million as of December 31, 2010. As of December 31, 2010, the fair value of our below investment grade Subprime securities with gross unrealized losses totaled $796 million, an increase of 10.2% compared to $722 million as of December 31, 2009. As of December 31, 2010, gross unrealized losses for our below investment grade Subprime portfolio totaled $438 million, a decrease of 48.4% compared to $849 million as of December 31, 2009. The improvement over prior year was primarily due to improved valuations resulting from lower risk premiums, impairment write-downs, sales and principal collections, partially offset by downgrades of certain Subprime securities to below investment grade during 2010. For our below investment grade Subprime with gross unrealized gains totaling $4 million, we have recognized cumulative write-downs in earnings totaling $95 million as of December 31, 2010. The credit loss evaluation for Alt-A and Subprime securities with gross unrealized losses is performed in two phases. The first phase estimates the future cash flows of the entire securitization trust from which our security was issued. A critical part of this estimate involves forecasting default rates and loss severities of the residential mortgage loans that collateralize the securitization trust. The factors that affect the default rates and loss severities include, but are 90 not limited to, historical collateral performance, collateral type, transaction vintage year, geographic concentrations, borrower credit quality, origination practices of the transaction sponsor, and practices of the mortgage loan servicers. Current loan-to-value ratios of underlying collateral are not consistently available and accordingly they are not a primary factor in our impairment evaluation. While our projections are developed internally and customized to our specific holdings, they are informed by and benchmarked against credit opinions obtained from third parties, such as industry analysts, nationally recognized credit rating agencies and an RMBS loss modeling advisory service. The default rate and loss severity forecasts result in an estimate of trust-level projected additional collateral loss. We then analyze the actual cumulative collateral losses incurred to date by the securitization trust, our projected additional collateral losses expected to be incurred and the position of the class of securities we own in the securitization trust relative to the trust's other classes to determine whether any of the collateral losses will be applied to our class. If our class has remaining credit enhancement sufficient to withstand the projected additional collateral losses, no collateral losses will be realized by our class and we expect to collect all contractual principal and interest of the security we own. Remaining credit enhancement is measured in terms of (i) subordination from other classes of securities in the trust that are contractually obligated to absorb losses before the class of security we own and (ii) the expected impact of other structural features embedded in the securitization trust beneficial to our class, such as overcollateralization and excess spread. For securities where there is insufficient remaining credit enhancement for the class of securities we own, a recovery value is calculated based on our best estimate of future cash flows specific to that security. This estimate is based on the contractual principal payments and current interest payments of the securities we own, adjusted for actual cumulative collateral losses incurred to date and the projected additional collateral losses expected to be incurred. This estimate also takes into consideration additional secondary sources of credit support, such as reliable bond insurance. For securities without secondary sources of credit support or for which the secondary sources do not fully offset the actual and projected additional collateral losses applied to them, a credit loss is recorded in earnings to the extent amortized cost exceeds recovery value. 98.8% and 1.2% of the fair value of our below investment grade Alt-A securities with gross unrealized losses were issued with Aaa and Aa original ratings and capital structure classifications, respectively. 87.4%, 10.7% and 1.9% of the fair value of our below investment grade Subprime securities with gross unrealized losses were issued with Aaa, Aa and A original ratings and capital structure classifications, respectively. As described previously, Alt-A and Subprime securities with higher original ratings typically have priority in receiving the principal repayments on the underlying collateral compared to those with lower original ratings. While the projected cash flow assumptions for our below investment grade Alt-A and Subprime securities with gross unrealized losses have deteriorated since the securities were originated, as reflected by their current credit ratings, these securities continue to retain the payment priority features that existed at the origination of the securitization trust. 91 The following tables show trust-level, class-level and security-specific detailed information for our below investment grade Alt-A securities with gross unrealized losses, by credit rating. ($ in millions) December 31, 2010 With other-than-temporary impairments recorded in earnings Without other-than-temporary impairments recorded in earnings Ba B Caa or lower Total Ba B Caa or lower Total Total Trust-level Actual cumulative collateral losses incurred to date (1) 0.5 % 0.7 % 8.1 % 8.0 % 0.1 % 3.1 % 3.7 % 3.0 % n/a Projected additional collateral losses to be incurred (2) 9.9 % 22.5 % 24.6 % 24.5 % 4.8 % 16.6 % 17.8 % 15.4 % n/a Class-level Average remaining credit enhancement (3) 9.9 % 19.0 % 6.8 % 6.9 % 5.3 % 27.1 % 23.9 % 20.7 % n/a Security-specific Number of positions 1 1 27 29 2 2 8 12 41 Par value $ 4 $ 3 $ 439 $ 446 $ 16 $ 4 $ 68 $ 88 $ 534 Amortized cost $ 4 $ 2 $ 316 $ 322 $ 16 $ 4 $ 62 $ 82 $ 404 Fair value $ 1 $ 1 $ 220 $ 222 $ 13 $ 2 $ 51 $ 66 $ 288 Gross unrealized losses Total $ (3 ) $ (1 ) $ (96 ) $ (100 ) $ (3 ) $ (2 ) $ (11 ) $ (16 ) $ (116 ) 12-24 months (4) $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ Over 24 months (5) $ (3 ) $ (1 ) $ (90 ) $ (94 ) $ (3 ) $ (2 ) $ (10 ) $ (15 ) $ (109 ) Cumulative write-downs recognized (6) $ $ (1 ) $ (92 ) $ (93 ) $ $ $ $ $ (93 ) Principal payments received during the period (7) $ $ $ 59 $ 59 $ 1 $ 1 $ 6 $ 8 $ 67 December 31, 2009 With other-than-temporary impairments recorded in earnings Without other-than-temporary impairments recorded in earnings Ba B Caa or lower Total Ba B Caa or lower Total Total Trust-level Actual cumulative collateral losses incurred to date (1) 0.2 % 4.3 % 4.2 % 4.2 % 0.8 % 1.4 % 2.5 % 1.6 % n/a Projected additional collateral losses to be incurred (2) 12.1 % 26.1 % 25.7 % 25.6 % 3.9 % 23.8 % 16.1 % 10.6 % n/a Class-level Average remaining credit enhancement (3) 11.3 % 24.7 % 7.6 % 9.7 % 7.1 % 29.2 % 16.6 % 12.8 % n/a Security-specific Number of positions 1 4 24 29 6 5 5 16 45 Par value $ 4 $ 56 $ 413 $ 473 $ 90 $ 12 $ 79 $ 181 $ 654 Amortized cost $ 4 $ 52 $ 289 $ 345 $ 88 $ 12 $ 78 $ 178 $ 523 Fair value $ 1 $ 32 $ 158 $ 191 $ 62 $ 5 $ 53 $ 120 $ 311 Gross unrealized losses Total $ (3 ) $ (20 ) $ (131 ) $ (154 ) $ (26 ) $ (7 ) $ (25 ) $ (58 ) $ (212 ) 12-24 months (4) $ (3 ) $ (4 ) $ (33 ) $ (40 ) $ (20 ) $ $ (24 ) $ (44 ) $ (84 ) Over 24 months (5) $ $ (16 ) $ (98 ) $ (114 ) $ (6 ) $ (7 ) $ (1 ) $ (14 ) $ (128 ) Cumulative write-downs recognized (6) $ $ (4 ) $ (92 ) $ (96 ) $ $ $ $ $ (96 ) Principal payments received during the period (7) $ $ 5 $ 43 $ 48 $ 9 $ 2 $ 23 $ 34 $ 82 (1) Weighted average actual cumulative collateral losses incurred to date as of period end are based on the actual principal losses incurred as a percentage of the remaining principal amount of the loans in the trust. The weighting calculation is based on the par value of each security. Actual losses on the securities we hold are less than the losses on the underlying collateral as presented in this table. Actual cumulative realized principal losses on the below investment grade Alt-A securities we own, as reported by the trust servicers, were $3 million as of December 31, 2010. 92 (2) Weighted average projected additional collateral losses to be incurred as of period end are based on our projections of future losses to be incurred by the trust, taking into consideration the actual cumulative collateral losses incurred to date, as a percentage of the remaining principal amount of the loans in the trust. Our projections are developed internally and customized to our specific holdings and are informed by and benchmarked against credit opinions obtained from third parties, such as industry analysts, nationally recognized credit rating agencies and an RMBS loss modeling advisory service. Projected additional collateral losses to be incurred are compared to average remaining credit enhancement for each security. For securities where the projected additional collateral losses exceed remaining credit enhancement, a recovery value is calculated to determine whether impairment losses should be recorded in earnings. The weighting calculation is based on the par value of each security. (3) Weighted average remaining credit enhancement as of period end is based on structural subordination and the expected impact of other structural features existing in the securitization trust beneficial to our class and reflects our projection of future principal losses that can occur as a percentage of the remaining principal amount of the loans in the trust before the class of the security we own will incur its first dollar of principal loss. The weighting calculation is based on the par value of each security. (4) Includes total gross unrealized losses on securities in an unrealized loss position for a period of 12 to 24 consecutive months. (5) Includes total gross unrealized losses on securities in an unrealized loss position for a period more than 24 consecutive months. As of December 31, 2010, $70 million of unrealized losses on securities with other-than-temporary impairments recognized in earnings and $11 million of unrealized losses on securities without other-than-temporary impairments recognized in earnings have been greater than or equal to 20% of those securities' amortized cost for a period of more than 24 consecutive months. As of December 31, 2009, there were no Alt-A securities with gross unrealized losses greater than or equal to 20% for a period of more than 24 consecutive months. (6) Includes cumulative write-downs recorded in accordance with GAAP. (7) Reflects principal payments for the years ended December 31, 2010 and 2009, respectively. The above tables include information about our below investment grade Alt-A securities with gross unrealized losses as of each period presented. The par value and composition of securities included can vary significantly from period to period due to changes in variables such as credit ratings, principal payments, sales, purchases and realized principal losses. As of December 31, 2010, our below investment grade Alt-A securities with gross unrealized losses and without other-than-temporary impairments recorded in earnings had incurred actual cumulative collateral losses of 3.0%. Our impairment evaluation forecasts more severe assumptions than the trusts are actually experiencing, including a projected weighted average underlying default rate of 33.7% and a projected weighted average loss severity of 47.4%, which resulted in projected additional collateral losses of 15.4%. As the average remaining credit enhancement for these securities of 20.7% exceeds the projected additional collateral losses of 15.4%, these securities have not been impaired. As of December 31, 2010, our below investment grade Alt-A securities with gross unrealized losses and with other-than-temporary impairments recorded in earnings had incurred actual cumulative collateral losses of 8.0%. Our impairment evaluation forecasts more severe assumptions than the trusts are actually experiencing, including a projected weighted average underlying default rate of 43.5% and a projected weighted average loss severity of 55.3%, which resulted in projected additional collateral losses of 24.5%. As the average remaining credit enhancement for these securities of 6.9% is insufficient to withstand the projected additional collateral losses, we have recognized cumulative write-downs in earnings on these securities as reflected in the table above using our calculated recovery value at the time of impairment. The current average recovery value of these securities as a percentage of par was 74.0% and exceeded these securities' current average amortized cost as a percentage of par of 72.1%, which demonstrates our conclusion that the nature of the remaining unrealized loss on these securities is temporary and will reverse over time. The comparison indicates that recovery value exceeds amortized cost based on a comprehensive evaluation of financial, economic and capital markets assumptions developed for this reporting period. The following table shows actual trust-level key metrics specific to the trusts from which our below investment grade Alt-A securities with gross unrealized losses were issued, as reported by the trust servicers. December 31, 2010 September 30, 2010 June 30, 2010 March 31, 2010 December 31, 2009 Trust-level statistics Delinquency rates 29.4 % 28.0 % 27.9 % 28.1 % 25.9 % Actual cumulative collateral losses incurred to date 7.2 % 6.5 % 5.5 % 4.3 % 3.5 % We believe the unrealized losses on our Alt-A securities, including those over 24 months, result from the current risk premium on these securities, which should continue to reverse over the securities' remaining lives, as demonstrated by improved valuations in 2010. We expect to receive our estimated share of contractual principal and interest collections used to determine the securities' recovery value. As of December 31, 2010, we do not have the intent to sell and it is not more likely than not we will be required to sell these securities before the recovery of their amortized cost basis. We believe that our valuation and impairment processes are comprehensive, employ the most current views about 93 collateral and securitization trust financial positions, and demonstrate our recorded impairments and that the remaining unrealized losses on these positions are temporary. The following tables show trust-level, class-level and security-specific detailed information for our below investment grade Subprime securities with gross unrealized losses that are not reliably insured, by credit rating. ($ in millions) December 31, 2010 With other-than-temporary impairments recorded in earnings Without other-than-temporary impairments recorded in earnings Ba B Caa or lower Total Ba B Caa or lower Total Total Trust-level Actual cumulative collateral losses incurred to date (1) % 12.0 % 16.1 % 16.0 % 13.2 % 12.5 % 12.6 % 12.7 % n/a Projected additional collateral losses to be incurred (2) % 38.2 % 43.2 % 43.0 % 46.5 % 42.7 % 40.8 % 42.1 % n/a Class-level Average remaining credit enhancement (3) % 26.0 % 22.6 % 22.8 % 72.7 % 63.6 % 50.5 % 56.7 % n/a Security-specific Number of positions 5 81 86 11 10 35 56 142 Par value $ $ 42 $ 952 $ 994 $ 73 $ 69 $ 265 $ 407 $ 1,401 Amortized cost $ $ 33 $ 650 $ 683 $ 73 $ 69 $ 265 $ 407 $ 1,090 Fair value $ $ 21 $ 425 $ 446 $ 62 $ 54 $ 158 $ 274 $ 720 Gross unrealized losses Total $ $ (12 ) $ (225 ) $ (237 ) $ (11 ) $ (15 ) $ (107 ) $ (133 ) $ (370 ) 12-24 months (4) $ $ $ (9 ) $ (9 ) $ $ $ $ $ (9 ) Over 24 months (5) $ $ (12 ) $ (216 ) $ (228 ) $ (11 ) $ (15 ) $ (107 ) $ (133 ) $ (361 ) Cumulative write-downs recognized (6) $ $ (9 ) $ (293 ) $ (302 ) $ $ $ $ $ (302 ) Principal payments received during the period (7) $ $ 4 $ 62 $ 66 $ 18 $ 4 $ 11 $ 33 $ 99 December 31, 2009 With other-than-temporary impairments recorded in earnings Without other-than-temporary impairments recorded in earnings Ba B Caa or lower Total Ba B Caa or lower Total Total Trust-level Actual cumulative collateral losses incurred to date (1) 15.0 % 13.8 % 17.2 % 16.9 % 8.8 % 8.1 % 9.5 % 9.1 % n/a Projected additional collateral losses to be incurred (2) 41.2 % 33.5 % 46.2 % 45.2 % 36.5 % 35.3 % 40.0 % 38.2 % n/a Class-level Average remaining credit enhancement (3) 38.1 % 30.1 % 38.6 % 38.0 % 49.6 % 45.4 % 42.6 % 45.4 % n/a Security-specific Number of positions 1 4 53 58 20 13 37 70 128 Par value $ 30 $ 52 $ 798 $ 880 $ 213 $ 59 $ 315 $ 587 $ 1,467 Amortized cost $ 24 $ 48 $ 581 $ 653 $ 213 $ 59 $ 314 $ 586 $ 1,239 Fair value $ 10 $ 28 $ 230 $ 268 $ 112 $ 32 $ 144 $ 288 $ 556 Gross unrealized losses Total $ (14 ) $ (20 ) $ (351 ) $ (385 ) $ (101 ) $ (27 ) $ (170 ) $ (298 ) $ (683 ) 12-24 months (4) $ $ (4 ) $ (53 ) $ (57 ) $ (2 ) $ (1 ) $ $ (3 ) $ (60 ) Over 24 months (5) $ (14 ) $ (12 ) $ (294 ) $ (320 ) $ (99 ) $ (26 ) $ (170 ) $ (295 ) $ (615 ) Cumulative write-downs recognized (6) $ (6 ) $ (4 ) $ (217 ) $ (227 ) $ $ $ $ $ (227 ) Principal payments received during the period (7) $ $ 13 $ 40 $ 53 $ 17 $ 11 $ 33 $ 61 $ 114 (1) Weighted average actual cumulative collateral losses incurred to date as of period end are based on the actual principal losses incurred as a percentage of the remaining principal amount of the loans in the trust. The weighting calculation is based on the par value of each security. Actual 94 losses on the securities we hold are less than the losses on the underlying collateral as presented in this table. Actual cumulative realized principal losses on the below investment grade Subprime securities we own, as reported by the trust servicers, were $20 million as of December 31, 2010. (2) Weighted average projected additional collateral losses to be incurred as of period end are based on our projections of future losses to be incurred by the trust, taking into consideration the actual cumulative collateral losses incurred to date, as a percentage of the remaining principal amount of the loans in the trust. Our projections are developed internally and customized to our specific holdings and are informed by and benchmarked against credit opinions obtained from third parties, such as industry analysts, nationally recognized credit rating agencies and an RMBS loss modeling advisory service. Projected additional collateral losses to be incurred are compared to average remaining credit enhancement for each security. For securities where the projected additional collateral losses exceed remaining credit enhancement, a recovery value is calculated to determine whether impairment losses should be recorded in earnings. The weighting calculation is based on the par value of each security. (3) Weighted average remaining credit enhancement as of period end is based on structural subordination and the expected impact of other structural features existing in the securitization trust beneficial to our class and reflects our projection of future principal losses that can occur as a percentage of the remaining principal amount of the loans in the trust before the class of the security we own will incur its first dollar of principal loss. The weighting calculation is based on the par value of each security. (4) Includes total gross unrealized losses on securities in an unrealized loss position for a period of 12 to 24 consecutive months. (5) Includes total gross unrealized losses on securities in an unrealized loss position for a period more than 24 consecutive months. As of December 31, 2010, $188 million of unrealized losses on securities with other-than-temporary impairments recognized in earnings and $108 million of unrealized losses on securities without other-than-temporary impairments recognized in earnings have been greater than or equal to 20% of those securities' amortized cost for a period of more than 24 consecutive months. As of December 31, 2009, $95 million of unrealized losses on securities with other-than-temporary impairments recognized in earnings and $50 million of unrealized losses on securities without other-than-temporary impairments recognized in earnings had been greater than or equal to 20% of those securities' amortized cost for a period of more than 24 consecutive months. (6) Includes cumulative write-downs recorded in accordance with GAAP. (7) Reflects principal payments for the years ended December 31, 2010 and 2009, respectively. The above tables include information only about below investment grade Subprime securities with gross unrealized losses that are not reliably insured as of each period presented. As such, the par value and composition of securities included can vary significantly from period to period due to changes in variables such as credit ratings, principal payments, sales, purchases and realized principal losses. As of December 31, 2010, our Subprime securities that are reliably insured include 10 below investment grade Subprime securities with a total fair value of $76 million and aggregate gross unrealized losses of $68 million, all of which are rated B. These securities are insured by one bond insurer rated B that we estimate has sufficient claims paying capacity to service its obligations on these securities. The securitization trusts from which our securities were issued are currently receiving contractual payments from the bond insurer and considering the combination of expected future payments from the bond insurer and cash flows available from the underlying collateral, we expect the trust to have adequate cash flows to make all contractual payments due to the class of securities we own. As a result, our security-specific estimates of future cash flows indicate that these securities' estimated recovery values equal or exceed their amortized cost. Accordingly, no other-than-temporary impairments have been recognized on these securities. As of December 31, 2009, our Subprime securities that were reliably insured by two bond insurers included 23 below investment grade securities with a total fair value of $166 million and aggregate gross unrealized losses of $166 million. As of December 31, 2010, our below investment grade Subprime securities with gross unrealized losses that are not reliably insured and without other-than-temporary impairments recorded in earnings had incurred actual cumulative collateral losses of 12.7%. Our impairment evaluation forecasts more severe assumptions than the trusts are actually experiencing, including a projected weighted average underlying default rate of 60.8% and a projected weighted average loss severity of 70.0%, which resulted in projected additional collateral losses of 42.1%. As the average remaining credit enhancement for these securities of 56.7% exceeds the projected additional collateral losses of 42.1%, these securities have not been impaired. As of December 31, 2010, our below investment grade Subprime securities with gross unrealized losses that are not reliably insured and with other-than-temporary impairments recorded in earnings had incurred actual cumulative collateral losses of 16.0%. Our impairment evaluation forecasts more severe assumptions than the trusts are actually experiencing, including a projected weighted average underlying default rate of 57.1% and a projected weighted average loss severity of 77.0%, which resulted in projected additional collateral losses of 43.0%. As the average remaining credit enhancement for these securities of 22.8% is insufficient to withstand the projected additional collateral losses, we have recognized cumulative write-downs in earnings on the securities as reflected in the table above using our calculated recovery value at the time of impairment. The current average recovery value of these securities as a percentage of par was 71.2% and exceeded these securities' current average amortized cost as a percentage of par of 68.7%, which demonstrates our conclusion that the nature of the remaining unrealized loss on these securities is temporary and will reverse over time. The comparison indicates that recovery value exceeds amortized cost based on a comprehensive evaluation of financial, economic and capital markets assumptions developed for this reporting period. 95 The following table shows actual trust-level key metrics specific to the trusts from which our below investment grade Subprime securities with gross unrealized losses were issued, as reported by the trust servicers. December 31, 2010 September 30, 2010 June 30, 2010 March 31, 2010 December 31, 2009 Trust-level statistics Delinquency rates 28.8 % 28.6 % 29.3 % 31.7 % 30.9 % Actual cumulative collateral losses incurred to date 16.5 % 15.4 % 14.7 % 14.4 % 13.5 % We believe the unrealized losses on our Subprime securities, including those over 24 months, result from the current risk premium on these securities, which should continue to reverse over the securities' remaining lives, as demonstrated by improved valuations in 2010. We expect to receive our estimated share of contractual principal and interest collections used to determine the securities' recovery value. As of December 31, 2010, we do not have the intent to sell and it is not more likely than not we will be required to sell these securities before the recovery of their amortized cost basis. We believe that our valuation and impairment processes are comprehensive, employ the most current views about collateral and securitization trust financial positions, and demonstrate our recorded impairments and that the remaining unrealized losses on these positions are temporary. Other-than-temporary impairment assessment for below investment grade CMBS As of December 31, 2010, the fair value of our below investment grade CMBS with gross unrealized losses totaled $135 million compared to $67 million as of December 31, 2009. As of December 31, 2010, gross unrealized losses for our below investment grade CMBS portfolio totaled $134 million, an increase of 9.8% compared to $122 million as of December 31, 2009. The increase over prior year was primarily due to downgrades of certain CMBS to below investment grade during 2010, partially offset by improved valuations and sales during 2010 in anticipation of negative capital treatment by certain regulatory and rating agencies. There were no gross unrealized gains for this portfolio as of December 31, 2010. The credit loss evaluation for CMBS with gross unrealized losses is performed in two phases. The first phase estimates the future cash flows of the entire securitization trust from which our security was issued. A critical part of this estimate involves forecasting the collateral losses of the commercial mortgage loans that collateralize the securitization trust. Factors affecting these estimates include, but are not limited to, estimates of current and future commercial property prices, current and projected rental incomes, the propensity of the mortgage loans to default under these assumptions and loss severities in cases of default. Estimates of future property prices and rental incomes consider specific property-type and geographic economic trends such as employment, property vacancy and rental rates, and forecasts of new supply in the commercial real estate markets. Estimates of default rates and loss severities consider factors such as borrower payment history, the origination practices of the transaction sponsor, overall collateral quality and diversification, transaction vintage year, maturity date, overall transaction structure and other factors that may influence performance. Realized losses in the CMBS market have historically been low and, we believe, are not predictive of future losses. Therefore, our projections of collateral performance rely on probability-weighted scenarios informed by credit opinions obtained from third parties, such as nationally recognized credit rating agencies, industry analysts and CMBS loss modeling advisory services. We then analyze the actual cumulative collateral losses incurred to date by the securitization trust, our projected additional collateral losses expected to be incurred and the position of the class of securities we own in the securitization trust relative to the trust's other classes to determine whether any of the collateral losses will be applied to our class. If our class has remaining credit enhancement sufficient to withstand the projected additional collateral losses, no collateral losses will be realized by our class and we expect to collect all contractual principal and interest of the security we own. Remaining credit enhancement is measured in terms of subordination from other classes of securities in the trust being contractually obligated to absorb losses before the class of security we own. For securities where there is insufficient remaining credit enhancement for the class of securities we own, a recovery value is calculated based on our best estimate of future cash flows specific to that security. This estimate is based on the contractual principal payments and current interest payments of the securities we own, adjusted for actual cumulative collateral losses incurred to date and the projected additional collateral losses expected to be incurred. In instances where the recovery value of the security is less than its amortized cost, a credit loss is recorded in earnings. 26.6%, 60.9% and 9.4% of the fair value of our below investment grade CMBS with gross unrealized losses were issued with Aaa, Aa and A original ratings and capital structure classifications, respectively. As described previously, 96 CMBS with higher original ratings typically have priority in receiving the principal repayments on the underlying collateral compared to those with lower original ratings. Tight credit markets and conservative underwriting standards continue to stress commercial mortgage borrowers' ability to refinance obligations. While the projected cash flow assumptions for our below investment grade CMBS with gross unrealized losses have deteriorated since the securities were originated, as reflected by their current credit ratings, these securities continue to retain the payment priority features that existed at the origination of the securitization trust. The following tables show trust-level, class-level and security-specific detailed information for our below investment grade CMBS with gross unrealized losses, by credit rating. ($ in millions) December 31, 2010 With other-than-temporary impairments recorded in earnings Without other-than-temporary impairments recorded in earnings Ba B Caa or lower Total Ba B Caa or lower Total Total Trust-level Actual cumulative collateral losses incurred to date (1) 0.6 % 3.2 % 2.5 % 2.3 % 1.1 % 0.3 % 0.4 % 0.9 % n/a Projected additional collateral losses to be incurred (2) 12.2 % 7.0 % 38.1 % 29.2 % 7.0 % 4.4 % 7.2 % 6.4 % n/a Class-level Average remaining credit enhancement (3) 12.5 % 7.0 % 25.5 % 20.7 % 9.1 % 7.5 % 9.0 % 8.7 % n/a Security-specific Number of positions 2 1 5 8 14 5 2 21 29 Par value $ 22 $ 16 $ 79 $ 117 $ 138 $ 46 $ 7 $ 191 $ 308 Amortized cost $ 17 $ 15 $ 39 $ 71 $ 143 $ 47 $ 8 $ 198 $ 269 Fair value $ 13 $ 6 $ 13 $ 32 $ 75 $ 25 $ 3 $ 103 $ 135 Gross unrealized losses Total $ (4 ) $ (9 ) $ (26 ) $ (39 ) $ (68 ) $ (22 ) $ (5 ) $ (95 ) $ (134 ) 12-24 months (4) $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ Over 24 months (5) $ (4 ) $ (9 ) $ (26 ) $ (39 ) $ (68 ) $ (22 ) $ (5 ) $ (95 ) $ (134 ) Cumulative write-downs recognized (6) $ (5 ) $ (2 ) $ (41 ) $ (48 ) $ $ $ $ $ (48 ) Principal payments received during the period (7) $ $ $ 1 $ 1 $ $ 1 $ $ 1 $ 2 97 December 31, 2009 With other-than-temporary impairments recorded in earnings Without other-than-temporary impairments recorded in earnings Ba B Caa or lower Total Ba B Caa or lower Total Total Trust-level Actual cumulative collateral losses incurred to date (1) 1.4 % 0.6 % % 0.8 % % % % % n/a Projected additional collateral losses to be incurred (2) 20.1 % 13.5 % % 15.0 % 6.1 % 7.7 % % 6.7 % n/a Class-level Average remaining credit enhancement (3) 17.4 % 9.8 % % 11.5 % 9.1 % 8.5 % % 8.9 % n/a Security-specific Number of positions 1 5 6 6 6 12 18 Par value $ 20 $ 69 $ $ 89 $ 87 $ 49 $ $ 136 $ 225 Amortized cost $ 14 $ 41 $ $ 55 $ 84 $ 50 $ $ 134 $ 189 Fair value $ 9 $ 16 $ $ 25 $ 29 $ 13 $ $ 42 $ 67 Gross unrealized losses Total $ (5 ) $ (25 ) $ $ (30 ) $ (55 ) $ (37 ) $ $ (92 ) $ (122 ) 12-24 months (4) $ $ $ $ $ (13 ) $ $ $ (13 ) $ (13 ) Over 24 months (5) $ (5 ) $ (25 ) $ $ (30 ) $ (42 ) $ (37 ) $ $ (79 ) $ (109 ) Cumulative write-downs recognized (6) $ (7 ) $ (34 ) $ $ (41 ) $ $ $ $ $ (41 ) Principal payments received during the period (7) $ 1 $ $ $ 1 $ 1 $ $ $ 1 $ 2 (1) Weighted average actual cumulative collateral losses incurred to date as of period end are based on the actual principal losses incurred as a percentage of the remaining principal amount of the loans in the trust. The weighting calculation is based on the par value of each security. Actual losses on the securities we hold are less than the losses on the underlying collateral as presented in this table. There were no actual cumulative realized principal losses on the below investment grade CMBS we own, as reported by the trust servicers, as of December 31, 2010. (2) Weighted average projected additional collateral losses to be incurred as of period end are based on our projections of future losses to be incurred by the trust, taking into consideration the actual cumulative collateral losses incurred to date, as a percentage of the remaining principal amount of the loans in the trust. Our projections are developed internally and customized to our specific holdings and are informed by and benchmarked against credit opinions obtained from third parties, such as industry analysts, nationally recognized credit rating agencies and CMBS loss modeling advisory services. Projected additional collateral losses to be incurred are compared to average remaining credit enhancement for each security. For securities where the projected additional collateral losses exceed remaining credit enhancement, a recovery value is calculated to determine whether impairment losses should be recorded in earnings. The weighting calculation is based on the par value of each security. (3) Weighted average remaining credit enhancement as of period end is based on structural subordination and reflects our projection of future principal losses that can occur as a percentage of the remaining principal amount of the loans in the trust before the class of the security we own will incur its first dollar of principal loss. The weighting calculation is based on the par value of each security. (4) Includes total gross unrealized losses on securities in an unrealized loss position for a period of 12 to 24 consecutive months. (5) Includes total gross unrealized losses on securities in an unrealized loss position for a period more than 24 consecutive months. As of December 31, 2010, $39 million of unrealized losses on securities with other-than-temporary impairments recognized in earnings and $93 million of unrealized losses on securities without other-than-temporary impairments recognized in earnings have been greater than or equal to 20% of those securities' amortized cost for a period of more than 24 consecutive months. As of December 31, 2009, there were no CMBS with gross unrealized losses greater than or equal to 20% for a period of more than 24 consecutive months. (6) Includes cumulative write-downs recorded in accordance with GAAP. (7) Reflects principal payments for the years ended December 31, 2010 and 2009, respectively. The above tables include information about below investment grade CMBS with gross unrealized losses as of each period presented. The par value and composition of securities included can vary significantly from period to period due to changes in variables such as credit ratings, principal payments, sales and purchases. Our impairment evaluation for CMBS forecasts more severe assumptions than the trusts are actually experiencing. We assume that all loans delinquent 60 days or more default and project default rates on otherwise performing loans. Projected loss severities are then applied against the resulting default rates, arriving at our projected additional collateral loss rates. The projected additional collateral loss rates by vintage year of our CMBS portfolio range from a low of 1.5% for holdings with a vintage year of 2001 to a high of 11.1% for holdings with a vintage year of 2005. As of December 31, 2010, our below investment grade CMBS with gross unrealized losses and without other-than-temporary impairments recorded in earnings had incurred actual cumulative collateral losses of 0.9%, and the projected additional collateral loss rate for these securities as of December 31, 2010 was 6.4%. As the average remaining credit enhancement for these securities of 8.7% exceeds the projected additional collateral losses of 6.4%, these securities have not been impaired. 98 As of December 31, 2010, our below investment grade CMBS with gross unrealized losses and with other-than-temporary impairments recorded in earnings had incurred actual cumulative collateral losses of 2.3%. The projected additional collateral loss rate for these securities as of December 31, 2010 was 29.2%. As the average remaining credit enhancement for these securities of 20.7% is insufficient to withstand the projected additional collateral losses, we have recognized cumulative write-downs in earnings on these securities as reflected in the table above using our calculated recovery value at the time of impairment. The current average recovery value of these securities as a percentage of par was 61.3% and exceeded these securities' current average amortized cost as a percentage of par of 61.2%, which demonstrates our conclusion that the nature of the remaining unrealized loss on these securities is temporary and will reverse over time. The comparison indicates that recovery value is in line with amortized cost as impairment write-downs were recorded in the reporting period based on a comprehensive evaluation of financial, economic and capital markets assumptions developed for this reporting period. The following table shows actual trust-level key metrics specific to the trusts from which our below investment grade CMBS with gross unrealized losses were issued, as reported by the trust servicers. December 31, 2010 September 30, 2010 June 30, 2010 March 31, 2010 December 31, 2009 Trust-level statistics Delinquency rates 7.2 % 8.3 % 8.5 % 8.6 % 5.2 % Actual cumulative collateral losses incurred to date 1.4 % 2.9 % 1.6 % 0.8 % 0.3 % We believe the unrealized losses on our CMBS, including those over 24 months, result from the current risk premium on these securities, which should continue to reverse over the securities' remaining lives, as demonstrated by improved valuations during 2010. We expect to receive our estimated share of contractual principal and interest collections used to determine the securities' recovery value. As of December 31, 2010, we do not have the intent to sell and it is not more likely than not we will be required to sell these securities before the recovery of their amortized cost basis. We believe that our valuation and impairment processes are comprehensive, employ the most current views about collateral and securitization trust financial positions, and demonstrate our recorded impairments and that the remaining unrealized losses on these positions are temporary. Other-than-temporary impairment assessment for below investment grade cash flow CLO ABS As of December 31, 2010, the fair value for our below investment grade cash flow CLO portfolio with gross unrealized losses totaled $169 million compared to $188 million as of December 31, 2009. The gross unrealized losses for these securities totaled $48 million as of December 31, 2010, a decrease of 51.5%, compared to $99 million as of December 31, 2009, primarily due to higher valuations resulting from lower risk premiums and upgrades of certain cash flow CLO to investment grade during 2010. Gross unrealized gains for these securities were $53 million as of December 31, 2010. For below investment grade cash flow CLO with gross unrealized gains, we have recognized cumulative write-downs in earnings totaling $85 million. As of December 31, 2010, none of our below investment grade cash flow CLO portfolio with gross unrealized losses have other-than-temporary impairments recorded in earnings and all of the gross unrealized losses are aged over 24 months. Cash flow CLO are collateralized primarily by below investment grade senior secured corporate loans and are structured with overcollateralization which serves as credit enhancement for the class of securities we own. Overcollateralization ratios are based on the par value of the collateral in the underlying portfolio as a percentage of the notes issued as cash flow CLO securities. The performance of these securities is impacted primarily by defaults and recoveries of the underlying collateral within the structures, which reduce overcollateralization ratios over time. A violation of the senior overcollateralization test could result in an event of default of the structure which would give the controlling class, generally defined as the majority of the senior lenders, certain rights, including the ability to divert cash flows or liquidate the underlying portfolio to pay off the senior liabilities. The credit loss evaluation for cash flow CLO is performed in two phases. The first phase evaluates the overcollateralization that exists for the class of securities we own. A critical part of this estimate involves projections of future losses formulated through our assessment of the corporate loan markets, and considers opinions from third parties, such as industry analysts and strategists, credit rating agencies, our own participation in these markets, as well as our overall economic outlook for indicators such as unemployment and GDP. The expected performance of each security considers anticipated collateral losses and credit enhancement levels, as well as factors including default rates, 99 anticipated recoveries, prepayment rates, changes in interest rates and other characteristics. In addition, the performance of collateral underlying certain of our securities is actively monitored by external managers, allowing for enhanced collateral management actions which help mitigate the risk of loss. If the overcollateralization that exists for our class exceeds 100%, our class has remaining credit enhancement sufficient to withstand the projected future losses, and we expect to collect all contractual principal and interest of the security we own. For securities where there is insufficient remaining credit enhancement for the class of securities we own, a recovery value is calculated based on our best estimate of future cash flows specific to that security. This estimate is based on the contractual principal payments and current interest payments of the securities we own, adjusted for actual cumulative collateral losses incurred to date and the projected future losses expected to be incurred. If we do not expect to receive cash flows sufficient to recover the entire amortized cost basis of the security, a credit loss is recorded to the extent amortized cost exceeds recovery value. The weighted average overcollateralization ratio as reported by the trust servicers for our below investment grade cash flow CLO securities with gross unrealized losses was 117.0% as of December 31, 2010, compared to 117.5% at original issuance. As of December 31, 2009, the weighted average overcollateralization ratio for our below investment grade cash flow CLO securities with gross unrealized losses was 113.6%. As the average overcollateralization ratios exceed 100%, this indicates that projected future collateral losses will be absorbed by lower classes and we expect the structures to have adequate cash flows to make all contractual payments due to the class of securities we own. Our comprehensive evaluation of financial, economic and capital markets assumptions developed for this reporting period, supported by the applicable overcollateralization ratios, indicates that the nature of the unrealized loss on these securities is temporary. We believe the unrealized losses on our cash flow CLO securities, including those over 24 months, result from the current risk premium on these securities, which should continue to reverse over the securities' remaining lives, as demonstrated by improved valuations in 2010. We expect to receive our estimated share of contractual principal and interest collections used to determine the securities' recovery value. As of December 31, 2010, we do not have the intent to sell and it is not more likely than not we will be required to sell these securities before the recovery of their amortized cost basis. We believe that our valuation and impairment processes are comprehensive, employ the most current views about collateral and securitization trust financial positions, and demonstrate our recorded impairments and that the remaining unrealized losses on these positions are temporary. Problem, restructured, or potential problem securities We also monitor the quality of our fixed income and bank loan portfolios by categorizing certain investments as "problem," "restructured," or "potential problem." Problem fixed income securities and bank loans are in default with respect to principal or interest and/or are investments issued by companies that have gone into bankruptcy subsequent to our acquisition or loan. Fixed income and bank loan investments are categorized as restructured when the debtor is experiencing financial difficulty and we grant a concession. Potential problem fixed income or bank loan investments are current with respect to contractual principal and/or interest, but because of other facts and circumstances, we have concerns regarding the borrower's ability to pay future principal and interest according to the original terms, which causes us to believe these investments may be classified as problem or restructured in the future. The following table summarizes problem, restructured and potential problem fixed income securities and bank loans, which are reported in other investments, as of December 31. ($ in millions) 2010 Par value (1) Amortized cost (1) Amortized cost as a percent of par value Fair value (2) Fair value as a percent of par value Percent of total fixed income and bank loan portfolios Restructured $ 99 $ 83 83.8 % $ 79 79.8 % 0.1 % Problem 665 214 32.2 188 28.3 0.2 Potential problem 3,441 1,485 43.2 1,171 34.0 1.5 Total $ 4,205 $ 1,782 42.4 $ 1,438 34.2 1.8 % Cumulative write- downs recognized (3) $ 1,005 100 2009 Par value (1) Amortized cost (1) Amortized cost as a percent of par value Fair value (2) Fair value as a percent of par value Percent of total fixed income and bank loan portfolios Restructured $ 107 $ 85 79.4 % $ 75 70.1 % 0.1 % Problem 823 321 39.0 221 26.9 0.3 Potential problem 2,630 1,651 62.8 977 37.1 1.2 Total $ 3,560 $ 2,057 57.8 $ 1,273 35.8 1.6 % Cumulative write- downs recognized (3) $ 1,188 (1) The difference between par value and amortized cost of $2.42 billion as of December 31, 2010 is primarily attributable to write-downs and a deep discount zero-coupon security. The difference between par value and amortized cost of $1.50 billion as of December 31, 2009 is primarily attributable to write-downs. Par value has been reduced by principal payments. (2) Bank loans are reflected at amortized cost. (3) Cumulative write-downs recognized only reflect impairment write-downs related to investments within the problem, potential problem and restructured categories. As of December 31, 2010, amortized cost for the problem category was $214 million and comprised $90 million of Subprime, $70 million of municipal bonds, $40 million of Alt-A, $6 million of corporates (primarily privately placed), $5 million of CDO and $3 million of Consumer and other ABS. As of December 31, 2010, amortized cost for the potential problem category was $1.49 billion and comprised $606 million of Subprime, $331 million of Alt-A, $213 million of Prime, $125 million of municipal bonds, $79 million of CDO, $71 million of CMBS, $41 million of corporates (primarily privately placed), $10 million of bank loans and $9 million of Consumer and other ABS. Net investment income The following table presents net investment income for the years ended December 31. ($ in millions) 2010 2009 2008 Fixed income securities $ 3,737 $ 3,998 $ 4,783 Equity securities 90 80 120 Mortgage loans 385 498 618 Limited partnership interests 40 17 62 Short-term investments 8 27 195 Other 19 (10 ) 54 Investment income, before expense 4,279 4,610 5,832 Investment expense (177 ) (166 ) (210 ) Net investment income $ 4,102 $ 4,444 $ 5,622 Net investment income decreased 7.7% or $342 million in 2010 compared to 2009, after decreasing 21.0% or $1.18 billion in 2009 compared to 2008. The 2010 decrease was primarily due to lower interest rates, risk reduction actions related to municipal bonds and commercial real estate, duration shortening actions taken to protect the portfolio from rising interest rates and lower average investment balances. The 2009 decrease was primarily due to lower yields, actions to shorten duration and maintain additional liquidity in the portfolio, along with reduced average investment balances. Also contributing to the decline in 2009 was lower income on limited partnership interests and decreased dividends on equity securities. 101 Realized capital gains and losses The following table presents the components of realized capital gains and losses and the related tax effect for the years ended December 31. ($ in millions) 2010 2009 2008 Impairment write-downs $ (797 ) $ (1,562 ) $ (1,983 ) Change in intent write-downs (204 ) (357 ) (1,752 ) Net other-than-temporary impairment losses recognized in earnings (1,001 ) (1,919 ) (3,735 ) Sales 686 1,272 (464 ) Valuation of derivative instruments (427 ) 367 (1,280 ) Settlements of derivative instruments (174 ) (162 ) 486 EMA limited partnership income 89 (141 ) (97 ) Realized capital gains and losses, pre-tax (827 ) (583 ) (5,090 ) Income tax benefit (expense) 290 (45 ) 1,779 Realized capital gains and losses, after-tax $ (537 ) $ (628 ) $ (3,311 ) Impairment write-downs for the years ended December 31 are presented in the following table. ($ in millions) 2010 2009 2008 Fixed income securities $ (626 ) $ (886 ) $ (1,507 ) Equity securities (57 ) (237 ) (328 ) Mortgage loans (65 ) (97 ) (4 ) Limited partnership interests (46 ) (308 ) (112 ) Other investments (3 ) (34 ) (32 ) Impairment write-downs $ (797 ) $ (1,562 ) $ (1,983 ) Impairment write-downs in 2010 were primarily driven by RMBS, which experienced deterioration in expected cash flows; investments with commercial real estate exposure, including CMBS, mortgage loans, limited partnership interests and certain housing related municipal bonds, which were impacted by lower real estate valuations or experienced deterioration in expected cash flows; and privately placed corporate bonds and municipal bonds impacted by issuer specific circumstances. Impairment write-downs on below investment grade RMBS, CMBS and ABS in 2010 were $332 million, $118 million and $29 million, respectively. Impairment write-downs that were related primarily to securities subsequently disposed were $99 million for the year ended December 31, 2010. Of the remaining write-downs in 2010, $386 million or 73.2% of the fixed income security write-downs related to impaired securities that were performing in line with anticipated or contractual cash flows but were written down primarily because of expected deterioration in the performance of the underlying collateral or our assessment of the probability of future default. For these securities, as of December 31, 2010, there were either no defaults or defaults only impacted classes lower than our position in the capital structure. $138 million of the fixed income security write-downs in 2010 related to securities experiencing a significant departure from anticipated cash flows; however, we believe they retain economic value. $3 million in 2010 related to fixed income securities for which future cash flows are not anticipated. Equity securities were written down primarily due to the length of time and extent to which fair value was below cost, considering our assessment of the financial condition and near-term and long-term prospects of the issuer, including relevant industry conditions and trends. Limited partnership impairment write-downs primarily related to Cost limited partnerships, which experienced declines in portfolio valuations and we could not assert the recovery period would be temporary. To determine if an other-than-temporary impairment has occurred related to a Cost limited partnership, we evaluate whether an impairment indicator has occurred in the period that may have a significant adverse effect on the carrying value of the investment. Impairment indicators may include: significantly reduced valuations of the investments held by the limited partnerships; actual recent cash flows received being significantly less than expected cash flows; reduced valuations based on financing completed at a lower value; completed sale of a material underlying investment at a price significantly lower than expected; or any other adverse events since the last financial statements received that might affect the fair value of the investee's capital. 102 Impairment write-downs in 2009 were primarily the result of recovery assessments related to investments with commercial real estate exposure, including limited partnership interests, equity securities, mortgage loans and CMBS; RMBS which experienced deterioration in expected cash flows; ABS, including CDO squared, cash flow CDO and synthetic CDO, and hybrid corporate fixed income securities. Change in intent write-downs for the years ended December 31 are presented in the following table. ($ in millions) 2010 2009 2008 Fixed income securities $ (198 ) $ (318 ) $ (1,555 ) Equity securities (27 ) (120 ) Mortgage loans (6 ) (6 ) (74 ) Other investments (6 ) (3 ) Change in intent write-downs $ (204 ) $ (357 ) $ (1,752 ) The change in intent write-downs in 2010 and 2009 were primarily a result of ongoing comprehensive reviews of our portfolios resulting in write-downs of individually identified investments, primarily municipal bonds and RMBS. Sales generated $686 million of net realized gains in 2010 primarily due to $595 million of net gains on sales of corporate, U.S. government, foreign government and municipal fixed income securities and $210 million of net gains on sales of equity securities, partially offset by $139 million of net losses on sales of CMBS and ABS. Net realized gains from sales of $1.27 billion in 2009 were primarily due to $445 million and $636 million of gains on sales of equity and U.S. and foreign government fixed income securities, respectively. Sales of equity securities in 2009 were primarily in connection with a change in strategy that uses a more passive portfolio management approach with a greater emphasis on asset allocation decisions. Valuation and settlement of derivative instruments recorded as net realized capital losses totaling $601 million in 2010 included $427 million of losses on the valuation of derivative instruments and $174 million of losses on the settlement of derivative instruments. In 2009, net realized capital gains on the valuation and settlement of derivative instruments totaled $205 million. Net realized capital gains and losses from our risk management derivative programs are primarily driven by changes in risk-free interest rates, equity market valuations, volatility and credit spreads during a given period. Net realized capital gains and losses from our income generation derivative programs are primarily driven by changes in the fair value of the reference entities or indices underlying the derivative instruments. A changing interest rate environment will drive changes in our portfolio duration targets. A duration target and range is established with an economic view of liabilities relative to a long-term investment portfolio view. Tactical duration management is accomplished through both cash market transactions, sales and new purchases, and derivative activities that generate realized gains and losses. As a component of our approach to managing portfolio duration, realized gains and losses on certain derivative instruments are most appropriately considered in conjunction with the unrealized gains and losses on the fixed income portfolio. This approach mitigates the impacts of general interest rate changes to our overall financial condition. As of December 31, 2010, our securities with embedded derivatives totaled $1.26 billion, a decrease in fair value of $152 million from December 31, 2009, comprising realized capital losses on valuation of $3 million, net sales activity of $320 million, unrealized net capital gains reported in OCI of $123 million for the host securities and an increase of $48 million due to the adoption of new accounting guidance. Unrealized net capital gains were further decreased by $30 million due to amortization of the host securities. The change in fair value of embedded derivatives is bifurcated from the host securities, separately valued and reported in realized capital gains and losses, while the change in the difference between the fair value and the amortized cost of the host securities is reported in OCI. Total fair value exceeded total amortized cost by $41 million as of December 31, 2010. Valuation gains and losses for securities with embedded derivatives are converted into cash upon our election to sell these securities. In the event the economic value of the embedded options is not realized, we will recover the par value if held to maturity unless the issuer of the security defaults. In the event there are defaults by the referenced credit entities of the embedded credit default swap, our loss is limited to the par value of the combined fixed income security, net of applicable recoveries. Total par value exceeded fair value by $45 million as of December 31, 2010. 103 The table below presents the realized capital gains and losses (pre-tax) on the valuation and settlement of derivative instruments shown by underlying exposure and derivative strategy for the years ended December 31. ($ in millions) 2010 2009 2008 2010 Explanations Valuation Settlements Total Total Total Risk management Property Liability Portfolio duration management (1) $ (96 ) $ (78 ) $ (174 ) $ 33 $ (10 ) Interest rate swaps, municipal interest rate swaps and short interest rate futures are used to offset the effects of changing interest rates on a portion of the Property-Liability fixed income portfolio that is reported in unrealized net capital gains or losses in OCI. The futures contracts are exchange traded, daily cash settled and can be exited at any time for minimal additional cost. The 2010 losses, resulting from decreasing interest rates are offset in unrealized net capital gains and losses in OCI to the extent it relates to changes in risk-free rates. Interest rate spike exposure (1) (173 ) (11 ) (184 ) (58 ) (97 ) Interest rate swaption contracts, with terms of less than one year, and exchange traded options on interest rate futures, with three to six month terms, provide an offset to declines in fixed income market values resulting from potential rising interest rates. As of December 31, 2010, the notional amount of our over-the-counter ("OTC") swaption positions totaled $7.81 billion and the notional amount of our exchange traded options totaled $800 million. Exchange traded options on interest rate futures are utilized to supplement the protection provided by swaption contracts without increasing the counterparty risk associated with OTC contracts. The 2010 losses on swaptions and options on interest rate futures contracts relates to a decrease in interest rates and a decline in volatility. Volatility represents the measure of variation of average value over a specified time period. If interest rates do not increase above the strike rate, the maximum loss on swaptions and options on interest rate futures is limited to the amount of the premium paid. The program is routinely monitored and revised as capital market conditions change. Hedging unrealized gains on equity securities (1) (56 ) (35 ) (91 ) (226 ) 420 Exchange traded put options and short equity index futures provide an offset to significant declines in our equity portfolio from equity market declines below a targeted level. Options can expire, terminate early or the option can be exercised. If the price level of the equity index does not fall below the put's strike price, the maximum loss on purchased puts is limited to the amount of the premium paid. The futures contracts are exchange traded, daily cash settled and can be exited at any time for minimal additional cost. The 2010 losses on futures and options were primarily the result of an increase in the price levels of the equity indices and a decrease in volatility and were partially offset by unrealized net capital gains and losses of our equity portfolio to the degree they reflect the changes in price levels of the equity indices, which is reflected in OCI. Foreign currency contracts 6 (20 ) (14 ) 4 (27 ) Currency forwards are used to protect our foreign bond and equity portfolios from changes in currency rates. The 2010 losses on foreign currency contracts are primary driven by the weakening of the U.S. currency versus the foreign currency. Credit risk reduction (1) (7 ) (10 ) (17 ) (45 ) 48 Valuation loss is the result of tightening credit spreads on referenced credit entities. Other 1 1 2 2 (29 ) 104 ($ in millions) 2010 2009 2008 2010 Explanations Valuation Settlements Total Total Total Allstate Financial Duration gap management (111 ) (43 ) (154 ) 288 (503 ) Interest rate caps, floors, swaptions and swaps are used by Allstate Financial to balance interest-rate sensitivities of its assets and liabilities. The contracts settle based on differences between current market rates and a contractually specified fixed rate through expiration. The contracts can be terminated and settled at any time with minimal additional cost. The maximum loss on caps, floors and swaptions is limited to the amount of premiums paid. The change in valuation reflects the changing value of expected future settlements from changing interest rates, which may vary over the period of the contracts. The 2010 losses, resulting from decreasing interest rates, are offset in unrealized capital gains and losses of our fixed income securities in OCI to the extent it relates to changes in risk-free rates. Anticipatory hedging 24 8 32 (18 ) 153 Futures and interest rate swaps are used to protect investment spread from interest rate changes during mismatches in the timing of cash flows between product sales and the related investment activity. The futures contracts are exchange traded, daily cash settled and can be exited at any time for minimal additional cost. If the cash flow mismatches are such that a positive net investment position is being hedged, there is an offset for the related investment's unrealized loss in OCI. The 2010 gains resulted from a decrease in risk-free interest rates over the life of the net short position as liability issuances exceeded asset acquisitions. Hedging of interest rate exposure in annuity contracts (16 ) (16 ) 10 (29 ) Value of expected future settlements on interest rate caps and the associated value of future credited interest, which is reportable in future periods when incurred, decreased due to a decrease in interest rates. Hedging unrealized gains on equity indexed notes 7 Hedge ineffectiveness 7 7 (1 ) (4 ) The hedge ineffectiveness of $7 million includes $74 million in realized capital losses on swaps that were offset by $81 million in realized capital gains on the hedged risk. Foreign currency contracts (2 ) 6 4 3 (1 ) Currency forwards are used to protect our foreign bond portfolio from changes in currency rates. Credit risk reduction (1) 6 (13 ) (7 ) (50 ) 17 Valuation gain is the result of widening credit spreads on referenced credit entities. Other 1 Total Risk management $ (417 ) $ (195 ) $ (612 ) $ (58 ) $ (54 ) Income generation The 2010 changes in valuation on the Property-Liability segment are due to the tightening of credit spreads on referenced credit entities. The gains are primarily on single name credit default swaps ("CDS"). The 2010 changes in valuation on the Allstate Financial segment are due to the widening credit spreads on referenced credit entities. The losses are primarily on first-to-default CDS and credit derivative index CDS. The changes in valuation would only be converted to cash upon disposition, which can be done at any time, or if the credit event specified in the contract occurs. For further discussion on CDS, see Note 6 of the consolidated financial statements. Asset replication credit exposure Property-Liability $ 5 $ 10 $ 15 $ 13 $ (41 ) Allstate Financial (10 ) 11 1 64 (62 ) Total (5 ) 21 16 77 (103 ) Asset replication equity exposure Property Liability 66 (84 ) Commodity derivatives Property Liability (44 ) Total Income generation $ (5 ) $ 21 $ 16 $ 143 $ (231 ) 105 ($ in millions) 2010 2009 2008 2010 Explanations Valuation Settlements Total Total Total Accounting Equity indexed notes Allstate Financial $ (17 ) $ $ (17 ) $ 28 $ (290 ) Equity-indexed notes are fixed income securities that contain embedded options. The changes in valuation of the embedded equity indexed call options are reported in realized capital gains and losses. The results generally track the performance of underlying equity indices. Valuation gains and losses are converted into cash upon sale or maturity. In the event the economic value of the options is not realized, we will recover the par value of the host fixed income security if held to maturity unless the issuer of the note defaults. Par value exceeded fair value by $21 million as of December 31, 2010. Equity-indexed notes are subject to our comprehensive portfolio monitoring and watchlist processes to identify and evaluate when the carrying value may be other-than-temporarily impaired. The following table compares the December 31, 2010 and 2009 holdings, respectively. ($ in millions) December 31, 2010 Change in fair value Change due to net sale activity December 31, 2009 Par value $ 300 $ $ (175 ) $ 475 Amortized cost of host contract $ 224 $ 15 $ (135 ) $ 344 Fair value of equity-indexed call option 47 (17 ) (25 ) 89 Total amortized cost $ 271 $ (2 ) $ (160 ) $ 433 Total fair value $ 279 $ 22 $ (173 ) $ 430 Unrealized gain/loss $ 8 $ 24 $ (13 ) $ (3 ) Conversion options in fixed income securities Property Liability (11 ) (11 ) 60 (143 ) Allstate Financial (11 ) (11 ) 32 (77 ) Total (22 ) (22 ) 92 (220 ) Convertible bonds are fixed income securities that contain embedded options. Changes in valuation of the embedded option are reported in realized capital gains and losses. The results generally track the performance of underlying equities. Valuation gains and losses are converted into cash upon our election to sell these securities. In the event the economic value of the options is not realized, we will recover the par value of the host fixed income security if held to maturity unless the issuer of the note defaults. Fair value exceeded par value by $80 million as of December 31, 2010. Convertible bonds are subject to our comprehensive portfolio monitoring and watchlist processes to identify and evaluate when the carrying value may be other-than-temporarily impaired. The following table compares the December 31, 2010 and 2009 holdings, respectively. ($ in millions) December 31, 2010 Change in fair value Change due to net sale activity December 31, 2009 Par value $ 820 $ $ (116 ) $ 936 Amortized cost of host contract $ 619 $ 19 $ (64 ) $ 664 Fair value of conversion option 236 (22 ) (54 ) 312 Total amortized cost $ 855 $ (3 ) $ (118 ) $ 976 Total fair value $ 900 $ 69 $ (147 ) $ 978 Unrealized gain/loss $ 45 $ 72 $ (29 ) $ 2 106 ($ in millions) 2010 2009 2008 2010 Explanations Valuation Settlements Total Total Total CDS in fixed income securities Property Liability Allstate Financial 36 36 Total 36 36 Synthetic CDO's are fixed income securities that contain embedded CDS. Effective July 1, 2010, when new accounting guidance requiring bifurcation of these derivatives was adopted, changes in valuation of the embedded credit default swap are reported in realized capital gains and losses. The embedded credit default swap increases or decreases in value as referenced credit entities' credit spreads tighten or widen, respectively. Credit events, changes in interest rates, correlations of the referenced entities and assumed recovery rates are among some of the other factors affecting the value of the embedded credit default swap. In the event a referenced credit entity experiences a credit event, our loss is limited to the par value of the fixed income security. Losses on credit events are net of recovery. Par value exceeded fair value by $104 million as of December 31, 2010. Synthetic CDO's are subject to our comprehensive portfolio monitoring and watchlist processes to identify and evaluate when the carrying value may be other-than-temporarily impaired. The following table compares the December 31, 2010 and July 1, 2010 holdings, respectively. ($ in millions) December 31, 2010 Change in fair value Change due to net sale activity July 1, 2010 Par value $ 181 $ $ $ 181 Amortized cost of host contract $ 177 $ (4 ) $ $ 181 Fair value of credit default swap (88 ) 36 (124 ) Total amortized cost $ 89 $ 32 $ $ 57 Total fair value $ 77 $ 29 $ $ 48 Unrealized gain/loss $ (12 ) $ (3 ) $ $ (9 ) Total Accounting $ (3 ) $ $ (3 ) $ 120 $ (510 ) Other (2 ) (2 ) 1 Total $ (427 ) $ (174 ) $ (601) (2) $ 205 (2) $ (794 ) Total Property-Liability $ (331 ) $ (143 ) $ (474 ) $ (151 ) $ (7 ) Total Allstate Financial (94 ) (31 ) (125 ) 356 (788 ) Other (2 ) (2 ) 1 Total $ (427 ) $ (174 ) $ (601) (2) $ 205 (2) $ (794 ) (1) A portion of the risk mitigation ("macro hedge") program is contained within this line item. (2) For the years ended December 31, 2010 and 2009, does not include $1 million of derivative gains related to the termination of fair value and cash flow hedges which are included in sales and reported with the hedged risk. 107 Included in the risk management section of the table above are net realized capital gains and losses on the valuation and settlement of derivative instruments related to our macro hedge program. Additional information regarding our macro hedge program, including these realized capital gains and losses, is included in the following table. ($ in millions) Fair value as of December 31, 2009 Net cash paid (received) for premiums Net cash paid (received) for settlement Gain (loss) on valuation (1) Gain (loss) on settlement (2) Fair value as of December 31, 2010 Premium based instruments Interest rate hedges Swaptions $ 114 $ 166 $ (57 ) $ (147 ) $ (12 ) $ 64 Options on interest rate futures 12 23 (7 ) (26 ) 1 3 Equity hedges Equity index options 50 83 (26 ) (47 ) (29 ) 31 176 272 (90 ) (220 ) (40 ) 98 Non-premium based instruments Interest rate hedges Futures 40 (42 ) (2 ) Interest rate swaps (12 ) (8 ) 21 (1 ) Credit hedges Purchased CDS (40 ) 32 7 (6 ) (7 ) (52 ) 64 28 (49 ) (9 ) Total $ 124 $ 272 $ (26 ) $ (192 ) $ (89 ) $ 89 (1) In general, for premium based instruments, valuation gains and losses represent changes in fair value on open contracts and contracts that expired by their contractual terms during the period. If a premium based instrument terminates prior to expiration, the inception to date change in fair value is reversed out of valuation and reclassified to settlement gain or loss. For non-premium based instruments, valuation gains and losses represent changes in fair value that occurred while the contract was open but do not include gains and losses on termination (represented by the change in fair value of a terminated contract since its last month-end valuation). (2) In general, for premium based instruments, settlement gains and losses represent the inception to date change in fair value for early-terminated contracts. For non-premium based instruments, settlement gains and losses represent the net realized capital gain or loss resulting from periodic payments required by the contracts during the period, as well as any gain or loss on contract termination (represented by the change in fair value of a terminated contract since its last month-end valuation). Our current macro hedge program consists of derivatives for which we pay a premium at inception and others that do not require an up front premium payment. The premium payment component includes over-the-counter interest rate swaptions, exchange traded options on interest rate futures, and options on equity indices. These programs are designed to protect against the "tail risk" associated with both interest rate spikes above, and equity market declines below, targeted thresholds, so that derivative valuation gains will be realized to partially offset corresponding declines in value for our fixed income and equity portfolios, respectively. Premiums paid are reflected in realized capital losses as changes in valuation over the life of the derivative. The maximum loss on our premium based instruments is limited to the remaining fair value as of December 31, 2010. Scheduled expirations for our premium based instruments are $89 million in 2011 and $9 million in 2012. The derivatives in our current macro hedge program that do not require an up front premium payment are related to interest rate and credit risk hedging. These positions currently include municipal interest rate swaps, eurodollar futures, and purchased CDS. Although interest rate swaps and purchased CDS typically do not require up front premiums, they do involve periodic payments throughout the life of the contract. The fair value and resulting gains and losses from these instruments are dependent on the size of the notional amounts and direction of our positions relative to the performance of the underlying markets and credit-referenced entities. As of December 31, 2010, our non-premium based interest rate hedges had aggregate outstanding notional amounts of $125 million, decreasing from $200 million as of December 31, 2009. As of December 31, 2010, our non-premium based credit hedges had aggregate outstanding notional amounts of $125 million, decreasing from $678 million as of December 31, 2009. As of December 31, 2010, we had 15,000 eurodollar futures contracts outstanding. Futures contracts were not utilized in our macro hedge program in 2009. The macro hedge program is routinely monitored and revised as capital market conditions change. 108 MARKET RISK Market risk is the risk that we will incur losses due to adverse changes in interest rates, credit spreads, equity prices, commodity prices, or currency exchange rates. Adverse changes to these rates and prices may occur due to changes in the liquidity of a market or market segment, insolvency or financial distress of key market makers or participants or changes in market perceptions of credit worthiness and/or risk tolerance. Our primary market risk exposures are to changes in interest rates, credit spreads and equity prices. The active management of market risk is integral to our results of operations. We may use the following approaches to manage exposure to market risk within defined tolerance ranges: 1) rebalancing existing asset or liability portfolios, 2) changing the character of investments purchased in the future and 3) using derivative instruments to modify the market risk characteristics of existing assets and liabilities or assets expected to be purchased. For a more detailed discussion of our use of derivative financial instruments, see Note 6 of the consolidated financial statements. Overview In formulating and implementing guidelines for investing funds, we seek to earn returns that enhance our ability to offer competitive rates and prices to customers while contributing to attractive and stable profits and long-term capital growth. Accordingly, our investment decisions and objectives are a function of the underlying risks and product profiles of each business. Investment policies define the overall framework for managing market and other investment risks, including accountability and controls over risk management activities. Subsidiaries that conduct investment activities follow policies that have been approved by their respective boards of directors. These investment policies specify the investment limits and strategies that are appropriate given the liquidity, surplus, product profile and regulatory requirements of the subsidiary. Executive oversight of investment activities is conducted primarily through subsidiaries' boards of directors and investment committees. For Allstate Financial, its asset-liability management ("ALM") policies further define the overall framework for managing market and investment risks. ALM focuses on strategies to enhance yields, mitigate market risks and optimize capital to improve profitability and returns for Allstate Financial. Allstate Financial ALM activities follow asset-liability policies that have been approved by their respective boards of directors. These ALM policies specify limits, ranges and/or targets for investments that best meet Allstate Financial's business objectives in light of its product liabilities. We manage our exposure to market risk through the use of asset allocation, duration, simulation, and as appropriate, through the use of stress tests. We have asset allocation limits that place restrictions on the total funds that may be invested within an asset class. We have duration limits on the Property-Liability and Allstate Financial investment portfolios and, as appropriate, on individual components of these portfolios. These duration limits place restrictions on the amount of interest rate risk that may be taken. Comprehensive day-to-day management of market risk within defined tolerance ranges occurs as portfolio managers buy and sell within their respective markets based upon the acceptable boundaries established by investment policies. For Allstate Financial, this day-to-day management is integrated with and informed by the activities of the ALM organization. This integration is intended to result in a prudent, methodical and effective adjudication of market risk and return, conditioned by the unique demands and dynamics of Allstate Financial's product liabilities and supported by the continuous application of advanced risk technology and analytics. Although we apply a similar overall philosophy to market risk, the underlying business frameworks and the accounting and regulatory environments differ considerably between the Property-Liability and Allstate Financial businesses affecting investment decisions and risk parameters. Interest rate risk is the risk that we will incur a loss due to adverse changes in interest rates relative to the interest rate characteristics of our interest bearing assets and liabilities. This risk arises from many of our primary activities, as we invest substantial funds in interest-sensitive assets and issue interest-sensitive liabilities. Interest rate risk includes risks related to changes in U.S. Treasury yields and other key risk-free reference yields. We manage the interest rate risk in our assets relative to the interest rate risk in our liabilities. One of the measures used to quantify this exposure is duration. Duration measures the price sensitivity of the assets and liabilities to changes in interest rates. For example, if interest rates increase 100 basis points, the fair value of an asset with a duration of 5 is expected to decrease in value by 5%. As of December 31, 2010, the difference between our asset and liability duration was (0.64) gap, compared to a (0.24) gap as of December 31, 2009. A negative duration gap indicates that the fair value of our liabilities is more sensitive to interest rate movements than the fair value of our assets. The Property-Liability segment generally maintains a positive duration gap between its assets and liabilities due to the relatively short duration of auto and homeowners claims, which are its primary liabilities. The Allstate Financial segment may have a positive or 109 negative duration gap, as the duration of its assets and liabilities vary with its product mix and investing activity. As of December 31, 2010, Property-Liability had a positive duration gap while Allstate Financial had a negative duration gap. In the management of investments supporting the Property-Liability business, we adhere to an objective of emphasizing safety of principal and consistency of income within a total return framework. This approach is designed to ensure our financial strength and stability for paying claims, while maximizing economic value and surplus growth. For the Allstate Financial business, we seek to invest premiums, contract charges and deposits to generate future cash flows that will fund future claims, benefits and expenses, and that will earn stable spreads across a wide variety of interest rate and economic scenarios. To achieve this objective and limit interest rate risk for Allstate Financial, we adhere to a philosophy of managing the duration of assets and related liabilities within predetermined tolerance levels. This philosophy is executed using duration targets for fixed income investments in addition to interest rate swaps, futures, forwards, caps, floors and swaptions to reduce the interest rate risk resulting from mismatches between existing assets and liabilities, and financial futures and other derivative instruments to hedge the interest rate risk of anticipated purchases and sales of investments and product sales to customers. We pledge and receive collateral on certain types of derivative contracts. For futures and option contracts traded on exchanges, we have pledged securities and cash as margin deposits totaling $37 million as of December 31, 2010. For OTC derivative transactions including interest rate swaps, foreign currency swaps, interest rate caps, interest rate floors, CDS, forwards and certain options (including swaptions), master netting agreements are used. These agreements allow us to net payments due for transactions covered by the agreements and, when applicable, we are required to post collateral. As of December 31, 2010, we held $58 million of cash and securities pledged by counterparties as collateral for OTC instruments, and we pledged $193 million of cash and securities as collateral to counterparties. We performed a sensitivity analysis on OTC derivative collateral by assuming a hypothetical 100 basis point decline in interest rates. The analysis indicated that we would have to post an estimated $194 million in additional collateral with 55% attributable to Allstate Financial. The selection of these hypothetical scenarios should not be construed as our prediction of future events, but only as an illustration of the estimated potential effect of such events. We also actively manage our counterparty credit risk exposure by monitoring the level of collateral posted by our counterparties with respect to our receivable positions. To calculate the duration gap between assets and liabilities, we project asset and liability cash flows and calculate their net present value using a risk-free market interest rate adjusted for credit quality, sector attributes, liquidity and other specific risks. Duration is calculated by revaluing these cash flows at alternative interest rates and determining the percentage change in aggregate fair value. The cash flows used in this calculation include the expected maturity and repricing characteristics of our derivative financial instruments, all other financial instruments, and certain other items including unearned premiums, property-liability insurance claims and claims expense reserves, annuity liabilities and other interest-sensitive liabilities. The projections include assumptions (based upon historical market experience and our experience) that reflect the effect of changing interest rates on the prepayment, lapse, leverage and/or option features of instruments, where applicable. The preceding assumptions relate primarily to mortgage-backed securities, municipal housing bonds, callable municipal and corporate obligations, and fixed rate single and flexible premium deferred annuities. Additionally, the calculations include assumptions regarding the renewal of property-liability policies. Based upon the information and assumptions used in the duration calculation, and interest rates in effect as of December 31, 2010, we estimate that a 100 basis point immediate, parallel increase in interest rates ("rate shock") would decrease the net fair value of the assets and liabilities by $1 million, compared to $378 million as of December 31, 2009, reflecting year to year changes in duration. Reflected in the duration calculation are the effects of a program that uses swaps, eurodollar futures, options on Treasury futures and interest rate swaptions to manage interest rate risk. In calculating the impact of a 100 basis point increase on the value of the derivatives, we have assumed interest rate volatility remains constant. Based on the swaps, eurodollar futures, options on Treasury futures and interest rate swaptions in place as of December 31, 2010, we would recognize realized capital gains totaling $327 million in the event of a 100 basis point immediate, parallel interest rate increase and $126 million in realized capital losses in the event of a 100 basis point immediate, parallel interest rate decrease on these derivatives. The selection of a 100 basis point immediate parallel change in interest rates should not be construed as our prediction of future market events, but only as an illustration of the potential effect of such an event. There are $8.71 billion of assets supporting life insurance products such as traditional and interest-sensitive life that are not financial instruments. These assets and the associated liabilities have not been included in the above estimate. The $8.71 billion of assets excluded from the calculation has increased from $8.12 billion as of December 31, 2009, due to an increase in interest-sensitive life contractholder funds and improved fixed income valuations as a result of declining risk-free interest rates and 110 tightening of credit spreads in certain sectors. Based on assumptions described above, in the event of a 100 basis point immediate increase in interest rates, the assets supporting life insurance products would decrease in value by $549 million, compared to a decrease of $459 million as of December 31, 2009. To the extent that conditions differ from the assumptions we used in these calculations, duration and rate shock measures could be significantly impacted. Additionally, our calculations assume that the current relationship between short-term and long-term interest rates (the term structure of interest rates) will remain constant over time. As a result, these calculations may not fully capture the effect of non-parallel changes in the term structure of interest rates and/or large changes in interest rates. Credit spread risk is the risk that we will incur a loss due to adverse changes in credit spreads ("spreads"). This risk arises from many of our primary activities, as we invest substantial funds in spread-sensitive fixed income assets. We manage the spread risk in our assets. One of the measures used to quantify this exposure is spread duration. Spread duration measures the price sensitivity of the assets to changes in spreads. For example, if spreads increase 100 basis points, the fair value of an asset exhibiting a spread duration of 5 is expected to decrease in value by 5%. Spread duration is calculated similarly to interest rate duration. As of December 31, 2010, the spread duration of Property-Liability assets was 4.45, compared to 5.02 as of December 31, 2009 and the spread duration of Allstate Financial assets was 4.97, compared to 4.79 as of December 31, 2009. Based upon the information and assumptions we use in this spread duration calculation, and spreads in effect as of December 31, 2010, we estimate that a 100 basis point immediate, parallel increase in spreads across all asset classes, industry sectors and credit ratings ("spread shock") would decrease the net fair value of the assets by $3.61 billion, compared to $3.85 billion as of December 31, 2009. Reflected in the duration calculation are the effects of our risk mitigation actions that use CDS to manage spread risk. Based on contracts in place as of December 31, 2010, we would recognize realized capital gains totaling $64 million in the event of a 100 basis point immediate, parallel spread increase and $64 million in realized capital losses in the event of a 100 basis point immediate, parallel spread decrease. The selection of a 100 basis point immediate parallel change in spreads should not be construed as our prediction of future market events, but only as an illustration of the potential effect of such an event. Equity price risk is the risk that we will incur losses due to adverse changes in the general levels of the equity markets. As of December 31, 2010, we held $4.67 billion in common stocks and Exchange Traded Funds ("ETFs") and $4.88 billion in other securities with equity risk (including primarily convertible securities, limited partnership interests, non-redeemable preferred securities and equity-linked notes), compared to $4.77 billion and $3.86 billion, respectively, as of December 31, 2009. 95.5% and 63.1% of these totals, respectively, represented assets of the Property-Liability operations as of December 31, 2010, compared to 97.3% and 57.1%, respectively, as of December 31, 2009. Additionally, we had 18,000 contracts in long Standard & Poor's 500 Composite Price Index ("S&P 500") puts as of December 31, 2010 with a fair value of $34 million. As of December 31, 2010, our portfolio of common stocks and other securities with equity risk had a cash market portfolio beta of 0.74, compared to a beta of 0.73 as of December 31, 2009. Beta represents a widely used methodology to describe, quantitatively, an investment's market risk characteristics relative to an index such as the S&P 500. Based on the beta analysis, we estimate that if the S&P 500 increases or decreases by 10%, the fair value of our equity investments will increase or decrease by 7.4%, respectively. Based upon the information and assumptions we used to calculate beta as of December 31, 2010, including the effect of the S&P 500 puts, we estimate that an immediate decrease in the S&P 500 of 10% would decrease the net fair value of our equity investments identified above by $695 million, compared to $605 million as of December 31, 2009, and an immediate increase in the S&P 500 of 10% would increase the net fair value by $708 million compared to $615 million as of December 31, 2009. In calculating the impact of a 10% S&P index perturbation on the value of the puts, we have assumed index volatility remains constant. Based on the S&P 500 index put options in place as of December 31, 2010, we would recognize losses totaling $14 million in the event of a 10% increase in the S&P 500 index and $22 million in gains in the event of a 10% decrease. The selection of a 10% immediate decrease or increase in the S&P 500 should not be construed as our prediction of future market events, but only as an illustration of the potential effect of such an event. The beta of our common stocks and other securities with equity risk was determined by calculating the change in the fair value of the portfolio resulting from stressing the equity market up and down 10%. The illustrations noted above may not reflect our actual experience if the future composition of the portfolio (hence its beta) and correlation relationships differ from the historical relationships. As of December 31, 2010 and 2009, we had separate accounts assets related to variable annuity and variable life contracts with account values totaling $8.68 billion and $9.07 billion, respectively. Equity risk exists for contract charges 111 based on separate account balances and guarantees for death and/or income benefits provided by our variable products. In 2006, we disposed of substantially all of the variable annuity business through reinsurance agreements with The Prudential Insurance Company of America, a subsidiary of Prudential Financial Inc. and therefore mitigated this aspect of our risk. Equity risk for our variable life business relates to contract charges and policyholder benefits. Total variable life contract charges for 2010 and 2009 were $80 million and $85 million, respectively. Separate account liabilities related to variable life contracts were $775 million and $708 million in December 31, 2010 and 2009, respectively. As of December 31, 2010 and 2009 we had $4.70 billion and $4.47 billion, respectively, in equity-indexed annuity liabilities that provide customers with interest crediting rates based on the performance of the S&P 500. We hedge the risk associated with these liabilities using equity-indexed options and futures, interest rate swaps, and eurodollar futures, maintaining risk within specified value-at-risk limits. Foreign currency exchange rate risk is the risk that we will incur economic losses due to adverse changes in foreign currency exchange rates. This risk primarily arises from our foreign equity investments, including real estate funds and private equity funds, and our Canadian and Northern Ireland operations. We also have certain funding agreement liabilities and fixed income securities that are denominated in foreign currencies; however, derivatives are used to hedge the foreign currency risk of these funding agreements and approximately 77% of the fixed income securities. As of December 31, 2010 and 2009, we had $435 million and $713 million, respectively, in funding agreements denominated in foreign currencies. As of December 31, 2010, we had $1.70 billion in foreign currency denominated equity investments, $773 million net investment in our foreign subsidiaries, and $91 million in unhedged non-dollar pay fixed income securities. These amounts were $1.38 billion, $686 million, and $148 million, respectively, as of December 31, 2009. 90.5% of the foreign currency exposure is in the Property-Liability business. Based upon the information and assumptions used as of December 31, 2010, we estimate that a 10% immediate unfavorable change in each of the foreign currency exchange rates to which we are exposed would decrease the value of our foreign currency denominated instruments by $257 million, compared with an estimated $222 million decrease as of December 31, 2009. The selection of a 10% immediate decrease in all currency exchange rates should not be construed as our prediction of future market events, but only as an illustration of the potential effect of such an event. Our currency exposure is diversified across 32 currencies as of December 31, 2010, compared to 39 currencies as of December 31, 2009. Our largest individual foreign currency exposures as of December 31, 2010 were to the Canadian dollar (37.0%) and the British Pound (13.3%). The largest individual foreign currency exposures as of December 31, 2009 were to the Canadian dollar (35.5%) and the Euro (22.9%). Our primary regional exposure is to Canada, with 37.0% as of December 31, 2010, compared to Western Europe, with 40.5% as of December 31, 2009. The modeling technique we use to report our currency exposure does not take into account correlation among foreign currency exchange rates. Even though we believe it is very unlikely that all of the foreign currency exchange rates that we are exposed to would simultaneously decrease by 10%, we nonetheless stress test our portfolio under this and other hypothetical extreme adverse market scenarios. Our actual experience may differ from these results because of assumptions we have used or because significant liquidity and market events could occur that we did not foresee. Commodity price risk is the risk that we will incur economic losses due to adverse changes in the prices of commodities. This risk arises from commodity linked investments, such as the Dow Jones AIG Commodity Index and Goldman Sachs Commodity Index which is a broad based, oil dominated index. As of December 31, 2010 and 2009, we had no exposure to the indices. PENSION PLANS We have defined benefit pension plans, which cover most full-time and certain part-time employees and employee-agents. See Note 16 of the consolidated financial statements for a complete discussion of these plans and their effect on the consolidated financial statements. The pension and other postretirement plans may be amended or terminated at any time. Any revisions could result in significant changes to our obligations and our obligation to fund the plans. We report unrecognized pension and other postretirement benefit cost in the Consolidated Statements of Financial Position as a component of accumulated other comprehensive income in shareholders' equity. It represents differences between the fair value of plan assets and the projected benefit obligation for pension plans and the accumulated postretirement benefit obligation for other postretirement plans that have not yet been recognized as a component of net periodic cost. The measurement of the unrecognized pension and other postretirement benefit cost can vary based upon the fluctuations in the fair value of the plan assets and the actuarial assumptions used for the plans as discussed 112 below. The unrecognized pension and other postretirement benefit cost as of December 31, 2010 was $1.19 billion, a decrease of $94 million from $1.28 billion as of December 31, 2009. The decrease was the result of the recognition of a portion of unrecognized pension and other postretirement benefit cost through pension expense during 2010, which was partially offset by actuarial losses incurred during the year. The market-related value component of expected returns recognizes plan losses and gains on equity securities over a five-year period, which we believe is consistent with the long-term nature of pension obligations. As a result, the effect of changes in fair value of equity securities on our net periodic pension cost may be experienced in periods subsequent to those in which the fluctuations actually occur. Net periodic pension cost in 2011 is estimated to be $293 million based on current assumptions, including settlement charges. This represents a decrease compared to 2010 due to favorable asset performance during 2010 and lower than expected salary increases. Net periodic pension cost increased in 2010 due to the effect of equity losses during the 2008 fiscal year and the decrease in discount rates experienced at the end of 2009. Net periodic pension cost decreased in 2009 due to the increase in discount rate for each pension plan, which resulted in lower amortization of net actuarial loss. In 2010 and 2008, net pension cost included non-cash settlement charges primarily resulting from lump sum distributions made to agents. Settlement charges also occurred during 2010, 2009 and 2008 related to the Supplemental Retirement Income Plan as a result of lump sum payments made from the plan. Settlement charges are likely to continue for some period in the future as we settle our remaining agent pension obligations by making lump sum distributions to agents. Amounts recorded for pension cost and accumulated other comprehensive income are significantly affected by fluctuations in the returns on plan assets and the amortization of unrecognized actuarial gains and losses. Plan assets sustained net losses in prior periods primarily due to declines in equity and credit markets. These asset losses, combined with all other unrecognized actuarial gains and losses, resulted in amortization of net actuarial loss (and additional net periodic pension cost) of $160 million in 2010 and $15 million in 2009. We anticipate that the unrealized loss for our pension plans will exceed 10% of the greater of the projected benefit obligations or the market-related value of assets in 2011 and into the foreseeable future, resulting in additional amortization and net periodic pension cost. Amounts recorded for net periodic pension cost and accumulated other comprehensive income are also significantly affected by changes in the assumptions used to determine the weighted average discount rate and the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets. The weighted average discount rate is based on rates at which expected pension benefits attributable to past employee service could effectively be settled on a present value basis at the measurement date. We develop the assumed weighted average discount rate by utilizing the weighted average yield of a theoretical dedicated portfolio derived from non-callable bonds available in the Barclays corporate bond universe having ratings of at least "AA" by S&P or at least "Aa" by Moody's on the measurement date with cash flows that match expected plan benefit requirements. Significant changes in discount rates, such as those caused by changes in the credit spreads, yield curve, the mix of bonds available in the market, the duration of selected bonds and expected benefit payments, may result in volatility in pension cost and accumulated other comprehensive income. Holding other assumptions constant, a hypothetical decrease of 100 basis points in the weighted average discount rate would result in an increase of $43 million in net periodic pension cost and a $392 million increase in the unrecognized pension and other postretirement benefit cost liability of our pension plans recorded as accumulated other comprehensive income as of December 31, 2010, compared to an increase of $43 million in net periodic pension cost and a $373 million increase in the unrecognized pension and other postretirement benefit cost liability as of December 31, 2009. A hypothetical increase of 100 basis points in the weighted average discount rate would decrease net periodic pension cost by $38 million and would decrease the unrecognized pension and other postretirement benefit cost liability of our pension plans recorded as accumulated other comprehensive income by $331 million as of December 31, 2010, compared to a decrease in net periodic pension cost of $38 million and a $317 million decrease in the unrecognized pension and other postretirement benefit cost liability of our pension plans recorded as accumulated other comprehensive income as of December 31, 2009. This non-symmetrical range results from the non-linear relationship between discount rates and pension obligations, and changes in the amortization of unrealized net actuarial gains and losses. The expected long-term rate of return on plan assets reflects the average rate of earnings expected on plan assets. While this rate reflects long-term assumptions and is consistent with long-term historical returns, sustained changes in the market or changes in the mix of plan assets may lead to revisions in the assumed long-term rate of return on plan assets that may result in variability of pension cost. Differences between the actual return on plan assets and the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets are a component of unrecognized gains or losses, which may be amortized as a component of net actuarial gains and losses and recorded in accumulated other comprehensive income. 113 As a result, the effect of changes in fair value on our pension cost may be experienced in results of operations in periods subsequent to those in which the fluctuations actually occur. Holding other assumptions constant, a hypothetical decrease of 100 basis points in the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets would result in an increase of $44 million in pension cost as of December 31, 2010, compared to $39 million as of December 31, 2009. A hypothetical increase of 100 basis points in the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets would result in a decrease in net periodic pension cost of $44 million as of December 31, 2010, compared to $39 million as of December 31, 2009. We target funding levels that do not restrict the payment of plan benefits in our domestic plans and were within our targeted range as of December 31, 2010. In 2010, we contributed $443 million to our pension plans. We expect to contribute $263 million for the 2011 plan year to maintain the plans' funded status. This estimate could change significantly following either a dramatic improvement or decline in investment markets. Other post employment benefits In 2010, the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act was signed into law. One aspect of this legislation is the introduction of an excise tax, effective in 2018, on "high cost" plans. The liabilities as of December 31, 2010 for the postretirement medical plans include an estimate of this additional liability, which amounts to $3 million. DEFERRED TAXES The total deferred tax valuation allowance was $6 million as of December 31, 2010 compared to $11 million as of December 31, 2009. We evaluate whether a valuation allowance for our deferred tax assets is required each reporting period. A valuation allowance is established if, based on the weight of available evidence, it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred income tax asset will not be realized. In determining whether a valuation allowance is needed, all available evidence is considered. This includes the potential for capital and ordinary loss carryback, future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences, tax planning strategies that we may employ to avoid a tax benefit from expiring unused and future taxable income exclusive of reversing temporary differences. With respect to our evaluation of the need for a valuation allowance related to the deferred tax asset on capital losses that have been realized but have not yet been recognized for tax purposes, we utilize prudent and feasible tax planning strategies that optimize the ability to carry back capital losses as well as the ability to offset future capital losses with unrealized capital gains that could be recognized for tax purposes. We have remaining capital loss carryback capacity of $439 million and $9 million from 2009 and 2010, respectively. With respect to our evaluation of the need for a valuation allowance related to the deferred tax asset on unrealized capital losses on fixed income and equity securities, our tax planning strategies first consider the availability of unrealized capital gains to offset future capital losses and then we rely on our assertion that we have the intent and ability to hold certain securities with unrealized losses to recovery. As a result, the unrealized losses on these securities would not be expected to materialize and no valuation allowance on the associated deferred tax asset is needed. CAPITAL RESOURCES AND LIQUIDITY 2010 HIGHLIGHTS Shareholders' equity as of December 31, 2010 was $19.02 billion, an increase of 13.9% from $16.69 billion as of December 31, 2009. On January 5, 2010, April 1, 2010, July 1, 2010 and October 1, 2010, we paid a quarterly shareholder dividend of $0.20, respectively. On November 9, 2010, we declared a quarterly shareholder dividend of $0.20 payable on January 3, 2011. In November 2010, we commenced a $1.00 billion share repurchase program. As of December 31, 2010, this program had $840 million remaining and is expected to be completed by March 31, 2012. 114 CAPITAL RESOURCES AND LIQUIDITY Capital resources consist of shareholders' equity and debt, representing funds deployed or available to be deployed to support business operations or for general corporate purposes. The following table summarizes our capital resources as of December 31. ($ in millions) 2010 2009 2008 Common stock, retained income and other shareholders' equity items $ 19,200 $ 18,798 $ 17,442 Accumulated other comprehensive loss (184 ) (2,106 ) (4,801 ) Total shareholders' equity 19,016 16,692 12,641 Debt 5,908 5,910 5,659 Total capital resources $ 24,924 $ 22,602 $ 18,300 Ratio of debt to shareholders' equity 31.1% 35.4% 44.8% Ratio of debt to capital resources 23.7% 26.1% 30.9% Shareholders' equity increased in 2010, primarily due to unrealized net capital gains on investments and net income, partially offset by dividends paid to shareholders and share repurchases. Shareholders' equity increased in 2009, due primarily to decreases in unrealized net capital losses on investments and net income, partially offset by dividends paid to shareholders. Debt decreased $2 million in 2010 due to decreases in long-term debt. Debt increased $251 million in 2009 due to net increases in long-term debt. In May 2009, we issued $300 million of 6.20% Senior Notes due 2014 and $700 million of 7.45% Senior Notes due 2019. The proceeds of this issuance were used for general corporate purposes, including to facilitate the repayment of the $750 million of 7.20% Senior Notes that matured on December 1, 2009. Except for $42 million in long-term debt related to the synthetic leases scheduled to mature in 2011, we do not have any required principal payments until 2012 when $350 million of 6.125% Senior Notes are due. For further information on debt issuances, see Note 11 of the consolidated financial statements. As of December 31, 2010 and 2009, there were no outstanding commercial paper borrowings. Share repurchases In November 2010, we commenced a $1.00 billion share repurchase program. As of December 31, 2010, this program had $840 million remaining and is expected to be completed by March 31, 2012. Since 1995, we have acquired 463 million shares of our common stock at a cost of $19.25 billion, primarily as part of various stock repurchase programs. We have reissued 97 million shares since 1995, primarily associated with our equity incentive plans, the 1999 acquisition of American Heritage Life Investment Corporation and the 2001 redemption of certain mandatorily redeemable preferred securities. Since 1995, total shares outstanding has decreased by 363 million shares or 40.5%, primarily due to our repurchase programs. Financial ratings and strength The following table summarizes our debt, commercial paper and insurance financial strength ratings as of December 31, 2010. Moody's Standard & Poor's A.M. Best The Allstate Corporation (senior long-term debt) A3 A- a- The Allstate Corporation (commercial paper) P-2 A-2 AMB-1 Allstate Insurance Company (insurance financial strength) Aa3 AA- A+ Allstate Life Insurance Company (insurance financial strength) A1 A+ A+ Our ratings are influenced by many factors including our operating and financial performance, asset quality, liquidity, asset/liability management, overall portfolio mix, financial leverage (i.e., debt), exposure to risks such as catastrophes and the current level of operating leverage. On January 24, 2011, Moody's affirmed The Allstate Corporation's debt and commercial paper ratings of A3, and P-2, respectively, AIC's financial strength rating of Aa3 and ALIC's financial strength rating of A1. The outlook for the Moody's ratings remained stable. On December 15, 2010, A.M. Best affirmed The Allstate Corporation's debt and commercial paper ratings of a- and AMB-1, respectively, as well as the A+ financial strength ratings of AIC and ALIC. The outlook for The Allstate Corporation and AIC remained stable while the outlook for ALIC remained negative. On November 17, 2010, S&P affirmed The Allstate Corporation's debt and commercial paper ratings of A- and A-2, 115 respectively, as well as the AA- financial strength rating of AIC. S&P downgraded the financial strength rating for ALIC to A+ from AA-. The outlook for all S&P ratings was revised to stable from negative. We have distinct and separately capitalized groups of subsidiaries licensed to sell property and casualty insurance in New Jersey and Florida that maintain separate group ratings. The ratings of these groups are influenced by the risks that relate specifically to each group. Many mortgage companies require property owners to have insurance from an insurance carrier with a secure financial strength rating from an accredited rating agency. Allstate New Jersey Insurance Company and Encompass Insurance Company of New Jersey, which write auto and homeowners insurance, are rated A- by A.M. Best. Allstate New Jersey Insurance Company also has a Financial Stability Rating of A" from Demotech. The outlook for these ratings is stable. Castle Key Insurance Company and its subsidiaries, which underwrite personal lines property insurance in Florida, are rated B- by A.M. Best. The outlook for the ratings of Castle Key Insurance Company and its subsidiaries is negative. Castle Key Insurance Company and its subsidiaries also have Financial Stability Ratings of A' from Demotech. ALIC, AIC and the Corporation are party to the Amended and Restated Intercompany Liquidity Agreement ("Liquidity Agreement") which allows for short-term advances of funds to be made between parties for liquidity and other general corporate purposes. The Liquidity Agreement does not establish a commitment to advance funds on the part of any party. ALIC and AIC each serve as a lender and borrower and the Corporation serves only as a lender. AIC also has a capital support agreement with ALIC. Under the capital support agreement, AIC is committed to provide capital to ALIC to maintain an adequate capital level. The maximum amount of potential funding under each of these agreements is $1.00 billion. In addition to the Liquidity Agreement, the Corporation also has an intercompany loan agreement with certain of its subsidiaries, which include, but are not limited to, AIC and ALIC. The amount of intercompany loans available to the Corporation's subsidiaries is at the discretion of the Corporation. The maximum amount of loans the Corporation will have outstanding to all its eligible subsidiaries at any given point in time is limited to $1.00 billion. The Corporation may use commercial paper borrowings, bank lines of credit and repurchase agreements to fund intercompany borrowings. Allstate's domestic property-liability and life insurance subsidiaries prepare their statutory-basis financial statements in conformity with accounting practices prescribed or permitted by the insurance department of the applicable state of domicile. Statutory surplus is a measure that is often used as a basis for determining dividend paying capacity, operating leverage and premium growth capacity, and it is also reviewed by rating agencies in determining their ratings. As of December 31, 2010, AIC's statutory surplus is approximately $15.38 billion compared to $15.03 billion as of December 31, 2009. These amounts include ALIC's statutory surplus of approximately $3.34 billion as of December 31, 2010, compared to $3.47 billion as of December 31, 2009. The ratio of net premiums written to statutory surplus is a common measure of operating leverage used in the property-casualty insurance industry and serves as an indicator of a company's premium growth capacity. Ratios in excess of 3 to 1 are typically considered outside the usual range by insurance regulators and rating agencies. AIC's premium to surplus ratio was 1.6x on December 31, 2010 compared to 1.7x in the prior year. State laws specify regulatory actions if an insurer's risk-based capital ("RBC"), a measure of an insurer's solvency, falls below certain levels. The NAIC has a standard formula for annually assessing RBC. The formula for calculating RBC for property-liability companies takes into account asset and credit risks but places more emphasis on underwriting factors for reserving and pricing. The formula for calculating RBC for life insurance companies takes into account factors relating to insurance, business, asset and interest rate risks. As of December 31, 2010, the RBC for each of our domestic insurance companies was within the range that we target. The NAIC has also developed a set of financial relationships or tests known as the Insurance Regulatory Information System to assist state regulators in monitoring the financial condition of insurance companies and identifying companies that require special attention or actions by insurance regulatory authorities. The NAIC analyzes financial data provided by insurance companies using prescribed ratios, each with defined "usual ranges". Generally, regulators will begin to monitor an insurance company if its ratios fall outside the usual ranges for four or more of the ratios. If an insurance company has insufficient capital, regulators may act to reduce the amount of insurance it can issue. The ratios of our domestic insurance companies are within these ranges. 116 Liquidity sources and uses Our potential sources of funds principally include activities shown in the following table. Property- Liability Allstate Financial Corporate and Other Receipt of insurance premiums X X Contractholder fund deposits X Reinsurance recoveries X X Receipts of principal, interest and dividends on investments X X X Sales of investments X X X Funds from securities lending, commercial paper and line of credit agreements X X X Intercompany loans X X X Capital contributions from parent X X Dividends from subsidiaries X X Tax refunds/settlements X X X Funds from periodic issuance of additional securities X Funds from the settlement of our benefit plans X Our potential uses of funds principally include activities shown in the following table. Property- Liability Allstate Financial Corporate and Other Payment of claims and related expenses X Payment of contract benefits, maturities, surrenders and withdrawals X Reinsurance cessions and payments X X Operating costs and expenses X X X Purchase of investments X X X Repayment of securities lending, commercial paper and line of credit agreements X X X Payment or repayment of intercompany loans X X X Capital contributions to subsidiaries X X Dividends to shareholders/parent company X X X Tax payments/settlements X X Share repurchases X Debt service expenses and repayment X X X Settlement payments of employee and agent benefit plans X X X We actively manage our financial position and liquidity levels in light of changing market, economic, and business conditions. Liquidity is managed at both the entity and enterprise level across the Company, and is assessed on both base and stressed level liquidity needs. We believe we have sufficient liquidity to meet these needs. Additionally, we have existing intercompany agreements in place that facilitate liquidity management across the Company to enhance flexibility. Parent company capital capacity At the parent holding company level, we have deployable invested assets totaling $3.84 billion as of December 31, 2010. These assets include investments that are generally saleable within one quarter totaling $3.43 billion. The substantial earnings capacity of the operating subsidiaries is the primary source of capital generation for the Corporation. In 2011, AIC will have the capacity to pay dividends currently estimated at $1.54 billion without prior regulatory approval. We do not anticipate that ALIC will pay dividends to AIC in 2011. In addition, we have access to $1.00 billion of funds from either commercial paper issuance or an unsecured revolving credit facility. This provides funds for the parent company's relatively low fixed charges. In 2010, dividends totaling $1.30 billion were paid by AIC to its parent, the Corporation. There were no dividends paid by AIC to the Corporation in 2009. In 2008, dividends totaling $3.40 billion were paid by AIC to the Corporation. There were no capital contributions paid by the Corporation to AIC in both 2010 and 2009. In 2008, capital contributions paid by the Corporation to AIC totaled $1.00 billion. In 2010 and 2009, a return of capital by American Heritage Life Investment Corporation to the Corporation totaled $24 million and $13 million, respectively. There were no dividends paid by Allstate Financial in 2008. 117 There were no capital contributions by AIC to ALIC in 2010. In 2009, capital contributions were paid in cash by AIC to ALIC totaling $250 million. 2009 also included capital contributions to ALIC comprising the transfer to ALIC from AIC of non-cash assets totaling $448 million and the transfer of a $25 million surplus note to Kennett Capital Inc. from ALIC in exchange for a note receivable with a principal sum equal to that of the surplus note, which was originally issued to ALIC by a subsidiary of ALIC. In 2008, funds paid by AIC to ALIC totaled $1.41 billion. The $1.41 billion includes capital contributions paid in cash totaling $607 million and the issuance of two surplus notes, each with a principal sum of $400 million, to AIC in exchange for cash totaling $800 million. 2008 also included capital contributions to ALIC comprising the transfer to ALIC from AIC of non-cash assets totaling $342 million and the transfer of a $50 million surplus note to Kennett Capital Inc. from ALIC in exchange for a note receivable with a principal sum equal to that of the surplus note, which was originally issued to ALIC by a subsidiary of ALIC. One of the surplus notes issued to AIC in 2008 was subsequently canceled and forgiven by AIC resulting in the recognition of a capital contribution equal to the outstanding principal balance of the surplus note of $400 million. The Corporation has access to additional borrowing to support liquidity as follows: A commercial paper facility with a borrowing limit of $1.00 billion to cover short-term cash needs. As of December 31, 2010, there were no balances outstanding and therefore the remaining borrowing capacity was $1.00 billion; however, the outstanding balance can fluctuate daily. Our primary credit facility is available for short-term liquidity requirements and backs our commercial paper facility. Our $1.00 billion unsecured revolving credit facility has an initial term of five years expiring in 2012 with two optional one-year extensions that can be exercised at the end of any of the remaining anniversary years of the facility upon approval of existing or replacement lenders providing more than two-thirds of the commitments to lend. The program is fully subscribed among 11 lenders with the largest commitment being $185 million. The commitments of the lenders are several and no lender is responsible for any other lender's commitment if such lender fails to make a loan under the facility. This facility contains an increase provision that would allow up to an additional $500 million of borrowing provided the increased portion could be fully syndicated at a later date among existing or new lenders. This facility has a financial covenant requiring that we not exceed a 37.5% debt to capital resources ratio as defined in the agreement. This ratio as of December 31, 2010 was 19.4%. Although the right to borrow under the facility is not subject to a minimum rating requirement, the costs of maintaining the facility and borrowing under it are based on the ratings of our senior, unsecured, nonguaranteed long-term debt. There were no borrowings under the credit facility during 2010. The total amount outstanding at any point in time under the combination of the commercial paper program and the credit facility cannot exceed the amount that can be borrowed under the credit facility. A universal shelf registration statement was filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on May 8, 2009. We can use this shelf registration to issue an unspecified amount of debt securities, common stock (including 367 million shares of treasury stock as of December 31, 2010), preferred stock, depositary shares, warrants, stock purchase contracts, stock purchase units and securities of trust subsidiaries. The specific terms of any securities we issue under this registration statement will be provided in the applicable prospectus supplements. Liquidity exposure Contractholder funds as of December 31, 2010 were $48.20 billion. The following table summarizes contractholder funds by their contractual withdrawal provisions as of December 31, 2010. ($ in millions) Percent to total Not subject to discretionary withdrawal $ 6,998 14.5 % Subject to discretionary withdrawal with adjustments: Specified surrender charges (1) 19,815 41.1 Market value adjustments (2) 7,805 16.2 Subject to discretionary withdrawal without adjustments (3) 13,577 28.2 Total contractholder funds (4) $ 48,195 100.0 % (1) Includes $9.80 billion of liabilities with a contractual surrender charge of less than 5% of the account balance. (2) $6.50 billion of the contracts with market value adjusted surrenders have a 30-45 day period at the end of their initial and subsequent interest rate guarantee periods (which are typically 5 or 6 years) during which there is no surrender charge or market value adjustment. (3) 67% of these contracts have a minimum interest crediting rate guarantee of 3% or higher. (4) Includes $1.23 billion of contractholder funds on variable annuities reinsured to The Prudential Insurance Company of America, a subsidiary of Prudential Financial Inc., in 2006. 118 While we are able to quantify remaining scheduled maturities for our institutional products, anticipating retail product surrenders is less precise. Retail life and annuity products may be surrendered by customers for a variety of reasons. Reasons unique to individual customers include a current or unexpected need for cash or a change in life insurance coverage needs. Other key factors that may impact the likelihood of customer surrender include the level of the contract surrender charge, the length of time the contract has been in force, distribution channel, market interest rates, equity market conditions and potential tax implications. In addition, the propensity for retail life insurance policies to lapse is lower than it is for fixed annuities because of the need for the insured to be re-underwritten upon policy replacement. Surrenders and partial withdrawals for our retail annuities increased 2.2% in 2010 compared to 2009. The annualized surrender and partial withdrawal rate on deferred annuities, interest-sensitive life insurance and Allstate Bank products, based on the beginning of year contractholder funds, was 12.2% and 11.8% in 2010 and 2009, respectively. Allstate Financial strives to promptly pay customers who request cash surrenders; however, statutory regulations generally provide up to six months in most states to fulfill surrender requests. Our institutional products are primarily funding agreements sold to unaffiliated trusts used to back medium-term notes. As of December 31, 2010, total institutional products outstanding were $2.64 billion. The following table presents the remaining scheduled maturities for our institutional products outstanding as of December 31, 2010. ($ in millions) 2011 $ 760 2012 40 2013 1,750 2016 85 $ 2,635 Our asset-liability management practices limit the differences between the cash flows generated by our investment portfolio and the expected cash flow requirements of our life insurance, annuity and institutional product obligations. Certain remote events and circumstances could constrain our liquidity. Those events and circumstances include, for example, a catastrophe resulting in extraordinary losses, a downgrade in our long-term debt rating of A3, A- and a- (from Moody's, S&P and A.M. Best, respectively) to non-investment grade status of below Baa3/BBB-/bb, a downgrade in AIC's financial strength rating from Aa3, AA- and A+ (from Moody's, S&P and A.M. Best, respectively) to below Baa2/BBB/A-, or a downgrade in ALIC's financial strength ratings from A1, A+ and A+ (from Moody's, S&P and A.M. Best, respectively) to below A3/A-/A-. The rating agencies also consider the interdependence of our individually rated entities; therefore, a rating change in one entity could potentially affect the ratings of other related entities. The following table summarizes consolidated cash flow activities by business segment. ($ in millions) Property-Liability (1) Allstate Financial (1) Corporate and Other (1) Consolidated 2010 2009 2008 2010 2009 2008 2010 2009 2008 2010 2009 2008 Net cash provided by (used in): Operating activities $ 1,373 $ 2,183 $ 1,746 $ 2,407 $ 2,196 $ 2,203 $ (91 ) $ (78 ) $ (39 ) $ 3,689 $ 4,301 $ 3,910 Investing activities (44 ) (1,919 ) 2,012 3,096 4,755 2,779 (720 ) 604 (1,003 ) 2,332 3,440 3,788 Financing activities (8 ) (6 ) (16 ) (5,510 ) (7,246 ) (5,510 ) (553 ) (292 ) (2,179 ) (6,071 ) (7,544 ) (7,705 ) Net (decrease) increase in consolidated cash $ (50 ) $ 197 $ (7 ) (1) Business unit cash flows reflect the elimination of intersegment dividends, contributions and borrowings. Property-Liability Lower cash provided by operating activities for Property-Liability in 2010 compared to 2009 was primarily due to income tax payments in 2010 compared to income tax refunds in 2009 and lower claim payments. Higher cash provided by operating activities for Property-Liability in 2009 compared to 2008 was primarily due to income tax refunds in 2009 compared to tax payments in 2008 and lower claim payments. Lower cash used in investing activities in 2010 compared to 2009 was primarily due to decreased net purchases of fixed income and equity securities and higher net sales of fixed income and equity securities, partially offset by net change in short-term investments. Cash used in investing activities in 2009 compared to cash provided by investing activities in 2008 was primarily due to increased net purchases of fixed income and equity securities, partially offset by net change in short-term investments. 119 Allstate Financial Operating cash flows for Allstate Financial in 2010 were higher than 2009 as higher premiums and tax refunds received were partially offset by lower investment income and higher contract benefits paid. Operating cash flows for Allstate Financial in 2009 were consistent with 2008 as higher income tax refunds and lower expenses were offset by lower net investment income. The increase in income tax refunds received in 2009 was related to the carryback of 2008 ordinary losses to prior tax years. Cash flows provided by investing activities in 2010 and 2009 were impacted by reductions of investments to fund reductions in contractholder fund liabilities. Lower cash flows used in financing activities in 2010 compared to 2009 were primarily due to decreased maturities and retirements of institutional products, partially offset by lower deposits on fixed annuities. Higher cash flows used in financing activities in 2009 compared to 2008 were primarily due to the absence of issuances of institutional products in 2009 compared to $4.16 billion in 2008 and lower deposits on fixed annuities, partially offset by lower maturities and retirements of institutional products. For quantification of the changes in contractholder funds, see the Allstate Financial Segment section of the MD&A. Corporate and Other Fluctuations in the Corporate and Other operating cash flows were primarily due to the timing of intercompany settlements. Investing activities primarily relate to investments in the portfolios of Kennett Capital Holdings, LLC. Financing cash flows of the Corporate and Other segment reflect actions such as fluctuations in short-term debt, repayment of debt, proceeds from the issuance of debt, dividends to shareholders of The Allstate Corporation and share repurchases; therefore, financing cash flows are affected when we increase or decrease the level of these activities. Contractual obligations and commitments Our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2010 and the payments due by period are shown in the following table. ($ in millions) Total Less than 1 year 1-3 years 4-5 years Over 5 years Liabilities for collateral (1) $ 484 $ 484 $ $ $ Contractholder funds (2) 57,525 8,761 14,232 9,310 25,222 Reserve for life-contingent contract benefits (2) 38,070 1,413 2,711 2,587 31,359 Long-term debt (3) 12,443 403 1,280 1,530 9,230 Capital lease obligations (3) 45 7 15 8 15 Operating leases (3) 632 199 260 109 64 Unconditional purchase obligations (3) 322 118 157 40 7 Defined benefit pension plans and other postretirement benefit plans (3)(4) 3,035 299 266 274 2,196 Reserve for property-liability insurance claims and claims expense (5) 19,468 8,388 5,886 2,224 2,970 Other liabilities and accrued expenses (6)(7) 3,351 3,076 202 43 30 Net unrecognized tax benefits (8) 25 25 Total contractual cash obligations $ 135,400 $ 23,173 $ 25,009 $ 16,125 $ 71,093 (1) Liabilities for collateral are typically fully secured with cash or short-term investments. We manage our short-term liquidity position to ensure the availability of a sufficient amount of liquid assets to extinguish short-term liabilities as they come due in the normal course of business, including utilizing potential sources of liquidity as disclosed previously. (2) Contractholder funds represent interest-bearing liabilities arising from the sale of products such as interest-sensitive life, fixed annuities, including immediate annuities without life contingencies, bank deposits and institutional products. The reserve for life-contingent contract benefits relates primarily to traditional life insurance, immediate annuities with life contingencies and voluntary accident and health insurance. These amounts reflect the present value of estimated cash payments to be made to contractholders and policyholders. Certain of these contracts, such as immediate annuities without life contingencies and institutional products, involve payment obligations where the amount and timing of the payment is essentially fixed and determinable. These amounts relate to (i) policies or contracts where we are currently making payments and will continue to do so and (ii) contracts where the timing of a portion or all of the payments has been determined by the contract. Other contracts, such as interest-sensitive life, fixed deferred annuities, traditional life insurance, immediate annuities with life contingencies and voluntary accident and health insurance, involve payment obligations where a portion or all of the amount and timing of future payments is uncertain. For these contracts and bank deposits, we are not currently making payments and will not make payments until (i) the occurrence of an insurable event such as death or illness or (ii) the occurrence of a payment triggering event such as the surrender or partial withdrawal on a policy or deposit contract, which is outside of our control. We have estimated the timing of payments related to these contracts based on historical experience and our expectation of future payment patterns. Uncertainties relating to these liabilities include mortality, morbidity, expenses, customer lapse and withdrawal activity, estimated additional deposits for interest-sensitive life contracts, and renewal premium for life policies, which may significantly impact both the 120 timing and amount of future payments. Such cash outflows reflect adjustments for the estimated timing of mortality, retirement, and other appropriate factors, but are undiscounted with respect to interest. As a result, the sum of the cash outflows shown for all years in the table exceeds the corresponding liabilities of $48.20 billion for contractholder funds and $13.48 billion for reserve for life-contingent contract benefits as included in the Consolidated Statements of Financial Position as of December 31, 2010. The liability amount in the Consolidated Statements of Financial Position reflects the discounting for interest as well as adjustments for the timing of other factors as described above. (3) Our payment obligations relating to long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating leases, unconditional purchase obligations and pension and other post employment benefits ("OPEB") contributions are managed within the structure of our intermediate to long-term liquidity management program. Amount differs from the balance presented on the Consolidated Statements of Financial Position as of December 31, 2010 because the long-term debt amount above includes interest. (4) The pension plans' obligations in the next 12 months represent our planned contributions, and the remaining years' contributions are projected based on the average remaining service period using the current underfunded status of the plans. The OPEB plans' obligations are estimated based on the expected benefits to be paid. These liabilities are discounted with respect to interest, and as a result the sum of the cash outflows shown for all years in the table exceeds the corresponding liability amount of $1.57 billion included in other liabilities and accrued expenses on the Consolidated Statements of Financial Position. (5) Reserve for property-liability insurance claims and claims expense is an estimate of amounts necessary to settle all outstanding claims, including claims that have been IBNR as of the balance sheet date. We have estimated the timing of these payments based on our historical experience and our expectation of future payment patterns. However, the timing of these payments may vary significantly from the amounts shown above, especially for IBNR claims. The ultimate cost of losses may vary materially from recorded amounts which are our best estimates. The reserve for property-liability insurance claims and claims expense includes loss reserves related to asbestos and environmental claims as of December 31, 2010, of $1.66 billion and $248 million, respectively. (6) Other liabilities primarily include accrued expenses and certain benefit obligations and claim payments and other checks outstanding. Certain of these long-term liabilities are discounted with respect to interest, as a result the sum of the cash outflows shown for all years in the table exceeds the corresponding liability amount of $3.34 billion. (7) Balance sheet liabilities not included in the table above include unearned and advance premiums of $10.59 billion and deferred tax liabilities of $1.71 billion netted in the net deferred tax asset of $784 million. These items were excluded as they do not meet the definition of a contractual liability as we are not contractually obligated to pay these amounts to third parties. Rather, they represent an accounting mechanism that allows us to present our financial statements on an accrual basis. In addition, other liabilities of $461 million were not included in the table above because they did not represent a contractual obligation or the amount and timing of their eventual payment was sufficiently uncertain. (8) Net unrecognized tax benefits represent our potential future obligation to the taxing authority for a tax position that was not recognized in the consolidated financial statements. We believe it is reasonably possible that the liability balance will be reduced by $25 million within the next twelve months upon the resolution of an outstanding issue resulting from the 2005-2006 Internal Revenue Service examination. The resolution of this obligation may be for an amount different than what we have accrued. Our contractual commitments as of December 31, 2010 and the periods in which the commitments expire are shown in the following table. ($ in millions) Total Less than 1 year 1-3 years 4-5 years Over 5 years Other commitments conditional $ 196 $ 144 $ 1 $ 3 $ 48 Other commitments unconditional 1,472 215 665 449 143 Total commitments $ 1,668 $ 359 $ 666 $ 452 $ 191 Contractual commitments represent investment commitments such as private placements, limited partnership interests and other loans. We have agreements in place for services we conduct, generally at cost, between subsidiaries relating to insurance, reinsurance, loans and capitalization. All material intercompany transactions have appropriately been eliminated in consolidation. Intercompany transactions among insurance subsidiaries and affiliates have been approved by the appropriate departments of insurance as required. For a more detailed discussion of our off-balance sheet arrangements, see Note 6 of the consolidated financial statements. ENTERPRISE RISK AND RETURN MANAGEMENT Enterprise Risk and Return Management's ("ERRM") role is to support Allstate's continued financial health and success. ERRM is a disciplined, holistic, integrated and interactive approach to risk that: Identifies potential risks and events that could significantly impact the Company Provides a shared viewpoint and thorough understanding of risks and opportunities Creates value by providing analysis of risk-return interrelationships and tradeoff opportunities Increases transparency and provides greater assurance of achieving objectives At Allstate, we have ERRM programs, risk committees and control structures to manage our enterprise portfolio of risk and return. These programs include governance policies with established tolerances and risk limits, Board and 121 senior management involvement, enterprise modeling, risk-return analytics and communication and reporting. Our perspective of risk, return and capital needs promotes capital and financial management. Allstate's senior management risk committee, the Enterprise Risk & Return Council, drives ERRM by establishing enterprise risk tolerance and risk-return requirements and directing integrated strategies and actions from a holistic enterprise perspective. Allstate's Board of Directors and Audit Committee provide ERRM oversight by reviewing enterprise principles, guidelines and limits for Allstate's significant risks and by monitoring strategies and actions management has taken to control these risks. Managers, risk professionals and chief risk officers in the various business units design and execute individual risk-return strategies that align with our overall enterprise standards. These include managing exposure to hurricanes and other severe weather events; managing impacts to invested assets and liabilities related to changes in risk-free interest rates, credit spreads, and equity markets; optimizing liquidity levels in light of changing market, economic and business conditions; and implementing practices to effectively identify, monitor and control operational and strategic risks. Our comprehensive enterprise stochastic model captures the unique and specific nature and interaction of risks inherent in our various businesses and serves as the foundation of our economic capital framework. We determine an appropriate level of enterprise economic capital to hold considering a broad range of risk perspectives, including capital stress scenarios, risks of financial distress and insolvency, volatility, shareholder value, rating agency constraints and regulatory RBC requirements. Strategic allocation of economic capital to lines of business is based on contribution to enterprise risk, expected return and diversification benefit, and is used for ongoing evaluation of business units and products. We adapt our ERRM processes to be fluid and dynamic in changing business and market environments and evolve our risk strategies to target return opportunities as they arise. For continuous ERRM validation and improvement, we benchmark and secure external perspectives on our processes. REGULATION AND LEGAL PROCEEDINGS We are subject to extensive regulation and we are involved in various legal and regulatory actions, all of which have an effect on specific aspects of our business. For a detailed discussion of the legal and regulatory actions in which we are involved, see Note 13 of the consolidated financial statements. PENDING ACCOUNTING STANDARDS There are several pending accounting standards that we have not implemented either because the standard has not been finalized or the implementation date has not yet occurred. For a discussion of these pending standards, see Note 2 of the consolidated financial statements. The effect of implementing certain accounting standards on our financial results and financial condition is often based in part on market conditions at the time of implementation of the standard and other factors we are unable to determine prior to implementation. For this reason, we are sometimes unable to estimate the effect of certain pending accounting standards until the relevant authoritative body finalizes these standards or until we implement them. 
