CIK: 899051
Company Name: ALLSTATE CORP
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2012-02-22


Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Page Overview 27 2011 Highlights 27 Consolidated Net Income 28 Application of Critical Accounting Estimates 29 Property-Liability 2011 Highlights 41 Property-Liability Operations 42 Allstate Protection Segment 44 Discontinued Lines and Coverages Segment 57 Property-Liability Investment Results 57 Property-Liability Claims and Claims Expense Reserves 58 Allstate Financial 2011 Highlights 69 Allstate Financial Segment 69 Investments 2011 Highlights 79 Investments 79 Market Risk 95 Pension Plans 99 Goodwill 100 Deferred Taxes 101 Capital Resources and Liquidity 2011 Highlights 101 Capital Resources and Liquidity 102 Enterprise Risk and Return Management 108 Regulation and Legal Proceedings 109 Pending Accounting Standards 109 26 Table of Contents OVERVIEW The following discussion highlights significant factors influencing the consolidated financial position and results of operations of The Allstate Corporation (referred to in this document as "we," "our," "us," the "Company" or "Allstate"). It should be read in conjunction with the 5-year summary of selected financial data, consolidated financial statements and related notes found under Part II, Item 6 and Item 8 contained herein. Further analysis of our insurance segments is provided in the Property-Liability Operations (which includes the Allstate Protection and the Discontinued Lines and Coverages segments) and in the Allstate Financial Segment sections of Management's Discussion and Analysis ("MD&A"). The segments are consistent with the way in which we use financial information to evaluate business performance and to determine the allocation of resources. Allstate is focused on the following priorities in 2012: maintain auto profitability; raise returns in homeowners and annuity businesses; grow insurance premiums; and proactively manage investments and capital. The most important factors we monitor to evaluate the financial condition and performance of our company include: For Allstate Protection: premium written, the number of policies in force ("PIF"), retention, price changes, claim frequency (rate of claim occurrence per policy in force) and severity (average cost per claim), catastrophes, loss ratio, expenses, underwriting results, and sales of all products and services; For Allstate Financial: benefit and investment spread, amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs ("DAC"), expenses, operating income, net income, invested assets, and premiums and contract charges; For Investments: credit quality/experience, total return, investment income, cash flows, realized capital gains and losses, unrealized capital gains and losses, stability of long-term returns, and asset and liability duration; and For financial condition: liquidity, parent holding company level of deployable invested assets, financial strength ratings, operating leverage, debt leverage, book value per share, and return on equity. Summary of Results: Consolidated net income was $788 million in 2011, a decrease of 15.1% compared to $928 million in 2010, following an 8.7% increase in 2010 from $854 million in 2009. The decrease in 2011 compared to 2010 was primarily due to lower net income from Property-Liability, partially offset by higher net income from Allstate Financial. The increase in 2010 compared to 2009 was primarily due to higher net income from Allstate Financial, partially offset by lower net income from Property-Liability. Net income per diluted share was $1.51, $1.71 and $1.58 in 2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively. Allstate Protection had an underwriting loss of $849 million in 2011 compared to underwriting income of $526 million in 2010 and underwriting income of $1.03 billion in 2009. The decrease in 2011 compared to 2010 was primarily due to increases in homeowners underwriting losses and decreases in other personal lines and standard auto underwriting income. The decrease in 2010 compared to 2009 was primarily due to decreases in standard auto underwriting income and increases in homeowners underwriting losses, partially offset by increases in other personal lines underwriting income. The Allstate Protection combined ratio was 103.3, 98.0 and 96.1 in 2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively. Underwriting income (loss), as measure not based on GAAP, is defined in the Property-Liability Operations section of the MD&A. Allstate Financial net income was $586 million in 2011 compared to net income of $58 million in 2010 and a net loss of $483 million in 2009. The increase in 2011 compared to 2010 was primarily due to net realized capital gains in the current year compared to net realized capital losses in the prior year and decreased interest credited to contractholder funds, partially offset by higher amortization of DAC and lower net investment income. The favorable change of $541 million in 2010 compared to 2009 was primarily due to lower amortization of DAC, decreased interest credited to contractholder funds and higher premiums and contract charges, partially offset by lower net investment income. 2011 HIGHLIGHTS Consolidated net income was $788 million in 2011 compared to $928 million in 2010. Net income per diluted share was $1.51 in 2011 compared to $1.71 in 2010. Property-Liability net income was $408 million in 2011 compared to $1.05 billion in 2010. 27 Table of Contents The Property-Liability combined ratio was 103.4 in 2011 compared to 98.1 in 2010. Allstate Financial net income was $586 million in 2011 compared to $58 million in 2010. Total revenues were $32.65 billion in 2011 compared to $31.40 billion in 2010. Property-Liability premiums earned totaled $25.94 billion in 2011 compared to $25.96 billion in 2010. Net realized capital gains were $503 million in 2011 compared to net realized capital losses of $827 million in 2010. Investments totaled $95.62 billion as of December 31, 2011, a decrease of 4.8% from $100.48 billion as of December 31, 2010. Net investment income was $3.97 billion in 2011, a decrease of 3.2% from $4.10 billion in 2010. Book value per diluted share (ratio of shareholders' equity to total shares outstanding and dilutive potential shares outstanding) was $36.92 as of December 31, 2011, an increase of 4.5% from $35.32 as of December 31, 2010. For the twelve months ended December 31, 2011, return on the average of beginning and ending period shareholders' equity was 4.2%, a decrease of 1.0 points from 5.2% for the twelve months ended December 31, 2010. As of December 31, 2011, we had $18.67 billion in shareholders' equity. This total included $2.24 billion in deployable invested assets at the parent holding company level. On October 7, 2011, we obtained all required regulatory approvals and closed our acquisition of certain entities making up the Esurance and Answer Financial groups of companies from White Mountains Holdings for a total price of $1.01 billion. CONSOLIDATED NET INCOME ($ in millions) For the years ended December 31, 2011 2010 2009 Revenues Property-liability insurance premiums $ 25,942 $ 25,957 $ 26,194 Life and annuity premiums and contract charges 2,238 2,168 1,958 Net investment income 3,971 4,102 4,444 Realized capital gains and losses: Total other-than-temporary impairment losses (563 ) (937 ) (2,376 ) Portion of loss recognized in other comprehensive income (33 ) (64 ) 457 Net other-than-temporary impairment losses recognized in earnings (596 ) (1,001 ) (1,919 ) Sales and other realized capital gains and losses 1,099 174 1,336 Total realized capital gains and losses 503 (827 ) (583 ) Total revenues 32,654 31,400 32,013 Costs and expenses Property-liability insurance claims and claims expense (20,161 ) (18,951 ) (18,746 ) Life and annuity contract benefits (1,761 ) (1,815 ) (1,617 ) Interest credited to contractholder funds (1,645 ) (1,807 ) (2,126 ) Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs (4,233 ) (4,034 ) (4,754 ) Operating costs and expenses (3,468 ) (3,281 ) (3,007 ) Restructuring and related charges (44 ) (30 ) (130 ) Interest expense (367 ) (367 ) (392 ) Total costs and expenses (31,679 ) (30,285 ) (30,772 ) (Loss) gain on disposition of operations (15 ) 11 7 Income tax expense (172 ) (198 ) (394 ) Net income $ 788 $ 928 $ 854 Property-Liability $ 408 $ 1,054 $ 1,543 Allstate Financial 586 58 (483 ) Corporate and Other (206 ) (184 ) (206 ) Net income $ 788 $ 928 $ 854 28 Table of Contents APPLICATION OF CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America ("GAAP") requires management to adopt accounting policies and make estimates and assumptions that affect amounts reported in the consolidated financial statements. The most critical estimates include those used in determining: Fair value of financial assets Impairment of fixed income and equity securities Deferred policy acquisition costs amortization Reserve for property-liability insurance claims and claims expense estimation Reserve for life-contingent contract benefits estimation In making these determinations, management makes subjective and complex judgments that frequently require estimates about matters that are inherently uncertain. Many of these policies, estimates and related judgments are common in the insurance and financial services industries; others are specific to our businesses and operations. It is reasonably likely that changes in these estimates could occur from period to period and result in a material impact on our consolidated financial statements. A brief summary of each of these critical accounting estimates follows. For a more detailed discussion of the effect of these estimates on our consolidated financial statements, and the judgments and assumptions related to these estimates, see the referenced sections of this document. For a complete summary of our significant accounting policies, see the notes to the consolidated financial statements. Fair value of financial assets Fair value is defined as the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. We categorize our financial assets measured at fair value into a three-level hierarchy based on the observability of inputs to the valuation techniques as follows: Level 1: Financial asset values are based on unadjusted quoted prices for identical assets in an active market that we can access. Level 2: Financial asset values are based on the following: (a) Quoted prices for similar assets in active markets; (b) Quoted prices for identical or similar assets in markets that are not active; or (c) Valuation models whose inputs are observable, directly or indirectly, for substantially the full term of the asset. Level 3: Financial asset values are based on prices or valuation techniques that require inputs that are both unobservable and significant to the overall fair value measurement. Unobservable inputs reflect our estimates of the assumptions that market participants would use in valuing the financial assets. Observable inputs are inputs that reflect the assumptions market participants would use in valuing financial assets that are developed based on market data obtained from independent sources. In the absence of sufficient observable inputs, unobservable inputs reflect our estimates of the assumptions market participants would use in valuing financial assets and are developed based on the best information available in the circumstances. The degree of management judgment involved in determining fair values is inversely related to the availability of market observable information. We are responsible for the determination of fair value of financial assets and the supporting assumptions and methodologies. We gain assurance on the overall reasonableness and consistent application of valuation input assumptions, valuation methodologies and compliance with accounting standards for fair value determination through the execution of various processes and controls designed to ensure that our financial assets are appropriately valued. We monitor fair values received from third parties and those derived internally on an ongoing basis. We employ independent third-party valuation service providers, broker quotes and internal pricing methods to determine fair values. We obtain or calculate only one single quote or price for each financial instrument. Valuation service providers typically obtain data about market transactions and other key valuation model inputs from multiple sources and, through the use of proprietary models, produce valuation information in the form of a single fair value for individual securities for which a fair value has been requested under the terms of our agreements. For certain equity securities, valuation service providers provide market quotations for completed transactions on the measurement date. For other security types, fair values are derived from the valuation service providers' proprietary valuation models. The inputs used by the valuation service providers include, but are not limited to, market prices from recently completed transactions and transactions of comparable securities, interest rate yield curves, credit spreads, 29 Table of Contents liquidity spreads, currency rates, and other information, as applicable. Credit and liquidity spreads are typically implied from completed transactions and transactions of comparable securities. Valuation service providers also use proprietary discounted cash flow models that are widely accepted in the financial services industry and similar to those used by other market participants to value the same financial instruments. The valuation models take into account, among other things, market observable information as of the measurement date, as described above, as well as the specific attributes of the security being valued including its term, interest rate, credit rating, industry sector, and where applicable, collateral quality and other issue or issuer specific information. Executing valuation models effectively requires seasoned professional judgment and experience. In cases where market transactions or other market observable data is limited, the extent to which judgment is applied varies inversely with the availability of market observable information. For certain of our financial assets measured at fair value, where our valuation service providers cannot provide fair value determinations, we obtain a single non-binding price quote from a broker familiar with the security who, similar to our valuation service providers, may consider transactions or activity in similar securities among other information. The brokers providing price quotes are generally from the brokerage divisions of leading financial institutions with market making, underwriting and distribution expertise regarding the security subject to valuation. The fair value of certain financial assets, including privately placed corporate fixed income securities, auction rate securities ("ARS") backed by student loans, equity-indexed notes, and certain free-standing derivatives, for which our valuation service providers or brokers do not provide fair value determinations, is determined using valuation methods and models widely accepted in the financial services industry. Internally developed valuation models, which include inputs that may not be market observable and as such involve some degree of judgment, are considered appropriate for each class of security to which they are applied. Our internal pricing methods are primarily based on models using discounted cash flow methodologies that develop a single best estimate of fair value. Our models generally incorporate inputs that we believe are representative of inputs other market participants would use to determine fair value of the same instruments, including yield curves, quoted market prices of comparable securities, published credit spreads, and other applicable market data. Additional inputs that are used include internally-derived assumptions such as liquidity premiums and credit ratings, as well as instrument-specific characteristics that include, but are not limited to, coupon rates, expected cash flows, sector of the issuer, and call provisions. Our internally assigned credit ratings are developed at a more detailed level than externally published ratings and allow for a more precise match of these ratings to other market observable valuation inputs, such as credit and sector spreads, when performing these valuations. Due to the existence of non-market observable inputs, such as liquidity premiums, judgment is required in developing these fair values. As a result, the fair value of these financial assets may differ from the amount actually received to sell an asset in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. Moreover, the use of different valuation assumptions may have a material effect on the financial assets' fair values. For the majority of our financial assets measured at fair value, all significant inputs are based on market observable data and significant management judgment does not affect the periodic determination of fair value. The determination of fair value using discounted cash flow models involves management judgment when significant model inputs are not based on market observable data. However, where market observable data is available, it takes precedence, and as a result, no range of reasonably likely inputs exists from which the basis of a sensitivity analysis could be constructed. There is one primary situation where a discounted cash flow model utilizes a significant input that is not market observable, and it relates to the determination of fair value for our ARS backed by student loans. The significant input utilized is the anticipated date liquidity will return to this market (that is, when auction failures will cease). Determination of this assumption allows for matching to market observable inputs when performing these valuations. The following table displays the sensitivity of reasonably likely changes in the anticipated date liquidity will return to the student loan ARS market as of December 31, 2011. The selection of these hypothetical scenarios represents an illustration of the estimated potential proportional effect of alternate assumptions and should not be construed as either a prediction of future events or an indication that it would be reasonably likely that all securities would be similarly affected. ($ in millions) ARS backed by student loans at fair value $ 710 Percentage change in fair value resulting from: Decrease in the anticipated date liquidity will return to this market by six months 1.4 % Increase in the anticipated date liquidity will return to this market by six months (1.4 )% 30 Table of Contents We believe our most significant exposure to changes in fair value is due to market risk. Our exposure to changes in market conditions is discussed fully in the Market Risk section of the MD&A. We employ specific control processes to determine the reasonableness of the fair value of our financial assets. Our processes are designed to ensure that the values received or internally estimated are accurately recorded and that the data inputs and the valuation techniques utilized are appropriate, consistently applied, and that the assumptions are reasonable and consistent with the objective of determining fair value. For example, on a continuing basis, we assess the reasonableness of individual security values that have stale prices or that exceed certain thresholds as compared to previous values received from those valuation service providers or derived from internal models. We perform procedures to understand and assess the methodologies, processes and controls of our valuation service providers. In addition, we may validate the reasonableness of fair value by comparing information obtained from our valuation service providers to other third party valuation sources for selected securities. We perform ongoing price validation procedures such as back-testing of actual sales, which corroborate the various inputs used in internal pricing models to market observable data. When fair value determinations are expected to be more variable, we validate them through reviews by members of management who have relevant expertise and who are independent of those charged with executing investment transactions. We also perform an analysis to determine whether there has been a significant decrease in the volume and level of activity for the asset when compared to normal market activity, and if so, whether transactions may not be orderly. Among the indicators we consider in determining whether a significant decrease in the volume and level of market activity for a specific asset has occurred include the level of new issuances in the primary market, trading volume in the secondary market, level of credit spreads over historical levels, bid-ask spread, and price consensuses among market participants and sources. If evidence indicates that prices are based on transactions that are not orderly, we place little, if any, weight on the transaction price and will estimate fair value using an internal pricing model. As of December 31, 2011 and 2010, we did not alter fair values provided by our valuation service providers or brokers or substitute them with an internal pricing model for such securities. The following table identifies fixed income and equity securities and short-term investments as of December 31, 2011 by source of fair value determination: ($ in millions) Fair value Percent to total Fair value based on internal sources $ 7,047 8.6 % Fair value based on external sources (1) 74,720 91.4 Total $ 81,767 100.0 % (1) Includes $3.87 billion that are valued using broker quotes. For more detailed information on our accounting policy for the fair value of financial assets and the financial assets by level in the fair value hierarchy, see Note 6 of the consolidated financial statements. Impairment of fixed income and equity securities For investments classified as available for sale, the difference between fair value and amortized cost for fixed income securities and cost for equity securities, net of certain other items and deferred income taxes (as disclosed in Note 5), is reported as a component of accumulated other comprehensive income on the Consolidated Statements of Financial Position and is not reflected in the operating results of any period until reclassified to net income upon the consummation of a transaction with an unrelated third party or when a write-down is recorded due to an other-than-temporary decline in fair value. We have a comprehensive portfolio monitoring process to identify and evaluate each fixed income and equity security whose carrying value may be other-than-temporarily impaired. For each fixed income security in an unrealized loss position, we assess whether management with the appropriate authority has made the decision to sell or whether it is more likely than not we will be required to sell the security before recovery of the amortized cost basis for reasons such as liquidity, contractual or regulatory purposes. If a security meets either of these criteria, the security's decline in fair value is considered other than temporary and is recorded in earnings. If we have not made the decision to sell the fixed income security and it is not more likely than not we will be required to sell the fixed income security before recovery of its amortized cost basis, we evaluate whether we expect to receive cash flows sufficient to recover the entire amortized cost basis of the security. We use our best estimate of future cash flows expected to be collected from the fixed income security, discounted at the security's original or current effective rate, as appropriate, to calculate a recovery value and determine whether a credit loss exists. The 31 Table of Contents determination of cash flow estimates is inherently subjective and methodologies may vary depending on facts and circumstances specific to the security. All reasonably available information relevant to the collectability of the security, including past events, current conditions, and reasonable and supportable assumptions and forecasts, are considered when developing the estimate of cash flows expected to be collected. That information generally includes, but is not limited to, the remaining payment terms of the security, prepayment speeds, foreign exchange rates, the financial condition and future earnings potential of the issue or issuer, expected defaults, expected recoveries, the value of underlying collateral, vintage, geographic concentration, available reserves or escrows, current subordination levels, third party guarantees and other credit enhancements. Other information, such as industry analyst reports and forecasts, sector credit ratings, financial condition of the bond insurer for insured fixed income securities, and other market data relevant to the realizability of contractual cash flows, may also be considered. The estimated fair value of collateral will be used to estimate recovery value if we determine that the security is dependent on the liquidation of collateral for ultimate settlement. If the estimated recovery value is less than the amortized cost of the security, a credit loss exists and an other-than-temporary impairment for the difference between the estimated recovery value and amortized cost is recorded in earnings. The portion of the unrealized loss related to factors other than credit remains classified in accumulated other comprehensive income. If we determine that the fixed income security does not have sufficient cash flow or other information to estimate a recovery value for the security, we may conclude that the entire decline in fair value is deemed to be credit related and the loss is recorded in earnings. There are a number of assumptions and estimates inherent in evaluating impairments of equity securities and determining if they are other than temporary, including: 1) our ability and intent to hold the investment for a period of time sufficient to allow for an anticipated recovery in value; 2) the length of time and extent to which the fair value has been less than cost; 3) the financial condition, near-term and long-term prospects of the issue or issuer, including relevant industry specific market conditions and trends, geographic location and implications of rating agency actions and offering prices; and 4) the specific reasons that a security is in an unrealized loss position, including overall market conditions which could affect liquidity. Once assumptions and estimates are made, any number of changes in facts and circumstances could cause us to subsequently determine that a fixed income or equity security is other-than-temporarily impaired, including: 1) general economic conditions that are worse than previously forecasted or that have a greater adverse effect on a particular issuer or industry sector than originally estimated; 2) changes in the facts and circumstances related to a particular issue or issuer's ability to meet all of its contractual obligations; and 3) changes in facts and circumstances that result in changes to management's intent to sell or result in our assessment that it is more likely than not we will be required to sell before recovery of the amortized cost basis of a fixed income security or causes a change in our ability or intent to hold an equity security until it recovers in value. Changes in assumptions, facts and circumstances could result in additional charges to earnings in future periods to the extent that losses are realized. The charge to earnings, while potentially significant to net income, would not have a significant effect on shareholders' equity, since our securities are designated as available for sale and carried at fair value and as a result, any related unrealized loss, net of deferred income taxes and related DAC, deferred sales inducement costs ("DSI") and reserves for life-contingent contract benefits, would already be reflected as a component of accumulated other comprehensive income in shareholders' equity. The determination of the amount of other-than-temporary impairment is an inherently subjective process based on periodic evaluation of the factors described above. Such evaluations and assessments are revised as conditions change and new information becomes available. We update our evaluations regularly and reflect changes in other-than-temporary impairments in results of operations as such evaluations are revised. The use of different methodologies and assumptions in the determination of the amount of other-than-temporary impairments may have a material effect on the amounts presented within the consolidated financial statements. For additional detail on investment impairments, see Note 5 of the consolidated financial statements. Deferred policy acquisition costs amortization We incur significant costs in connection with acquiring insurance policies and investment contracts. In accordance with GAAP, costs that vary with and are primarily related to acquiring insurance policies and investment contracts are deferred and recorded as an asset on the Consolidated Statements of Financial Position. DAC related to property-liability contracts is amortized into income as premiums are earned, typically over periods of six or twelve months. The amortization methodology for DAC related to Allstate Financial policies and contracts includes significant assumptions and estimates. DAC related to traditional life insurance is amortized over the premium paying period of the related policies in proportion to the estimated revenues on such business. Significant assumptions relating to estimated premiums, investment returns, as well as mortality, persistency and expenses to administer the business are established at the time 32 Table of Contents the policy is issued and are generally not revised during the life of the policy. The assumptions for determining the timing and amount of DAC amortization are consistent with the assumptions used to calculate the reserve for life-contingent contract benefits. Any deviations from projected business in force resulting from actual policy terminations differing from expected levels and any estimated premium deficiencies may result in a change to the rate of amortization in the period such events occur. Generally, the amortization periods for these policies approximates the estimated lives of the policies. The recovery of DAC is dependent upon the future profitability of the business. We periodically review the adequacy of reserves and recoverability of DAC for these policies on an aggregate basis using actual experience. We aggregate all traditional life insurance products and immediate annuities with life contingencies in the analysis. In the event actual experience is significantly adverse compared to the original assumptions and a premium deficiency is determined to exist, any remaining unamortized DAC balance must be expensed to the extent not recoverable and a premium deficiency reserve may be required if the remaining DAC balance is insufficient to absorb the deficiency. In 2011, 2010 and 2009, our reviews concluded that no premium deficiency adjustments were necessary, primarily due to projected profit from traditional life insurance more than offsetting the projected losses in immediate annuities with life contingencies. DAC related to interest-sensitive life, fixed annuities and other investment contracts is amortized in proportion to the incidence of the total present value of gross profits, which includes both actual historical gross profits ("AGP") and estimated future gross profits ("EGP") expected to be earned over the estimated lives of the contracts. The amortization is net of interest on the prior period DAC balance using rates established at the inception of the contracts. Actual amortization periods generally range from 15-30 years; however, incorporating estimates of the rate of customer surrenders, partial withdrawals and deaths generally results in the majority of the DAC being amortized during the surrender charge period, which is typically 10-20 years for interest-sensitive life and 5-10 years for fixed annuities. The cumulative DAC amortization is reestimated and adjusted by a cumulative charge or credit to income when there is a difference between the incidence of actual versus expected gross profits in a reporting period or when there is a change in total EGP. AGP and EGP primarily consist of the following components: contract charges for the cost of insurance less mortality costs and other benefits (benefit margin); investment income and realized capital gains and losses less interest credited (investment margin); and surrender and other contract charges less maintenance expenses (expense margin). The principal assumptions for determining the amount of EGP are investment returns, including capital gains and losses on assets supporting contract liabilities, interest crediting rates to contractholders, and the effects of persistency, mortality, expenses, and hedges if applicable, and these assumptions are reasonably likely to have the greatest impact on the amount of DAC amortization. Changes in these assumptions can be offsetting and we are unable to reasonably predict their future movements or offsetting impacts over time. Each reporting period, DAC amortization is recognized in proportion to AGP for that period adjusted for interest on the prior period DAC balance. This amortization process includes an assessment of AGP compared to EGP, the actual amount of business remaining in force and realized capital gains and losses on investments supporting the product liability. The impact of realized capital gains and losses on amortization of DAC depends upon which product liability is supported by the assets that give rise to the gain or loss. If the AGP is greater than EGP in the period, but the total EGP is unchanged, the amount of DAC amortization will generally increase, resulting in a current period decrease to earnings. The opposite result generally occurs when the AGP is less than the EGP in the period, but the total EGP is unchanged. However, when DAC amortization or a component of gross profits for a quarterly period is potentially negative (which would result in an increase of the DAC balance) as a result of negative AGP, the specific facts and circumstances surrounding the potential negative amortization are considered to determine whether it is appropriate for recognition in the consolidated financial statements. Negative amortization is only recorded when the increased DAC balance is determined to be recoverable based on facts and circumstances. Negative amortization was not recorded for certain fixed annuities during 2011, 2010 and 2009 periods in which significant capital losses were realized on their related investment portfolio. For products whose supporting investments are exposed to capital losses in excess of our expectations which may cause periodic AGP to become temporarily negative, EGP and AGP utilized in DAC amortization may be modified to exclude the excess capital losses. Annually, we review and update all assumptions underlying the projections of EGP, including investment returns, comprising investment income and realized capital gains and losses, interest crediting rates, persistency, mortality, expenses and the effect of any hedges. At each reporting period, we assess whether any revisions to assumptions used to determine DAC amortization are required. These reviews and updates may result in amortization acceleration or deceleration, which are commonly referred to as "DAC unlocking". If the update of assumptions causes total EGP to increase, the rate of DAC amortization will generally decrease, resulting in a current period increase to earnings. A decrease to earnings generally occurs when the assumption update causes the total EGP to decrease. 33 Table of Contents Over the past three years, our most significant DAC assumption updates that resulted in a change to EGP and the amortization of DAC have been revisions to expected future investment returns, primarily realized capital losses, mortality, expenses and the number of contracts in force or persistency. The following table provides the effect on DAC amortization of changes in assumptions relating to the gross profit components of investment margin, benefit margin and expense margin during the years ended December 31. ($ in millions) 2011 2010 2009 Investment margin $ 2 $ 15 $ (399 ) Benefit margin 7 (45 ) 129 Expense margin (21 ) 42 (7 ) Net (acceleration) deceleration $ (12 ) $ 12 $ (277 ) In 2011, DAC amortization deceleration related to changes in the investment margin component of EGP primarily related to equity-indexed annuities and was due to an increase in projected investment margins. The deceleration related to benefit margin was primarily due to increased projected persistency on interest-sensitive life insurance. The acceleration related to expense margin primarily related to interest-sensitive life insurance and was due to an increase in projected expenses. In 2010, DAC amortization deceleration related to changes in the investment margin component of EGP primarily related to interest-sensitive life insurance and was due to higher than previously projected investment income and lower interest credited, partially offset by higher projected realized capital losses. The acceleration related to benefit margin was primarily due to lower projected renewal premium (which is also expected to reduce persistency) on interest-sensitive life insurance, partially offset by higher than previously projected revenues associated with variable life insurance due to appreciation in the underlying separate account valuations. The deceleration related to expense margin resulted from current and expected expense levels lower than previously projected. DAC amortization acceleration related to changes in the investment margin component of EGP in the first quarter of 2009 was primarily due to an increase in the level of expected realized capital losses in 2009 and 2010. The deceleration related to benefit margin was due to more favorable projected life insurance mortality. The acceleration related to expense margin resulted from current and expected expense levels higher than previously projected. The following table displays the sensitivity of reasonably likely changes in assumptions included in the gross profit components of investment margin or benefit margin to amortization of the DAC balance as of December 31, 2011. ($ in millions) Increase/(reduction) in DAC Increase in future investment margins of 25 basis points $ 73 Decrease in future investment margins of 25 basis points $ (81 ) Decrease in future life mortality by 1% $ 21 Increase in future life mortality by 1% $ (22 ) Any potential changes in assumptions discussed above are measured without consideration of correlation among assumptions. Therefore, it would be inappropriate to add them together in an attempt to estimate overall variability in amortization. For additional detail related to DAC, see the Allstate Financial Segment section of this document. Reserve for property-liability insurance claims and claims expense estimation Reserves are established to provide for the estimated costs of paying claims and claims expenses under insurance policies we have issued. Property-Liability underwriting results are significantly influenced by estimates of property-liability insurance claims and claims expense reserves. These reserves are an estimate of amounts necessary to settle all outstanding claims, including claims that have been incurred but not reported ("IBNR"), as of the financial statement date. Characteristics of reserves Reserves are established independently of business segment management for each business segment and line of business based on estimates of the ultimate cost to settle claims, less losses that have been paid. The significant lines of business are auto, homeowners, and other lines for Allstate Protection, and asbestos, environmental, and other discontinued lines for Discontinued Lines and Coverages. Allstate Protection's claims are typically reported promptly with relatively little reporting lag between the date of occurrence and the date the loss is reported. Auto and homeowners liability losses generally take an average of about two years to settle, while auto physical damage, homeowners property and other personal lines have an average settlement time of less than one year. Discontinued Lines and Coverages involve long-tail losses, such as those related to asbestos and environmental claims, which often involve substantial reporting lags and extended times to settle. 34 Table of Contents Reserves are the difference between the estimated ultimate cost of losses incurred and the amount of paid losses as of the reporting date. Reserves are estimated for both reported and unreported claims, and include estimates of all expenses associated with processing and settling all incurred claims. We update most of our reserve estimates quarterly and as new information becomes available or as events emerge that may affect the resolution of unsettled claims. Changes in prior year reserve estimates (reserve reestimates), which may be material, are determined by comparing updated estimates of ultimate losses to prior estimates, and the differences are recorded as property-liability insurance claims and claims expense in the Consolidated Statements of Operations in the period such changes are determined. Estimating the ultimate cost of claims and claims expenses is an inherently uncertain and complex process involving a high degree of judgment and is subject to the evaluation of numerous variables. The actuarial methods used to develop reserve estimates Reserve estimates are derived by using several different actuarial estimation methods that are variations on one primary actuarial technique. The actuarial technique is known as a "chain ladder" estimation process in which historical loss patterns are applied to actual paid losses and reported losses (paid losses plus individual case reserves established by claim adjusters) for an accident year or a report year to create an estimate of how losses are likely to develop over time. An accident year refers to classifying claims based on the year in which the claims occurred. A report year refers to classifying claims based on the year in which the claims are reported. Both classifications are used to prepare estimates of required reserves for payments to be made in the future. The key assumptions affecting our reserve estimates comprise data elements including claim counts, paid losses, case reserves, and development factors calculated with this data. In the chain ladder estimation technique, a ratio (development factor) is calculated which compares current period results to results in the prior period for each accident year. A three-year or two-year average development factor, based on historical results, is usually multiplied by the current period experience to estimate the development of losses of each accident year into the next time period. The development factors for the future time periods for each accident year are compounded over the remaining future periods to calculate an estimate of ultimate losses for each accident year. The implicit assumption of this technique is that an average of historical development factors is predictive of future loss development, as the significant size of our experience data base achieves a high degree of statistical credibility in actuarial projections of this type. The effects of inflation are implicitly considered in the reserving process, the implicit assumption being that a multi-year average development factor includes an adequate provision. Occasionally, unusual aberrations in loss patterns are caused by external and internal factors such as changes in claim reporting, settlement patterns, unusually large losses, process changes, legal or regulatory changes, and other influences. In these instances, analyses of alternate development factor selections are performed to evaluate the effect of these factors and actuarial judgment is applied to make appropriate development factor assumptions needed to develop a best estimate of ultimate losses. How reserve estimates are established and updated Reserve estimates are developed at a very detailed level, and the results of these numerous micro-level best estimates are aggregated to form a consolidated reserve estimate. For example, over one thousand actuarial estimates of the types described above are prepared each quarter to estimate losses for each line of insurance, major components of losses (such as coverages and perils), major states or groups of states and for reported losses and IBNR. The actuarial methods described above are used to analyze the settlement patterns of claims by determining the development factors for specific data elements that are necessary components of a reserve estimation process. Development factors are calculated quarterly and periodically throughout the year for data elements such as claim counts reported and settled, paid losses, and paid losses combined with case reserves. The calculation of development factors from changes in these data elements also impacts claim severity trends, which is a common industry reference used to explain changes in reserve estimates. The historical development patterns for these data elements are used as the assumptions to calculate reserve estimates. Often, several different estimates are prepared for each detailed component, incorporating alternative analyses of changing claim settlement patterns and other influences on losses, from which we select our best estimate for each component, occasionally incorporating additional analyses and actuarial judgment, as described above. These micro-level estimates are not based on a single set of assumptions. Actuarial judgments that may be applied to these components of certain micro-level estimates generally do not have a material impact on the consolidated level of reserves. Moreover, this detailed micro-level process does not permit or result in a compilation of a company-wide roll up to generate a range of needed loss reserves that would be meaningful. Based on our review of these estimates, our best estimate of required reserves for each state/line/coverage component is recorded for each accident year, and the required reserves for each component are summed to create the reserve balance carried on our Consolidated Statements of Financial Position. 35 Table of Contents Reserves are reestimated quarterly and periodically throughout the year, by combining historical results with current actual results to calculate new development factors. This process incorporates the historic and latest actual trends, and other underlying changes in the data elements used to calculate reserve estimates. New development factors are likely to differ from previous development factors used in prior reserve estimates because actual results (claims reported or settled, losses paid, or changes to case reserves) occur differently than the implied assumptions contained in the previous development factor calculations. If claims reported, paid losses, or case reserve changes are greater or less than the levels estimated by previous development factors, reserve reestimates increase or decrease. When actual development of these data elements is different than the historical development pattern used in a prior period reserve estimate, a new reserve is determined. The difference between indicated reserves based on new reserve estimates and recorded reserves (the previous estimate) is the amount of reserve reestimate and is recognized as an increase or decrease in property-liability insurance claims and claims expense in the Consolidated Statements of Operations. Total Property-liability reserve reestimates, after-tax, as a percent of net income in 2011, 2010 and 2009 were 27.7%, 11.1%, and 8.5%, respectively. For Property-Liability, the 3-year average of reserve reestimates as a percentage of total reserves was a favorable 1.2%, for Allstate Protection, the 3-year average of reserve estimates was a favorable 1.5% and for Discontinued Lines and Coverages, the 3-year average of reserve reestimates was an unfavorable 1.3%, each of these results being consistent within a reasonable actuarial tolerance for our respective businesses. A more detailed discussion of reserve reestimates is presented in the Property-Liability Claims and Claims Expense Reserves section of this document. The following table shows net claims and claims expense reserves by segment and line of business as of December 31: ($ in millions) 2011 2010 2009 Allstate Protection Auto $ 11,404 $ 11,034 $ 10,606 Homeowners 2,439 2,442 2,399 Other lines 2,237 2,141 2,145 Total Allstate Protection 16,080 15,617 15,150 Discontinued Lines and Coverages Asbestos 1,078 1,100 1,180 Environmental 185 201 198 Other discontinued lines 444 478 500 Total Discontinued Lines and Coverages 1,707 1,779 1,878 Total Property-Liability $ 17,787 $ 17,396 $ 17,028 Allstate Protection reserve estimates Factors affecting reserve estimates Reserve estimates are developed based on the processes and historical development trends as previously described. These estimates are considered in conjunction with known facts and interpretations of circumstances and factors including our experience with similar cases, actual claims paid, historical trends involving claim payment patterns and pending levels of unpaid claims, loss management programs, product mix and contractual terms, changes in law and regulation, judicial decisions, and economic conditions. When we experience changes of the type previously mentioned, we may need to apply actuarial judgment in the determination and selection of development factors considered more reflective of the new trends, such as combining shorter or longer periods of historical results with current actual results to produce development factors based on two-year, three-year, or longer development periods to reestimate our reserves. For example, if a legal change is expected to have a significant impact on the development of claim severity for a coverage which is part of a particular line of insurance in a specific state, actuarial judgment is applied to determine appropriate development factors that will most accurately reflect the expected impact on that specific estimate. Another example would be when a change in economic conditions is expected to affect the cost of repairs to damaged autos or property for a particular line, coverage, or state, actuarial judgment is applied to determine appropriate development factors to use in the reserve estimate that will most accurately reflect the expected impacts on severity development. As claims are reported, for certain liability claims of sufficient size and complexity, the field adjusting staff establishes case reserve estimates of ultimate cost, based on their assessment of facts and circumstances related to each individual claim. For other claims which occur in large volumes and settle in a relatively short time frame, it is not practical or efficient to set case reserves for each claim, and a statistical case reserve is set for these claims based on 36 Table of Contents estimation techniques previously described. In the normal course of business, we may also supplement our claims processes by utilizing third party adjusters, appraisers, engineers, inspectors, and other professionals and information sources to assess and settle catastrophe and non-catastrophe related claims. Historically, the case reserves set by the field adjusting staff have not proven to be an entirely accurate estimate of the ultimate cost of claims. To provide for this, a development reserve is estimated using previously described processes, and allocated to pending claims as a supplement to case reserves. Typically, the case and supplemental development reserves comprise about 90% of total reserves. Another major component of reserves is IBNR. Typically, IBNR comprises about 10% of total reserves. Generally, the initial reserves for a new accident year are established based on severity assumptions for different business segments, lines and coverages based on historical relationships to relevant inflation indicators, and reserves for prior accident years are statistically determined using processes previously described. Changes in auto current year claim severity are generally influenced by inflation in the medical and auto repair sectors of the economy. We mitigate these effects through various loss management programs. Injury claims are affected largely by medical cost inflation while physical damage claims are affected largely by auto repair cost inflation and used car prices. For auto physical damage coverages, we monitor our rate of increase in average cost per claim against a weighted average of the Maintenance and Repair price index and the Parts and Equipment price index. We believe our claim settlement initiatives, such as improvements to the claim review and settlement process, the use of special investigative units to detect fraud and handle suspect claims, litigation management and defense strategies, as well as various other loss management initiatives underway, contribute to the mitigation of injury and physical damage severity trends. Changes in homeowners current year claim severity are generally influenced by inflation in the cost of building materials, the cost of construction and property repair services, the cost of replacing home furnishings and other contents, the types of claims that qualify for coverage, deductibles and other economic and environmental factors. We employ various loss management programs to mitigate the effect of these factors. As loss experience for the current year develops for each type of loss, it is monitored relative to initial assumptions until it is judged to have sufficient statistical credibility. From that point in time and forward, reserves are reestimated using statistical actuarial processes to reflect the impact actual loss trends have on development factors incorporated into the actuarial estimation processes. Statistical credibility is usually achieved by the end of the first calendar year; however, when trends for the current accident year exceed initial assumptions sooner, they are usually determined to be credible, and reserves are increased accordingly. The very detailed processes for developing reserve estimates, and the lack of a need and existence of a common set of assumptions or development factors, limits aggregate reserve level testing for variability of data elements. However, by applying standard actuarial methods to consolidated historic accident year loss data for major loss types, comprising auto injury losses, auto physical damage losses and homeowner losses, we develop variability analyses consistent with the way we develop reserves by measuring the potential variability of development factors, as described in the section titled "Potential Reserve Estimate Variability" below. Causes of reserve estimate uncertainty Since reserves are estimates of unpaid portions of claims and claims expenses that have occurred, including IBNR losses, the establishment of appropriate reserves, including reserves for catastrophes, requires regular reevaluation and refinement of estimates to determine our ultimate loss estimate. At each reporting date, the highest degree of uncertainty in estimates of losses arises from claims remaining to be settled for the current accident year and the most recent preceding accident year. The greatest degree of uncertainty exists in the current accident year because the current accident year contains the greatest proportion of losses that have not been reported or settled but must be estimated as of the current reporting date. Most of these losses relate to damaged property such as automobiles and homes, and medical care for injuries from accidents. During the first year after the end of an accident year, a large portion of the total losses for that accident year are settled. When accident year losses paid through the end of the first year following the initial accident year are incorporated into updated actuarial estimates, the trends inherent in the settlement of claims emerge more clearly. Consequently, this is the point in time at which we tend to make our largest reestimates of losses for an accident year. After the second year, the losses that we pay for an accident year typically relate to claims that are more difficult to settle, such as those involving serious injuries or litigation. Private passenger auto insurance provides a good illustration of the uncertainty of future loss estimates: our typical annual percentage payout of reserves for an accident year is approximately 45% in the first year after the end of the accident year, 20% in the second year, 15% in the third year, 10% in the fourth year, and the remaining 10% thereafter. 37 Table of Contents Reserves for catastrophe losses Property-Liability claims and claims expense reserves also include reserves for catastrophe losses. Catastrophe losses are an inherent risk of the property-liability insurance industry that have contributed, and will continue to contribute, to potentially material year-to-year fluctuations in our results of operations and financial position. We define a "catastrophe" as an event that produces pre-tax losses before reinsurance in excess of $1 million and involves multiple first party policyholders, or an event that produces a number of claims in excess of a preset, per-event threshold of average claims in a specific area, occurring within a certain amount of time following the event. Catastrophes are caused by various natural events including high winds, winter storms, tornadoes, hailstorms, wildfires, tropical storms, hurricanes, earthquakes and volcanoes. We are also exposed to man-made catastrophic events, such as certain types of terrorism or industrial accidents. The nature and level of catastrophes in any period cannot be predicted. The estimation of claims and claims expense reserves for catastrophes also comprises estimates of losses from reported claims and IBNR, primarily for damage to property. In general, our estimates for catastrophe reserves are based on claim adjuster inspections and the application of historical loss development factors as described previously. However, depending on the nature of the catastrophe, as noted above, the estimation process can be further complicated. For example, for hurricanes, complications could include the inability of insureds to promptly report losses, limitations placed on claims adjusting staff affecting their ability to inspect losses, determining whether losses are covered by our homeowners policy (generally for damage caused by wind or wind driven rain) or specifically excluded coverage caused by flood, estimating additional living expenses, and assessing the impact of demand surge, exposure to mold damage, and the effects of numerous other considerations, including the timing of a catastrophe in relation to other events, such as at or near the end of a financial reporting period, which can affect the availability of information needed to estimate reserves for that reporting period. In these situations, we may need to adapt our practices to accommodate these circumstances in order to determine a best estimate of our losses from a catastrophe. As an example, in 2005 to complete an estimate for certain areas affected by Hurricane Katrina and not yet inspected by our claims adjusting staff, or where we believed our historical loss development factors were not predictive, we relied on analysis of actual claim notices received compared to total PIF, as well as visual, governmental and third party information, including aerial photos, area observations, and data on wind speed and flood depth to the extent available. Potential reserve estimate variability The aggregation of numerous micro-level estimates for each business segment, line of insurance, major components of losses (such as coverages and perils), and major states or groups of states for reported losses and IBNR forms the reserve liability recorded in the Consolidated Statements of Financial Position. Because of this detailed approach to developing our reserve estimates, there is not a single set of assumptions that determine our reserve estimates at the consolidated level. Given the numerous micro-level estimates for reported losses and IBNR, management does not believe the processes that we follow will produce a statistically credible or reliable actuarial reserve range that would be meaningful. Reserve estimates, by their very nature, are very complex to determine and subject to significant judgment, and do not represent an exact determination for each outstanding claim. Accordingly, as actual claims, and/or paid losses, and/or case reserve results emerge, our estimate of the ultimate cost to settle will be different than previously estimated. To develop a statistical indication of potential reserve variability within reasonably likely possible outcomes, an actuarial technique (stochastic modeling) is applied to the countrywide consolidated data elements for paid losses and paid losses combined with case reserves separately for injury losses, auto physical damage losses, and homeowners losses excluding catastrophe losses. Based on the combined historical variability of the development factors calculated for these data elements, an estimate of the standard error or standard deviation around these reserve estimates is calculated within each accident year for the last twenty years for each type of loss. The variability of these reserve estimates within one standard deviation of the mean (a measure of frequency of dispersion often viewed to be an acceptable level of accuracy) is believed by management to represent a reasonable and statistically probable measure of potential variability. Based on our products and coverages, historical experience, the statistical credibility of our extensive data and stochastic modeling of actuarial chain ladder methodologies used to develop reserve estimates, we estimate that the potential variability of our Allstate Protection reserves, excluding reserves for catastrophe losses, within a reasonable probability of other possible outcomes, may be approximately plus or minus 4%, or plus or minus $450 million in net income. A lower level of variability exists for auto injury losses, which comprise approximately 75% of reserves, due to their relatively stable development patterns over a longer duration of time required to settle claims. Other types of losses, such as auto physical damage, homeowners losses and other losses, which comprise about 25% of reserves, tend to have greater variability but are settled in a much shorter period of time. Although this evaluation reflects most reasonably likely outcomes, it is possible the final outcome may fall below or above these amounts. Historical variability of reserve estimates is reported in the Property-Liability Claims and Claims Expense Reserves section of this document. 38 Table of Contents Adequacy of reserve estimates We believe our net claims and claims expense reserves are appropriately established based on available methodology, facts, technology, laws and regulations. We calculate and record a single best reserve estimate, in conformance with generally accepted actuarial standards, for each line of insurance, its components (coverages and perils) and state, for reported losses and for IBNR losses, and as a result we believe that no other estimate is better than our recorded amount. Due to the uncertainties involved, the ultimate cost of losses may vary materially from recorded amounts, which are based on our best estimates. Discontinued Lines and Coverages reserve estimates Characteristics of Discontinued Lines exposure We continue to receive asbestos and environmental claims. Asbestos claims relate primarily to bodily injuries asserted by people who were exposed to asbestos or products containing asbestos. Environmental claims relate primarily to pollution and related clean-up costs. Our exposure to asbestos, environmental and other discontinued lines claims arises principally from assumed reinsurance coverage written during the 1960s through the mid-1980s, including reinsurance on primary insurance written on large U.S. companies, and from direct excess insurance written from 1972 through 1985, including substantial excess general liability coverages on large U.S. companies. Additional exposure stems from direct primary commercial insurance written during the 1960s through the mid-1980s. Other discontinued lines exposures primarily relate to general liability and product liability mass tort claims, such as those for medical devices and other products. In 1986, the general liability policy form used by us and others in the property-liability industry was amended to introduce an "absolute pollution exclusion," which excluded coverage for environmental damage claims, and to add an asbestos exclusion. Most general liability policies issued prior to 1987 contain annual aggregate limits for product liability coverage. General liability policies issued in 1987 and thereafter contain annual aggregate limits for product liability coverage and annual aggregate limits for all coverages. Our experience to date is that these policy form changes have limited the extent of our exposure to environmental and asbestos claim risks. Our exposure to liability for asbestos, environmental and other discontinued lines losses manifests differently depending on whether it arises from assumed reinsurance coverage, direct excess insurance or direct primary commercial insurance. The direct insurance coverage we provided that covered asbestos, environmental and other discontinued lines was substantially "excess" in nature. Direct excess insurance and reinsurance involve coverage written by us for specific layers of protection above retentions and other insurance plans. The nature of excess coverage and reinsurance provided to other insurers limits our exposure to loss to specific layers of protection in excess of policyholder retention on primary insurance plans. Our exposure is further limited by the significant reinsurance that we had purchased on our direct excess business. Our assumed reinsurance business involved writing generally small participations in other insurers' reinsurance programs. The reinsured losses in which we participate may be a proportion of all eligible losses or eligible losses in excess of defined retentions. The majority of our assumed reinsurance exposure, approximately 85%, is for excess of loss coverage, while the remaining 15% is for pro-rata coverage. Our direct primary commercial insurance business did not include coverage to large asbestos manufacturers. This business comprises a cross section of policyholders engaged in many diverse business sectors located throughout the country. How reserve estimates are established and updated We conduct an annual review in the third quarter to evaluate and establish asbestos, environmental and other discontinued lines reserves. Changes to reserves are recorded in the reporting period in which they are determined. Using established industry and actuarial best practices and assuming no change in the regulatory or economic environment, this detailed and comprehensive methodology determines asbestos reserves based on assessments of the characteristics of exposure (i.e. claim activity, potential liability, jurisdiction, products versus non-products exposure) presented by individual policyholders, and determines environmental reserves based on assessments of the characteristics of exposure (i.e. environmental damages, respective shares of liability of potentially responsible parties, appropriateness and cost of remediation) to pollution and related clean-up costs. The number and cost of these claims is affected by intense advertising by trial lawyers seeking asbestos plaintiffs, and entities with asbestos exposure seeking bankruptcy protection as a result of asbestos liabilities, initially causing a delay in the reporting of claims, often followed by an acceleration and an increase in claims and claims expenses as settlements occur. After evaluating our insureds' probable liabilities for asbestos and/or environmental claims, we evaluate our insureds' coverage programs for such claims. We consider our insureds' total available insurance coverage, including the 39 Table of Contents coverage we issued. We also consider relevant judicial interpretations of policy language and applicable coverage defenses or determinations, if any. Evaluation of both the insureds' estimated liabilities and our exposure to the insureds depends heavily on an analysis of the relevant legal issues and litigation environment. This analysis is conducted by our specialized claims adjusting staff and legal counsel. Based on these evaluations, case reserves are established by claims adjusting staff and actuarial analysis is employed to develop an IBNR reserve, which includes estimated potential reserve development and claims that have occurred but have not been reported. As of December 31, 2011 and 2010, IBNR was 59.0% and 60.1%, respectively, of combined asbestos and environmental reserves. For both asbestos and environmental reserves, we also evaluate our historical direct net loss and expense paid and incurred experience to assess any emerging trends, fluctuations or characteristics suggested by the aggregate paid and incurred activity. Other Discontinued Lines and Coverages The following table shows reserves for other discontinued lines which provide for remaining loss and loss expense liabilities related to business no longer written by us, other than asbestos and environmental, as of December 31. ($ in millions) 2011 2010 2009 Other mass torts $ 169 $ 188 $ 201 Workers' compensation 117 116 122 Commercial and other 158 174 177 Other discontinued lines $ 444 $ 478 $ 500 Other mass torts describes direct excess and reinsurance general liability coverage provided for cumulative injury losses other than asbestos and environmental. Workers' compensation and commercial and other include run-off from discontinued direct primary, direct excess and reinsurance commercial insurance operations of various coverage exposures other than asbestos and environmental. Reserves are based on considerations similar to those previously described, as they relate to the characteristics of specific individual coverage exposures. Potential reserve estimate variability Establishing Discontinued Lines and Coverages net loss reserves for asbestos, environmental and other discontinued lines claims is subject to uncertainties that are much greater than those presented by other types of claims. Among the complications are lack of historical data, long reporting delays, uncertainty as to the number and identity of insureds with potential exposure and unresolved legal issues regarding policy coverage; unresolved legal issues regarding the determination, availability and timing of exhaustion of policy limits; plaintiffs' evolving and expanding theories of liability; availability and collectability of recoveries from reinsurance; retrospectively determined premiums and other contractual agreements; estimates of the extent and timing of any contractual liability; the impact of bankruptcy protection sought by various asbestos producers and other asbestos defendants; and other uncertainties. There are also complex legal issues concerning the interpretation of various insurance policy provisions and whether those losses are covered, or were ever intended to be covered, and could be recoverable through retrospectively determined premium, reinsurance or other contractual agreements. Courts have reached different and sometimes inconsistent conclusions as to when losses are deemed to have occurred and which policies provide coverage; what types of losses are covered; whether there is an insurer obligation to defend; how policy limits are determined; how policy exclusions and conditions are applied and interpreted; and whether clean-up costs represent insured property damage. Our reserves for asbestos and environmental exposures could be affected by tort reform, class action litigation, and other potential legislation and judicial decisions. Environmental exposures could also be affected by a change in the existing federal Superfund law and similar state statutes. There can be no assurance that any reform legislation will be enacted or that any such legislation will provide for a fair, effective and cost-efficient system for settlement of asbestos or environmental claims. We believe these issues are not likely to be resolved in the near future, and the ultimate costs may vary materially from the amounts currently recorded resulting in material changes in loss reserves. Historical variability of reserve estimates is demonstrated in the Property-Liability Claims and Claims Expense Reserves section of this document. Adequacy of reserve estimates Management believes its net loss reserves for environmental, asbestos and other discontinued lines exposures are appropriately established based on available facts, technology, laws, regulations, and assessments of other pertinent factors and characteristics of exposure (i.e. claim activity, potential liability, jurisdiction, products versus non-products exposure) presented by individual policyholders, assuming no change in the legal, legislative or economic environment. Due to the uncertainties and factors described above, management believes it is not practicable to develop a meaningful range for any such additional net loss reserves that may be required. 40 Table of Contents Further discussion of reserve estimates For further discussion of these estimates and quantification of the impact of reserve estimates, reserve reestimates and assumptions, see Notes 8 and 14 to the consolidated financial statements and the Property-Liability Claims and Claims Expense Reserves section of this document. Reserve for life-contingent contract benefits estimation Due to the long term nature of traditional life insurance, life-contingent immediate annuities and voluntary accident and health products, benefits are payable over many years; accordingly, the reserves are calculated as the present value of future expected benefits to be paid, reduced by the present value of future expected net premiums. Long-term actuarial assumptions of future investment yields, mortality, morbidity, policy terminations and expenses are used when establishing the reserve for life-contingent contract benefits payable under these insurance policies. These assumptions, which for traditional life insurance are applied using the net level premium method, include provisions for adverse deviation and generally vary by characteristics such as type of coverage, year of issue and policy duration. Future investment yield assumptions are determined based upon prevailing investment yields as well as estimated reinvestment yields. Mortality, morbidity and policy termination assumptions are based on our experience and industry experience. Expense assumptions include the estimated effects of inflation and expenses to be incurred beyond the premium-paying period. These assumptions are established at the time the policy is issued, are consistent with assumptions for determining DAC amortization for these policies, and are generally not changed during the policy coverage period. However, if actual experience emerges in a manner that is significantly adverse relative to the original assumptions, adjustments to DAC or reserves may be required resulting in a charge to earnings which could have a material effect on our operating results and financial condition. We periodically review the adequacy of reserves and recoverability of DAC for these policies on an aggregate basis using actual experience. In the event actual experience is significantly adverse compared to the original assumptions and a premium deficiency is determined to exist, any remaining unamortized DAC balance must be expensed to the extent not recoverable and the establishment of a premium deficiency reserve may be required. In 2011, 2010 and 2009, our reviews concluded that no premium deficiency adjustments were necessary, primarily due to profit from traditional life insurance more than offsetting the projected losses in immediate annuities with life contingencies. We will continue to monitor the experience of our traditional life insurance and immediate annuities. We anticipate that mortality, investment and reinvestment yields, and policy terminations are the factors that would be most likely to require premium deficiency adjustments to these reserves or related DAC. For further detail on the reserve for life-contingent contract benefits, see Note 9 of the consolidated financial statements. PROPERTY-LIABILITY 2011 HIGHLIGHTS Premiums written, an operating measure that is defined and reconciled to premiums earned in the Property-Liability Operations section of the MD&A, increased 0.3% to $25.98 billion in 2011 from $25.91 billion in 2010. Allstate brand standard auto premiums written decreased 0.9% to $15.70 billion in 2011 from $15.84 billion in 2010. Allstate brand homeowners premiums written increased 2.4% to $5.89 billion in 2011 from $5.75 billion in 2010. Encompass brand premiums written decreased 3.6% to $1.06 billion in 2011 from $1.10 billion 2010. Esurance brand premiums written were $181 million in 2011 for the period from the October 7, 2011 acquisition date to December 31, 2011. Premium operating measures and statistics contributing to overall Allstate brand standard auto premiums written decrease were the following: 1.5% decrease in PIF as of December 31, 2011 compared to December 31, 2010 0.2% increase in the six month policy term average gross premium before reinsurance to $444 in 2011 from $443 in 2010 0.3 point increase in the six month renewal ratio to 89.0% in 2011 compared to 88.7% in 2010 5.8% decrease in new issued applications in 2011 compared to 2010 Premium operating measures and statistics contributing to overall Allstate brand homeowners premiums written increase were the following: 4.8% decrease in PIF as of December 31, 2011 compared to December 31, 2010 5.9% increase in the twelve month policy term average gross premium before reinsurance to $999 in 2011 from $943 in 2010 0.1 point decrease in the twelve month renewal ratio to 88.3% in 2011 compared to 88.4% in 2010 14.9% decrease in new issued applications in 2011 compared to 2010 $39 million decrease in catastrophe reinsurance costs to $495 million in 2011 from $534 million in 2010 41 Table of Contents Factors comprising the Allstate brand standard auto loss ratio decrease of 0.1 points to 70.6 in 2011 from 70.7 in 2010 were the following: 1.6 point increase in the effect of catastrophe losses to 2.6 points in 2011 compared to 1.0 points in 2010 2.0% decrease in standard auto claim frequency for property damage in 2011 compared to 2010 1.6% decrease in standard auto claim frequency for bodily injury in 2011 compared to 2010 2.2% increase in auto paid claim severities for property damage in 2011 compared to 2010 1.5% increase in auto paid claim severities for bodily injury in 2011 compared to 2010 Factors comprising the Allstate brand homeowners loss ratio, which includes catastrophes, increase of 15.9 points to 98.0 in 2011 from 82.1 in 2010 were the following: 18.7 point increase in the effect of catastrophe losses to 50.0 points in 2011 compared to 31.3 points in 2010 2.9% increase in homeowner claim frequency, excluding catastrophes, in 2011 compared to 2010 2.1% increase in paid claim severity, excluding catastrophes, in 2011 compared to 2010 Factors comprising the $1.61 billion increase in catastrophe losses to $3.82 billion in 2011 compared to $2.21 billion in 2010 were the following: 91 events with losses of $3.95 billion in 2011 compared to 90 events with losses of $2.37 billion in 2010 $130 million favorable prior year reserve reestimates in 2011 compared to $163 million favorable reserve reestimates in 2010 Factors comprising the $335 million of favorable prior year reserve reestimates in 2011 compared to $159 million favorable in 2010 included: prior year reserve reestimates related to auto, homeowners and other personal lines in 2011 contributed $381 million favorable, $69 million favorable and $94 million unfavorable, respectively, compared to prior year reserve reestimates in 2010 of $179 million favorable, $23 million favorable and $15 million unfavorable, respectively prior year reserve reestimates in 2011 and 2010 are largely attributable to severity development that was better than expected and catastrophes. Prior year reserve reestimates in 2010 also included a litigation settlement. Property-Liability underwriting loss was $874 million in 2011 compared to underwriting income of $495 million in 2010. Underwriting income (loss), a measure not based on GAAP, is defined below. Net realized capital gains were $85 million in 2011 compared to net realized capital losses of $321 million in 2010. Property-Liability investments were $36.00 billion as of December 31, 2011, an increase of 2.7% from $35.05 billion as of December 31, 2010. Net investment income was $1.20 billion in 2011, an increase of 1.0% from $1.19 billion in 2010. PROPERTY-LIABILITY OPERATIONS Overview Our Property-Liability operations consist of two reporting segments: Allstate Protection and Discontinued Lines and Coverages. Allstate Protection comprises three brands: Allstate, Encompass and Esurance. Allstate Protection is principally engaged in the sale of personal property and casualty insurance, primarily private passenger auto and homeowners insurance, to individuals in the United States and Canada. Discontinued Lines and Coverages includes results from insurance coverage that we no longer write and results for certain commercial and other businesses in run-off. These segments are consistent with the groupings of financial information that management uses to evaluate performance and to determine the allocation of resources. Underwriting income (loss), a measure that is not based on GAAP and is reconciled to net income (loss) below, is calculated as premiums earned, less claims and claims expense ("losses"), amortization of DAC, operating costs and expenses and restructuring and related charges, as determined using GAAP. We use this measure in our evaluation of results of operations to analyze the profitability of the Property-Liability insurance operations separately from investment results. It is also an integral component of incentive compensation. It is useful for investors to evaluate the components of income separately and in the aggregate when reviewing performance. Net income (loss) is the GAAP measure most directly comparable to underwriting income (loss). Underwriting income (loss) should not be considered as a substitute for net income and does not reflect the overall profitability of the business. The table below includes GAAP operating ratios we use to measure our profitability. We believe that they enhance an investor's understanding of our profitability. They are calculated as follows: Claims and claims expense ("loss") ratio the ratio of claims and claims expense to premiums earned. Loss ratios include the impact of catastrophe losses. Expense ratio the ratio of amortization of DAC, operating costs and expenses, and restructuring and related charges to premiums earned. 42 Table of Contents Combined ratio the ratio of claims and claims expense, amortization of DAC, operating costs and expenses, and restructuring and related charges to premiums earned. The combined ratio is the sum of the loss ratio and the expense ratio. The difference between 100% and the combined ratio represents underwriting income (loss) as a percentage of premiums earned, or underwriting margin. We have also calculated the following impacts of specific items on the GAAP operating ratios because of the volatility of these items between fiscal periods. Effect of catastrophe losses on combined ratio the percentage of catastrophe losses included in claims and claims expense to premiums earned. This ratio includes prior year reserve reestimates of catastrophe losses. Effect of prior year reserve reestimates on combined ratio the percentage of prior year reserve reestimates included in claims and claims expense to premiums earned. This ratio includes prior year reserve reestimates of catastrophe losses. Effect of business combination expenses and the amortization of purchased intangible assets on combined and expense ratio the percentage of business combination expenses and the amortization of purchased intangible assets to premiums earned. Effect of restructuring and related charges on combined ratio the percentage of restructuring and related charges to premiums earned. Effect of Discontinued Lines and Coverages on combined ratio the ratio of claims and claims expense and operating costs and expenses in the Discontinued Lines and Coverages segment to Property-Liability premiums earned. The sum of the effect of Discontinued Lines and Coverages on the combined ratio and the Allstate Protection combined ratio is equal to the Property-Liability combined ratio. 43 Table of Contents Summarized financial data, a reconciliation of underwriting (loss) income to net income, and GAAP operating ratios for our Property-Liability operations are presented in the following table. ($ in millions, except ratios) 2011 2010 2009 Premiums written $ 25,980 $ 25,907 $ 25,971 Revenues Premiums earned $ 25,942 $ 25,957 $ 26,194 Net investment income 1,201 1,189 1,328 Realized capital gains and losses 85 (321 ) (168 ) Total revenues 27,228 26,825 27,354 Costs and expenses Claims and claims expense (20,161 ) (18,951 ) (18,746 ) Amortization of DAC (3,640 ) (3,678 ) (3,789 ) Operating costs and expenses (2,972 ) (2,800 ) (2,559 ) Restructuring and related charges (43 ) (33 ) (105 ) Total costs and expenses (26,816 ) (25,462 ) (25,199 ) Gain on disposition of operations 5 Income tax expense (4 ) (314 ) (612 ) Net income $ 408 $ 1,054 $ 1,543 Underwriting (loss) income $ (874 ) $ 495 $ 995 Net investment income 1,201 1,189 1,328 Income tax benefit (expense) on operations 27 (426 ) (558 ) Realized capital gains and losses, after-tax 54 (207 ) (222 ) Gain on disposition of operations, after-tax 3 Net income $ 408 $ 1,054 $ 1,543 Catastrophe losses (1) $ 3,815 $ 2,207 $ 2,069 GAAP operating ratios Claims and claims expense ratio 77.7 73.0 71.6 Expense ratio 25.7 25.1 24.6 Combined ratio 103.4 98.1 96.2 Effect of catastrophe losses on combined ratio (1) 14.7 8.5 7.9 Effect of prior year reserve reestimates on combined ratio (1) (1.3 ) (0.6 ) (0.4 ) Effect of business combination expenses and the amortization of purchased intangible assets on combined ratio 0.2 Effect of restructuring and related charges on combined ratio 0.2 0.1 0.4 Effect of Discontinued Lines and Coverages on combined ratio 0.1 0.1 0.1 (1) Prior year reserve reestimates included in catastrophe losses totaled $130 million favorable in 2011, $163 million favorable in 2010 and $169 million favorable in 2009. ALLSTATE PROTECTION SEGMENT Overview and strategy The Allstate Protection segment primarily sells private passenger auto and homeowners insurance to individuals through Allstate exclusive agencies and directly through call centers and the internet under the Allstate brand. We sell auto and homeowners insurance through independent agencies under both the Allstate brand and the Encompass brand. We also sell auto insurance direct to consumers online, through a call center and through select agents, including Answer Financial, under the Esurance brand. Our strategy is to position our products and distribution systems to meet the changing needs of the customer in managing the risks they face. This includes customers who want advice and assistance and those who are self-directed. In addition, there are customers who are brand-sensitive and those who are brand-neutral. Our strategy is to serve all 44 Table of Contents four of these sectors with unique products and in unique and innovative ways while leveraging our claims, pricing and operational capabilities. When we do not offer a product our customers need, we may offer non-proprietary products that meet their needs. Our operating priorities for the Protection segment include achieving profitable market share growth for our auto business as well as earning acceptable returns on our homeowners business. Key goals include: Improving customer loyalty and retention; Deepening customer product relationships; Improving auto competitive position through price optimization; Improving the profitability of our homeowners business; Investing in the effectiveness and reach of our multiple distribution channels including self-directed consumers through our newly acquired Esurance brand; and Maintaining a strong capital foundation through risk management and effective resource allocation. Our customer-focused strategy for the Allstate brand aligns targeted marketing, product innovation, distribution effectiveness, and pricing toward acquiring and retaining an increased share of our target customers, which generally refers to consumers who want to purchase multiple products from one insurance provider including auto, homeowners and financial products, who have better retention and potentially present more favorable prospects for profitability over the course of their relationships with us. The Allstate brand utilizes marketing delivered to target customers to promote our strategic priorities, with messaging that continues to communicate affordability and ease of doing business with Allstate, as well as the importance of having proper coverage by highlighting our comprehensive product and coverage options. At Allstate we differentiate ourselves from competitors by offering a comprehensive range of innovative product options and features as well as product customization, including Allstate Your Choice Auto with options such as accident forgiveness, safe driving deductible rewards and a safe driving bonus. We will continue to focus on developing and introducing products and services that benefit today's consumers and further differentiate Allstate and enhance the customer experience. We will deepen customer relationships through value-added customer interactions and expanding our presence in households with multiple products by providing financial protection for customer needs. In addition, we introduced a claim satisfaction guarantee that promises a return of premium to any Allstate Brand standard auto insurance customer dissatisfied with their claims experience, which differentiates Allstate from the competition. Within our multiple distribution channels we are undergoing a focused effort to enhance our capabilities by implementing uniform processes and standards to elevate the level and consistency of our customer experience. We continue to enhance technology to integrate our distribution channels, improve customer service, facilitate the introduction of new products and services and reduce infrastructure costs related to supporting agencies and handling claims. These actions and others are designed to optimize the effectiveness of our distribution and service channels by increasing the productivity of the Allstate brand's exclusive agencies. Beginning in 2012, Allstate Brand direct sales and service will focus on serving customers who prefer personal advice and assistance and work closer with Allstate exclusive agencies. Our pricing and underwriting strategies and decisions, made in conjunction within a program called Strategic Risk Management, are designed to enhance both our competitive position and our profit potential. Pricing sophistication, which underlies our Strategic Risk Management program, uses a number of risk evaluation factors including insurance scoring, to the extent permissible by regulations, based on information that is obtained from credit reports. Our updated auto risk evaluation pricing model was implemented for 25 states in 2011 and these implementations will continue in other states throughout 2012. Our pricing strategy involves marketplace pricing and underwriting decisions that are based on these risk evaluation models and an evaluation of competitors. We will utilize pricing sophistication to increase our price competiveness to a greater share of target customers. We call this price optimization and it includes using underwriting information, pricing and discounts to achieve a higher close rate. We will also continue to provide a range of discounts to attract more target customers. For the Allstate brand auto and homeowners business, we continue to improve our mix of customers towards those customers that have better retention and thus potentially present more favorable prospects for profitability over the course of their relationships with us. For homeowners, we will address rate adequacy and improve underwriting and claim effectiveness. Our comprehensive strategic review of our homeowners insurance business is ongoing. 45 Table of Contents The Allstate Protection segment also includes a separate organization called Emerging Businesses which comprises Business Insurance (commercial products for small business owners), Consumer Household (specialty products including motorcycle, boat, renters and condominium insurance policies), Allstate Dealer Services (insurance and non-insurance products sold primarily to auto dealers), Allstate Roadside Services (retail and wholesale roadside assistance products) and Ivantage (insurance agency). Premiums written by Emerging Businesses were $2.49 billion in 2011 compared to $2.43 billion in 2010. We expect we will continue to accelerate profitable growth in Emerging Businesses during 2012. Our strategy for the Encompass brand includes enhancing our premier package policy (providing customers with the ability to simplify their insurance needs by consolidating their coverage into one policy, with one bill, one premium and one renewal date) to appeal to customers with broad personal lines coverage needs and that value an independent agent. Additionally, Encompass is focused on increasing distribution effectiveness and improving agency technology interfaces to become the package carrier of choice for aligned agencies to generate stable, consistent earnings growth. Our strategy for Esurance brand focuses on self-directed and web-savvy customers. To best serve these customers, Esurance develops its technology and website to continuously improve its hassle-free purchase and claims experience. In 2012, Esurance plans to broaden its product offering and increase its preferred driver mix, while raising its advertising investment and marketing effectiveness to support growth. We continue to manage our property catastrophe exposure with the goal of providing shareholders an acceptable return on the risks assumed in our property business and to reduce the variability of our earnings. Our property business includes personal homeowners, commercial property and other property lines. As of December 31, 2011, we continue to be within our goal to have no more than a 1% likelihood of exceeding annual aggregate catastrophe losses by $2 billion, net of reinsurance, from hurricanes and earthquakes, based on modeled assumptions and applications currently available. The use of different assumptions and updates to industry models could materially change the projected loss. Property catastrophe exposure management includes purchasing reinsurance to provide coverage for known exposure to hurricanes, earthquakes, wildfires, fires following earthquakes and other catastrophes. We are also working for changes in the regulatory environment, including recognizing the need for better catastrophe preparedness, improving appropriate risk based pricing and promoting the creation of government sponsored, privately funded solutions for mega-catastrophes that will make insurance more available and affordable. While the actions that we take will be primarily focused on reducing the catastrophe exposure in our property business, we also consider their impact on our ability to market our auto lines. Pricing of property products is typically intended to establish returns that we deem acceptable over a long-term period. Losses, including losses from catastrophic events and weather-related losses (such as wind, hail, lightning and freeze losses not meeting our criteria to be declared a catastrophe), are accrued on an occurrence basis within the policy period. Therefore, in any reporting period, loss experience from catastrophic events and weather-related losses may contribute to negative or positive underwriting performance relative to the expectations we incorporated into the products' pricing. We pursue rate increases where indicated using a newly re-designed methodology that appropriately addresses the changing costs of losses from catastrophes such as severe weather and the net cost of reinsurance. Allstate Protection outlook Allstate Protection will continue to focus on its strategy of offering differentiated products and services to our target customers while maintaining pricing discipline. We expect that volatility in the level of catastrophes we experience will contribute to variation in our underwriting results; however, this volatility will be mitigated due to our catastrophe management actions, including the purchase of reinsurance. We will continue to study the efficiencies of our operations and cost structure for additional areas where costs may be reduced. Premiums written , an operating measure, is the amount of premiums charged for policies issued during a fiscal period. Premiums earned is a GAAP measure. Premiums are considered earned and are included in the financial results on a pro-rata basis over the policy period. The portion of premiums written applicable to the unexpired terms of the policies is recorded as unearned premiums on our Consolidated Statements of Financial Position. Since policy periods are typically 6 or 12 months, rate changes will generally be recognized in premiums earned over a period of 6 to 24 months. 46 Table of Contents The following table shows the unearned premium balance as of December 31 and the timeframe in which we expect to recognize these premiums as earned. ($ in millions) % earned after 2011 2010 90 days 180 days 270 days 360 days Allstate brand: Standard auto $ 4,120 $ 4,103 72.2 % 97.3 % 99.3 % 100.0 % Non-standard auto 216 239 67.5 % 93.9 % 98.6 % 100.0 % Homeowners 3,314 3,259 43.5 % 75.6 % 94.2 % 100.0 % Other personal lines (1) 1,293 1,276 40.9 % 69.2 % 86.5 % 92.9 % Total Allstate brand 8,943 8,877 57.0 % 85.2 % 95.6 % 99.0 % Encompass brand: Standard auto 311 327 43.6 % 75.3 % 94.1 % 100.0 % Non-standard auto 1 % % % % Homeowners 202 206 43.6 % 75.5 % 94.1 % 100.0 % Other personal lines (1) 47 47 43.8 % 75.6 % 94.2 % 100.0 % Total Encompass brand 560 581 43.6 % 75.4 % 94.1 % 100.0 % Esurance brand (2) Standard auto 208 74.5 % 99.1 % 99.8 % 100.0 % Allstate Protection unearned premiums $ 9,711 $ 9,458 56.6 % 84.9 % 95.6 % 99.1 % (1) Other personal lines include commercial, condominium, renters, involuntary auto and other personal lines. (2) Esurance brand business was acquired on October 7, 2011. A reconciliation of premiums written to premiums earned is shown in the following table. ($ in millions) 2011 2010 2009 Premiums written: Allstate Protection $ 25,981 $ 25,906 $ 25,972 Discontinued Lines and Coverages (1 ) 1 (1 ) Property-Liability premiums written 25,980 25,907 25,971 (Increase) decrease in unearned premiums (33 ) 19 200 Other (5 ) 31 23 Property-Liability premiums earned $ 25,942 $ 25,957 $ 26,194 Premiums earned: Allstate Protection $ 25,942 $ 25,955 $ 26,195 Discontinued Lines and Coverages 2 (1 ) Property-Liability $ 25,942 $ 25,957 $ 26,194 Premiums written by brand are shown in the following table. Allstate brand Encompass brand Esurance brand Allstate Protection ($ in millions) 2011 2010 2009 2011 2010 2009 2011 2011 2010 2009 Standard auto $ 15,703 $ 15,842 $ 15,763 $ 604 $ 644 $ 800 $ 181 $ 16,488 $ 16,486 $ 16,563 Non-standard auto 775 883 927 1 6 22 776 889 949 Homeowners 5,893 5,753 5,635 362 357 408 6,255 6,110 6,043 Other personal lines 2,372 2,331 2,317 90 90 100 2,462 2,421 2,417 Total $ 24,743 $ 24,809 $ 24,642 $ 1,057 $ 1,097 $ 1,330 $ 181 $ 25,981 $ 25,906 $ 25,972 47 Table of Contents Premiums earned by brand are shown in the following table. Allstate brand Encompass brand Esurance brand Allstate Protection ($ in millions) 2011 2010 2009 2011 2010 2009 2011 2011 2010 2009 Standard auto $ 15,679 $ 15,814 $ 15,735 $ 620 $ 716 $ 907 $ 201 $ 16,500 $ 16,530 $ 16,642 Non-standard auto 797 896 939 2 9 27 799 905 966 Homeowners 5,835 5,693 5,633 365 385 444 6,200 6,078 6,077 Other personal lines 2,352 2,348 2,402 91 94 108 2,443 2,442 2,510 Total $ 24,663 $ 24,751 $ 24,709 $ 1,078 $ 1,204 $ 1,486 $ 201 $ 25,942 $ 25,955 $ 26,195 Premium operating measures and statistics that are used to analyze the business are calculated and described below. Measures and statistics presented for Allstate brand exclude Allstate Canada, loan protection and specialty auto. PIF: Policy counts are based on items rather than customers. A multi-car customer would generate multiple item (policy) counts, even if all cars were insured under one policy. Average premium-gross written: Gross premiums written divided by issued item count. Gross premiums written include the impacts from discounts and surcharges, and exclude the impacts from mid-term premium adjustments, ceded reinsurance premiums, and premium refund accruals. Allstate brand average gross premiums represent the appropriate policy term for each line, which is 6 months for standard and non-standard auto and 12 months for homeowners. Encompass brand average gross premiums represent the appropriate policy term for each line, which is 12 months for standard auto and homeowners and 6 months for non-standard auto. Esurance brand average gross premiums represent the appropriate policy term, which is 6 months for standard auto. Renewal ratio: Renewal policies issued during the period, based on contract effective dates, divided by the total policies issued 6 months prior for standard and non-standard auto (12 months prior for Encompass brand standard auto) or 12 months prior for homeowners. New issued applications: Item counts of automobiles or homeowners insurance applications for insurance policies that were issued during the period. Does not include automobiles that are added by existing customers. Net items added to existing policies: Net increases in insured cars by policy endorsement activity. Standard auto premiums written total of $16.49 billion in 2011 was comparable to 2010, following a 0.5% decrease in 2010 from $16.56 billion in 2009. Allstate brand Encompass brand Esurance brand Standard Auto 2011 2010 2009 2011 2010 2009 2011 PIF (thousands) 17,213 17,484 17,744 673 689 859 786 Average premium-gross written (1) $ 444 $ 443 $ 434 $ 935 $ 979 $ 972 $ N/A (8) Renewal ratio (%) (1) 89.0 88.7 88.9 69.5 69.2 69.6 76.3 Approved rate changes (2) : # of states 33 45 (6) 36 (6) 19 24 36 N/A Countrywide (%) (3) 4.7 1.4 4.6 3.5 1.4 7.3 N/A State specific (%) (4) (5) 8.1 (7) 2.2 7.2 6.1 2.7 9.3 N/A (1) Policy term is six months for Allstate and Esurance brands and twelve months for Encompass brand. (2) Rate changes that are indicated based on loss trend analysis to achieve a targeted return will continue to be pursued. Rate changes do not include rating plan enhancements, including the introduction of discounts and surcharges, that result in no change in the overall rate level in the state. These rate changes do not reflect initial rates filed for insurance subsidiaries initially writing business in a state. (3) Represents the impact in the states where rate changes were approved during 2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively, as a percentage of total countrywide prior year-end premiums written. (4) Represents the impact in the states where rate changes were approved during 2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively, as a percentage of its respective total prior year-end premiums written in those states. (5) Based on historical premiums written in those states, rate changes approved for standard auto totaled $731 million, $218 million and $784 million in 2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively. (6) Includes Washington D.C. (7) 2011 includes the impact of Florida rate increases averaging 18.5%, and New York rate increases averaging 11.2% taken across multiple companies. (8) N/A reflects not available. 48 Table of Contents Allstate brand standard auto premiums written totaled $15.70 billion in 2011, a decrease of 0.9% from $15.84 billion in 2010, following a 0.5% increase in 2010 from $15.76 billion in 2009. Contributing to the Allstate brand standard auto premiums written decrease in 2011 compared to 2010 were the following: decrease in PIF of 1.5% as of December 31, 2011 compared to December 31, 2010, due to fewer new issued applications and fewer policies available to renew. Excluding Florida and New York, PIF as of December 31, 2011 were comparable to December 31, 2010. 5.8% decrease in new issued applications on a countrywide basis to 1,908 thousand in 2011 from 2,025 thousand in 2010. Excluding Florida and New York (impacted by actions to improve profitability), new issued applications on a countrywide basis decreased 0.1% to 1,697 thousand in 2011 from 1,699 thousand in 2010. New issued applications increased in 17 states in 2011 compared to 2010. increase in average gross premium in 2011 compared to 2010. 0.3 point increase in the renewal ratio in 2011 compared to 2010. In 2011, 39 states are showing favorable comparisons to prior year. Allstate brand standard auto premiums written increased in 2010 compared to 2009. Contributing to the Allstate brand standard auto premiums written increase in 2010 compared to 2009 were the following: decrease in PIF as of December 31, 2010 compared to December 31, 2009, due to fewer policies available to renew and a 0.7% decrease in net items added to existing policies to 1,498 thousand from 1,509 thousand, reflecting industry economic trends for declines in the number of cars per household 0.2% decrease in new issued applications on a countrywide basis to 2,025 thousand in 2010 from 2,029 thousand in 2009 impacted by decreases in Florida and California, due in part to rate actions that were approved in 2009 in these markets and other actions to improve profitability. Excluding Florida and California, new issued applications on a countrywide basis increased 12.9% to 1,606 thousand in 2010 from 1,423 thousand in 2009. New issued application increased in 40 states in 2010 compared to 2009, most of which offer an auto discount (the Preferred Package Discount) for our target customer. increased average gross premium in 2010 compared to 2009, primarily due to rate changes, partially offset by customers electing to lower coverage levels of their policy 0.2 point decrease in the renewal ratio in 2010 compared to 2009, reflects profit management actions in California, New York and Georgia as well as the effects of the direct channel which has a lower renewal ratio. Excluding these items the renewal ratio had a 0.3 point increase. The level of Encompass premiums written continues to be impacted by comprehensive actions designed to reposition Encompass as the package policy carrier of choice for above middle market customers through independent agencies in order to drive stable, consistent earnings growth over time. Some of the actions contributing to the Encompass brand standard auto premiums written decrease in 2011 compared to 2010 were the following: Aligned pricing and underwriting with strategic direction Terminated relationships with certain independent agencies Non-renewal of underperforming business Discontinued writing the Special Value product (middle market auto product focused on segment auto) and Deerbrook (non-standard auto) in certain states Non-renewal of property in Florida Non-standard auto premiums written totaled $776 million in 2011, a decrease of 12.7% from $889 million in 2010, following a 6.3% decrease in 2009 from $949 million in 2009. Allstate brand Non-Standard Auto 2011 2010 2009 PIF (thousands) 571 640 719 Average premium-gross written (6 months) $ 606 $ 624 $ 616 Renewal ratio (%) (6 months) 70.4 71.4 72.5 Approved rate changes: # of states 13 (2) 11 (2) 11 Countrywide (%) 6.0 4.6 2.6 State specific (%) (1) 12.8 9.6 6.5 (1) Based on historical premiums written in those states, rate changes approved for non-standard auto totaled $49 million, $41 million and $25 million in 2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively. (2) Includes Washington D.C. 49 Table of Contents Allstate brand non-standard auto premiums written totaled $775 million in 2011, a decrease of 12.2% from $883 million in 2010, following a 4.7% decrease in 2010 from $927 million in 2009. Contributing to the Allstate brand non-standard auto premiums written decrease in 2011 compared to 2010 were the following: decrease in PIF as of December 31, 2011 compared to December 31, 2010, due to a decline in the number of policies available to renew, a lower retention rate and fewer new issued applications 17.2% decrease in new issued applications to 256 thousand in 2011 from 309 thousand in 2010, driven in large part by management actions in Florida through October 2011 decrease in average gross premium in 2011 compared to 2010 1.0 point decrease in the renewal ratio in 2011 compared to 2010 Allstate brand non-standard auto premiums written decreased in 2010 compared to 2009. Contributing to the Allstate brand non-standard auto premiums written decrease in 2010 compared to 2009 were the following: decrease in PIF as of December 31, 2010 compared to December 31, 2009, due to a decline in the number of policies available to renew and fewer new issued applications 14.9% decrease in new issued applications to 309 thousand in 2010 from 363 thousand in 2009 increase in average gross premium in 2010 compared to 2009 1.1 point decrease in the renewal ratio in 2010 compared to 2009 Homeowners premiums written totaled $6.26 billion in 2011, an increase of 2.4% from $6.11 billion in 2010, following a 1.1% increase in 2010 from $6.04 billion in 2009. Excluding the cost of catastrophe reinsurance, premiums written increased 1.6% in 2011 compared to 2010. For a more detailed discussion on reinsurance, see the Property-Liability Claims and Claims Expense Reserves section of the MD&A and Note 10 of the consolidated financial statements. Allstate brand Encompass brand Homeowners 2011 2010 2009 2011 2010 2009 PIF (thousands) 6,369 6,690 6,973 306 314 371 Average premium-gross written (12 months) $ 999 $ 943 $ 883 $ 1,297 $ 1,298 $ 1,265 Renewal ratio (%) (12 months) 88.3 88.4 88.1 79.8 78.1 78.9 Approved rate changes (1) : # of states (3) 41 32 40 27 23 36 Countrywide (%) 8.6 7.0 8.4 3.1 0.7 4.4 State specific (%) (2) 11.0 10.0 10.7 4.1 1.4 5.9 (1) Includes rate changes approved based on our net cost of reinsurance. (2) Based on historical premiums written in those states, rate changes approved for homeowners totaled $533 million, $424 million and $534 million in 2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively. (3) Includes Washington D.C. Allstate brand homeowners premiums written totaled $5.89 billion in 2011, an increase of 2.4% from $5.75 billion in 2010, following a 2.1% increase in 2010 from $5.64 billion in 2009. Contributing to the Allstate brand homeowners premiums written increase in 2011 compared to 2010 were the following: 4.8% decrease in PIF as of December 31, 2011 compared to December 31, 2010, due to fewer policies available to renew and fewer new issued applications 14.9% decrease in new issued applications to 456 thousand in 2011 from 536 thousand in 2010. During the second quarter of 2011, our Castle Key Indemnity Company subsidiary completed a 2008 regulatory consent decree to sell 50,000 new homeowners policies in Florida by November 2011. increase in average gross premium in 2011 compared to 2010, primarily due to rate changes 0.1 point decrease in the renewal ratio in 2011 compared to 2010 decrease in the cost of our catastrophe reinsurance program in 2011 compared to 2010 Actions taken to manage our catastrophe exposure in areas with known exposure to hurricanes, earthquakes, wildfires, fires following earthquakes and other catastrophes have had an impact on our new business writings and retention for homeowners insurance. Homeowners PIF has declined 1.2 million or 16% in the four years ended December 31, 2011. This impact will continue in 2012, although to a lesser degree. For a more detailed discussion on exposure management actions, see the Catastrophe Management section of the MD&A. 50 Table of Contents We have different plans around the country to improve the growth and profitability of our homeowners business. In states where we offer homeowners and other property coverages that do not have severe weather issues and that have acceptable returns, we are seeking to grow. In another group of states where we offer homeowners and other property coverages, we plan to implement pricing and/or underwriting actions that will improve performance to achieve our profitability targets. For two other groups of states, including those with severe weather issues and other risks such as hurricane exposure, we may take more substantial actions including raising prices, offering policies with more limited coverage, or brokering to other carriers. We are currently piloting our Allstate House and Home SM product which provides greater options of coverage for roof damage including depreciated value versus replacement value and uses a number of factors to determine price, some of which relate to auto insurance risks. We expect to roll it out countrywide for new business gradually over the next three years. Allstate brand homeowners premiums written increased in 2010 compared to 2009. Contributing to the Allstate brand homeowners premiums written increase in 2010 compared to 2009 were the following: 4.1% decrease in PIF as of December 31, 2010 compared to December 31, 2009, following a 3.9% decrease as of December 31, 2009 compared to December 31, 2008, due to fewer policies available to renew and fewer new issued applications 3.6% decrease in new issued applications to 536 thousand in 2010 from 556 thousand in 2009. Excluding Florida, new issued applications on a countrywide basis decreased 12.4% to 487 thousand in 2010 from 556 thousand in 2009. increase in average gross premium in 2010 compared to 2009, primarily due to rate changes 0.3 point increase in the renewal ratio in 2010 compared to 2009 decrease in the net cost of our catastrophe reinsurance program in 2010 compared to 2009 Underwriting results are shown in the following table. ($ in millions) 2011 2010 2009 Premiums written $ 25,981 $ 25,906 $ 25,972 Premiums earned $ 25,942 $ 25,955 $ 26,195 Claims and claims expense (20,140 ) (18,923 ) (18,722 ) Amortization of DAC (3,640 ) (3,678 ) (3,789 ) Other costs and expenses (2,968 ) (2,795 ) (2,552 ) Restructuring and related charges (43 ) (33 ) (105 ) Underwriting (loss) income $ (849 ) $ 526 $ 1,027 Catastrophe losses $ 3,815 $ 2,207 $ 2,069 Underwriting income (loss) by line of business Standard auto $ 568 $ 692 $ 987 Non-standard auto 101 74 76 Homeowners (1,330 ) (335 ) (125 ) Other personal lines (188 ) 95 89 Underwriting (loss) income $ (849 ) $ 526 $ 1,027 Underwriting income (loss) by brand Allstate brand $ (666 ) $ 569 $ 1,022 Encompass brand (146 ) (43 ) 5 Esurance brand (37 ) Underwriting (loss) income $ (849 ) $ 526 $ 1,027 Allstate Protection experienced an underwriting loss of $849 million in 2011 compared to underwriting income of $526 million in 2010, primarily due to an increase in homeowners underwriting loss, an underwriting loss for other personal lines compared to an underwriting gain in the prior year, and a decrease in standard auto underwriting income. Homeowners underwriting loss increased $995 million to $1.33 billion in 2011 from $335 million in 2010, primarily due to increases in catastrophe losses and higher expenses partially offset by average earned premiums increasing faster than loss costs. Other personal lines underwriting income decreased $283 million to an underwriting loss of $188 million in 2011 from underwriting income of $95 million in 2010, primarily due to increases in catastrophe losses, unfavorable reserve reestimates and higher expenses. Standard auto underwriting income decreased $124 million to 51 Table of Contents $568 million in 2011 from $692 million in 2010, primarily due to increases in catastrophe losses and higher expenses, partially offset by favorable reserve reestimates. For further discussion and quantification of the impact of reserve estimates and assumptions, see the Application of Critical Accounting Estimates and Property-Liability Claims and Claims Expense Reserves sections of the MD&A. Allstate Protection experienced underwriting income of $526 million in 2010 compared to $1.03 billion in 2009, primarily due to decreases in standard auto underwriting income and increases in homeowners underwriting losses, partially offset by increases in other personal lines underwriting income. Standard auto underwriting income decreased 29.9% to an underwriting income of $692 million in 2010 from an underwriting income of $987 million in 2009 primarily due to increases in auto claim frequency and expenses and a $25 million litigation settlement, partially offset by favorable reserve reestimates and decreases in catastrophe losses. Homeowners underwriting loss increased $210 million to an underwriting loss of $335 million in 2010 from an underwriting loss of $125 million in 2009 primarily due to a $75 million unfavorable prior year reserve reestimate related to a litigation settlement and increases in expenses and catastrophe losses, including prior year reestimates for catastrophes, partially offset by average earned premiums increasing faster than loss costs. Other personal lines underwriting income increased 6.7% to an underwriting income of $95 million in 2010 from an underwriting income of $89 million in 2009 primarily due to lower unfavorable reserve reestimates. Catastrophe losses were $3.82 billion in 2011 as detailed in the table below. This compares to catastrophe losses of $2.21 billion in 2010. We define a "catastrophe" as an event that produces pre-tax losses before reinsurance in excess of $1 million and involves multiple first party policyholders, or an event that produces a number of claims in excess of a preset, per-event threshold of average claims in a specific area, occurring within a certain amount of time following the event. Catastrophes are caused by various natural events including high winds, winter storms, tornadoes, hailstorms, wildfires, tropical storms, hurricanes, earthquakes and volcanoes. We are also exposed to man-made catastrophic events, such as certain types of terrorism or industrial accidents. The nature and level of catastrophes in any period cannot be reliably predicted. Catastrophe losses related to events that occurred by the size of the event are shown in the following table. ($ in millions) 2011 Number of events Claims and claims expense Combined ratio impact Average catastrophe loss per event Size of catastrophe Greater than $250 million 4 4.4 % $ 1,595 41.8 % 6.1 $ 399 $101 million to $250 million 4 4.4 563 14.8 2.2 141 $50 million to $100 million 12 13.2 877 23.0 3.4 73 Less than $50 million 71 78.0 910 23.8 3.5 13 Total 91 100.0 % 3,945 103.4 15.2 43 Prior year reserve reestimates (130 ) (3.4 ) (0.5 ) Total catastrophe losses $ 3,815 100.0 % 14.7 Catastrophe losses incurred by the type of event are shown in the following table. ($ in millions) 2011 2010 2009 Number of events Number of events Number of events Hurricanes/Tropical storms $ 619 3 $ 15 1 $ 48 1 Tornadoes 1,234 7 174 7 384 4 Wind/Hail 1,775 68 1,908 74 1,561 67 Wildfires 67 9 15 1 83 5 Other events 250 4 258 7 162 5 Prior year reserve reestimates (130 ) (163 ) (169 ) Total catastrophe losses $ 3,815 91 $ 2,207 90 $ 2,069 82 52 Table of Contents Catastrophes excluding hurricanes named or numbered by the National Weather Service, fires following earthquakes and earthquakes totaled $3.30 billion, $2.27 billion and $2.16 billion in 2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively, and are the result of severe weather experienced during these periods. Combined ratio Loss ratios are a measure of profitability. Loss ratios by product, and expense and combined ratios by brand, are shown in the following table. These ratios are defined in the Property-Liability Operations section of the MD&A. Ratio (1) Effect of catastrophe losses on combined ratio Effect of prior year reserve reestimates on combined ratio Effect of business combination expenses and the amortization of purchased intangible assets on combined ratio 2011 2010 2009 2011 2010 2009 2011 2010 2009 2011 Allstate brand loss ratio: Standard auto 70.6 70.7 69.3 2.6 1.0 1.2 (2.3 ) (0.9 ) (0.3 ) Non-standard auto 62.8 67.2 67.1 1.1 0.3 0.7 (4.9 ) (3.6 ) (1.6 ) Homeowners 98.0 82.1 79.6 50.0 31.3 29.0 (1.2 ) (0.3 ) (2.6 ) Other personal lines 76.0 66.4 67.3 13.6 7.2 7.0 4.0 0.7 3.5 Total Allstate brand loss ratio 77.3 72.8 71.4 14.8 8.5 8.1 (1.5 ) (0.7 ) (0.5 ) Allstate brand expense ratio 25.4 24.9 24.5 Allstate brand combined ratio 102.7 97.7 95.9 Encompass brand loss ratio: Standard auto 81.8 75.4 75.4 1.8 0.8 0.3 2.4 0.7 Non-standard auto 150.0 100.0 74.1 (50.0 ) (11.1 ) Homeowners 88.5 74.3 66.0 39.7 23.1 14.6 0.3 (1.3 ) (4.3 ) Other personal lines 83.5 73.4 75.9 9.9 4.3 1.9 (1.1 ) 5.6 Total Encompass brand loss ratio 84.3 75.1 72.6 15.3 8.2 4.7 1.4 (0.5 ) (0.7 ) Encompass brand expense ratio 29.2 28.5 27.1 Encompass brand combined ratio 113.5 103.6 99.7 Esurance brand loss ratio: Standard auto 78.1 Total Esurance brand loss ratio 78.1 Esurance brand expense ratio 40.3 20.9 Esurance brand combined ratio 118.4 Allstate Protection loss ratio 77.6 72.9 71.5 14.7 8.5 7.9 (1.4 ) (0.7 ) (0.5 ) Allstate Protection expense ratio 25.7 25.1 24.6 0.2 Allstate Protection combined ratio 103.3 98.0 96.1 (1) Ratios are calculated using the premiums earned for the respective line of business. Standard auto loss ratio for the Allstate brand decreased 0.1 points in 2011 compared to 2010 primarily due to favorable reserve reestimates, partially offset by higher catastrophe losses. Excluding the impact of catastrophe losses, the Allstate brand standard auto loss ratio improved 1.7 points in 2011 compared 2010. Florida and New York continued to have loss ratios higher than the countrywide average in 2011 though results in these two key states have improved relative to 2010, reducing the pressure on countrywide results. However, Florida and New York have improved underwriting results in the fourth quarter of 2011. We continue to pursue profitability management actions in Florida and New York, including rate increases, underwriting restrictions, increased claims staffing and review, and continued advocacy for legislative reform. In 2011, claim frequencies in the bodily injury and physical damage coverages have decreased compared to 2010. Bodily injury and physical damage coverages severity results in 2011 increased in line with historical Consumer Price Index ("CPI") trends. Standard auto loss ratio for the Allstate brand increased 1.4 points in 2010 compared to 2009 due to higher claim frequency and a $25 million litigation settlement, partially offset by 53 Table of Contents favorable reserve reestimates and lower catastrophe losses. The increase is primarily driven by increases in Florida and New York. In 2010, claim frequencies in the bodily injury and physical damage coverages have increased compared to 2009, but remain within historical norms. Bodily injury and physical damage coverages severity results in 2010 increased in line with historical CPI trends. Homeowners loss ratio for the Allstate brand increased 15.9 points to 98.0 in 2011 from 82.1 in 2010 due to higher catastrophe losses. Excluding the impact of catastrophe losses, the Allstate brand homeowners loss ratio improved 2.8 points in 2011 compared to 2010 due to average earned premiums increasing faster than loss costs. Homeowners loss ratio for the Allstate brand increased 2.5 points to 82.1 in 2010 from 79.6 in 2009 due to a $75 million unfavorable prior year reserve reestimate related to a litigation settlement and higher catastrophe losses including prior year reserve reestimates for catastrophes, partially offset by average earned premiums increasing faster than loss costs. Expense ratio for Allstate Protection increased 0.6 points in 2011 compared to 2010. Restructuring costs increased 0.1 points in 2011 compared to 2010, driven by technology and operations efficiency efforts and agent pension plan settlement charges. Excluding restructuring, the expense ratio for Allstate Protection increased 0.5 points in 2011 compared to 2010, driven by additional marketing, including $78 million spent on the Grow to Win initiative, and other growth initiative costs, and reduced guaranty fund accrual levels in 2010. We expect advertising costs to increase in 2012 as we focus on growing Esurance. The expense ratio for Allstate Protection increased 0.5 points in 2010 compared to 2009. Restructuring costs decreased 0.3 points in 2010 compared to 2009, driven by prior year costs associated with claim office consolidations, reorganization of Business Insurance and technology prioritization and efficiency efforts. Excluding restructuring, the expense ratio for Allstate Protection increased 0.8 points in 2010 compared to 2009, driven by additional marketing expenses and increases in net costs of employee benefits, partially offset by reduced guaranty fund accrual levels and improved operational efficiencies. The impact of specific costs and expenses on the expense ratio are included in the following table. Allstate brand Encompass brand Esurance brand Allstate Protection 2011 2010 2009 2011 2010 2009 2011 2011 2010 2009 Amortization of DAC 13.9 14.0 14.2 18.0 18.3 18.5 2.0 13.9 14.2 14.5 Other costs and expenses 11.3 10.8 9.9 11.2 9.7 8.3 17.4 11.4 10.8 9.7 Business combination expenses and amortization of purchased intangible assets 20.9 0.2 Restructuring and related charges 0.2 0.1 0.4 0.5 0.3 0.2 0.1 0.4 Total expense ratio 25.4 24.9 24.5 29.2 28.5 27.1 40.3 25.7 25.1 24.6 The expense ratio for the standard auto and homeowners businesses generally approximates the total Allstate Protection expense ratio. The expense ratio for the non-standard auto business generally is lower than the total Allstate Protection expense ratio due to lower agent commission rates and higher average premiums for non-standard auto as compared to standard auto. The Encompass brand DAC amortization is higher on average than Allstate brand DAC amortization due to higher commission rates. The Esurance brand expense ratio is higher than Allstate and Encompass brands due to business combination expenses and amortization of purchased intangible assets. Purchased intangible assets will be amortized on an accelerated basis with over 80% of the amortization taking place by 2016. Since Esurance uses a direct distribution model, its primary acquisition-related costs are advertising as opposed to commissions for the Allstate and Encompass brands. Advertising expense had a 10.9 point impact on the Esurance brand expense ratio in 2011. Advertising costs are not capitalized as DAC while commission costs are capitalized as DAC. As a result the Esurance expense and combined ratios will be higher during periods of growth since the expenses will be recognized prior to the premium earned. DAC We establish a DAC asset for costs that vary with and are primarily related to acquiring business, principally agents' remuneration, premium taxes and inspection costs. For the Allstate Protection business, DAC is amortized to 54 Table of Contents income over the period in which premiums are earned. The balance of DAC for each product type as of December 31 is included in the following table. Allstate brand Encompass brand Esurance brand Allstate Protection ($ in millions) 2011 2010 2011 2010 2011 2011 2010 Standard auto $ 533 $ 541 $ 52 $ 55 $ 32 (1) $ 617 $ 596 Non-standard auto 26 25 26 25 Homeowners 439 437 34 36 473 473 Other personal lines 289 276 7 7 296 283 Total DAC $ 1,287 $ 1,279 $ 93 $ 98 $ 32 $ 1,412 $ 1,377 (1) Includes $21 million of present value of future profits, which will be fully amortized by March 31, 2012. On January 1, 2012, we will adopt new DAC accounting guidance on a retrospective basis (see Note 2 of the consolidated financial statements for further details). It is currently estimated that the restated Allstate Protection DAC balance will decline by $63 million when compared to the reported December 31, 2011 balance. We estimate that the new DAC accounting guidance will have an insignificant effect on net income in 2012. Catastrophe management Historical catastrophe experience Since the beginning of 1992, the average annual impact of catastrophes on our Property-Liability loss ratio was 8.0 points. However, this average does not reflect the impact of some of the more significant actions we have taken to limit our catastrophe exposure. Consequently, it is useful to consider the impact of catastrophes after excluding losses that are now partially or substantially covered by the California Earthquake Authority ("CEA"), the Florida Hurricane Catastrophe Fund ("FHCF") or placed with a third party, such as hurricane coverage in Hawaii. The average annual impact of all catastrophes, excluding losses from Hurricanes Andrew and Iniki and losses from California earthquakes, on our Property-Liability loss ratio was 7.0 points since the beginning of 1992. Comparatively, the average annual impact of catastrophes on the homeowners loss ratio for the years 1992 through 2011 is shown in the following table. Average annual impact of catastrophes on the homeowners loss ratio Average annual impact of catastrophes on the homeowners loss ratio excluding losses from hurricanes Andrew and Iniki, and losses from California earthquakes Florida 95.6 46.5 Other hurricane exposure states 30.5 30.3 Total hurricane exposure states 35.5 31.6 All other 25.0 20.6 Total 30.6 26.5 Over time, we have limited our aggregate insurance exposure to catastrophe losses in certain regions of the country that are subject to high levels of natural catastrophes. Limitations include our participation in various state facilities, such as the CEA, which provides insurance for California earthquake losses; the FHCF, which provides reimbursements to participating insurers for certain qualifying Florida hurricane losses; and other state facilities, such as wind pools. However, the impact of these actions may be diminished by the growth in insured values, and the effect of state insurance laws and regulations. In addition, in various states we are required to participate in assigned risk plans, reinsurance facilities and joint underwriting associations that provide insurance coverage to individuals or entities that otherwise are unable to purchase such coverage from private insurers. Because of our participation in these and other state facilities such as wind pools, we may be exposed to losses that surpass the capitalization of these facilities and to assessments from these facilities. We continue to take actions to maintain an appropriate level of exposure to catastrophic events while continuing to meet the needs of our customers, including the following: Selectively not offering continuing coverage of mono-line homeowners policies in coastal areas of certain states. Increased capacity in our brokerage platform for customers not offered a renewal. 55 Table of Contents Expanded our excess and surplus carrier (North Light Specialty) to eight new states in 2011, bringing the total number of active states to 25. In Texas we are ceding wind exposure related to insured property located in wind pool eligible areas along the coast including the Galveston Islands. We have ceased writing new homeowners business in California. We will continue to renew current policyholders and have a renewal ratio of approximately 91% in California. We have ceased writing new business in Florida beyond a modest stance for existing customers who replace their currently-insured home with an acceptable property. Withdrawal from the property lines was completed for the Encompass companies operating in Florida. Hurricanes We consider the greatest areas of potential catastrophe losses due to hurricanes generally to be major metropolitan centers in counties along the eastern and gulf coasts of the United States. Usually, the average premium on a property policy near these coasts is greater than in other areas. However, average premiums are often not considered commensurate with the inherent risk of loss. In addition and as explained in Note 14 of the consolidated financial statements, in various states Allstate is subject to assessments from assigned risk plans, reinsurance facilities and joint underwriting associations providing insurance for wind related property losses. We have addressed our risk of hurricane loss by, among other actions, purchasing reinsurance for specific states and on a countrywide basis for our personal lines property insurance in areas most exposed to hurricanes; limiting personal homeowners new business writings in coastal areas in southern and eastern states; implementing tropical cyclone deductibles where appropriate; and not offering continuing coverage on certain policies in coastal counties in certain states. We continue to seek appropriate returns for the risks we write. This may require further actions, similar to those already taken, in geographies where we are not getting appropriate returns. However, we may maintain or opportunistically increase our presence in areas where we achieve adequate returns and do not materially increase our hurricane risk. Earthquakes Actions taken to reduce our exposure from earthquake coverage are substantially complete. These actions included purchasing reinsurance on a countrywide basis and in the state of Kentucky; no longer offering new optional earthquake coverage in most states; removing optional earthquake coverage upon renewal in most states; and entering into arrangements in many states to make earthquake coverage available through other insurers for new and renewal business. We expect to retain approximately 30,000 PIF with earthquake coverage due to regulatory and other reasons. We also will continue to have exposure to earthquake risk on certain policies that do not specifically exclude coverage for earthquake losses, including our auto policies, and to fires following earthquakes. Allstate policyholders in the state of California are offered coverage through the CEA, a privately-financed, publicly-managed state agency created to provide insurance coverage for earthquake damage. Allstate is subject to assessments from the CEA under certain circumstances as explained in Note 14 of the consolidated financial statements. Fires Following Earthquakes Actions taken related to our risk of loss from fires following earthquakes include changing homeowners underwriting requirements in California, purchasing reinsurance for Kentucky personal lines property risks, and purchasing nationwide occurrence reinsurance, excluding Florida and New Jersey. Wildfires Actions we are taking to reduce our risk of loss from wildfires include changing homeowners underwriting requirements in certain states and purchasing nationwide occurrence reinsurance. Catastrophe losses related to the Southern California wildfires occurred during 2009 and totaled $76 million. Reinsurance A description of our current catastrophe reinsurance program appears in Note 10 of the consolidated financial statements and a description of program changes as of June 1, 2012 appears in the Property-Liability Claims and Claims Expense Reserves section of the MD&A. 56 Table of Contents DISCONTINUED LINES AND COVERAGES SEGMENT Overview The Discontinued Lines and Coverages segment includes results from insurance coverage that we no longer write and results for certain commercial and other businesses in run-off. Our exposure to asbestos, environmental and other discontinued lines claims is reported in this segment. We have assigned management of this segment to a designated group of professionals with expertise in claims handling, policy coverage interpretation, exposure identification and reinsurance collection. As part of its responsibilities, this group is also regularly engaged in policy buybacks, settlements and reinsurance assumed and ceded commutations. Summarized underwriting results for the years ended December 31 are presented in the following table. ($ in millions) 2011 2010 2009 Premiums written $ (1 ) $ 1 $ (1 ) Premiums earned $ $ 2 $ (1 ) Claims and claims expense (21 ) (28 ) (24 ) Operating costs and expenses (4 ) (5 ) (7 ) Underwriting loss $ (25 ) $ (31 ) $ (32 ) Underwriting losses of $25 million in 2011 related to a $26 million unfavorable reestimate of asbestos reserves and a $5 million unfavorable reestimate of other reserves, primarily as a result of our annual review using established industry and actuarial best practices, partially offset by a $26 million decrease of our allowance for future uncollectible reinsurance and environmental reserves essentially unchanged. The cost of administering claims settlements totaled $11 million in 2011 and $13 million for each of 2010 and 2009. Underwriting losses of $31 million in 2010 related to an $18 million unfavorable reestimate of environmental reserves and a $5 million unfavorable reestimate of asbestos reserves, partially offset by a $4 million favorable reestimate of other reserves, primarily as a result of our annual review using established industry and actuarial best practices. Underwriting losses of $32 million in 2009 were primarily related to a $13 million unfavorable reestimate of environmental reserves and a $28 million unfavorable reestimate of other reserves, partially offset by an $8 million favorable reestimate of asbestos reserves, primarily as a result of our annual review using established industry and actuarial best practices. See the Property-Liability Claims and Claims Expense Reserves section of the MD&A for a more detailed discussion. Discontinued Lines and Coverages outlook We may continue to experience asbestos and/or environmental losses in the future. These losses could be due to the potential adverse impact of new information relating to new and additional claims or the impact of resolving unsettled claims based on unanticipated events such as litigation or legislative, judicial and regulatory actions. Environmental losses may also increase as the result of additional funding for environmental site cleanup. Because of our annual review, we believe that our reserves are appropriately established based on available information, technology, laws and regulations. We continue to be encouraged that the pace of industry asbestos claim activity has slowed, perhaps reflecting various state legislative and judicial actions with respect to medical criteria and increased legal scrutiny of the legitimacy of claims. PROPERTY-LIABILITY INVESTMENT RESULTS Net investment income increased 1.0% or $12 million to $1.20 billion in 2011 from $1.19 billion in 2010, after decreasing 10.5% in 2010 compared to 2009. The 2011 increase was primarily due to higher yields, partially offset by lower average investment balances. The 2010 decrease was primarily due to lower yields and duration shortening actions taken to protect the portfolio from rising interest rates, partially offset by higher average investment balances. The following table presents the average pre-tax investment yields for the years ended December 31. Pre-tax yield is calculated as investment income (including dividend income in the case of equity securities) divided by the average of 57 Table of Contents the investment balances at the beginning and end of period and interim quarters. Amortized cost is used to calculate the average investment balance for fixed income securities and mortgage loans. Cost is used for equity securities. 2011 2010 2009 Fixed income securities: tax-exempt 4.8 % 4.9 % 5.1 % Fixed income securities: tax-exempt equivalent 7.0 7.1 7.4 Fixed income securities: taxable 3.8 3.5 4.1 Equity securities 2.8 2.3 2.1 Mortgage loans 4.0 5.7 4.7 Cost method limited partnership interests 5.6 3.1 1.5 Total portfolio 3.9 3.8 4.2 Net realized capital gains and losses are presented in the following table. ($ in millions) 2011 2010 2009 Impairment write-downs $ (250 ) $ (295 ) $ (534 ) Change in intent write-downs (49 ) (62 ) (89 ) Net other-than-temporary impairment losses recognized in earnings (299 ) (357 ) (623 ) Sales 469 455 611 Valuation of derivative instruments (54 ) (331 ) 52 Settlements of derivative instruments (127 ) (143 ) (203 ) EMA limited partnership income 96 55 (5 ) Realized capital gains and losses, pre-tax 85 (321 ) (168 ) Income tax (expense) benefit (31 ) 114 (54 ) Realized capital gains and losses, after-tax $ 54 $ (207 ) $ (222 ) For a further discussion of net realized capital gains and losses, see the Investments section of the MD&A. PROPERTY-LIABILITY CLAIMS AND CLAIMS EXPENSE RESERVES Property-Liability underwriting results are significantly influenced by estimates of property-liability claims and claims expense reserves. For a description of our reserve process, see Note 8 of the consolidated financial statements and for a further description of our reserving policies and the potential variability in our reserve estimates, see the Application of Critical Accounting Estimates section of the MD&A. These reserves are an estimate of amounts necessary to settle all outstanding claims, including IBNR claims, as of the reporting date. The facts and circumstances leading to our reestimates of reserves relate to revisions to the development factors used to predict how losses are likely to develop from the end of a reporting period until all claims have been paid. Reestimates occur because actual losses are likely different than those predicted by the estimated development factors used in prior reserve estimates. As of December 31, 2011, the impact of a reserve reestimation corresponding to a one percent increase or decrease in net reserves would be a decrease or increase of approximately $116 million in net income. The table below shows total net reserves as of December 31 by line of business. ($ in millions) 2011 2010 2009 Allstate brand $ 14,792 $ 14,696 $ 14,123 Encompass brand 859 921 1,027 Esurance brand 429 Total Allstate Protection 16,080 15,617 15,150 Discontinued Lines and Coverages 1,707 1,779 1,878 Total Property-Liability $ 17,787 $ 17,396 $ 17,028 58 Table of Contents The tables below show reserves, net of reinsurance, representing the estimated cost of outstanding claims as they were recorded at the beginning of years 2011, 2010 and 2009, and the effect of reestimates in each year. ($ in millions) January 1 reserves 2011 2010 2009 Allstate brand $ 14,696 $ 14,123 $ 14,118 Encompass brand 921 1,027 1,133 Esurance brand Total Allstate Protection 15,617 15,150 15,251 Discontinued Lines and Coverages 1,779 1,878 1,931 Total Property-Liability $ 17,396 $ 17,028 $ 17,182 ($ in millions, except ratios) 2011 2010 2009 Reserve reestimate (1) Effect on combined ratio Reserve reestimate (1) Effect on combined ratio Reserve reestimate (1) Effect on combined ratio Allstate brand $ (371 ) (1.4 ) $ (181 ) (0.7 ) $ (126 ) (0.5 ) Encompass brand 15 (6 ) (10 ) Esurance brand Total Allstate Protection (356 ) (1.4 ) (187 ) (0.7 ) (136 ) (0.5 ) Discontinued Lines and Coverages 21 0.1 28 0.1 24 0.1 Total Property-Liability $ (335 ) (1.3 ) $ (159 ) (0.6 ) $ (112 ) (0.4 ) Reserve reestimates, after-tax $ (218 ) $ (103 ) $ (73 ) Net income $ 788 $ 928 $ 854 Reserve reestimates as a % of net income 27.7 % 11.1 % 8.5 % (1) Favorable reserve reestimates are shown in parentheses. Allstate Protection The tables below show Allstate Protection net reserves representing the estimated cost of outstanding claims as they were recorded at the beginning of years 2011, 2010 and 2009, and the effect of reestimates in each year. January 1 reserves ($ in millions) 2011 2010 2009 Auto $ 11,034 $ 10,606 $ 10,220 Homeowners 2,442 2,399 2,824 Other personal lines 2,141 2,145 2,207 Total Allstate Protection $ 15,617 $ 15,150 $ 15,251 59 Table of Contents ($ in millions, except ratios) 2011 2010 2009 Reserve reestimate Effect on combined ratio Reserve reestimate Effect on combined ratio Reserve reestimate Effect on combined ratio Auto $ (381 ) (1.5 ) $ (179 ) (0.7 ) $ (57 ) (0.2 ) Homeowners (69 ) (0.3 ) (23 ) (0.1 ) (168 ) (0.6 ) Other personal lines 94 0.4 15 0.1 89 0.3 Total Allstate Protection $ (356 ) (1.4 ) $ (187 ) (0.7 ) $ (136 ) (0.5 ) Underwriting (loss) income $ (849 ) $ 526 $ 1,027 Reserve reestimates as a % of underwriting (loss) income 41.9 % 35.6 % 13.2 % Auto reserve reestimates in 2011, 2010 and 2009 were primarily due to claim severity development that was better than expected. 2010 was also impacted by a litigation settlement. Favorable homeowners reserve reestimates in 2011 were primarily due to favorable catastrophe reserve reestimates. Favorable homeowners reserve reestimates in 2010 were primarily due to favorable catastrophe reserve reestimates, partially offset by a litigation settlement. Favorable homeowners reserve reestimates in 2009 were primarily due to favorable reserve reestimates from Hurricanes Ike and Gustav and a catastrophe related subrogation recovery. Other personal lines reserve reestimates in 2011, 2010 and 2009 were primarily the result of loss development higher than anticipated in previous estimates. Pending, new and closed claims for Allstate Protection are summarized in the following table for the years ended December 31. Number of claims 2011 (1) 2010 2009 Auto Pending, beginning of year 490,459 540,424 566,394 New 5,656,687 5,571,199 5,482,941 Total closed (5,710,174 ) (5,621,164 ) (5,508,911 ) Pending, end of year 436,972 490,459 540,424 Homeowners Pending, beginning of year 51,031 59,685 74,772 New 1,214,792 991,962 997,954 Total closed (1,221,689 ) (1,000,616 ) (1,013,041 ) Pending, end of year 44,134 51,031 59,685 Other personal lines Pending, beginning of year 33,388 36,537 41,001 New 333,209 282,137 278,978 Total closed (334,726 ) (285,286 ) (283,442 ) Pending, end of year 31,871 33,388 36,537 Total Allstate Protection Pending, beginning of year 574,878 636,646 682,167 New 7,204,688 6,845,298 6,759,873 Total closed (7,266,589 ) (6,907,066 ) (6,805,394 ) Pending, end of year 512,977 574,878 636,646 (1) Excludes Esurance brand number of claims since not available. We believe the net loss reserves for Allstate Protection exposures are appropriately established based on available facts, technology, laws and regulations. 60 Table of Contents The following tables reflect the accident years to which the reestimates shown above are applicable by line of business. Favorable reserve reestimates are shown in parentheses. 2011 Prior year reserve reestimates ($ in millions) 2001 & prior 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 Total Allstate brand $ 123 $ 16 $ 26 $ 8 $ 5 $ 7 $ $ (28 ) $ (150 ) $ (378 ) $ (371 ) Encompass brand 2 (1 ) 1 1 (1 ) 2 2 9 15 Total Allstate Protection 125 16 25 8 6 8 (1 ) (26 ) (148 ) (369 ) (356 ) Discontinued Lines and Coverages 21 21 Total Property- Liability $ 146 $ 16 $ 25 $ 8 $ 6 $ 8 $ (1 ) $ (26 ) $ (148 ) $ (369 ) $ (335 ) 2010 Prior year reserve reestimates ($ in millions) 2000 & prior 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 Total Allstate brand $ 262 $ (1 ) $ (7 ) $ (18 ) $ (15 ) $ (51 ) $ (106 ) $ (86 ) $ (45 ) $ (114 ) $ (181 ) Encompass brand 1 1 1 2 6 (6 ) (1 ) (10 ) (6 ) Total Allstate Protection 263 (1 ) (6 ) (17 ) (13 ) (45 ) (106 ) (92 ) (46 ) (124 ) (187 ) Discontinued Lines and Coverages 28 28 Total Property-Liability $ 291 $ (1 ) $ (6 ) $ (17 ) $ (13 ) $ (45 ) $ (106 ) $ (92 ) $ (46 ) $ (124 ) $ (159 ) 2009 Prior year reserve reestimates ($ in millions) 1999 & prior 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 Total Allstate brand $ 247 $ 46 $ 58 $ 44 $ 37 $ 85 $ 74 $ (149 ) $ (151 ) $ (417 ) $ (126 ) Encompass brand 3 1 3 6 5 10 8 (7 ) (39 ) (10 ) Total Allstate Protection 247 49 59 47 43 90 84 (141 ) (158 ) (456 ) (136 ) Discontinued Lines and Coverages 24 24 Total Property- Liability $ 271 $ 49 $ 59 $ 47 $ 43 $ 90 $ 84 $ (141 ) $ (158 ) $ (456 ) $ (112 ) Allstate brand prior year reserve reestimates were $371 million favorable in 2011, $181 million favorable in 2010 and $126 million favorable in 2009. In 2011, this was primarily due to severity development that was better than expected and favorable catastrophe reserve reestimates. The increased reserves in accident years 2001 & prior is due to a reclassification of injury reserves to older years and reserve strengthening. In 2010, this was primarily due to favorable catastrophe reserve reestimates and severity development that was better than expected, partially offset by litigation settlements. The increased reserves in accident years 2000 & prior is due to the litigation settlements of $100 million, a reclassification of injury reserves to older years and reserve strengthening. In 2009, this was primarily due to favorable reserve reestimates from Hurricanes Ike and Gustav and a catastrophe related subrogation recovery. The shift of reserves to older accident years is attributable to a reallocation of reserves related to employee postretirement benefits to more accident years, and a reclassification of injury and 2008 non-injury reserves to older years. These trends are primarily responsible for revisions to loss development factors, as previously described, used to predict how losses are likely to develop from the end of a reporting period until all claims have been paid. Because these trends cause actual losses to differ from those predicted by the estimated development factors used in prior reserve estimates, reserves are revised as actuarial studies validate new trends based on the indications of updated development factor calculations. 61 Table of Contents The impact of these reestimates on the Allstate brand underwriting (loss) income is shown in the table below. ($ in millions) 2011 2010 2009 Reserve reestimates $ (371 ) $ (181 ) $ (126 ) Allstate brand underwriting (loss) income (666 ) 569 1,022 Reserve reestimates as a % of underwriting (loss) income 55.7 % 31.8 % 12.3 % Encompass brand Reserve reestimates in 2011 were related to higher than anticipated claim settlement costs. 2010 and 2009 Encompass brand reserve reestimates were related to lower than anticipated claim settlement costs. The impact of these reestimates on the Encompass brand underwriting (loss) income is shown in the table below. ($ in millions) 2011 2010 2009 Reserve reestimates $ 15 $ (6 ) $ (10 ) Encompass brand underwriting (loss) income (146 ) (43 ) 5 Reserve reestimates as a % of underwriting (loss) income (10.3 )% 14.0 % 200.0 % Discontinued Lines and Coverages We conduct an annual review in the third quarter of each year to evaluate and establish asbestos, environmental and other discontinued lines reserves. Reserves are recorded in the reporting period in which they are determined. Using established industry and actuarial best practices and assuming no change in the regulatory or economic environment, this detailed and comprehensive methodology determines reserves based on assessments of the characteristics of exposure (e.g. claim activity, potential liability, jurisdiction, products versus non-products exposure) presented by policyholders. Reserve reestimates for the Discontinued Lines and Coverages, as shown in the table below, were increased primarily for asbestos in 2011, environmental in 2010 and other discontinued lines in 2009. ($ in millions) 2011 2010 2009 January 1 reserves Reserve reestimate January 1 reserves Reserve reestimate January 1 reserves Reserve reestimate Asbestos claims $ 1,100 $ 26 $ 1,180 $ 5 $ 1,228 $ (8 ) Environmental claims 201 198 18 195 13 Other discontinued lines 478 (5 ) 500 5 508 19 Total Discontinued Lines and Coverages $ 1,779 $ 21 $ 1,878 $ 28 $ 1,931 $ 24 Underwriting loss $ (25 ) $ (31 ) $ (32 ) Reserve reestimates as a % of underwriting loss (84.0 )% (90.3 )% (75.0 )% Reserve additions for asbestos in 2011 totaling $26 million were primarily for products related coverage due to increases for the assumed reinsurance portion of discontinued lines where we are reliant on our ceding companies to report claims. Reserve additions for asbestos in 2010 totaling $5 million were primarily for products related coverage. Asbestos reserves reestimates in 2009 were $8 million favorable. Normal environmental claim activity resulted in essentially no change in estimated reserves for 2011. The reserve additions for environmental in 2010 and 2009 were primarily related to site-specific remediations where the clean-up cost estimates and responsibility for the clean-up were more fully determined. IBNR now represents 64% of total net environmental reserves, 2 points higher than as of December 31, 2010. 62 Table of Contents The table below summarizes reserves and claim activity for asbestos and environmental claims before (Gross) and after (Net) the effects of reinsurance for the past three years. ($ in millions, except ratios) 2011 2010 2009 Gross Net Gross Net Gross Net Asbestos claims Beginning reserves $ 1,655 $ 1,100 $ 1,780 $ 1,180 $ 1,933 $ 1,228 Incurred claims and claims expense 38 26 (7 ) 5 (3 ) (8 ) Claims and claims expense paid (86 ) (48 ) (118 ) (85 ) (150 ) (40 ) Ending reserves $ 1,607 $ 1,078 $ 1,655 $ 1,100 $ 1,780 $ 1,180 Annual survival ratio 18.7 22.5 14.0 12.9 11.9 11.5 3-year survival ratio 13.6 13.6 12.6 12.2 12.4 12.9 Environmental claims Beginning reserves $ 248 $ 201 $ 247 $ 198 $ 250 $ 195 Incurred claims and claims expense (2 ) 19 18 16 13 Claims and claims expense paid (21 ) (16 ) (18 ) (15 ) (19 ) (10 ) Ending reserves $ 225 $ 185 $ 248 $ 201 $ 247 $ 198 Annual survival ratio 10.7 11.6 13.8 13.4 12.7 12.1 3-year survival ratio 11.8 11.6 8.0 8.7 7.1 7.5 Combined environmental and asbestos claims Annual survival ratio 17.1 19.7 14.0 13.0 12.0 11.6 3-year survival ratio 13.4 13.3 11.7 11.6 11.4 11.7 Percentage of IBNR in ending reserves 59.0 % 60.1 % 62.3 % The survival ratio is calculated by taking our ending reserves divided by payments made during the year. This is a commonly used but extremely simplistic and imprecise approach to measuring the adequacy of asbestos and environmental reserve levels. Many factors, such as mix of business, level of coverage provided and settlement procedures have significant impacts on the amount of environmental and asbestos claims and claims expense reserves, claim payments and the resultant ratio. As payments result in corresponding reserve reductions, survival ratios can be expected to vary over time. The 2009 net survival ratios in the table above have been adjusted to remove the claims and claims expense paid of $63 million for asbestos and $7 million for environmental attributable to commutation activity related to three reinsurers. In 2011, the asbestos net 3-year survival ratio increased due to lower average annual payments. In 2010, the asbestos net 3-year survival ratio decreased due to lower reserve levels as the result of loss settlements. The environmental net 3-year survival ratio increased in both 2011 and 2010 due to lower average annual payments. 63 Table of Contents Our net asbestos reserves by type of exposure and total reserve additions are shown in the following table. ($ in millions) December 31, 2011 December 31, 2010 December 31, 2009 Active policy- holders Net reserves % of reserves Active policy- holders Net reserves % of reserves Active policy- holders Net reserves % of reserves Direct policyholders: Primary 52 $ 17 2 % 51 $ 17 1 % 51 $ 19 1 % Excess 314 263 24 319 261 24 318 256 22 Total 366 280 26 370 278 25 369 275 23 Assumed reinsurance 171 16 165 15 176 15 IBNR 627 58 657 60 729 62 Total net reserves $ 1,078 100 % $ 1,100 100 % $ 1,180 100 % Total reserve additions $ 26 $ 5 $ (8 ) During the last three years, 57 direct primary and excess policyholders reported new claims, and claims of 75 policyholders were closed, decreasing the number of active policyholders by 18 during the period. The 18 decrease comprised (4) from 2011, 1 from 2010 and (15) from 2009. The decrease of 4 from 2011 included 16 new policyholders reporting new claims and the closing of 20 policyholders' claims. IBNR net reserves decreased by $30 million. As of December 31, 2011 IBNR represented 58% of total net asbestos reserves, compared to 60% as of December 31, 2010. IBNR provides for reserve development of known claims and future reporting of additional unknown claims from current and new policyholders and ceding companies. Pending, new, total closed and closed without payment claims for asbestos and environmental exposures for the years ended December 31, are summarized in the following table. Number of claims 2011 2010 2009 Asbestos Pending, beginning of year 8,421 8,252 8,780 New 507 788 814 Total closed (856 ) (619 ) (1,342 ) Pending, end of year 8,072 8,421 8,252 Closed without payment 664 336 469 Environmental Pending, beginning of year 4,297 4,114 4,603 New 351 498 389 Total closed (472 ) (315 ) (878 ) Pending, end of year 4,176 4,297 4,114 Closed without payment 334 181 416 Property-Liability reinsurance ceded For Allstate Protection, we utilize reinsurance to reduce exposure to catastrophe risk and manage capital, and to support the required statutory surplus and the insurance financial strength ratings of certain subsidiaries such as Castle Key Insurance Company and Allstate New Jersey Insurance Company. We purchase significant reinsurance to manage our aggregate countrywide exposure to an acceptable level. The price and terms of reinsurance and the credit quality of the reinsurer are considered in the purchase process, along with whether the price can be appropriately reflected in the costs that are considered in setting future rates charged to policyholders. We also participate in various reinsurance mechanisms, including industry pools and facilities, which are backed by the financial resources of the property-liability insurance company market participants, and have historically purchased reinsurance to mitigate long-tail liability lines, including environmental, asbestos and other discontinued lines exposures. We retain primary liability as a direct insurer for all risks ceded to reinsurers. 64 Table of Contents The impacts of reinsurance on our reserve for claims and claims expense as of December 31 are summarized in the following table, net of allowances we have established for uncollectible amounts. Reserve for property-liability insurance claims and claims expense Reinsurance recoverables, net ($ in millions) 2011 2010 2011 2010 Industry pools and facilities $ 2,491 $ 1,990 $ 1,865 $ 1,419 Asbestos and environmental 1,832 1,903 591 628 Other including allowance for future uncollectible reinsurance recoverables 16,052 15,575 218 105 Total Property-Liability $ 20,375 $ 19,468 $ 2,674 $ 2,152 Reinsurance recoverables include an estimate of the amount of property-liability insurance claims and claims expense reserves that may be ceded under the terms of the reinsurance agreements, including incurred but not reported unpaid losses. We calculate our ceded reinsurance estimate based on the terms of each applicable reinsurance agreement, including an estimate of how IBNR losses will ultimately be ceded under the agreement. We also consider other limitations and coverage exclusions under our reinsurance agreements. Accordingly, our estimate of reinsurance recoverables is subject to similar risks and uncertainties as our estimate of reserve for property-liability claims and claims expense. We believe the recoverables are appropriately established; however, as our underlying reserves continue to develop, the amount ultimately recoverable may vary from amounts currently recorded. We regularly evaluate the reinsurers and the respective amounts recoverable, and a provision for uncollectible reinsurance is recorded if needed. The establishment of reinsurance recoverables and the related allowance for uncollectible reinsurance is also an inherently uncertain process involving estimates. Changes in estimates could result in additional changes to the Consolidated Statements of Operations. The allowance for uncollectible reinsurance relates to Discontinued Lines and Coverages reinsurance recoverables and was $103 million and $142 million as of December 31, 2011 and 2010, respectively. This amount represents 13.4% and 17.6% of the related reinsurance recoverable balances as of December 31, 2011 and 2010, respectively. The allowance is based upon our ongoing review of amounts outstanding, length of collection periods, changes in reinsurer credit standing, and other relevant factors. In addition, in the ordinary course of business, we may become involved in coverage disputes with certain of our reinsurers which may ultimately result in lawsuits and arbitrations brought by or against such reinsurers to determine the parties' rights and obligations under the various reinsurance agreements. We employ dedicated specialists to manage reinsurance collections and disputes. We also consider recent developments in commutation activity between reinsurers and cedants, and recent trends in arbitration and litigation outcomes in disputes between cedants and reinsurers in seeking to maximize our reinsurance recoveries. Adverse developments in the insurance industry have led to a decline in the financial strength of some of our reinsurance carriers, causing amounts recoverable from them and future claims ceded to them to be considered a higher risk. There has also been consolidation activity in the industry, which causes reinsurance risk across the industry to be concentrated among fewer companies. In addition, over the last several years the industry has increasingly segregated asbestos, environmental, and other discontinued lines exposures into separate legal entities with dedicated capital. Regulatory bodies in certain cases have supported these actions. We are unable to determine the impact, if any, that these developments will have on the collectability of reinsurance recoverables in the future. 65 Table of Contents The largest reinsurance recoverable balances are shown in the following table as of December 31, net of the allowance we have established for uncollectible amounts. Standard & Poor's financial strength rating (1) Reinsurance recoverable on paid and unpaid claims, net ($ in millions) 2011 2010 Industry pools and facilities Michigan Catastrophic Claim Association ("MCCA") N/A $ 1,709 $ 1,243 North Carolina Reinsurance Facility N/A 70 65 New Jersey Unsatisfied Claim and Judgment Fund N/A 50 55 National Flood Insurance Program N/A 33 10 Other 3 46 Total 1,865 1,419 Asbestos, Environmental and Other Lloyd's of London ("Lloyd's") A+ 193 183 Westport Insurance Corporation (formerly Employers Reinsurance Corporation) AA- 98 56 New England Reinsurance Corporation N/A 36 37 R&Q Reinsurance Company N/A 31 34 OneBeacon Insurance Company A- 30 1 Clearwater Insurance Company BB+ 27 30 Other, including allowance for future uncollectible reinsurance recoverables 394 392 Total 809 733 Total Property-Liability $ 2,674 $ 2,152 (1) N/A reflects no rating available. The effects of reinsurance ceded on our property-liability premiums earned and claims and claims expense for the years ended December 31 are summarized in the following table. ($ in millions) 2011 2010 2009 Ceded property-liability premiums earned $ 1,098 $ 1,092 $ 1,056 Ceded property-liability claims and claims expense Industry pool and facilities FHCF $ 8 $ 10 $ 47 National Flood Insurance Program 196 50 111 MCCA 509 142 133 Other 84 64 59 Subtotal industry pools and facilities 797 266 350 Asbestos, Environmental and Other 130 5 65 Ceded property-liability claims and claims expense $ 927 $ 271 $ 415 For the year ended December 31, 2011, ceded property-liability premiums earned increased $6 million when compared to prior year, primarily due to higher premium rates and an increase in policies written for the National Flood Insurance Program. For the year ended December 31, 2010, ceded property-liability premiums earned increased $36 million when compared to prior year, primarily due to the adoption of accounting guidance related to the consolidation of variable interest entities, which resulted in the consolidation of two insurance company affiliates, Allstate Texas Lloyds and Allstate County Mutual Insurance Company. 66 Table of Contents Ceded property-liability claims and claims expense increased in 2011 primarily due to reserve increases in the MCCA program and an increase in claim activity on the National Flood Insurance Program due to multiple flooding events throughout the year. Ceded property-liability claims and claims expense decreased in 2010 primarily due to amounts ceded to National Flood Insurance Program. For a detailed description of the MCCA, FHCF and Lloyd's, see Note 10 of the consolidated financial statements. As of December 31, 2011, other than the recoverable balances listed in the table above, no other amount due or estimated to be due from any single Property-Liability reinsurer was in excess of $19 million. We enter into certain intercompany insurance and reinsurance transactions for the Property-Liability operations in order to maintain underwriting control and manage insurance risk among various legal entities. These reinsurance agreements have been approved by the appropriate regulatory authorities. All significant intercompany transactions have been eliminated in consolidation. Catastrophe reinsurance Our catastrophe reinsurance program is designed, utilizing our risk management methodology, to address our exposure to catastrophes nationwide. Our program provides reinsurance protection for catastrophes including storms named or numbered by the National Weather Service, fires following earthquakes, earthquakes and wildfires including California wildfires. These reinsurance agreements are part of our catastrophe management strategy, which is intended to provide our shareholders an acceptable return on the risks assumed in our property business, and to reduce variability of earnings, while providing protection to our customers. We anticipate completing the placement of our 2012 catastrophe reinsurance program in February 2012. We expect the program will be substantially similar to our 2011 catastrophe reinsurance program. The information below provides further detail regarding our 2012 catastrophe reinsurance program. Our 2012 reinsurance program will continue to support our goal to have no more than a 1% likelihood of exceeding annual aggregate catastrophe losses by $2 billion, net of reinsurance, from hurricanes and earthquakes, based on modeled assumptions and applications currently available. Since the 2006 inception of Allstate's catastrophe reinsurance program, our exposure to wind loss has been materially reduced and we have nearly eliminated our exposure to earthquake loss. Similar to our 2011 program, we have designed our 2012 program to respond to these exposure changes by including coverage for multiple perils, in addition to hurricanes and earthquakes, in all agreements except for the Kentucky agreement, which provides coverage for earthquakes and fires following earthquakes. The 2012 program, as described below, is expected to provide $3.25 billion of reinsurance coverage above the retention. Similar to the expiring program, the 2012 program will include a Per Occurrence Excess Catastrophe Reinsurance agreement reinsuring our personal lines property and auto excess catastrophe losses resulting from multiple perils in every state other than New Jersey and Florida. For June 1, 2012 to May 31, 2013, it is anticipated the program will consist of two agreements: a Per Occurrence Excess Catastrophe Reinsurance agreement providing coverage in six layers with the reinstatement of limits available for the First through Fifth Layers, and a Top and Drop Excess Catastrophe Reinsurance agreement which includes Coverage A and Coverage B. The Per Occurrence Excess Catastrophe Reinsurance agreement provides an initial $3.25 billion per occurrence limit in excess of a $500 million retention and after the Company has incurred $250 million in losses "otherwise recoverable." The $250 million in losses otherwise recoverable applies once each contract year to the First Layer only and losses from multiple qualifying occurrences can apply to this $250 million threshold in excess of $500 million per occurrence. For June 1, 2012 to May 31, 2013, the program will consist of two existing contracts which expire May 31, 2013 and May 31, 2014 and three new contracts which expire May 31, 2013, May 31, 2014, and May 31, 2015. The Top and Drop Excess Catastrophe Reinsurance agreement provides $250 million of reinsurance limits which may be used for Coverage A, Coverage B, or a combination of both. For June 1, 2012 to May 31, 2013, Coverage A reinsures the "Top" of the program and provides 12.66% of $500 million excess of a $3.25 billion retention. For June 1, 2012 to May 31, 2013, Coverage B allows the program limit to "Drop" and provides reinsurance for 25% of $250 million in limits excess of a $750 million retention and after the Company has incurred $500 million in losses "otherwise recoverable" under the agreement. Losses from multiple qualifying occurrences, in excess of $750 million per occurrence, can apply to this $500 million threshold. The New Jersey and Florida components of the reinsurance program are designed separately from the other components of the program to address the distinct needs of our separately capitalized legal entities in those states. The New Jersey agreement reinsures personal lines property losses resulting from multiple perils and consists of three contracts which expire on May 31, 2013, May 31, 2014 and May 31, 2015. The Florida component will be placed in May of 67 Table of Contents 2012. Allstate Protection's separate reinsurance programs in Pennsylvania and Kentucky will continue to address exposures unique to those states. A description of the catastrophe reinsurance treaties that will reinsure Allstate Protection as of June 1, 2012 follows: Nationwide excluding Florida and New Jersey The Per Occurrence Excess Catastrophe Reinsurance agreement reinsures personal lines property and auto excess catastrophe losses caused by multiple perils under Seven Layers of coverage as follows: First Layer $250 million limit in excess of a $500 million retention and after an initial $250 million in losses "otherwise recoverable" has been satisfied, 1 reinstatement Second Layer $250 million limit in excess of a $750 million retention, 1 reinstatement Third Layer $500 million limit in excess of a $1 billion retention, 1 reinstatement Fourth Layer $750 million limit in excess of a $1.5 billion retention, 1 reinstatement Fifth Layer $1 billion limit in excess of a $2.25 billion retention, 1 reinstatement Sixth Layer $500 million limit in excess of a $3.25 billion retention Coverage for the First through the Fifth Layers comprises three contracts, each contract providing one third of 95% of the total limit and expiring as of May 31, 2013, May 31, 2014 and May 31, 2015. Coverage for the Sixth Layer will comprise five contracts and will be 82.34% placed. For June 1, 2012 to May 31, 2013, two existing contracts, expiring May 31, 2013 and May 31, 2014, provide 31.67% of the placed limit; and three newly placed contracts, expiring May 31, 2013, May 31, 2014, and May 31, 2015, in total provide 50.67% of the placed limit. The newly placed contracts, effective June 1, 2012, will not have a prepaid reinstatement limit thus requiring premium for the reinstatement of limits. The Sixth Layer does not have a reinstatement of limits. Reinsurance premium is subject to redetermination for exposure changes at each anniversary. The Top and Drop Excess Catastrophe Reinsurance agreement reinsures personal lines property and auto excess catastrophe losses caused by multiple perils under a three year term contract expiring May 31, 2014. The reinsurance limit may be used for Coverage A, Coverage B or a combination of both and is not subject to reinstatement. For June 1, 2012 to May 31, 2013, Coverage A of the Top and Drop provides 12.66% of $500 million in limits in excess of a $3.25 billion retention, which completes the 95% placement of the Sixth Layer of the Per Occurrence Excess Catastrophe Reinsurance agreement. Coverage B provides 25% of $250 million in limits in excess of a $750 million retention. In addition to this retention, the Company must incur $500 million in losses, "otherwise recoverable", under Coverage B during the contract year before Coverage B attaches. Losses from multiple qualifying occurrences can apply to this $500 million threshold. For June 1, 2013 to May 31, 2014, the contract provides 6% of Coverage A's and 12.66% of Coverage B's placement. Reinsurance premium is subject to redetermination for exposure changes. New Jersey The Excess Catastrophe Reinsurance contract reinsures personal lines property excess catastrophe losses in New Jersey caused by multiple perils. One existing and a newly placed contract each provides 32% of $400 million of limits excess of a $150 million retention and include one reinstatement per contract year. In addition, a separate existing New Jersey contract will remain in place until May 31, 2013 and provides a First Layer of 32% of $300 million of limits in excess of a $184 million retention and a Second Layer of 42% of $200 million in limits excess of a $484 million retention. Each Layer includes one reinstatement per contract year. The reinsurance premium and retention are subject to redetermination for exposure changes at each anniversary. Pennsylvania The Excess Catastrophe Reinsurance Contract reinsures personal lines property losses in Pennsylvania caused by multiple perils. This agreement will be effective June 1, 2012 for three years and provide 95% of $100 million of limits in excess of a $100 million retention with two limits being available for the remaining term of the contract. The reinsurance premium and retention are not subject to redetermination for exposure changes. 68 Table of Contents Kentucky The Earthquake Excess Catastrophe Reinsurance Contract reinsures personal lines property losses in Kentucky caused by earthquakes or fires following earthquakes. The agreement is effective June 1, 2012 for three years and provides 95% of $25 million of limits in excess of a $5 million retention. The agreement provides three limits over its three year term subject to two limits being available in any one contract year. The reinsurance premium and retention are not subject to redetermination for exposure changes. See Note 10 for further details of the existing 2011 program. We estimate that the total annualized cost of all catastrophe reinsurance programs for the year beginning June 1, 2012 will be approximately $577 million compared to $564 million annualized cost for the year beginning June 1, 2011. The total cost of our catastrophe reinsurance programs in 2011 was $558 million compared to $593 million in 2010. These annual costs reflect premium re-measurements recognized in the year. We continue to attempt to capture our reinsurance cost in premium rates as allowed by state regulatory authorities. ALLSTATE FINANCIAL 2011 HIGHLIGHTS Net income was $586 million in 2011 compared to $58 million in 2010. Premiums and contract charges on underwritten products, including traditional life, interest-sensitive life and accident and health insurance, totaled $2.10 billion in 2011, an increase of 3.3% from $2.03 billion in 2010. Net realized capital gains totaled $388 million in 2011 compared to net realized capital losses of $517 million in 2010. Investments totaled $57.37 billion as of December 31, 2011, reflecting a decrease in carrying value of $4.21 billion from $61.58 billion as of December 31, 2010. Net investment income decreased 4.8% to $2.72 billion in 2011 from $2.85 billion in 2010. Contractholder funds totaled $42.33 billion as of December 31, 2011, reflecting a decrease of $5.86 billion from $48.19 billion as of December 31, 2010. ALLSTATE FINANCIAL SEGMENT Overview and strategy The Allstate Financial segment is a major provider of life insurance, retirement and investment products, and voluntary accident and health insurance. We serve our customers through Allstate exclusive agencies, workplace distribution and non-proprietary distribution channels. Allstate Financial's strategic vision is to reinvent protection and retirement for the consumer and its purpose is to create financial value and to add strategic value to the organization. To fulfill its purpose, Allstate Financial's primary objectives are to deepen relationships with Allstate customers by adding financial services to their suite of products with Allstate, dramatically expand Allstate Benefits (our workplace distribution business) and improve profitability by decreasing earnings volatility and increasing our returns. Allstate Financial brings value to The Allstate Corporation in three principal ways: through profitable growth of Allstate Financial, improving the economics of the Protection business through increased customer loyalty and renewal rates by cross selling Allstate Financial products to existing customers, and by bringing new customers to Allstate. We continue to shift our mix of products in force by decreasing spread based products, principally fixed annuities and institutional products, and through growth of underwritten products having mortality or morbidity risk, principally life insurance and accident and health products. In addition to focusing on higher return markets, products, and distribution channels, Allstate Financial continues to emphasize capital efficiency and enterprise risk and return management strategies and actions. Allstate Financial's strategy provides a platform to profitably grow its business. Based upon Allstate's strong financial position and brand, we have a unique opportunity to cross-sell to our customers. We will leverage trusted customer relationships through our Allstate exclusive agencies or direct marketing to serve those who are looking for assistance in meeting their protection and retirement needs by providing them with the information, products and services that they need. Life insurance applications issued through Allstate agencies increased 33% in 2011 compared to 2010. Our employer relationships through Allstate Benefits also afford opportunities to offer additional Allstate products. Our products include interest-sensitive, traditional and variable life insurance; fixed annuities such as deferred and immediate annuities; voluntary accident and health insurance; and funding agreements backing medium-term notes, which we most recently offered in 2008. Our products are sold through multiple distribution channels including Allstate exclusive agencies and exclusive financial specialists, independent agents (including master brokerage agencies and workplace enrolling agents), specialized structured settlement brokers and directly through call centers and the internet. 69 Table of Contents Our institutional product line consists of funding agreements sold to unaffiliated trusts that use them to back medium-term notes issued to institutional and individual investors. Banking products and services were previously offered to customers through the Allstate Bank. In 2011, after receiving regulatory approval to voluntarily dissolve, Allstate Bank ceased operations. In the first half of 2012, we expect to cancel the bank's charter and deregister The Allstate Corporation as a savings and loan holding company. Allstate Financial outlook We plan to continue to increase premiums and contract charges on underwritten insurance products and develop products our customers need for retirement income. Our growth initiatives will be primarily focused on increasing the number of customers served through our proprietary and Allstate Benefits (workplace distribution) channels. We will continue to focus on improving returns and reducing our concentration in spread based products resulting in net reductions in contractholder funds obligations. We expect increases in Allstate Financial's attributed GAAP equity as there may be limitations on the amount of dividends Allstate Financial companies can pay without prior approval by their insurance departments. We expect lower investment spread due to reduced contractholder funds, the continuing low interest rate environment and changes in asset allocations. The amount by which the low interest rate environment will reduce our investment spread is contingent on our ability to maintain the portfolio yield and lower interest crediting rates on spread based products, which could be limited by market conditions, regulatory minimum rates or contractual minimum rate guarantees, and may not match the timing or magnitude of changes in asset yields. We also anticipate changing our asset allocation for long-term immediate annuities by reducing fixed income securities and increasing investments in limited partnerships, equities and other alternative investments. This shift could result in lower and more volatile investment income; however, we anticipate that this strategy will lead to higher total returns and attributed equity. Summary analysis Summarized financial data for the years ended December 31 is presented in the following table. ($ in millions) 2011 2010 2009 Revenues Life and annuity premiums and contract charges $ 2,238 $ 2,168 $ 1,958 Net investment income 2,716 2,853 3,064 Realized capital gains and losses 388 (517 ) (431 ) Total revenues 5,342 4,504 4,591 Costs and expenses Life and annuity contract benefits (1,761 ) (1,815 ) (1,617 ) Interest credited to contractholder funds (1,645 ) (1,807 ) (2,126 ) Amortization of DAC (593 ) (356 ) (965 ) Operating costs and expenses (455 ) (469 ) (430 ) Restructuring and related charges (1 ) 3 (25 ) Total costs and expenses (4,455 ) (4,444 ) (5,163 ) (Loss) gain on disposition of operations (15 ) 6 7 Income tax (expense) benefit (286 ) (8 ) 82 Net income (loss) $ 586 $ 58 $ (483 ) Investments as of December 31 $ 57,373 $ 61,582 $ 62,216 Net income Life insurance $ 289 Accident and health insurance 104 Annuities and institutional and bank products 193 Net income $ 586 Net income in 2011 was $586 million compared to $58 million in 2010. The $528 million increase was primarily due to net realized capital gains in the current year compared to net realized capital losses in the prior year, decreased 70 Table of Contents interest credited to contractholder funds, higher life and annuity premiums and contract charges and lower life and annuity contract benefits, partially offset by higher amortization of DAC and lower net investment income. Net income in 2010 was $58 million compared to a net loss of $483 million in 2009. The favorable change of $541 million was primarily due to lower amortization of DAC, decreased interest credited to contractholder funds and higher premiums and contract charges, partially offset by lower net investment income, higher life and annuity contract benefits and increased net realized capital losses. Analysis of revenues Total revenues increased 18.6% or $838 million in 2011 compared to 2010 due to net realized capital gains in the current year compared to net realized capital losses in the prior year and higher premiums and contract charges, partially offset by lower net investment income. Total revenues decreased 1.9% or $87 million in 2010 compared to 2009 due to lower net investment income and higher net realized capital losses, partially offset by higher premiums and contract charges. Life and annuity premiums and contract charges Premiums represent revenues generated from traditional life insurance, immediate annuities with life contingencies, and accident and health insurance products that have significant mortality or morbidity risk. Contract charges are revenues generated from interest-sensitive and variable life insurance and fixed annuities for which deposits are classified as contractholder funds or separate account liabilities. Contract charges are assessed against the contractholder account values for maintenance, administration, cost of insurance and surrender prior to contractually specified dates. The following table summarizes life and annuity premiums and contract charges by product for the years ended December 31. ($ in millions) 2011 2010 2009 Underwritten products Traditional life insurance premiums $ 441 $ 420 $ 407 Accident and health insurance premiums 643 621 460 Interest-sensitive life insurance contract charges 1,015 991 944 Subtotal 2,099 2,032 1,811 Annuities Immediate annuities with life contingencies premiums 106 97 102 Other fixed annuity contract charges 33 39 45 Subtotal 139 136 147 Life and annuity premiums and contract charges (1) $ 2,238 $ 2,168 $ 1,958 (1) Contract charges related to the cost of insurance totaled $659 million, $637 million and $616 million in 2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively. Total premiums and contract charges increased 3.2% in 2011 compared to 2010 primarily due to higher contract charges on interest-sensitive life insurance products primarily resulting from the aging of our policyholders, growth in Allstate Benefits's accident and health insurance business in force and increased traditional life insurance premiums. Increased traditional life insurance premiums were primarily due to lower reinsurance premiums resulting from higher retention, partially offset by lower renewal premiums. Total premiums and contract charges increased 10.7% in 2010 compared to 2009 primarily due to higher sales of accident and health insurance through Allstate Benefits, with a significant portion of the increase resulting from sales to employees of one large company, and higher contract charges on interest-sensitive life insurance products resulting from a shift in the mix of policies in force to contracts with higher cost of insurance rates and policy administration fees. In addition, increased traditional life insurance premiums in 2010 were primarily due to lower reinsurance premiums resulting from higher retention, partially offset by lower renewal premiums and decreased sales. Contractholder funds represent interest-bearing liabilities arising from the sale of individual and institutional products, such as interest-sensitive life insurance, fixed annuities, funding agreements and bank deposits. The balance of contractholder funds is equal to the cumulative deposits received and interest credited to the contractholder less 71 Table of Contents cumulative contract maturities, benefits, surrenders, withdrawals and contract charges for mortality or administrative expenses. The following table shows the changes in contractholder funds for the years ended December 31. ($ in millions) 2011 2010 2009 Contractholder funds, beginning balance $ 48,195 $ 52,582 $ 58,413 Deposits Fixed annuities 667 932 1,964 Interest-sensitive life insurance 1,288 1,512 1,438 Bank and other deposits 363 994 1,178 Total deposits 2,318 3,438 4,580 Interest credited 1,629 1,794 2,025 Maturities, benefits, withdrawals and other adjustments Maturities and retirements of institutional products (867 ) (1,833 ) (4,773 ) Benefits (1,461 ) (1,552 ) (1,588 ) Surrenders and partial withdrawals (6,398 ) (5,203 ) (5,172 ) Contract charges (1,028 ) (983 ) (918 ) Net transfers from separate accounts 12 11 11 Fair value hedge adjustments for institutional products (34 ) (196 ) 25 Other adjustments (1) (34 ) 137 (21 ) Total maturities, benefits, withdrawals and other adjustments (9,810 ) (9,619 ) (12,436 ) Contractholder funds, ending balance $ 42,332 $ 48,195 $ 52,582 (1) The table above illustrates the changes in contractholder funds, which are presented gross of reinsurance recoverables on the Consolidated Statements of Financial Position. The table above is intended to supplement our discussion and analysis of revenues, which are presented net of reinsurance on the Consolidated Statements of Operations. As a result, the net change in contractholder funds associated with products reinsured to third parties is reflected as a component of the other adjustments line. Contractholder funds decreased 12.2%, 8.3% and 10.0% in 2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively, reflecting our continuing actions to reduce our concentration in spread-based products and the return of funds to Allstate Bank account holders in December 2011 in connection with ceasing operations. Average contractholder funds decreased 10.2% in 2011 compared to 2010 and 9.2% in 2010 compared to 2009. Contractholder deposits decreased 32.6% in 2011 compared to 2010 primarily due to lower deposits on Allstate Bank products and fixed annuities. In September 2011, Allstate Bank stopped opening new customer accounts. Contractholder deposits decreased 24.9% in 2010 compared to 2009 primarily due to lower deposits on fixed annuities. Deposits on fixed annuities decreased 52.5% in 2010 compared to 2009 due to our strategic decision to discontinue distributing fixed annuities through banks and broker-dealers and our goal to reduce our concentration in spread-based products and improve returns on new business. Maturities and retirements of institutional products decreased $966 million to $867 million in 2011 from $1.83 billion in 2010, reflecting the continuing decline in these obligations over the past four years. Maturities and retirements of institutional products decreased 61.6% to $1.83 billion in 2010 from $4.77 billion in 2009. During 2009, we retired all of our remaining outstanding extendible institutional market obligations totaling $1.45 billion. In addition, 2009 included the redemption of $1.39 billion of institutional product liabilities in conjunction with cash tender offers. Surrenders and partial withdrawals on deferred fixed annuities, interest-sensitive life insurance products and Allstate Bank products (including maturities of certificates of deposit) increased 23.0% to $6.40 billion in 2011 from $5.20 billion in 2010, and increased 0.6% in 2010 from $5.17 billion in 2009. In 2011, the increase was primarily due to higher surrenders and partial withdrawals on fixed annuities and the return of $1.09 billion of funds to Allstate Bank account holders, partially offset by lower surrenders and partial withdrawals on interest-sensitive life insurance products. The increase for fixed annuities resulted from an increased number of contracts reaching the 30-45 day period (typically at their 5 or 6 year anniversary) during which there is no surrender charge as well as crediting rate actions taken by management. In 2010, the increase was primarily due to higher surrenders and partial withdrawals on fixed annuities, partially offset by lower surrenders and partial withdrawals on Allstate Bank products. 72 Table of Contents The surrender and partial withdrawal rate on deferred fixed annuities, interest-sensitive life insurance products and Allstate Bank products, based on the beginning of year contractholder funds, was 15.9% in 2011 compared to 12.2% in 2010 and 11.8% in 2009. Excluding Allstate Bank products, the surrender and partial withdrawal rate on deferred fixed annuities and interest-sensitive life insurance products, based on the beginning of year contractholder funds, was 12.6% in 2011 compared to 10.1% in 2010 and 9.6% in 2009. Net investment income decreased 4.8% or $137 million to $2.72 billion in 2011 from $2.85 billion in 2010 primarily due to lower average investment balances which were partially offset by higher yields. The higher yields are primarily attributable to yield optimization actions including the termination of interest rate swaps during the first quarter of 2011. Net investment income decreased 6.9% or $211 million to $2.85 billion in 2010 from $3.06 billion in 2009 primarily due to lower yields, reduced average investment balances and risk reduction actions. Net realized capital gains and losses are presented in the following table for the years ended December 31. ($ in millions) 2011 2010 2009 Impairment write-downs $ (246 ) $ (501 ) $ (1,021 ) Change in intent write-downs (51 ) (142 ) (268 ) Net other-than-temporary impairment losses recognized in earnings (297 ) (643 ) (1,289 ) Sales 838 219 638 Valuation of derivative instruments (237 ) (94 ) 315 Settlements of derivative instruments 22 (31 ) 41 EMA limited partnership income 62 32 (136 ) Realized capital gains and losses, pre-tax 388 (517 ) (431 ) Income tax (expense) benefit (138 ) 180 14 Realized capital gains and losses, after-tax $ 250 $ (337 ) $ (417 ) For further discussion of realized capital gains and losses, see the Investments section of the MD&A. Analysis of costs and expenses Total costs and expenses increased 0.2% or $11 million in 2011 compared to 2010 primarily due to higher amortization of DAC, partially offset by lower interest credited to contractholder funds and life and annuity contract benefits. Total costs and expenses decreased 13.9% or $719 million in 2010 compared to 2009 primarily due to lower amortization of DAC and interest credited to contractholder funds, partially offset by higher life and annuity contract benefits. Life and annuity contract benefits decreased 3.0% or $54 million in 2011 compared to 2010 primarily due to reserve reestimations recorded in second quarter 2010 that did not recur in 2011 and a $38 million reduction in accident and health insurance reserves at Allstate Benefits as of December 31, 2011 related to a contract modification, partially offset by unfavorable mortality experience on life insurance. The reserve reestimations in the second quarter of 2010 utilized more refined policy level information and assumptions. The increase in reserves for certain secondary guarantees on universal life insurance policies resulted in a charge to contract benefits of $68 million and a related reduction in amortization of DAC of $50 million. The decrease in reserves for immediate annuities resulted in a credit to contract benefits of $26 million. The net impact was an increase to income of $8 million, pre-tax. Life and annuity contract benefits increased 12.2% or $198 million in 2010 compared to 2009 primarily due to higher contract benefits on accident and health insurance and interest-sensitive life insurance products, partially offset by lower contract benefits on immediate annuities with life contingencies. Higher contract benefits on accident and health insurance were proportionate to growth in premiums. The increase in contract benefits on interest-sensitive life insurance was primarily due to the reestimation of reserves for certain secondary guarantees on universal life insurance policies and higher mortality experience resulting from an increase in average claim size and higher incidence of claims. Lower contract benefits on immediate annuities with life contingencies were due to the reestimation of reserves for benefits payable to certain annuitants to reflect current contractholder information. We analyze our mortality and morbidity results using the difference between premiums and contract charges earned for the cost of insurance and life and annuity contract benefits excluding the portion related to the implied interest on immediate annuities with life contingencies ("benefit spread"). This implied interest totaled $541 million in 2011, $549 million in 2010 and $558 million in 2009. 73 Table of Contents The benefit spread by product group is disclosed in the following table for the years ended December 31. ($ in millions) 2011 2010 2009 Life insurance $ 355 $ 282 $ 363 Accident and health insurance 329 252 196 Annuities (55 ) (25 ) (33 ) Total benefit spread $ 629 $ 509 $ 526 Benefit spread increased 23.6% or $120 million in 2011 compared to 2010 primarily due to reestimations of reserves that increased contract benefits for interest-sensitive life insurance and decreased contract benefits for immediate annuities with life contingencies in 2010, a reduction in accident and health insurance reserves at Allstate Benefits as of December 31, 2011 related to a contract modification, and favorable morbidity experience on certain accident and health products and growth at Allstate Benefits. Benefit spread decreased 3.2% or $17 million in 2010 compared to 2009. The decrease was primarily due to higher mortality experience on interest-sensitive life insurance and reestimations of reserves that increased contract benefits for interest-sensitive life insurance and decreased contract benefits for immediate annuities, partially offset by growth in accident and health insurance sold through Allstate Benefits. Interest credited to contractholder funds decreased 9.0% or $162 million in 2011 compared to 2010 primarily due to lower average contractholder funds and lower interest crediting rates on deferred fixed annuities, interest-sensitive life insurance and immediate fixed annuities. Additionally, valuation changes on derivatives embedded in equity-indexed annuity contracts that are not hedged increased interest credited to contractholder funds by $18 million in 2011. Amortization of deferred sales inducement costs was $23 million in 2011 compared to $27 million in 2010. Interest credited to contractholder funds decreased 15.0% or $319 million in 2010 compared to 2009 primarily due to lower average contractholder funds and management actions to reduce interest crediting rates on deferred fixed annuities and interest-sensitive life insurance. In addition, the decline in 2010 also reflects lower amortization of DSI. Amortization of DSI declined to $27 million in 2010 compared to $129 million in 2009, primarily due to a $46 million decrease in amortization relating to realized capital gains and losses and a $38 million reduction in amortization acceleration for changes in assumptions. In order to analyze the impact of net investment income and interest credited to contractholders on net income, we monitor the difference between net investment income and the sum of interest credited to contractholder funds and the implied interest on immediate annuities with life contingencies, which is included as a component of life and annuity contract benefits on the Consolidated Statements of Operations ("investment spread"). The investment spread by product group is shown in the following table for the years ended December 31. ($ in millions) 2011 2010 2009 Annuities and institutional products $ 170 $ 179 $ 126 Life insurance 54 35 3 Allstate Bank products 22 31 30 Accident and health insurance 19 18 16 Net investment income on investments supporting capital 265 234 205 Total investment spread $ 530 $ 497 $ 380 Investment spread increased 6.6% or $33 million in 2011 compared to 2010 as actions to improve investment portfolio yields and lower crediting rates more than offset the effect of the continuing decline in our spread-based business in force. Investment spread increased 30.8% or $117 million in 2010 compared to 2009 as lower net investment income was more than offset by decreased interest credited to contractholder funds, which includes lower amortization of DSI. Excluding amortization of DSI, investment spread increased 2.9% or $15 million in 2010 compared to 2009. 74 Table of Contents To further analyze investment spreads, the following table summarizes the weighted average investment yield on assets supporting product liabilities and capital, interest crediting rates and investment spreads. Weighted average investment yield Weighted average interest crediting rate Weighted average investment spreads 2011 2010 2009 2011 2010 2009 2011 2010 2009 Interest-sensitive life insurance 5.4 % 5.5 % 5.5 % 4.2 % 4.4 % 4.6 % 1.2 % 1.1 % 0.9 % Deferred fixed annuities and institutional products 4.6 4.4 4.5 3.3 3.2 3.4 1.3 1.2 1.1 Immediate fixed annuities with and without life contingencies 6.3 6.4 6.3 6.2 6.4 6.5 0.1 (0.2 ) Investments supporting capital, traditional life and other products 3.9 3.7 3.7 n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a The following table summarizes our product liabilities as of December 31 and indicates the account value of those contracts and policies in which an investment spread is generated. ($ in millions) 2011 2010 2009 Immediate fixed annuities with life contingencies $ 8,831 $ 8,696 $ 8,454 Other life contingent contracts and other 5,618 4,786 4,456 Reserve for life-contingent contract benefits $ 14,449 $ 13,482 $ 12,910 Interest-sensitive life insurance $ 10,826 $ 10,675 $ 10,276 Deferred fixed annuities 25,228 29,367 32,194 Immediate fixed annuities without life contingencies 3,821 3,799 3,869 Institutional products 1,891 2,650 4,370 Allstate Bank products 1,091 1,085 Market value adjustments related to fair value hedges and other 566 613 788 Contractholder funds $ 42,332 $ 48,195 $ 52,582 The following table summarizes the weighted average guaranteed crediting rates and weighted average current crediting rates as of December 31, 2011 for certain fixed annuities and interest-sensitive life contracts where management has the ability to change the crediting rate, subject to a contractual minimum. Other products, including equity-indexed, variable and immediate annuities, equity-indexed and variable life, and institutional products totaling $11.01 billion of contractholder funds, have been excluded from the analysis because management does not have the ability to change the crediting rate or the minimum crediting rate is not considered meaningful in this context. ($ in millions) Weighted average guaranteed crediting rates Weighted average current crediting rates Contractholder funds Annuities with annual crediting rate resets 3.12 % 3.14 % $ 11,537 Annuities with multi-year rate guarantees: (1) Resetable in next 12 months 2.16 4.16 2,432 Resetable after 12 months 1.61 3.74 6,597 Interest-sensitive life insurance 3.95 4.30 10,756 (1) These contracts include interest rate guarantee periods which are typically 5 or 6 years. 75 Table of Contents Amortization of DAC increased 66.6% or $237 million in 2011 compared to 2010 and decreased 63.1% or $609 million in 2010 compared to 2009. The components of amortization of DAC are summarized in the following table for the years ended December 31. ($ in millions) 2011 2010 2009 Amortization of DAC before amortization relating to realized capital gains and losses, valuation changes on embedded derivatives that are not hedged and changes in assumptions $ 397 $ 326 $ 472 Amortization relating to realized capital gains and losses (1) and valuation changes on embedded derivatives that are not hedged 184 42 216 Amortization acceleration (deceleration) for changes in assumptions ("DAC unlocking") 12 (12 ) 277 Total amortization of DAC $ 593 $ 356 $ 965 (1) The impact of realized capital gains and losses on amortization of DAC is dependent upon the relationship between the assets that give rise to the gain or loss and the product liability supported by the assets. Fluctuations result from changes in the impact of realized capital gains and losses on actual and expected gross profits. The increase of $237 million in 2011 was primarily due to increased amortization relating to realized capital gains, lower amortization in the second quarter of 2010 resulting from decreased benefit spread on interest-sensitive life insurance due to the reestimation of reserves, and an unfavorable change in amortization acceleration/deceleration for changes in assumptions. In 2011, DAC amortization relating to realized capital gains and losses primarily resulted from realized capital gains on sales of fixed income securities. The decrease of $609 million in 2010 was primarily due to a favorable change in amortization acceleration/deceleration for changes in assumptions, lower amortization relating to realized capital gains and losses, a decreased amortization rate on fixed annuities and lower amortization from decreased benefit spread on interest-sensitive life insurance due to the reestimation of reserves. In 2010, DAC amortization relating to realized capital gains and losses primarily resulted from realized capital gains on derivatives and sales of fixed income securities. During the first quarter of 2011, we completed our annual comprehensive review of the profitability of our products to determine DAC balances for our interest-sensitive life, fixed annuities and other investment contracts which covers assumptions for investment returns, including capital gains and losses, interest crediting rates to policyholders, the effect of any hedges, persistency, mortality and expenses in all product lines. The review resulted in an acceleration of DAC amortization (charge to income) of $12 million in the first quarter of 2011. Amortization acceleration of $17 million related to interest-sensitive life insurance and was primarily due to an increase in projected expenses. Amortization deceleration of $5 million related to equity-indexed annuities and was primarily due to an increase in projected investment margins. In 2010, our annual comprehensive review resulted in a deceleration of DAC amortization (credit to income) of $12 million. Amortization deceleration of $45 million related to variable life insurance and was primarily due to appreciation in the underlying separate account valuations. Amortization acceleration of $32 million related to interest-sensitive life insurance and was primarily due to an increase in projected realized capital losses and lower projected renewal premium (which is also expected to reduce persistency), partially offset by lower expenses. In 2009, our annual comprehensive review resulted in the acceleration of DAC amortization of $277 million. $289 million related to fixed annuities, of which $210 million was attributable to market value adjusted annuities, and $18 million related to variable life insurance. Partially offsetting these amounts was amortization deceleration for interest-sensitive life insurance of $30 million. The principal assumption impacting fixed annuity amortization acceleration was an increase in the level of expected realized capital losses in 2009 and 2010. For interest-sensitive life insurance, the amortization deceleration was due to a favorable change in our mortality assumptions, partially offset by increased expected capital losses. 76 The changes in DAC are detailed in the following table. ($ in millions) Traditional life and accident and health Interest-sensitive life insurance Fixed annuities Other Total 2011 2010 2011 2010 2011 2010 2011 2010 2011 2010 Beginning balance $ 693 $ 650 $ 2,265 $ 2,246 $ 431 $ 1,159 $ 3 $ 5 $ 3,392 $ 4,060 Acquisition costs deferred 178 156 226 275 29 52 433 483 Amortization of DAC before amortization relating to realized capital gains and losses, valuation changes on embedded derivatives that are not hedged and changes in assumptions (1) (119 ) (113 ) (212 ) (140 ) (65 ) (71 ) (1 ) (2 ) (397 ) (326 ) (Amortization) accretion relating to realized capital gains and losses and valuation changes on embedded derivatives that are not hedged (1) (24 ) 15 (160 ) (57 ) (184 ) (42 ) Amortization (acceleration) deceleration for changes in assumptions ("DAC unlocking") (1) (17 ) 13 5 (1 ) (12 ) 12 Effect of unrealized capital gains and losses (2) (204 ) (144 ) 3 (651 ) (201 ) (795 ) Ending balance $ 752 $ 693 $ 2,034 $ 2,265 $ 243 $ 431 $ 2 $ 3 $ 3,031 $ 3,392 (1) Included as a component of amortization of DAC on the Consolidated Statements of Operations. (2) Represents the change in the DAC adjustment for unrealized capital gains and losses. The DAC adjustment balance was $(126) million and $75 million as of December 31, 2011 and 2010, respectively, and represents the amount by which the amortization of DAC would increase or decrease if the unrealized gains and losses in the respective product portfolios were realized. On January 1, 2012, we will adopt new DAC accounting guidance on a retrospective basis (see Note 2 of the consolidated financial statements for further details). It is currently estimated that the restated Allstate Financial DAC balance will decline by $508 million when compared to the reported December 31, 2011 balance. We estimate that the new DAC accounting guidance will reduce net income by approximately $40 million, after-tax, in 2012. Operating costs and expenses decreased 3.0% or $14 million in 2011 compared to 2010 and increased 9.1% or $39 million in 2010 compared to 2009. The following table summarizes operating costs and expenses for the years ended December 31. ($ in millions) 2011 2010 2009 Non-deferrable acquisition costs $ 168 $ 168 $ 156 Other operating costs and expenses 287 301 274 Total operating costs and expenses $ 455 $ 469 $ 430 Restructuring and related charges $ 1 $ (3 ) $ 25 Non-deferrable acquisition costs in 2011 were comparable to 2010. Other operating costs and expenses decreased 4.7% or $14 million in 2011 compared to 2010 primarily due to lower employee and professional service costs, reduced insurance department assessments for 2011 and lower net Allstate agencies distribution channel expenses reflecting increased fees from sales of third party financial products, partially offset by a charge related to the liquidation plan for Executive Life Insurance Company of New York. Non-deferrable acquisition costs increased 7.7% or $12 million in 2010 compared to 2009 primarily due to higher non-deferrable commissions related to accident and health insurance business sold through Allstate Benefits. Other operating costs and expenses increased 9.9% or $27 million in 2010 compared to 2009 primarily due to higher product development, marketing and technology costs, increased litigation expenses, lower reinsurance expense allowances resulting from higher retention and increases in the net cost of employee benefits. In 2010, these increased costs were partially offset by our expense reduction actions, which resulted in lower employee, professional services and sales support expenses. During 2009, restructuring and related charges of $25 million were recorded in connection with our plan to improve efficiency and narrow our focus of product offerings. In accordance with this plan, among other actions, we eliminated approximately 1,000 workforce positions relative to December 31, 2008 levels through a combination of attrition, position elimination and outsourcing. This reduction reflected approximately 30% of Allstate Financial's work force at the time the plan was initiated. 77 Loss on disposition of $15 million in 2011 includes $22 million related to the dissolution of Allstate Bank. In 2011, after receiving regulatory approval to voluntarily dissolve, Allstate Bank ceased operations. In the first half of 2012, we expect to cancel the bank's charter and deregister The Allstate Corporation as a savings and loan holding company. Income tax expense was $286 million in 2011 compared to income tax expense of $8 million in 2010 and an income tax benefit of $82 million in 2009. The change in 2011 was due to the proportionate change in income on which income tax expense was determined. The income tax benefit for 2009 included expense of $142 million attributable to an increase in the valuation allowance relating to the deferred tax asset on capital losses recorded in the first quarter of 2009. This valuation allowance was released in connection with the adoption of new OTTI accounting guidance on April 1, 2009; however, the release was recorded as an increase to retained income and therefore did not reverse the amount recorded in income tax benefit. Reinsurance ceded We enter into reinsurance agreements with unaffiliated reinsurers to limit our risk of mortality and morbidity losses. In addition, Allstate Financial has used reinsurance to effect the acquisition or disposition of certain blocks of business. We retain primary liability as a direct insurer for all risks ceded to reinsurers. As of December 31, 2011 and 2010, 42% and 45%, respectively, of our face amount of life insurance in force was reinsured. Additionally, we ceded substantially all of the risk associated with our variable annuity business and we cede 100% of the morbidity risk on substantially all of our long-term care contracts. Our reinsurance recoverables, summarized by reinsurer as of December 31, are shown in the following table. ($ in millions) Standard & Poor's financial strength rating (4) Reinsurance recoverable on paid and unpaid benefits 2011 2010 Prudential Insurance Company of America AA- $ 1,681 $ 1,633 Employers Reassurance Corporation A+ 960 853 Transamerica Life Group AA- 454 402 RGA Reinsurance Company AA- 359 360 Swiss Re Life and Health America, Inc. (1) AA- 212 210 Scottish Re Group (2) N/A 134 136 Paul Revere Life Insurance Company A- 132 140 Munich American Reassurance AA- 127 124 Mutual of Omaha Insurance A+ 96 98 Security Life of Denver A- 71 79 Manulife Insurance Company AA- 64 68 Lincoln National Life Insurance AA- 63 64 Triton Insurance Company N/A 56 58 American Health & Life Insurance Co. N/A 48 50 Other (3) 120 125 Total $ 4,577 $ 4,400 (1) The Company has extensive reinsurance contracts directly with Swiss Re and its affiliates and indirectly through Swiss Re's acquisition of other companies with whom we had reinsurance or retrocession contracts. (2) The reinsurance recoverable on paid and unpaid benefits related to the Scottish Re Group as of December 31, 2011 comprised $73 million related to Scottish Re Life Corporation and $61 million related to Scottish Re (U.S.), Inc. The reinsurance recoverable on paid and unpaid benefits related to the Scottish Re Group as of December 31, 2010 comprised $73 million related to Scottish Re Life Corporation and $63 million related to Scottish Re (U.S.), Inc. (3) As of December 31, 2011 and 2010, the other category includes $103 million and $106 million, respectively, of recoverables due from reinsurers with an investment grade credit rating from Standard & Poor's ("S&P"). (4) N/A reflects no rating available. Certain of our reinsurers experienced rating downgrades in 2011 by S&P, including Surety Life of Denver and Mutual of Omaha. We continuously monitor the creditworthiness of reinsurers in order to determine our risk of recoverability on an individual and aggregate basis, and a provision for uncollectible reinsurance is recorded if needed. No amounts have been deemed unrecoverable in the three-years ended December 31, 2011. We enter into certain intercompany reinsurance transactions for the Allstate Financial operations in order to maintain underwriting control and manage insurance risk among various legal entities. These reinsurance agreements 78 have been approved by the appropriate regulatory authorities. All significant intercompany transactions have been eliminated in consolidation. INVESTMENTS 2011 HIGHLIGHTS Investments totaled $95.62 billion as of December 31, 2011, a decrease of 4.8% from $100.48 billion as of December 31, 2010. Unrealized net capital gains totaled $2.88 billion as of December 31, 2011, increasing from $1.39 billion as of December 31, 2010. As of December 31, 2011, $334 million or 40% of our $825 million below investment grade gross unrealized losses related to Subprime residential mortgage-backed securities compared to $438 million as of December 31, 2010. The fair value of these securities totaled $586 million as of December 31, 2011 compared to $796 million as of December 31, 2010. Net investment income was $3.97 billion in 2011, a decrease of 3.2% from $4.10 billion in 2010. Net realized capital gains were $503 million in 2011 compared to net realized capital losses of $827 million in 2010. INVESTMENTS Overview and strategy The return on our investment portfolios is an important component of our financial results. Investment portfolios are segmented between the Property-Liability, Allstate Financial and Corporate and Other operations. While taking into consideration the investment portfolio in aggregate, we manage the underlying portfolios based upon the nature of each respective business and its corresponding liability structure. We employ a strategic asset allocation approach which considers the nature of the liabilities and risk tolerances, as well as the risk and return parameters of the various asset classes in which we invest. This asset allocation is informed by our global economic and market outlook, as well as other inputs and constraints, including diversification effects, duration, liquidity and capital considerations. Within the ranges set by the strategic asset allocation, tactical investment decisions are made in consideration of prevailing market conditions. We manage risks associated with interest rates, credit spreads, equity markets, real estate and currency exchange rates. Our continuing focus is to manage risks and to position our portfolio to take advantage of market opportunities while attempting to mitigate adverse effects. The Property-Liability portfolio's investment strategy emphasizes protection of principal and consistent income generation, within a total return framework. This approach, which has produced competitive returns over the long term, is designed to ensure financial strength and stability for paying claims, while maximizing economic value and surplus growth. The Allstate Financial portfolio's investment strategy focuses on the total return of assets needed to support the underlying liabilities, asset-liability management and achieving an appropriate return on capital. The Corporate and Other portfolio's investment strategy balances the unique liquidity needs of the portfolio in relation to the overall corporate capital structure with the pursuit of returns. Investments outlook We anticipate the financial markets will continue to have periods of high volatility. Invested assets and income are expected to decline in line with reductions in contractholder funds for the Allstate Financial segment. We plan to focus on the following priorities: Optimizing return and risk in an uncertain economic climate and volatile investment markets. Expanding ownership of real estate and other cash-generating assets, including real assets, through direct and fund investments. Managing the alignment of assets with respect to Allstate Financial's changing liability profile. 79 Portfolio composition The composition of the investment portfolios as of December 31, 2011 is presented in the table below. Also see Notes 2 and 5 of the consolidated financial statements for investment accounting policies and additional information. Property- Liability (5) Allstate Financial (5) Corporate and Other (5) Total ($ in millions) Percent to total Percent to total Percent to total Percent to total Fixed income securities (1) $ 27,801 77.2 % $ 46,290 80.7 % $ 2,022 90.0 % $ 76,113 79.6 % Equity securities (2) 4,165 11.6 198 0.4 4,363 4.5 Mortgage loans 474 1.3 6,665 11.6 7,139 7.5 Limited partnership interests (3) 3,055 8.5 1,612 2.8 30 1.3 4,697 4.9 Short-term (4) 451 1.3 645 1.1 195 8.7 1,291 1.4 Other 52 0.1 1,963 3.4 2,015 2.1 Total $ 35,998 100.0 % $ 57,373 100.0 % $ 2,247 100.0 % $ 95,618 100.0 % (1) Fixed income securities are carried at fair value. Amortized cost basis for these securities was $27.12 billion, $44.30 billion and $1.96 billion for Property-Liability, Allstate Financial and Corporate and Other, respectively. (2) Equity securities are carried at fair value. Cost basis for these securities was $4.04 billion and $159 million for Property-Liability and Allstate Financial, respectively. (3) We have commitments to invest in additional limited partnership interests totaling $1.22 billion and $797 million for Property-Liability and Allstate Financial, respectively. (4) Short-term investments are carried at fair value. Amortized cost basis for these investments was $451 million, $645 million and $195 million for Property-Liability, Allstate Financial and Corporate and Other, respectively. (5) Balances reflect the elimination of related party investments between segments. Total investments decreased to $95.62 billion as of December 31, 2011, from $100.48 billion as of December 31, 2010, primarily due to net reductions in contractholder funds, partially offset by higher valuations of fixed income securities. Valuations of fixed income securities are typically driven by a combination of changes in relevant risk-free interest rates and credit spreads over the period. Risk-free interest rates are typically referenced as the yield on U.S. Treasury securities, whereas credit spread is the additional yield on fixed income securities above the risk-free rate that market participants require to compensate them for assuming credit, liquidity and/or prepayment risks. U.S. Treasury securities continue to trade in active markets, and the yield curve on U.S. Treasury securities remains an appropriate basis for determining risk-free rates. The increase in valuation of fixed income securities during 2011 was due to declining risk-free interest rates, partially offset by widening credit spreads. The Property-Liability investment portfolio increased to $36.00 billion as of December 31, 2011, from $35.05 billion as of December 31, 2010, primarily due to the acquisition of Esurance, higher valuations of fixed income securities, positive operating cash flows and increased collateral from securities lending activities, partially offset by dividends paid by Allstate Insurance Company ("AIC") to its parent, The Allstate Corporation (the "Corporation"). The Allstate Financial investment portfolio decreased to $57.37 billion as of December 31, 2011, from $61.58 billion as of December 31, 2010, primarily due to net reductions in contractholder funds of $5.86 billion, partially offset by higher valuations of fixed income securities. The Corporate and Other investment portfolio decreased to $2.25 billion as of December 31, 2011, from $3.85 billion as of December 31, 2010, primarily due to the acquisition of Esurance and Answer Financial, share repurchases, dividends paid to shareholders and interest paid on debt, partially offset by dividends of $838 million paid by AIC to the Corporation. 80 Fixed income securities by type are listed in the table below. ($ in millions) Fair value as of December 31, 2011 Percent to total investments Fair value as of December 31, 2010 Percent to total investments U.S. government and agencies $ 6,315 6.6 % $ 8,596 8.6 % Municipal 14,241 14.9 15,934 15.9 Corporate 43,581 45.6 37,655 37.5 Foreign government 2,081 2.2 3,158 3.1 Residential mortgage-backed securities ("RMBS") 4,121 4.3 7,993 7.9 Commercial mortgage-backed securities ("CMBS") 1,784 1.9 1,994 2.0 Asset-backed securities ("ABS") 3,966 4.1 4,244 4.2 Redeemable preferred stock 24 38 Total fixed income securities $ 76,113 79.6 % $ 79,612 79.2 % As of December 31, 2011, 92.1% of the consolidated fixed income securities portfolio was rated investment grade, which is defined as a security having a rating of Aaa, Aa, A or Baa from Moody's, a rating of AAA, AA, A or BBB from S&P, Fitch, Dominion, or Realpoint, a rating of aaa, aa, a or bbb from A.M. Best, or a comparable internal rating if an externally provided rating is not available. All of our fixed income securities are rated by third party credit rating agencies, the National Association of Insurance Commissioners ("NAIC"), and/or internally rated. Our initial investment decisions and ongoing monitoring procedures for fixed income securities are based on a thorough due diligence process which includes, but is not limited to, an assessment of the credit quality, sector, structure, and liquidity risks of each issue. 81 The following table summarizes the fair value and unrealized net capital gains and losses for fixed income securities by credit rating as of December 31, 2011. ($ in millions) Aaa Aa A Fair value Unrealized gain/(loss) Fair value Unrealized gain/(loss) Fair value Unrealized gain/(loss) U.S. government and agencies $ 6,315 $ 349 $ $ $ $ Municipal Tax exempt 901 61 4,557 227 2,134 106 Taxable 208 23 2,690 289 1,093 79 ARS 511 (37 ) 91 (13 ) 78 (14 ) Corporate Public 1,000 61 2,816 180 11,716 793 Privately placed 1,029 48 1,524 90 4,173 274 Foreign government 821 124 478 35 486 29 RMBS U.S. government sponsored entities ("U.S. Agency") 1,897 80 Prime residential mortgage-backed securities ("Prime") 185 2 55 161 2 Alt-A residential mortgage-backed securities ("Alt-A") 40 (1 ) 68 Subprime residential mortgage-backed securities ("Subprime") 52 (18 ) 43 (7 ) CMBS 941 33 214 (5 ) 166 (31 ) ABS Collateralized debt obligations ("CDO") 117 (2 ) 750 (34 ) 340 (74 ) Consumer and other asset-backed securities ("Consumer and other ABS") 1,418 34 306 2 360 2 Redeemable preferred stock 1 Total fixed income securities $ 15,343 $ 776 $ 13,574 $ 752 $ 20,818 $ 1,159 Baa Ba or lower Total Fair value Unrealized gain/(loss) Fair value Unrealized gain/(loss) Fair value Unrealized gain/(loss) U.S. government and agencies $ $ $ $ $ 6,315 $ 349 Municipal Tax exempt 966 9 447 (59 ) 9,005 344 Taxable 394 (26 ) 109 (22 ) 4,494 343 ARS 62 (16 ) 742 (80 ) Corporate Public 11,468 710 2,405 19 29,405 1,763 Privately placed 6,385 202 1,065 (13 ) 14,176 601 Foreign government 296 27 2,081 215 RMBS U.S. Agency 1,897 80 Prime 36 475 (32 ) 912 (28 ) Alt-A 27 364 (79 ) 499 (80 ) Subprime 61 (30 ) 657 (328 ) 813 (383 ) CMBS 293 (83 ) 170 (92 ) 1,784 (178 ) ABS CDO 183 (64 ) 234 (79 ) 1,624 (253 ) Consumer and other ABS 241 3 17 (2 ) 2,342 39 Redeemable preferred stock 23 2 24 2 Total fixed income securities $ 20,373 $ 750 $ 6,005 $ (703 ) $ 76,113 $ 2,734 82 Table of Contents Municipal bonds , including tax exempt, taxable and ARS securities, totaled $14.24 billion as of December 31, 2011 with an unrealized net capital gain of $607 million. The municipal bond portfolio includes general obligations of state and local issuers, revenue bonds and pre-refunded bonds, which are bonds for which an irrevocable trust has been established to fund the remaining payments of principal and interest. The following table summarizes by state the fair value, amortized cost and credit rating of our municipal bonds, excluding $1.39 billion of pre-refunded bonds, as of December 31, 2011. State general obligation Local general obligation Amortized cost Average credit rating ($ in millions) Revenue (1) Fair value State California $ 76 $ 626 $ 632 $ 1,334 $ 1,316 A Texas 24 391 574 989 922 Aa Florida 43 163 558 764 728 A New York 33 108 535 676 637 Aa Ohio 99 197 249 545 530 A Illinois 147 347 494 457 A Missouri 30 131 286 447 429 A Delaware 393 393 428 Aa Pennsylvania 94 92 200 386 378 Aa Michigan 33 137 211 381 365 Aa All others 1,127 1,422 3,898 6,447 6,164 A Total $ 1,559 $ 3,414 $ 7,883 $ 12,856 $ 12,354 A (1) The nature of the activities supporting revenue bonds is highly diversified and includes transportation, health care, industrial development, housing, higher education, utilities, recreation/convention centers and other activities. Our practice for acquiring and monitoring municipal bonds is predominantly based on the underlying credit quality of the primary obligor. We currently rely on the primary obligor to pay all contractual cash flows and are not relying on bond insurers for payments. As a result of downgrades in the insurers' credit ratings, the ratings of the insured municipal bonds generally reflect the underlying ratings of the primary obligor. As of December 31, 2011, 99.3% of our insured municipal bond portfolio is rated investment grade. ARS totaled $742 million with an unrealized net capital loss of $80 million as of December 31, 2011. Our holdings primarily have a credit rating of Aaa. As of December 31, 2011, $710 million of our ARS backed by student loans was 80% to 100% insured by the U.S. Department of Education. All of our ARS holdings are experiencing failed auctions and we receive the failed auction rate or, for those which contain maximum reset rate formulas, we receive the contractual maximum rate. We anticipate that failed auctions may persist and most of our holdings will continue to pay the failed auction rate or, for those that contain maximum rate reset formulas, the maximum rate. Auctions continue to be conducted as scheduled for each of the securities. Corporate bonds , including publicly traded and privately placed, totaled $43.58 billion as of December 31, 2011 with an unrealized net capital gain of $2.36 billion. Privately placed securities primarily consist of corporate issued senior debt securities that are directly negotiated with the borrower or are in unregistered form. Our portfolio of privately placed securities is broadly diversified by issuer, industry sector and country. The portfolio is made up of 525 issuers. Privately placed corporate obligations contain structural security features such as financial covenants and call protections that provide investors greater protection against credit deterioration, reinvestment risk or fluctuations in interest rates than those typically found in publicly registered debt securities. Additionally, investments in these securities are made after extensive due diligence of the issuer, typically including direct discussions with senior management and on-site visits to company facilities. Ongoing monitoring includes direct periodic dialog with senior management of the issuer and continuous monitoring of operating performance and financial position. Every issue not rated by an independent rating agency is internally rated with a formal rating affirmation at least once a year. Foreign government securities totaled $2.08 billion as of December 31, 2011, with 100% rated investment grade and an unrealized net capital gain of $215 million. Of these securities, 18.8% are backed by the U.S. government, 35.1% are in Canadian governmental securities held in our Canadian subsidiary and the remaining 46.1% are highly diversified in other foreign governments. 83 Table of Contents RMBS, CMBS and ABS are structured securities that are primarily collateralized by residential and commercial real estate loans and other consumer or corporate borrowings. The cash flows from the underlying collateral paid to the securitization trust are generally applied in a pre-determined order and are designed so that each security issued by the trust, typically referred to as a "class", qualifies for a specific original rating. For example, the "senior" portion or "top" of the capital structure, or rating class, which would originally qualify for a rating of Aaa typically has priority in receiving principal repayments on the underlying collateral and retains this priority until the class is paid in full. In a sequential structure, underlying collateral principal repayments are directed to the most senior rated Aaa class in the structure until paid in full, after which principal repayments are directed to the next most senior Aaa class in the structure until it is paid in full. Senior Aaa classes generally share any losses from the underlying collateral on a pro-rata basis after losses are absorbed by classes with lower original ratings. The payment priority and class subordination included in these securities serves as credit enhancement for holders of the senior or top portions of the structures. These securities continue to retain the payment priority features that existed at the origination of the securitization trust. Other forms of credit enhancement may include structural features embedded in the securitization trust, such as overcollateralization, excess spread and bond insurance. The underlying collateral can have fixed interest rates, variable interest rates (such as adjustable rate mortgages) or may contain features of both fixed and variable rate mortgages. RMBS , including U.S. Agency, Prime, Alt-A and Subprime, totaled $4.12 billion, with 63.7% rated investment grade, as of December 31, 2011. The RMBS portfolio is subject to interest rate risk, but unlike other fixed income securities, is additionally subject to significant prepayment risk from the underlying residential mortgage loans. The credit risk associated with U.S. Agency portfolio is mitigated because they were issued by or have underlying collateral guaranteed by U.S. government agencies. The unrealized net capital loss of $411 million as of December 31, 2011 was the result of wider credit spreads than at initial purchase on the non-U.S. Agency portion of our RMBS portfolio, largely due to higher risk premiums caused by macroeconomic conditions and credit market deterioration, including the impact of lower residential real estate valuations, which show signs of stabilization or recovery in certain geographic areas but remain under stress in other geographic areas. The following table shows our RMBS portfolio as of December 31, 2011 based upon vintage year of the issuance of the securities. ($ in millions) U.S. Agency Prime Alt-A Subprime Total RMBS Fair value Unrealized gain/(loss) Fair value Unrealized gain/(loss) Fair value Unrealized gain/(loss) Fair value Unrealized gain/(loss) Fair value Unrealized gain/(loss) 2011 $ 23 $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ 23 $ 2010 83 167 2 51 1 301 3 2009 273 8 58 8 339 8 2008 382 14 382 14 2007 110 4 202 (4 ) 56 (24 ) 198 (96 ) 566 (120 ) 2006 92 5 160 (4 ) 138 (29 ) 196 (106 ) 586 (134 ) 2005 276 12 146 (18 ) 107 (18 ) 226 (108 ) 755 (132 ) Pre-2005 658 37 179 (4 ) 139 (10 ) 193 (73 ) 1,169 (50 ) Total $ 1,897 $ 80 $ 912 $ (28 ) $ 499 $ (80 ) $ 813 $ (383 ) $ 4,121 $ (411 ) Prime are collateralized by residential mortgage loans issued to prime borrowers. As of December 31, 2011, $684 million of the Prime had fixed rate underlying collateral and $228 million had variable rate underlying collateral. Alt-A includes securities collateralized by residential mortgage loans issued to borrowers who do not qualify for prime financing terms due to high loan-to-value ratios or limited supporting documentation, but have stronger credit profiles than subprime borrowers. As of December 31, 2011, $386 million of the Alt-A had fixed rate underlying collateral and $113 million had variable rate underlying collateral. Subprime includes securities collateralized by residential mortgage loans issued to borrowers that cannot qualify for Prime or Alt-A financing terms due in part to weak or limited credit history. It also includes securities that are collateralized by certain second lien mortgages regardless of the borrower's credit history. The Subprime portfolio consisted of $605 million and $208 million of first lien and second lien securities, respectively. As of December 31, 2011, $444 million of the Subprime had fixed rate underlying collateral and $369 million had variable rate underlying collateral. CMBS totaled $1.78 billion, with 90.5% rated investment grade, as of December 31, 2011. The CMBS portfolio is subject to credit risk, but unlike certain other structured securities, is generally not subject to prepayment risk due to protections within the underlying commercial mortgage loans. Of the CMBS investments, 93.0% are traditional conduit transactions collateralized by commercial mortgage loans, broadly diversified across property types and geographical 84 Table of Contents area. The remainder consists of non-traditional CMBS such as small balance transactions, large loan pools and single borrower transactions. The following table shows our CMBS portfolio as of December 31, 2011 based upon vintage year of the underlying collateral. ($ in millions) Fair value Unrealized gain/(loss) 2011 $ 5 $ 2010 25 2 2007 271 (22 ) 2006 523 (120 ) 2005 290 (43 ) Pre-2005 670 5 Total CMBS $ 1,784 $ (178 ) The unrealized net capital loss of $178 million as of December 31, 2011 on our CMBS portfolio was the result of wider credit spreads than at initial purchase, largely due to the macroeconomic conditions and credit market deterioration, including the impact of lower commercial real estate valuations, which show signs of stabilization or recovery in certain geographic areas but remain under stress in other geographic areas. CMBS credit spreads are wider than at initial purchase in our 2005-2007 vintage year CMBS. ABS , including CDO and Consumer and other ABS, totaled $3.97 billion, with 93.7% rated investment grade, as of December 31, 2011. Credit risk is managed by monitoring the performance of the underlying collateral. Many of the securities in the ABS portfolio have credit enhancement with features such as overcollateralization, subordinated structures, reserve funds, guarantees and/or insurance. The unrealized net capital loss of $214 million as of December 31, 2011 on our ABS portfolio was the result of wider credit spreads than at initial purchase. CDO totaled $1.62 billion, with 85.6% rated investment grade, as of December 31, 2011. CDO consist primarily of obligations collateralized by high yield and investment grade corporate credits including $1.34 billion of cash flow collateralized loan obligations ("CLO") with unrealized losses of $136 million. Cash flow CLO are structures collateralized primarily by below investment grade senior secured corporate loans. The underlying collateral is actively managed by external managers that monitor the collateral's performance and is well diversified across industries and among issuers. The remaining $283 million of securities consisted of synthetic CDO, trust preferred CDO, project finance CDO, market value CDO, collateralized bond obligations and other CLO with unrealized losses of $117 million. Consumer and other ABS totaled $2.34 billion, with 99.3% rated investment grade, as of December 31, 2011. Consumer and other ABS consists of $684 million of consumer auto and $1.66 billion of credit card and other ABS with unrealized gains of $1 million and $38 million, respectively. Equity securities Equity securities primarily include common stocks, exchange traded and mutual funds, non-redeemable preferred stocks and real estate investment trust equity investments. The equity securities portfolio was $4.36 billion as of December 31, 2011 compared to $4.81 billion as of December 31, 2010. Net unrealized gains totaled $160 million as of December 31, 2011 compared to $583 million as of December 31, 2010. Mortgage loans Our mortgage loan portfolio, which is primarily held in the Allstate Financial portfolio, totaled $7.14 billion as of December 31, 2011, compared to $6.68 billion as of December 31, 2010, and primarily comprises loans secured by first mortgages on developed commercial real estate. Key considerations used to manage our exposure include property type and geographic diversification. We recognized $37 million of realized capital losses related to net increases in the valuation allowance on impaired mortgage loans in 2011, primarily due to the risk associated with refinancing near-term maturities, and decreases in occupancy which resulted in deteriorating debt service coverage and declines in property valuations. While property valuations show signs of stabilization or recovery in many larger, primary markets, valuations in many smaller cities remain under stress. We recognized $65 million of realized capital losses related to net increases in the valuation allowance on impaired loans in 2010. For further detail on our mortgage loan portfolio, see Note 5 of the consolidated financial statements. Limited partnership interests consist of investments in private equity/debt funds, real estate funds, hedge funds and tax credit funds. The limited partnership interests portfolio is well diversified across a number of characteristics 85 Table of Contents including fund managers, vintage years, strategies, geography (including international), and company/property types. The following table presents information about our limited partnership interests as of December 31, 2011. ($ in millions) Private equity/debt funds Real estate funds Hedge funds Tax credit funds Total Cost method of accounting ("Cost") $ 1,095 $ 372 $ 95 $ 7 $ 1,569 Equity method of accounting ("EMA") 801 727 1,047 553 3,128 Total $ 1,896 $ 1,099 $ 1,142 $ 560 $ 4,697 Number of managers 94 45 13 9 Number of individual funds 154 92 78 17 Largest exposure to single fund $ 42 $ 184 $ 79 $ 58 Our aggregate limited partnership exposure represented 4.9% and 3.8% of total invested assets as of December 31, 2011 and 2010, respectively. The following table shows the results from our limited partnership interests by fund type and accounting classification for the years ended December 31. 2011 2010 ($ in millions) Cost EMA Total income Impairment write-downs (1) Cost EMA Total income Impairment write-downs (1) Private equity/debt funds $ 77 $ 72 $ 149 $ (3 ) $ 40 $ 76 $ 116 $ (9 ) Real estate funds 12 86 98 (3 ) 2 (34 ) (32 ) (35 ) Hedge funds 12 12 47 47 (2 ) Tax credit funds (1 ) (11 ) (12 ) (2 ) (2 ) Total $ 88 $ 159 $ 247 $ (6 ) $ 40 $ 89 $ 129 $ (46 ) (1) Impairment write-downs related to Cost limited partnerships were $4 million and $45 million in 2011 and 2010, respectively. Impairment write-downs related to EMA limited partnerships were $2 million and $1 million in 2011 and 2010, respectively. Limited partnership interests, excluding impairment write-downs, produced income of $247 million in 2011 compared to income of $129 million in 2010. Income on EMA limited partnerships is recognized on a delay due to the availability of the related financial statements. The recognition of income on hedge funds is primarily on a one-month delay and the income recognition on private equity/debt funds, real estate funds and tax credit funds are generally on a three-month delay. Income on Cost limited partnerships is recognized only upon receipt of amounts distributed by the partnerships. Short-term investments Our short-term investment portfolio was $1.29 billion and $3.28 billion as of December 31, 2011 and 2010, respectively. Other investments Our other investments as of December 31, 2011 primarily comprise $1.15 billion of policy loans, $339 million of bank loans and $168 million of certain derivatives. Policy loans are carried at unpaid principal balances. Bank loans are primarily senior secured corporate loans and are carried at amortized cost. For further detail on our use of derivatives, see Note 7 of the consolidated financial statements. Unrealized net capital gains totaled $2.88 billion as of December 31, 2011 compared to unrealized net capital gains of $1.39 billion as of December 31, 2010. The improvement since December 31, 2010 for fixed income securities was due to declining risk-free interest rates, partially offset by widening credit spreads. The decline since December 31, 2010 for 86 Table of Contents equity securities was primarily due to lower equity valuations. The following table presents unrealized net capital gains and losses as of December 31. ($ in millions) 2011 2010 U.S. government and agencies $ 349 $ 276 Municipal 607 (267 ) Corporate 2,364 1,395 Foreign government 215 337 RMBS (411 ) (516 ) CMBS (178 ) (219 ) ABS (214 ) (181 ) Redeemable preferred stock 2 1 Fixed income securities (1) 2,734 826 Equity securities 160 583 EMA limited partnership interests 2 Derivatives (17 ) (22 ) Unrealized net capital gains and losses, pre-tax $ 2,879 $ 1,387 (1) Unrealized net capital gains and losses for fixed income securities as of December 31, 2011 and 2010 comprise $(267) million and $(293) million, respectively, related to unrealized net capital losses on fixed income securities with other-than-temporary impairment and $3.00 billion and $1.12 billion, respectively, related to other unrealized net capital gains and losses. The unrealized net capital gains for the fixed income portfolio totaled $2.73 billion and comprised $4.40 billion of gross unrealized gains and $1.67 billion of gross unrealized losses as of December 31, 2011. This is compared to unrealized net capital gains for the fixed income portfolio totaling $826 million, comprised of $3.26 billion of gross unrealized gains and $2.43 billion of gross unrealized losses as of December 31, 2010. 87 Table of Contents Gross unrealized gains and losses as of December 31, 2011 on fixed income securities by type and sector are provided in the table below. Gross unrealized Amortized cost as a percent of par value (2) Fair value as a percent of par value (2) ($ in millions) Par value (1) Amortized cost Fair value Gains Losses Corporate: Banking $ 3,649 $ 3,621 $ 96 $ (185 ) $ 3,532 99.2 % 96.8 % Financial services 3,695 3,643 169 (54 ) 3,758 98.6 101.7 Capital goods 4,878 4,915 372 (32 ) 5,255 100.8 107.7 Utilities 7,204 7,201 711 (32 ) 7,880 100.0 109.4 Consumer goods (cyclical and non-cyclical) 8,250 8,361 521 (21 ) 8,861 101.3 107.4 Transportation 1,851 1,858 164 (15 ) 2,007 100.4 108.4 Communications 2,638 2,647 151 (14 ) 2,784 100.3 105.5 Basic industry 2,287 2,302 140 (8 ) 2,434 100.7 106.4 Energy 3,363 3,408 242 (4 ) 3,646 101.3 108.4 Technology 1,841 1,874 109 (3 ) 1,980 101.8 107.6 Other 1,491 1,387 68 (11 ) 1,444 93.0 96.8 Total corporate fixed income portfolio 41,147 41,217 2,743 (379 ) 43,581 100.2 105.9 U.S. government and agencies 6,310 5,966 349 6,315 94.5 100.1 Municipal 15,543 13,634 863 (256 ) 14,241 87.7 91.6 Foreign government 1,951 1,866 216 (1 ) 2,081 95.6 106.7 RMBS 5,292 4,532 110 (521 ) 4,121 85.6 77.9 CMBS 2,017 1,962 48 (226 ) 1,784 97.3 88.4 ABS 4,458 4,180 73 (287 ) 3,966 93.8 89.0 Redeemable preferred stock 22 22 2 24 100.0 109.1 Total fixed income securities $ 76,740 $ 73,379 $ 4,404 $ (1,670 ) $ 76,113 95.6 99.2 (1) Included in par value are zero-coupon securities that are generally purchased at a deep discount to the par value that is received at maturity. These primarily included corporate, U.S. government and agencies, municipal and foreign government zero-coupon securities with par value of $514 million, $948 million, $3.48 billion and $382 million, respectively. (2) Excluding the impact of zero-coupon securities, the percentage of amortized cost to par value would be 100.5% for corporates, 101.4% for U.S. government and agencies, 101.2% for municipals and 103.3% for foreign governments. Similarly, excluding the impact of zero-coupon securities, the percentage of fair value to par value would be 106.2% for corporates, 104.7% for U.S. government and agencies, 106.1% for municipals and 111.3% for foreign governments. The banking, financial services, and capital goods sectors had the highest concentration of gross unrealized losses in our corporate fixed income securities portfolio as of December 31, 2011. In general, credit spreads remain wider than at initial purchase for most of the securities with gross unrealized losses in these categories. The unrealized net capital gain for the equity portfolio totaled $160 million and comprised $369 million of gross unrealized gains and $209 million of gross unrealized losses as of December 31, 2011. This is compared to an unrealized net capital gain for the equity portfolio totaling $583 million, comprised of $646 million of gross unrealized gains and $63 million of gross unrealized losses as of December 31, 2010. 88 Table of Contents Gross unrealized gains and losses as of December 31, 2011 on equity securities by sector are provided in the table below. Gross unrealized Amortized cost Fair value ($ in millions) Gains Losses Financial services $ 295 $ 37 $ (39 ) $ 293 Emerging market equity funds 458 (35 ) 423 Index-based funds 419 25 (24 ) 420 Consumer goods (cyclical and non-cyclical) 715 101 (21 ) 795 Emerging market fixed income funds 610 (18 ) 592 Technology 345 49 (12 ) 382 Basic industry 182 20 (12 ) 190 Banking 214 19 (11 ) 222 Energy 272 44 (10 ) 306 Capital goods 234 22 (9 ) 247 Real estate 145 8 (7 ) 146 Communications 165 22 (7 ) 180 Utilities 92 12 (2 ) 102 Transportation 57 10 (2 ) 65 Total equity securities $ 4,203 $ 369 $ (209 ) $ 4,363 Within the equity portfolio, the losses were primarily concentrated in financial services, emerging market equity funds and index-based funds. The unrealized losses were company and sector specific. As of December 31, 2011, we have the intent and ability to hold our equity securities with unrealized losses until recovery. As of December 31, 2011, the total fair value of our investments in the European Union ("EU") is $4.03 billion, with net unrealized capital gains of $79 million, comprised of $224 million of gross unrealized gains and $145 million of gross unrealized losses. The following table summarizes our total direct exposure related to Greece, Ireland, Italy, Portugal and Spain (collectively "GIIPS") and the EU. ($ in millions) Banking Sovereign Other corporate Total Fair value Gross unrealized losses Fair value Gross unrealized losses Fair value Gross unrealized losses Fair value Gross unrealized losses GIIPS Fixed income securities $ 23 $ (11 ) $ 2 $ $ 496 $ (37 ) $ 521 $ (48 ) Equity securities 6 6 Total 23 (11 ) 2 502 (37 ) 527 (48 ) EU non-GIIPS Fixed income securities 373 (49 ) 70 (1 ) 2,785 (34 ) 3,228 (84 ) Equity securities 7 (2 ) 270 (11 ) 277 (13 ) Total 380 (51 ) 70 (1 ) 3,055 (45 ) 3,505 (97 ) Total EU $ 403 $ (62 ) $ 72 $ (1 ) $ 3,557 $ (82 ) $ 4,032 $ (145 ) We have a comprehensive portfolio monitoring process to identify and evaluate each fixed income and equity security that may be other-than-temporarily impaired. The process includes a quarterly review of all securities to identify instances where the fair value of a security compared to its amortized cost (for fixed income securities) or cost (for equity securities) is below established thresholds. The process also includes the monitoring of other impairment indicators such as ratings, ratings downgrades and payment defaults. The securities identified, in addition to other securities for which we may have a concern, are evaluated based on facts and circumstances for inclusion on our watch-list. All investments in an unrealized loss position as of December 31, 2011 were included in our portfolio monitoring process for determining whether declines in value were other than temporary. The extent and duration of a decline in fair value for fixed income securities have become less indicative of actual credit deterioration with respect to an issue or issuer. While we continue to use declines in fair value and the length of time a security is in an unrealized loss position as indicators of potential credit deterioration, our determination of 89 Table of Contents whether a security's decline in fair value is other than temporary has placed greater emphasis on our analysis of the underlying credit and collateral and related estimates of future cash flows. The following table summarizes the fair value and gross unrealized losses of fixed income securities by type and investment grade classification as of December 31, 2011. Investment grade Below investment grade Total ($ in millions) Fair value Unrealized losses Fair value Unrealized losses Fair value Unrealized losses U.S. government and agencies $ 61 $ $ $ $ 61 $ Municipal 1,536 (155 ) 485 (101 ) 2,021 (256 ) Corporate 3,625 (305 ) 1,087 (74 ) 4,712 (379 ) Foreign government 86 (1 ) 86 (1 ) RMBS 443 (63 ) 1,112 (458 ) 1,555 (521 ) CMBS 707 (130 ) 160 (96 ) 867 (226 ) ABS 1,795 (191 ) 185 (96 ) 1,980 (287 ) Total $ 8,253 $ (845 ) $ 3,029 $ (825 ) $ 11,282 $ (1,670 ) We have experienced declines in the fair values of fixed income securities primarily due to wider credit spreads resulting from higher risk premiums since the time of initial purchase, largely due to macroeconomic conditions and credit market deterioration, including the impact of lower real estate valuations, which show signs of stabilization or recovery in certain geographic areas but remain under stress in other geographic areas. Consistent with their ratings, our portfolio monitoring process indicates that investment grade securities have a low risk of default. Securities rated below investment grade, comprising securities with a rating of Ba, B and Caa or lower, have a higher risk of default. As of December 31, 2011, 40% of our below investment grade gross unrealized losses related to Subprime RMBS. Fair values for our structured securities are obtained from third-party valuation service providers and are subject to review as disclosed in our Application of Critical Accounting Estimates. In accordance with GAAP, when fair value is less than the amortized cost of a security and we have not made the decision to sell the security and it is not more likely than not we will be required to sell the security before recovery of its amortized cost basis, we evaluate if we expect to receive cash flows sufficient to recover the entire amortized cost basis of the security. We calculate the estimated recovery value by discounting our best estimate of future cash flows at the security's original or current effective rate, as appropriate, and compare this to the amortized cost of the security. If we do not expect to receive cash flows sufficient to recover the entire amortized cost basis of the security, the credit loss component of the impairment is recorded in earnings, with the remaining amount of the unrealized loss related to other factors ("non-credit-related") recognized in other comprehensive income. The non-credit-related unrealized losses for our structured securities, including our below investment grade Subprime, are heavily influenced by risk factors other than those related to our best estimate of future cash flows. The difference between these securities' original or current effective rates and the yields implied by their fair value indicates that a higher risk premium is included in the valuation of these securities than existed at initial issue or purchase. This risk premium represents the return that a market participant requires as compensation to assume the risk associated with the uncertainties regarding the future performance of the underlying collateral. The risk premium is comprised of: default risk, which reflects the probability of default and the uncertainty related to collection of contractual principal and interest; liquidity risk, which reflects the risk associated with exiting the investment in an illiquid market, both in terms of timeliness and cost; and volatility risk, which reflects the potential valuation volatility during an investor's holding period. Other factors reflected in the risk premium include the costs associated with underwriting, monitoring and holding these types of complex securities. Certain aspects of the default risk are included in the development of our best estimate of future cash flows, as appropriate. Other aspects of the risk premium are considered to be temporary in nature and are expected to reverse over the remaining lives of the securities as future cash flows are received. Other-than-temporary impairment assessment for below investment grade Subprime RMBS As of December 31, 2011, the fair value of our below investment grade Subprime securities with gross unrealized losses totaled $586 million, a decrease of 26.4% compared to $796 million as of December 31, 2010, primarily due to sales. As of December 31, 2011, gross unrealized losses for our below investment grade Subprime portfolio totaled $334 million, an improvement of 23.7% compared to $438 million as of December 31, 2010, due to impairment write-downs, sales and principal collections, partially offset by the downgrade of certain securities to below investment grade 90 Table of Contents and lower valuations. For our below investment grade Subprime with gross unrealized gains totaling $5 million, we have recognized cumulative write-downs in earnings totaling $123 million as of December 31, 2011. The credit loss evaluation for Subprime securities with gross unrealized losses is performed in two phases. The first phase estimates the future cash flows of the entire securitization trust from which our security was issued. A critical part of this estimate involves forecasting default rates and loss severities of the residential mortgage loans that collateralize the securitization trust. The factors that affect the default rates and loss severities include, but are not limited to, historical collateral performance, collateral type, transaction vintage year, geographic concentrations, borrower credit quality, origination practices of the transaction sponsor, and practices of the mortgage loan servicers. Current loan-to-value ratios of underlying collateral are not consistently available and accordingly they are not a primary factor in our impairment evaluation. While our projections are developed internally and customized to our specific holdings, they are informed by and benchmarked against credit opinions obtained from third parties, such as industry analysts, nationally recognized credit rating agencies and an RMBS loss modeling advisory service. The default rate and loss severity forecasts result in an estimate of trust-level projected additional collateral loss. We then analyze the actual cumulative collateral losses incurred to date by the securitization trust, our projected additional collateral losses expected to be incurred and the position of the class of securities we own in the securitization trust relative to the trust's other classes to determine whether any of the collateral losses will be applied to our class. If our class has remaining credit enhancement sufficient to withstand the projected additional collateral losses, no collateral losses will be realized by our class and we expect to collect all contractual principal and interest of the security we own. Remaining credit enhancement is measured in terms of (i) subordination from other classes of securities in the trust that are contractually obligated to absorb losses before the class of security we own and (ii) the expected impact of other structural features embedded in the securitization trust beneficial to our class, such as overcollateralization and excess spread. For securities where there is insufficient remaining credit enhancement for the class of securities we own, a recovery value is calculated based on our best estimate of future cash flows specific to that security. This estimate is based on the contractual principal payments and current interest payments of the securities we own, adjusted for actual cumulative collateral losses incurred to date and the projected additional collateral losses expected to be incurred. This estimate also takes into consideration additional secondary sources of credit support, such as reliable bond insurance. For securities without secondary sources of credit support or for which the secondary sources do not fully offset the actual and projected additional collateral losses applied to them, a credit loss is recorded in earnings to the extent amortized cost exceeds recovery value. 75.3%, 20.9% and 3.8% of the fair value of our below investment grade Subprime securities with gross unrealized losses were issued with Aaa, Aa and A original ratings and capital structure classifications, respectively. As described previously, Subprime securities with higher original ratings typically have priority in receiving the principal repayments on the underlying collateral compared to those with lower original ratings. While the projected cash flow assumptions for our below investment grade Subprime securities with gross unrealized losses have deteriorated since the securities were originated, as reflected by their current credit ratings, these securities continue to retain the payment priority features that existed at the origination of the securitization trust. 91 Table of Contents The following tables show trust-level, class-level and security-specific detailed information for our below investment grade Subprime securities with gross unrealized losses that are not reliably insured, by credit rating. ($ in millions) December 31, 2011 With other-than-temporary impairments recorded in earnings Without other-than-temporary impairments recorded in earnings B Caa or lower Total Ba B Caa or lower Total Total Trust-level Actual cumulative collateral losses incurred to date (1) 14.6 % 19.1 % 18.8 % 3.8 % 6.6 % 13.2 % 8.8 % n/a Projected additional collateral losses to be incurred (2) 40.0 % 42.9 % 42.8 % 32.6 % 31.6 % 40.2 % 35.7 % n/a Class-level Average remaining credit enhancement (3) 28.7 % 19.7 % 20.2 % 46.8 % 43.9 % 46.9 % 46.0 % n/a Security-specific Number of positions 5 66 71 9 15 24 48 119 Par value $ 41 $ 728 $ 769 $ 84 $ 78 $ 132 $ 294 $ 1,063 Amortized cost $ 34 $ 469 $ 503 $ 84 $ 78 $ 132 $ 294 $ 797 Fair value $ 26 $ 301 $ 327 $ 60 $ 45 $ 67 $ 172 $ 499 Gross unrealized losses Total $ (8 ) $ (168 ) $ (176 ) $ (24 ) $ (33 ) $ (65 ) $ (122 ) $ (298 ) 12-24 months $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ Over 24 months (4) $ (8 ) $ (167 ) $ (175 ) $ (24 ) $ (33 ) $ (65 ) $ (122 ) $ (297 ) Cumulative write-downs recognized $ (7 ) $ (249 ) $ (256 ) $ $ $ $ $ (256 ) Principal payments received during the period $ 67 December 31, 2010 With other-than-temporary impairments recorded in earnings Without other-than-temporary impairments recorded in earnings B Caa or lower Total Ba B Caa or lower Total Total Trust-level Actual cumulative collateral losses incurred to date 12.0 % 16.1 % 16.0 % 13.2 % 12.5 % 12.6 % 12.7 % n/a Projected additional collateral losses to be incurred 38.2 % 43.2 % 43.0 % 46.5 % 42.7 % 40.8 % 42.1 % n/a Class-level Average remaining credit enhancement 26.0 % 22.6 % 22.8 % 72.7 % 63.6 % 50.5 % 56.7 % n/a Security-specific Number of positions 5 81 86 11 10 35 56 142 Par value $ 42 $ 952 $ 994 $ 73 $ 69 $ 265 $ 407 $ 1,401 Amortized cost $ 33 $ 650 $ 683 $ 73 $ 69 $ 265 $ 407 $ 1,090 Fair value $ 21 $ 425 $ 446 $ 62 $ 54 $ 158 $ 274 $ 720 Gross unrealized losses Total $ (12 ) $ (225 ) $ (237 ) $ (11 ) $ (15 ) $ (107 ) $ (133 ) $ (370 ) 12-24 months $ $ (9 ) $ (9 ) $ $ $ $ $ (9 ) Over 24 months (4) $ (12 ) $ (216 ) $ (228 ) $ (11 ) $ (15 ) $ (107 ) $ (133 ) $ (361 ) Cumulative write-downs recognized $ (9 ) $ (293 ) $ (302 ) $ $ $ $ $ (302 ) Principal payments received during the period $ 99 (1) Weighted average actual cumulative collateral losses incurred to date as of period end are based on the actual principal losses incurred as a percentage of the remaining principal amount of the loans in the trust. The weighting calculation is based on the par value of each security. Actual losses on the securities we hold are less than the losses on the underlying collateral as presented in this table. Actual cumulative realized principal losses on the below investment grade Subprime securities we own, as reported by the trust servicers, were $16 million as of December 31, 2011. (2) Weighted average projected additional collateral losses to be incurred as of period end are based on our projections of future losses to be incurred by the trust, taking into consideration the actual cumulative collateral losses incurred to date, as a percentage of the remaining principal amount of the loans in the trust. Our projections are developed internally and customized to our specific holdings and are informed by and benchmarked 92 Table of Contents against credit opinions obtained from third parties, such as industry analysts, nationally recognized credit rating agencies and an RMBS loss modeling advisory service. Projected additional collateral losses to be incurred are compared to average remaining credit enhancement for each security. For securities where the projected additional collateral losses exceed remaining credit enhancement, a recovery value is calculated to determine whether impairment losses should be recorded in earnings. The weighting calculation is based on the par value of each security. (3) Weighted average remaining credit enhancement as of period end is based on structural subordination and the expected impact of other structural features existing in the securitization trust beneficial to our class and reflects our projection of future principal losses that can occur as a percentage of the remaining principal amount of the loans in the trust before the class of the security we own will incur its first dollar of principal loss. The weighting calculation is based on the par value of each security. (4) As of December 31, 2011, $122 million of unrealized losses on securities with other-than-temporary impairments recognized in earnings and $104 million of unrealized losses on securities without other-than-temporary impairments recognized in earnings have been greater than or equal to 20% of those securities' amortized cost for a period of more than 24 consecutive months. As of December 31, 2010, $188 million of unrealized losses on securities with other-than-temporary impairments recognized in earnings and $108 million of unrealized losses on securities without other-than-temporary impairments recognized in earnings have been greater than or equal to 20% of those securities' amortized cost for a period of more than 24 consecutive months. The above tables include information only about below investment grade Subprime securities with gross unrealized losses that are not reliably insured as of each period presented. As such, the par value and composition of securities included can vary significantly from period to period due to changes in variables such as credit ratings, principal payments, sales, purchases and realized principal losses. As of December 31, 2011, our Subprime securities that are reliably insured include nine below investment grade Subprime securities with a total fair value of $87 million and aggregate gross unrealized losses of $36 million, all of which are rated B. These securities are insured by one bond insurer rated B that we estimate has sufficient claims paying capacity to service its obligations on these securities. The securitization trusts from which our securities were issued are currently receiving contractual payments from the bond insurer and considering the combination of expected future payments from the bond insurer and cash flows available from the underlying collateral, we expect the trust to have adequate cash flows to make all contractual payments due to the class of securities we own. As a result, our security-specific estimates of future cash flows indicate that these securities' estimated recovery values equal or exceed their amortized cost. Accordingly, no other-than-temporary impairments have been recognized on these securities. As of December 31, 2010, our Subprime securities that are reliably insured included ten below investment grade Subprime securities with a total fair value of $76 million and aggregate gross unrealized losses of $68 million. As of December 31, 2011, our below investment grade Subprime securities with gross unrealized losses that are not reliably insured and without other-than-temporary impairments recorded in earnings had incurred actual cumulative collateral losses of 8.8%. Our impairment evaluation forecasts more severe assumptions than the trusts are actually experiencing, including a projected weighted average underlying default rate of 51.9% and a projected weighted average loss severity of 69.5%, which resulted in projected additional collateral losses of 35.7%. As the average remaining credit enhancement for these securities of 46.0% exceeds the projected additional collateral losses of 35.7%, these securities have not been impaired. As of December 31, 2011, our below investment grade Subprime securities with gross unrealized losses that are not reliably insured and with other-than-temporary impairments recorded in earnings had incurred actual cumulative collateral losses of 18.8%. Our impairment evaluation forecasts more severe assumptions than the trusts are actually experiencing, including a projected weighted average underlying default rate of 56.8% and a projected weighted average loss severity of 76.5%, which resulted in projected additional collateral losses of 42.8%. As the average remaining credit enhancement for these securities of 20.2% is insufficient to withstand the projected additional collateral losses, we have recognized cumulative write-downs in earnings on the securities as reflected in the table above using our calculated recovery value at the time of impairment. The current average recovery value of these securities as a percentage of par was 67.1% and exceeded these securities' current average amortized cost as a percentage of par of 65.4%, which demonstrates our conclusion that the nature of the remaining unrealized loss on these securities is temporary and will reverse over time. The comparison indicates that recovery value exceeds amortized cost based on a comprehensive evaluation of financial, economic and capital markets assumptions developed for this reporting period. We believe the unrealized losses on our Subprime securities, including those over 24 months, result from the current risk premium on these securities, which should continue to reverse over the securities' remaining lives, as demonstrated by improved valuations since 2009, primarily in 2010. We expect to receive our estimated share of contractual principal and interest collections used to determine the securities' recovery value. As of December 31, 2011, we do not have the intent to sell and it is not more likely than not we will be required to sell these securities before the recovery of their amortized cost basis. We believe that our valuation and impairment processes are comprehensive, employ the most current views about collateral and securitization trust financial positions, and demonstrate our recorded impairments and that the remaining unrealized losses on these positions are temporary. 93 Table of Contents Net investment income The following table presents net investment income for the years ended December 31. ($ in millions) 2011 2010 2009 Fixed income securities $ 3,484 $ 3,737 $ 3,998 Equity securities 122 90 80 Mortgage loans 359 385 498 Limited partnership interests 88 40 17 Short-term investments 6 8 27 Other 95 19 (10 ) Investment income, before expense 4,154 4,279 4,610 Investment expense (183 ) (177 ) (166 ) Net investment income $ 3,971 $ 4,102 $ 4,444 Net investment income decreased 3.2% or $131 million in 2011 compared to 2010, after decreasing 7.7% or $342 million in 2010 compared to 2009. The 2011 decline was primarily due to lower average investment balances due to decreased Allstate Financial contractholder funds, partially offset by higher yields. The higher yields are primarily attributable to yield optimization actions including the termination of interest rate swaps during the first quarter of 2011, higher distributions from cost method limited partnerships and dividend income from equity securities. The 2010 decrease was primarily due to lower interest rates, risk reduction actions related to municipal bonds and commercial real estate, duration shortening actions taken to protect the portfolio from rising interest rates and lower average investment balances. Realized capital gains and losses The following table presents the components of realized capital gains and losses and the related tax effect for the years ended December 31. ($ in millions) 2011 2010 2009 Impairment write-downs $ (496 ) $ (797 ) $ (1,562 ) Change in intent write-downs (100 ) (204 ) (357 ) Net other-than-temporary impairment losses recognized in earnings (596 ) (1,001 ) (1,919 ) Sales 1,336 686 1,272 Valuation of derivative instruments (291 ) (427 ) 367 Settlements of derivative instruments (105 ) (174 ) (162 ) EMA limited partnership income 159 89 (141 ) Realized capital gains and losses, pre-tax 503 (827 ) (583 ) Income tax (expense) benefit (179 ) 290 (45 ) Realized capital gains and losses, after-tax $ 324 $ (537 ) $ (628 ) Impairment write-downs for the years ended December 31 are presented in the following table. ($ in millions) 2011 2010 2009 Fixed income securities $ (302 ) $ (626 ) $ (886 ) Equity securities (131 ) (57 ) (237 ) Mortgage loans (37 ) (65 ) (97 ) Limited partnership interests (6 ) (46 ) (308 ) Other investments (20 ) (3 ) (34 ) Impairment write-downs $ (496 ) $ (797 ) $ (1,562 ) Impairment write-downs in 2011 were primarily driven by RMBS, which experienced deterioration in expected cash flows; investments with commercial real estate exposure, including CMBS, mortgage loans and municipal bonds, which were impacted by lower real estate valuations or experienced deterioration in expected cash flows; and corporate fixed income securities impacted by issuer specific circumstances. Impairment write-downs on below investment grade RMBS and CMBS in 2011 were $169 million and $55 million, respectively. Equity securities were also written down due to the length of time and extent to which fair value was below cost, considering our assessment of the financial condition and near-term and long-term prospects of the issuer, including relevant industry conditions and trends. 94 Table of Contents Impairment write-downs in 2010 were primarily driven by RMBS, which experienced deterioration in expected cash flows; investments with commercial real estate exposure, including CMBS, mortgage loans, limited partnership interests and certain housing related municipal bonds, which were impacted by lower real estate valuations or experienced deterioration in expected cash flows; and privately placed corporate bonds and municipal bonds impacted by issuer specific circumstances. Impairment write-downs on below investment grade RMBS, CMBS and ABS in 2010 were $332 million, $118 million and $29 million, respectively. Change in intent write-downs for the years ended December 31 are presented in the following table. ($ in millions) 2011 2010 2009 Fixed income securities $ (92 ) $ (198 ) $ (318 ) Equity securities (8 ) (27 ) Mortgage loans (6 ) (6 ) Other investments (6 ) Change in intent write-downs $ (100 ) $ (204 ) $ (357 ) The change in intent write-downs in 2011 were primarily a result of ongoing comprehensive reviews of our portfolios resulting in write-downs of individually identified investments, primarily lower yielding, floating rate RMBS and municipal bonds, and equity securities. The change in intent write-downs in 2010 were primarily a result of ongoing comprehensive reviews of our portfolios resulting in write-downs of individually identified investments, primarily municipal bonds and RMBS. Sales generated $1.34 billion of net realized gains in 2011 primarily due to $1.11 billion of net gains on sales of corporate, foreign government, U.S. government, ABS, U.S. Agency and municipal fixed income securities and $202 million of net gains on sales of equity securities. During the second half of 2011, interest rates were at historical lows and we capitalized on valuation gains on fixed income securities through $8.49 billion in sales generating $750 million of realized capital gains. Net realized gains from sales of $686 million in 2010 were primarily due to $595 million of net gains on sales of corporate, U.S. government, foreign government and municipal fixed income securities and $210 million of net gains on sales of equity securities, partially offset by $139 million of net losses on sales of CMBS and ABS. Valuation and settlements of derivative instruments net realized capital losses totaling $396 million in 2011 included $291 million of losses on the valuation of derivative instruments and $105 million of losses on the settlement of derivative instruments. The net realized capital losses on derivative instruments in 2011 primarily included losses on interest rate risk management due to decreases in interest rates. In 2010, net realized capital losses on the valuation and settlement of derivative instruments totaled $601 million. As a component of our approach to managing interest rate risk, realized gains and losses on certain derivative instruments are most appropriately considered in conjunction with the unrealized gains and losses on the fixed income portfolio. This approach mitigates the impacts of general interest rate changes to our overall financial condition. MARKET RISK Market risk is the risk that we will incur losses due to adverse changes in interest rates, credit spreads, equity prices or currency exchange rates. Adverse changes to these rates and prices may occur due to changes in fiscal policy, the economic climate, the liquidity of a market or market segment, insolvency or financial distress of key market makers or participants or changes in market perceptions of credit worthiness and/or risk tolerance. Our primary market risk exposures are to changes in interest rates, credit spreads and equity prices. The active management of market risk is integral to our results of operations. We may use the following approaches to manage exposure to market risk within defined tolerance ranges: 1) rebalancing existing asset or liability portfolios, 2) changing the character of investments purchased in the future and 3) using derivative instruments to modify the market risk characteristics of existing assets and liabilities or assets expected to be purchased. For a more detailed discussion of our use of derivative financial instruments, see Note 7 of the consolidated financial statements. Overview In formulating and implementing guidelines for investing funds, we seek to earn returns that enhance our ability to offer competitive rates and prices to customers while contributing to attractive and stable profits and long-term capital growth. Accordingly, our investment decisions and objectives are a function of the underlying risks and product profiles of each business. Investment policies define the overall framework for managing market and other investment risks, including accountability and controls over risk management activities. Subsidiaries that conduct investment activities follow 95 Table of Contents policies that have been approved by their respective boards of directors. These investment policies specify the investment limits and strategies that are appropriate given the liquidity, surplus, product profile and regulatory requirements of the subsidiary. Executive oversight of investment activities is conducted primarily through subsidiaries' boards of directors and investment committees. For Allstate Financial, its asset-liability management ("ALM") policies further define the overall framework for managing market and investment risks. ALM focuses on strategies to enhance yields, mitigate market risks and optimize capital to improve profitability and returns for Allstate Financial. Allstate Financial ALM activities follow asset-liability policies that have been approved by their respective boards of directors. These ALM policies specify limits, ranges and/or targets for investments that best meet Allstate Financial's business objectives in light of its product liabilities. We manage our exposure to market risk through the use of asset allocation, duration, simulation, and as appropriate, through the use of stress tests. We have asset allocation limits that place restrictions on the total funds that may be invested within an asset class. Comprehensive day-to-day management of market risk within defined tolerance ranges occurs as portfolio managers buy and sell within their respective markets based upon the acceptable boundaries established by investment policies. For Allstate Financial, this day-to-day management is integrated with and informed by the activities of the ALM organization. This integration is intended to result in a prudent, methodical and effective adjudication of market risk and return, conditioned by the unique demands and dynamics of Allstate Financial's product liabilities and supported by the continuous application of advanced risk technology and analytics. Although we apply a similar overall philosophy to market risk, the underlying business frameworks and the accounting and regulatory environments differ considerably between the Property-Liability and Allstate Financial businesses affecting investment decisions and risk parameters. Interest rate risk is the risk that we will incur a loss due to adverse changes in interest rates relative to the interest rate characteristics of our interest bearing assets and liabilities. This risk arises from many of our primary activities, as we invest substantial funds in interest-sensitive assets and issue interest-sensitive liabilities. Interest rate risk includes risks related to changes in U.S. Treasury yields and other key risk-free reference yields. We manage the interest rate risk in our assets relative to the interest rate risk in our liabilities. One of the measures used to quantify this exposure is duration. Duration measures the price sensitivity of the assets and liabilities to changes in interest rates. For example, if interest rates increase 100 basis points, the fair value of an asset with a duration of 5 is expected to decrease in value by 5%. To calculate the duration gap between assets and liabilities, we project asset and liability cash flows and calculate their net present value using a risk-free market interest rate adjusted for credit quality, sector attributes, liquidity and other specific risks. Duration is calculated by revaluing these cash flows at alternative interest rates and determining the percentage change in aggregate fair value. The cash flows used in this calculation include the expected maturity and repricing characteristics of our derivative financial instruments, all other financial instruments, and certain other items including unearned premiums, property-liability insurance claims and claims expense reserves, annuity liabilities and other interest-sensitive liabilities. The projections include assumptions (based upon historical market experience and our experience) that reflect the effect of changing interest rates on the prepayment, lapse, leverage and/or option features of instruments, where applicable. The preceding assumptions relate primarily to mortgage-backed securities, municipal housing bonds, callable municipal and corporate obligations, and fixed rate single and flexible premium deferred annuities. Additionally, the calculations include assumptions regarding the renewal of property-liability policies. As of December 31, 2011, the difference between our asset and liability duration was a (0.62) gap, compared to a (0.65) gap as of December 31, 2010. A negative duration gap indicates that the fair value of our liabilities is more sensitive to interest rate movements than the fair value of our assets. The Property-Liability segment generally maintains a positive duration gap between its assets and liabilities due to the relatively short duration of auto and homeowners claims, which are its primary liabilities. The Allstate Financial segment may have a positive or negative duration gap, as the duration of its assets and liabilities vary with its product mix and investing activity. As of December 31, 2011, Property-Liability had a positive duration gap while Allstate Financial had a negative duration gap. In the management of investments supporting the Property-Liability business, we adhere to an objective of emphasizing safety of principal and consistency of income within a total return framework. This approach is designed to ensure our financial strength and stability for paying claims, while maximizing economic value and surplus growth. For the Allstate Financial business, we seek to invest premiums, contract charges and deposits to generate future cash flows that will fund future claims, benefits and expenses, and that will earn stable spreads across a wide variety of interest rate and economic scenarios. To achieve this objective and limit interest rate risk for Allstate Financial, we adhere to a philosophy of managing the duration of assets and related liabilities within predetermined tolerance levels. 96 Table of Contents This philosophy is executed using duration targets for fixed income investments in addition to interest rate swaps, futures, forwards, caps, floors and swaptions to reduce the interest rate risk resulting from mismatches between existing assets and liabilities, and financial futures and other derivative instruments to hedge the interest rate risk of anticipated purchases and sales of investments and product sales to customers. Based upon the information and assumptions used in the duration calculation, and interest rates in effect as of December 31, 2011, we estimate that a 100 basis point immediate, parallel increase in interest rates ("rate shock") would decrease the net fair value of the assets and liabilities by $127 million, compared to a decrease of $36 million as of December 31, 2010, reflecting year to year changes in duration. Reflected in the duration calculation are the effects of a program that uses swaps, eurodollar futures, options on Treasury futures and interest rate swaptions to manage interest rate risk. In calculating the impact of a 100 basis point increase on the value of the derivatives, we have assumed interest rate volatility remains constant. Based on the swaps, eurodollar futures, options on Treasury futures and interest rate swaptions in place as of December 31, 2011, we would recognize realized capital losses totaling $14 million in the event of a 100 basis point immediate, parallel interest rate increase and $15 million in realized capital gains in the event of a 100 basis point immediate, parallel interest rate decrease on these derivatives. The selection of a 100 basis point immediate, parallel change in interest rates should not be construed as our prediction of future market events, but only as an illustration of the potential effect of such an event. There are $10.49 billion of assets supporting life insurance products such as traditional and interest-sensitive life that are not financial instruments. These assets and the associated liabilities have not been included in the above estimate. The $10.49 billion of assets excluded from the calculation has increased from $9.60 billion as of December 31, 2010, due to an increase in interest-sensitive life contractholder funds and improved fixed income valuations as a result of declining risk-free interest rates and tightening of credit spreads in certain sectors. Based on assumptions described above, in the event of a 100 basis point immediate increase in interest rates, the assets supporting life insurance products would decrease in value by $660 million, compared to a decrease of $549 million as of December 31, 2010. To the extent that conditions differ from the assumptions we used in these calculations, duration and rate shock measures could be significantly impacted. Additionally, our calculations assume that the current relationship between short-term and long-term interest rates (the term structure of interest rates) will remain constant over time. As a result, these calculations may not fully capture the effect of non-parallel changes in the term structure of interest rates and/or large changes in interest rates. We pledge and receive collateral on certain types of derivative contracts. For over-the-counter ("OTC") derivative transactions, master netting agreements are used. These agreements allow us to net payments due for transactions covered by the agreements and, when applicable, we are required to post collateral. As of December 31, 2011, we held $64 million of cash and securities pledged by counterparties as collateral for OTC instruments, and we pledged $82 million of cash and securities as collateral to counterparties. We performed a sensitivity analysis on OTC derivative collateral by assuming a hypothetical 100 basis point decline in interest rates. The analysis indicated that we would have to post an estimated $2 million in additional collateral. The selection of these hypothetical scenarios should not be construed as our prediction of future events, but only as an illustration of the estimated potential effect of such events. We also actively manage our counterparty credit risk exposure by monitoring the level of collateral posted by our counterparties with respect to our receivable positions. Credit spread risk is the risk that we will incur a loss due to adverse changes in credit spreads ("spreads"). This risk arises from many of our primary activities, as we invest substantial funds in spread-sensitive fixed income assets. We manage the spread risk in our assets. One of the measures used to quantify this exposure is spread duration. Spread duration measures the price sensitivity of the assets to changes in spreads. For example, if spreads increase 100 basis points, the fair value of an asset exhibiting a spread duration of 5 is expected to decrease in value by 5%. Spread duration is calculated similarly to interest rate duration. As of December 31, 2011, the spread duration of Property-Liability assets was 4.77, compared to 4.45 as of December 31, 2010, and the spread duration of Allstate Financial assets was 5.58, compared to 4.97 as of December 31, 2010. Based upon the information and assumptions we use in this spread duration calculation, and spreads in effect as of December 31, 2011, we estimate that a 100 basis point immediate, parallel increase in spreads across all asset classes, industry sectors and credit ratings ("spread shock") would decrease the net fair value of the assets by $4.10 billion, compared to $3.61 billion as of December 31, 2010. Reflected in the duration calculation are the effects of our risk mitigation actions that use CDS to manage spread risk. The selection of a 100 basis point immediate parallel change in spreads should not be construed as our prediction of future market events, but only as an illustration of the potential effect of such an event. 97 Table of Contents Equity price risk is the risk that we will incur losses due to adverse changes in the general levels of the equity markets. As of December 31, 2011, we held $4.26 billion in common stocks and exchange traded and mutual funds and $4.82 billion in other securities with equity risk (including primarily limited partnership interests, non-redeemable preferred securities and equity-linked notes), compared to $4.67 billion and $4.88 billion, respectively, as of December 31, 2010. 95.7% and 63.3% of these totals, respectively, represented assets of the Property-Liability operations as of December 31, 2011, compared to 95.5% and 63.1%, respectively, as of December 31, 2010. As of December 31, 2011, our portfolio of common stocks and other securities with equity risk had a cash market portfolio beta of 0.72, compared to a beta of 0.74 as of December 31, 2010. Beta represents a widely used methodology to describe, quantitatively, an investment's market risk characteristics relative to an index such as the S&P 500. Based on the beta analysis, we estimate that if the S&P 500 increases or decreases by 10%, the fair value of our equity investments will increase or decrease by 7.2%, respectively. Based upon the information and assumptions we used to calculate beta as of December 31, 2011, we estimate that an immediate decrease in the S&P 500 of 10% would decrease the net fair value of our equity investments identified above by $652 million, compared to $695 million as of December 31, 2010, and an immediate increase in the S&P 500 of 10% would increase the net fair value by $654 million compared to $708 million as of December 31, 2010. In calculating the impact of a 10% S&P index perturbation on the value of the puts, we have assumed index volatility remains constant. The selection of a 10% immediate decrease or increase in the S&P 500 should not be construed as our prediction of future market events, but only as an illustration of the potential effect of such an event. The beta of our common stocks and other securities with equity risk was determined by calculating the change in the fair value of the portfolio resulting from stressing the equity market up and down 10%. The illustrations noted above may not reflect our actual experience if the future composition of the portfolio (hence its beta) and correlation relationships differ from the historical relationships. As of December 31, 2011 and 2010, we had separate accounts assets related to variable annuity and variable life contracts with account values totaling $6.98 billion and $8.68 billion, respectively. Equity risk exists for contract charges based on separate account balances and guarantees for death and/or income benefits provided by our variable products. In 2006, we disposed of substantially all of the variable annuity business through reinsurance agreements with The Prudential Insurance Company of America, a subsidiary of Prudential Financial Inc. and therefore mitigated this aspect of our risk. Equity risk for our variable life business relates to contract charges and policyholder benefits. Total variable life contract charges for 2011 and 2010 were $76 million and $80 million, respectively. Separate account liabilities related to variable life contracts were $716 million and $775 million in December 31, 2011 and 2010, respectively. As of December 31, 2011 and 2010 we had $3.86 billion and $4.70 billion, respectively, in equity-indexed annuity liabilities that provide customers with interest crediting rates based on the performance of the S&P 500. We hedge the majority of the risk associated with these liabilities using equity-indexed options and futures, interest rate swaps, and eurodollar futures, maintaining risk within specified value-at-risk limits. Foreign currency exchange rate risk is the risk that we will incur economic losses due to adverse changes in foreign currency exchange rates. This risk primarily arises from our foreign equity investments, including real estate funds and private equity funds, and our Canadian and Northern Ireland operations. We also have certain fixed income securities that are denominated in foreign currencies; however, derivatives are used to hedge the foreign currency risk of approximately 38% of the fixed income securities. As of December 31, 2011, we had $1.24 billion in foreign currency denominated equity investments, $786 million net investment in our foreign subsidiaries, and $363 million in unhedged non-dollar pay fixed income securities. These amounts were $1.70 billion, $773 million, and $91 million, respectively, as of December 31, 2010. 90.0% of the foreign currency exposure is in the Property-Liability business. Based upon the information and assumptions used as of December 31, 2011, we estimate that a 10% immediate unfavorable change in each of the foreign currency exchange rates to which we are exposed would decrease the value of our foreign currency denominated instruments by $225 million, compared with an estimated $257 million decrease as of December 31, 2010. The selection of a 10% immediate decrease in all currency exchange rates should not be construed as our prediction of future market events, but only as an illustration of the potential effect of such an event. Our currency exposure is diversified across 33 currencies as of December 31, 2011, compared to 32 currencies as of December 31, 2010. Our largest individual foreign currency exposures as of December 31, 2011 were to the Canadian dollar (39.6%) and the Japanese Yen (10.4%). The largest individual foreign currency exposures as of December 31, 98 Table of Contents 2010 were to the Canadian dollar (37.0%) and the British Pound (13.3%). Our primary regional exposure is to Canada, with 39.6% as of December 31, 2011, compared to Canada, with 37.0% as of December 31, 2010. The modeling technique we use to report our currency exposure does not take into account correlation among foreign currency exchange rates. Even though we believe it is very unlikely that all of the foreign currency exchange rates that we are exposed to would simultaneously decrease by 10%, we nonetheless stress test our portfolio under this and other hypothetical extreme adverse market scenarios. Our actual experience may differ from these results because of assumptions we have used or because significant liquidity and market events could occur that we did not foresee. PENSION PLANS We have defined benefit pension plans, which cover most full-time and certain part-time employees and employee-agents. See Note 17 of the consolidated financial statements for a complete discussion of these plans and their effect on the consolidated financial statements. The pension and other postretirement plans may be amended or terminated at any time. Any revisions could result in significant changes to our obligations and our obligation to fund the plans. We report unrecognized pension and other postretirement benefit cost in the Consolidated Statements of Financial Position as a component of accumulated other comprehensive income in shareholders' equity. It represents differences between the fair value of plan assets and the projected benefit obligation for pension plans and the accumulated postretirement benefit obligation for other postretirement plans that have not yet been recognized as a component of net periodic cost. The measurement of the unrecognized pension and other postretirement benefit cost can vary based upon the fluctuations in the fair value of the plan assets and the actuarial assumptions used for the plans as discussed below. The unrecognized pension and other postretirement benefit cost as of December 31, 2011 was $1.43 billion, an increase of $239 million from $1.19 billion as of December 31, 2010. The increase was the result of a lower discount rate used to value the pension and postretirement benefit obligations along with asset returns that were less than expected. The market-related value component of expected returns recognizes plan losses and gains on equity securities over a five-year period, which we believe is consistent with the long-term nature of pension obligations. As a result, the effect of changes in fair value of equity securities on our net periodic pension cost may be experienced in periods subsequent to those in which the fluctuations actually occur. Net periodic pension cost in 2012 is estimated to be $270 million based on current assumptions, including settlement charges. This represents a decrease compared to $304 million in 2011 due to an increase in the market-related value of assets and a decrease in anticipated settlement charges. Net periodic pension cost decreased in 2011 compared to $345 million in 2010 primarily due to an increase in the market-related value of assets. Net periodic pension cost increased in 2010 due to the effect of equity losses during the 2008 fiscal year and the decrease in discount rates experienced at the end of 2009. In 2011 and 2010, net pension cost included non-cash settlement charges primarily resulting from lump sum distributions made to agents. Settlement charges also occurred during 2011, 2010 and 2009 related to the Supplemental Retirement Income Plan as a result of lump sum payments made from the plan. Settlement charges are likely to continue for some period in the future as we settle our remaining agent pension obligations by making lump sum distributions to agents. Amounts recorded for pension cost and accumulated other comprehensive income are significantly affected by fluctuations in the returns on plan assets and the amortization of unrecognized actuarial gains and losses. Plan assets sustained net losses in prior periods primarily due to declines in equity and credit markets. These asset losses, combined with all other unrecognized actuarial gains and losses, resulted in amortization of net actuarial loss (and additional net periodic pension cost) of $153 million in 2011 and $160 million in 2010. We anticipate that the unrealized loss for our pension plans will exceed 10% of the greater of the projected benefit obligations or the market-related value of assets in 2012 and into the foreseeable future, resulting in additional amortization and net periodic pension cost. Amounts recorded for net periodic pension cost and accumulated other comprehensive income are also significantly affected by changes in the assumptions used to determine the weighted average discount rate and the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets. The weighted average discount rate is based on rates at which expected pension benefits attributable to past employee service could effectively be settled on a present value basis at the measurement date. We develop the assumed weighted average discount rate by utilizing the weighted average yield of a theoretical dedicated portfolio derived from non-callable bonds and bonds with a make-whole provision available in the Barclays corporate bond universe having ratings of at least "AA" by S&P or at least "Aa" by Moody's on the measurement date with cash flows that match expected plan benefit requirements. Significant changes in discount rates, such as those caused by changes in the credit spreads, yield curve, the mix of bonds available in the market, the duration of selected bonds and expected benefit payments, may result in volatility in pension cost and accumulated other comprehensive income. 99 Table of Contents Holding other assumptions constant, a hypothetical decrease of 100 basis points in the weighted average discount rate would result in an increase of $52 million in net periodic pension cost and a $427 million increase in the unrecognized pension and other postretirement benefit cost liability of our pension plans recorded as accumulated other comprehensive income as of December 31, 2011, compared to an increase of $43 million in net periodic pension cost and a $392 million increase in the unrecognized pension and other postretirement benefit cost liability as of December 31, 2010. A hypothetical increase of 100 basis points in the weighted average discount rate would decrease net periodic pension cost by $46 million and would decrease the unrecognized pension and other postretirement benefit cost liability of our pension plans recorded as accumulated other comprehensive income by $360 million as of December 31, 2011, compared to a decrease in net periodic pension cost of $38 million and a $331 million decrease in the unrecognized pension and other postretirement benefit cost liability of our pension plans recorded as accumulated other comprehensive income as of December 31, 2010. This non-symmetrical range results from the non-linear relationship between discount rates and pension obligations, and changes in the amortization of unrealized net actuarial gains and losses. The expected long-term rate of return on plan assets reflects the average rate of earnings expected on plan assets. While this rate reflects long-term assumptions and is consistent with long-term historical returns, sustained changes in the market or changes in the mix of plan assets may lead to revisions in the assumed long-term rate of return on plan assets that may result in variability of pension cost. Differences between the actual return on plan assets and the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets are a component of unrecognized gains or losses, which may be amortized as a component of net actuarial gains and losses and recorded in accumulated other comprehensive income. As a result, the effect of changes in fair value on our pension cost may be experienced in results of operations in periods subsequent to those in which the fluctuations actually occur. Holding other assumptions constant, a hypothetical decrease of 100 basis points in the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets would result in an increase of $47 million in pension cost as of December 31, 2011, compared to $44 million as of December 31, 2010. A hypothetical increase of 100 basis points in the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets would result in a decrease in net periodic pension cost of $47 million as of December 31, 2011, compared to $44 million as of December 31, 2010. We target funding levels that do not restrict the payment of plan benefits in our domestic plans and were within our targeted range as of December 31, 2011. In 2011, we contributed $264 million to our pension plans. We expect to contribute $417 million for the 2012 fiscal year to maintain the plans' funded status. This estimate could change significantly following either a dramatic improvement or decline in investment markets. Other post employment benefits In 2010, the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act was signed into law. One aspect of this legislation is the introduction of an excise tax, effective in 2018, on "high cost" plans. The liabilities as of December 31, 2011 for the postretirement medical plans include an estimate of this additional liability, which amounts to $3 million. GOODWILL Goodwill represents the excess of amounts paid for acquiring businesses over the fair value of the net assets acquired. The goodwill balances were $824 million and $418 million as of December 31, 2011 and $456 million and $418 million as of December 31, 2010 for the Allstate Protection segment and the Allstate Financial segment, respectively. The increase in 2011 relates to the acquisition of Esurance and Answer Financial. Our reporting units are equivalent to our reporting segments, Allstate Protection and Allstate Financial. Goodwill is allocated to reporting units based on which unit is expected to benefit from the synergies of the business combination. Goodwill is not amortized but is tested for impairment at least annually. We perform our annual goodwill impairment testing during the fourth quarter of each year based upon data as of the close of the third quarter. We also review goodwill for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances, such as deteriorating or adverse market conditions, indicate that it is more likely than not that the carrying amount of goodwill may exceed its implied fair value. Impairment testing requires the use of estimates and judgments. For purposes of goodwill impairment testing, if the carrying value of a reporting unit exceeds its estimated fair value, the second step of the goodwill test is required. In such instances, the implied fair value of the goodwill is determined in the same manner as the amount of goodwill that would be determined in a business acquisition. The excess of the carrying value of goodwill over the implied fair value of goodwill would be recognized as an impairment and recorded as a charge against net income. To estimate the fair value of our reporting units for our annual impairment test as of September 30, 2011, we utilized a combination of widely accepted valuation techniques including a stock price and market capitalization analysis, 100 Table of Contents discounted cash flow calculations and peer company price to earnings multiples analysis. The analyses were weighted based on management's judgment of their relevance given current facts and circumstances. The stock price and market capitalization analysis takes into consideration the quoted market price of our outstanding common stock and includes a control premium, derived from historical insurance industry acquisition activity, in determining the estimated fair value of the consolidated entity before allocating that fair value to individual reporting units. The discounted cash flow analysis utilizes long term assumptions for revenue growth, capital growth, earnings projections including those used in our strategic plan, and an appropriate discount rate. The peer company price to earnings multiples analysis takes into consideration the price earnings multiples of peer companies for each reporting unit and estimated income from our strategic plan. We apply significant judgment when determining the fair value of our reporting units and when assessing the relationship of market capitalization to the estimated fair value of our reporting units. The valuation analyses described above are subject to critical judgments and assumptions and may be potentially sensitive to variability. Estimates of fair value are inherently uncertain and represent management's reasonable expectation regarding future developments. These estimates and the judgments and assumptions utilized may differ from future actual results. Declines in the estimated fair value of our reporting units could result in goodwill impairments in future periods which may be material to our results of operations but not our financial position. Goodwill impairment evaluations indicated no impairment as of December 31, 2011 and no reporting unit was at risk of having its carrying value including goodwill exceed its fair value. DEFERRED TAXES As of December 31, 2011, we had a net deferred tax asset of $520 million. Included in the deferred tax asset was $99 million, net of valuation allowance, for net operating loss carryforwards obtained in the acquisition of Esurance and Answer Financial. The total deferred tax valuation allowance was $67 million as of December 31, 2011 compared to $6 million as of December 31, 2010. The valuation allowance increased primarily due to the acquisition of Answer Financial. The valuation allowance relates to the portion of Answer Financial's net operating loss carryforwards that, due to limitations contained in the Internal Revenue Code, are expected to expire prior to their utilization. We evaluate whether a valuation allowance for our deferred tax assets is required each reporting period. A valuation allowance is established if, based on the weight of available evidence, it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred income tax asset will not be realized. In determining whether a valuation allowance is needed, all available evidence is considered. This includes the potential for capital and ordinary loss carryback, future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences, tax planning strategies that we may employ to avoid a tax benefit from expiring unused and future taxable income exclusive of reversing temporary differences. With respect to our evaluation of the need for a valuation allowance related to the deferred tax asset on capital losses that have been realized but have not yet been recognized for tax purposes, we utilize prudent and feasible tax planning strategies that optimize the ability to carry back capital losses as well as the ability to offset future capital losses with unrealized capital gains that could be recognized for tax purposes. We have remaining capital loss carryback capacity of $266 million, $37 million and $329 million from 2009, 2010 and 2011, respectively. With respect to our evaluation of the need for a valuation allowance related to the deferred tax asset on unrealized capital losses on fixed income and equity securities, our tax planning strategies first consider the availability of unrealized capital gains to offset future capital losses and then we rely on our assertion that we have the intent and ability to hold certain securities with unrealized losses to recovery. As a result, the unrealized losses on these securities would not be expected to materialize and no valuation allowance on the associated deferred tax asset is needed. CAPITAL RESOURCES AND LIQUIDITY 2011 HIGHLIGHTS Shareholders' equity as of December 31, 2011 was $18.67 billion, a decrease of 1.8% from $19.02 billion as of December 31, 2010. On January 3, 2011, April 1, 2011, July 1, 2011 and October 3, 2011, we paid a quarterly shareholder dividend of $0.20, $0.21, $0.21 and $0.21, respectively. On November 8, 2011, we declared a quarterly shareholder dividend of $0.21 payable on January 3, 2012. On February 21, 2012, we declared a quarterly shareholder dividend of $0.22 payable on April 2, 2012. In September 2011, we completed our $1.00 billion share repurchase program that commenced in November 2010. In November 2011, we commenced a $1.00 billion share repurchase program that is expected to be completed by March 31, 2013. As of December 31, 2011, this program had $894 million remaining. 101 Table of Contents CAPITAL RESOURCES AND LIQUIDITY Capital resources consist of shareholders' equity and debt, representing funds deployed or available to be deployed to support business operations or for general corporate purposes. The following table summarizes our capital resources as of December 31. ($ in millions) 2011 2010 2009 Common stock, retained income and other shareholders' equity items $ 18,681 $ 19,200 $ 18,798 Accumulated other comprehensive loss (7 ) (184 ) (2,106 ) Total shareholders' equity 18,674 19,016 16,692 Debt 5,908 5,908 5,910 Total capital resources $ 24,582 $ 24,924 $ 22,602 Ratio of debt to shareholders' equity 31.6% 31.1% 35.4% Ratio of debt to capital resources 24.0% 23.7% 26.1% Shareholders' equity decreased in 2011, primarily due to share repurchases and dividends paid to shareholders, partially offset by net income and increased unrealized net capital gains on investments. Shareholders' equity increased in 2010, primarily due to unrealized net capital gains on investments and net income, partially offset by dividends paid to shareholders and share repurchases. Debt The debt balance did not change during 2011 and decreased $2 million in 2010. On January 11, 2012, we issued $500 million of 5.20% Senior Notes due 2042, utilizing the registration statement filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on May 8, 2009. The proceeds of this issuance will be used for general corporate purposes, including the repayment of $350 million of 6.125% Senior Notes maturing on February 15, 2012. The next debt maturity is on June 15, 2013 when $250 million of 7.50% Debentures are due. For further information on outstanding debt, see Note 12 of the consolidated financial statements. As of December 31, 2011 and 2010, there were no outstanding commercial paper borrowings. Share repurchases In September 2011, we completed our $1.00 billion share repurchase program that we commenced in November 2010. In November 2011, we commenced a $1.00 billion share repurchase program that is expected to be completed by March 31, 2013. As of December 31, 2011, this program had $894 million remaining. Since 1995, we have acquired 496 million shares of our common stock at a cost of $20.20 billion, primarily as part of various stock repurchase programs. We have reissued 99 million shares since 1995, primarily associated with our equity incentive plans, the 1999 acquisition of American Heritage Life Investment Corporation and the 2001 redemption of certain mandatorily redeemable preferred securities. Since 1995, total shares outstanding has decreased by 395 million shares or 44.1%, primarily due to our repurchase programs. On November 8, 2011, we announced that we may issue debt or preferred stock to fund the existing $1.00 billion share repurchase program. Financial ratings and strength The following table summarizes our debt, commercial paper and insurance financial strength ratings as of December 31, 2011. Moody's Standard & Poor's A.M. Best The Allstate Corporation (senior long-term debt) A3 A- a- The Allstate Corporation (commercial paper) P-2 A-2 AMB-1 Allstate Insurance Company (insurance financial strength) Aa3 AA- A+ Allstate Life Insurance Company (insurance financial strength) A1 A+ A+ Our ratings are influenced by many factors including our operating and financial performance, asset quality, liquidity, asset/liability management, overall portfolio mix, financial leverage (i.e., debt), exposure to risks such as catastrophes and the current level of operating leverage. On November 8, 2011, Moody's affirmed The Allstate Corporation's debt and commercial paper ratings of A3 and P-2, respectively, AIC's financial strength rating of Aa3 and Allstate Life Insurance Company's ("ALIC's") financial strength rating of A1. The outlook for all Moody's ratings was revised to negative from stable. On November 2, 2011, S&P affirmed The Allstate Corporation's debt and commercial paper ratings of A- and A-2, respectively, AIC's financial 102 Table of Contents strength rating of AA- and ALIC's financial strength rating of A+. The outlook for all S&P ratings was revised to negative from stable. On January 26, 2012, A.M. Best affirmed The Allstate Corporation's debt and commercial paper ratings of a- and AMB-1, respectively, and our insurance entities financial strength ratings of A+ for AIC and ALIC. The outlook for AIC is stable and ALIC was revised to stable from negative. A.M. Best also gives our legal entities that are fully reinsured the financial strength rating of the assuming company. We have distinct and separately capitalized groups of subsidiaries licensed to sell property and casualty insurance in New Jersey and Florida that maintain separate group ratings. The ratings of these groups are influenced by the risks that relate specifically to each group. Many mortgage companies require property owners to have insurance from an insurance carrier with a secure financial strength rating from an accredited rating agency. Allstate New Jersey Insurance Company, which writes auto and homeowners insurance, is rated A- by A.M. Best. The outlook for this rating is stable. Allstate New Jersey Insurance Company also has a Financial Stability Rating of A" from Demotech, which was affirmed on November 16, 2011. Castle Key Insurance Company, which underwrites personal lines property insurance in Florida, is rated B- by A.M. Best. The outlook for the rating is negative. Castle Key Insurance Company also has a Financial Stability Rating of A' from Demotech, which was affirmed on November 16, 2011. ALIC, AIC and The Allstate Corporation are party to the Amended and Restated Intercompany Liquidity Agreement ("Liquidity Agreement") which allows for short-term advances of funds to be made between parties for liquidity and other general corporate purposes. The Liquidity Agreement does not establish a commitment to advance funds on the part of any party. ALIC and AIC each serve as a lender and borrower and the Corporation serves only as a lender. AIC also has a capital support agreement with ALIC. Under the capital support agreement, AIC is committed to provide capital to ALIC to maintain an adequate capital level. The maximum amount of potential funding under each of these agreements is $1.00 billion. In addition to the Liquidity Agreement, the Corporation also has an intercompany loan agreement with certain of its subsidiaries, which include, but are not limited to, AIC and ALIC. The amount of intercompany loans available to the Corporation's subsidiaries is at the discretion of the Corporation. The maximum amount of loans the Corporation will have outstanding to all its eligible subsidiaries at any given point in time is limited to $1.00 billion. The Corporation may use commercial paper borrowings, bank lines of credit and securities lending to fund intercompany borrowings. Allstate's domestic property-liability and life insurance subsidiaries prepare their statutory-basis financial statements in conformity with accounting practices prescribed or permitted by the insurance department of the applicable state of domicile. Statutory surplus is a measure that is often used as a basis for determining dividend paying capacity, operating leverage and premium growth capacity, and it is also reviewed by rating agencies in determining their ratings. As of December 31, 2011, AIC's statutory surplus is approximately $15.13 billion compared to $15.38 billion as of December 31, 2010. These amounts include ALIC's statutory surplus of approximately $3.46 billion as of December 31, 2011, compared to $3.34 billion as of December 31, 2010. The ratio of net premiums written to statutory surplus is a common measure of operating leverage used in the property-casualty insurance industry and serves as an indicator of a company's premium growth capacity. Ratios in excess of 3 to 1 are typically considered outside the usual range by insurance regulators and rating agencies, and for homeowners and related coverages that have significant net exposure to natural catastrophes a ratio of 1 to 1 is considered appropriate. AIC's premium to surplus ratio was 1.6x as of December 31, 2011 and 2010. State laws specify regulatory actions if an insurer's risk-based capital ("RBC"), a measure of an insurer's solvency, falls below certain levels. The NAIC has a standard formula for annually assessing RBC. The formula for calculating RBC for property-liability companies takes into account asset and credit risks but places more emphasis on underwriting factors for reserving and pricing. The formula for calculating RBC for life insurance companies takes into account factors relating to insurance, business, asset and interest rate risks. As of December 31, 2011, the RBC for each of our domestic insurance companies was within the range that we target. The NAIC has also developed a set of financial relationships or tests known as the Insurance Regulatory Information System to assist state regulators in monitoring the financial condition of insurance companies and identifying companies that require special attention or actions by insurance regulatory authorities. The NAIC analyzes financial data provided by insurance companies using prescribed ratios, each with defined "usual ranges". Generally, regulators will begin to monitor an insurance company if its ratios fall outside the usual ranges for four or more of the ratios. If an insurance company has insufficient capital, regulators may act to reduce the amount of insurance it can issue. The ratios of our domestic insurance companies are within these ranges. 103 Table of Contents Liquidity sources and uses Our potential sources of funds principally include activities shown in the following table. Property- Liability Allstate Financial Corporate and Other Receipt of insurance premiums X X Contractholder fund deposits X Reinsurance recoveries X X Receipts of principal, interest and dividends on investments X X X Sales of investments X X X Funds from securities lending, commercial paper and line of credit agreements X X X Intercompany loans X X X Capital contributions from parent X X Dividends from subsidiaries X X Tax refunds/settlements X X X Funds from periodic issuance of additional securities X Funds from the settlement of our benefit plans X Our potential uses of funds principally include activities shown in the following table. Property- Liability Allstate Financial Corporate and Other Payment of claims and related expenses X Payment of contract benefits, maturities, surrenders and withdrawals X Reinsurance cessions and payments X X Operating costs and expenses X X X Purchase of investments X X X Repayment of securities lending, commercial paper and line of credit agreements X X X Payment or repayment of intercompany loans X X X Capital contributions to subsidiaries X X Dividends to shareholders/parent company X X X Tax payments/settlements X X Share repurchases X Debt service expenses and repayment X X X Settlement payments of employee and agent benefit plans X X X We actively manage our financial position and liquidity levels in light of changing market, economic, and business conditions. Liquidity is managed at both the entity and enterprise level across the Company, and is assessed on both base and stressed level liquidity needs. We believe we have sufficient liquidity to meet these needs. Additionally, we have existing intercompany agreements in place that facilitate liquidity management across the Company to enhance flexibility. Parent company capital capacity At the parent holding company level, we have deployable invested assets totaling $2.24 billion as of December 31, 2011. These assets include investments that are generally saleable within one quarter totaling $1.72 billion. The substantial earnings capacity of the operating subsidiaries is the primary source of capital generation for the Corporation. In 2012, AIC will have the capacity to pay dividends currently estimated at $1.51 billion without prior regulatory approval. In addition, we have access to $1.00 billion of funds from either commercial paper issuance or an unsecured revolving credit facility. This provides funds for the parent company's relatively low fixed charges and other corporate purposes. In 2011, dividends totaling $838 million were paid by AIC to its parent, the Corporation. In 2010, dividends totaling $1.30 billion were paid by AIC to the Corporation. There were no dividends paid by AIC to the Corporation in 2009. There were no capital contributions paid by the Corporation to AIC in 2011, 2010 or 2009. In 2011, 2010 and 2009, return of capital by American Heritage Life Investment Corporation to the Corporation totaled $27 million, $24 million and $13 million, respectively. In 2011, return of capital by Kennett Capital Holdings, LLC to the Corporation totaled $5 million. 104 Table of Contents There were no capital contributions by AIC to ALIC in 2011 or 2010. In 2009, capital contributions of $697 million were paid by AIC to ALIC. The Corporation has access to additional borrowing to support liquidity as follows: A commercial paper facility with a borrowing limit of $1.00 billion to cover short-term cash needs. As of December 31, 2011, there were no balances outstanding and therefore the remaining borrowing capacity was $1.00 billion; however, the outstanding balance can fluctuate daily. Our primary credit facility is available for short-term liquidity requirements and backs our commercial paper facility. Our $1.00 billion unsecured revolving credit facility has an initial term of five years expiring in May 2012. The facility is fully subscribed among 11 lenders with the largest commitment being $185 million. We have the option to extend the expiration by one year upon approval of existing or replacement lenders providing more than two-thirds of the commitments to lend. The commitments of the lenders are several and no lender is responsible for any other lender's commitment if such lender fails to make a loan under the facility. This facility contains an increase provision that would allow up to an additional $500 million of borrowing provided the increased portion could be fully syndicated at a later date among existing or new lenders. This facility has a financial covenant requiring that we not exceed a 37.5% debt to capital resources ratio as defined in the agreement. This ratio as of December 31, 2011 was 20.0%. Although the right to borrow under the facility is not subject to a minimum rating requirement, the costs of maintaining the facility and borrowing under it are based on the ratings of our senior, unsecured, nonguaranteed long-term debt. There were no borrowings under the credit facility during 2011. The total amount outstanding at any point in time under the combination of the commercial paper program and the credit facility cannot exceed the amount that can be borrowed under the credit facility. A universal shelf registration statement was filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on May 8, 2009. We can use this shelf registration to issue an unspecified amount of debt securities, common stock (including 399 million shares of treasury stock as of December 31, 2011), preferred stock, depositary shares, warrants, stock purchase contracts, stock purchase units and securities of trust subsidiaries. The specific terms of any securities we issue under this registration statement will be provided in the applicable prospectus supplements. Liquidity exposure Contractholder funds as of December 31, 2011 were $42.33 billion. The following table summarizes contractholder funds by their contractual withdrawal provisions as of December 31, 2011. ($ in millions) Percent to total Not subject to discretionary withdrawal $ 6,072 14.3 % Subject to discretionary withdrawal with adjustments: Specified surrender charges (1) 16,079 38.0 Market value adjustments (2) 6,435 15.2 Subject to discretionary withdrawal without adjustments (3) 13,746 32.5 Total contractholder funds (4) $ 42,332 100.0 % (1) Includes $8.76 billion of liabilities with a contractual surrender charge of less than 5% of the account balance. (2) $5.28 billion of the contracts with market value adjusted surrenders have a 30-45 day period at the end of their initial and subsequent interest rate guarantee periods (which are typically 5 or 6 years) during which there is no surrender charge or market value adjustment. (3) 70% of these contracts have a minimum interest crediting rate guarantee of 3% or higher. (4) Includes $1.16 billion of contractholder funds on variable annuities reinsured to The Prudential Insurance Company of America, a subsidiary of Prudential Financial Inc., in 2006. While we are able to quantify remaining scheduled maturities for our institutional products, anticipating retail product surrenders is less precise. Retail life and annuity products may be surrendered by customers for a variety of reasons. Reasons unique to individual customers include a current or unexpected need for cash or a change in life insurance coverage needs. Other key factors that may impact the likelihood of customer surrender include the level of the contract surrender charge, the length of time the contract has been in force, distribution channel, market interest rates, equity market conditions and potential tax implications. In addition, the propensity for retail life insurance policies to lapse is lower than it is for fixed annuities because of the need for the insured to be re-underwritten upon policy replacement. Surrenders and partial withdrawals for our retail annuities increased 21.9% in 2011 compared to 2010. The annualized surrender and partial withdrawal rate on deferred annuities and interest-sensitive life insurance products, based on the beginning of year contractholder funds, was 12.6% and 10.1% in 2011 and 2010, respectively. Allstate 105 Table of Contents Financial strives to promptly pay customers who request cash surrenders; however, statutory regulations generally provide up to six months in most states to fulfill surrender requests. Our institutional products are primarily funding agreements sold to unaffiliated trusts used to back medium-term notes. As of December 31, 2011, total institutional products outstanding were $1.88 billion, with scheduled maturities of $40 million, $1.75 billion and $85 million in 2012, 2013 and 2016, respectively. Our asset-liability management practices limit the differences between the cash flows generated by our investment portfolio and the expected cash flow requirements of our life insurance, annuity and institutional product obligations. Certain remote events and circumstances could constrain our liquidity. Those events and circumstances include, for example, a catastrophe resulting in extraordinary losses, a downgrade in our long-term debt rating of A3, A- and a- (from Moody's, S&P and A.M. Best, respectively) to non-investment grade status of below Baa3/BBB-/bb, a downgrade in AIC's financial strength rating from Aa3, AA- and A+ (from Moody's, S&P and A.M. Best, respectively) to below Baa2/BBB/A-, or a downgrade in ALIC's financial strength ratings from A1, A+ and A+ (from Moody's, S&P and A.M. Best, respectively) to below A3/A-/A-. The rating agencies also consider the interdependence of our individually rated entities; therefore, a rating change in one entity could potentially affect the ratings of other related entities. The following table summarizes consolidated cash flow activities by segment. ($ in millions) Property-Liability (1) Allstate Financial (1) Corporate and Other (1) Consolidated 2011 2010 2009 2011 2010 2009 2011 2010 2009 2011 2010 2009 Net cash provided by (used in): Operating activities $ 789 $ 1,373 $ 2,183 $ 1,295 $ 2,407 $ 2,196 $ (155 ) $ (91 ) $ (78 ) $ 1,929 $ 3,689 $ 4,301 Investing activities 244 (44 ) (1,919 ) 5,284 3,096 4,755 633 (720 ) 604 6,161 2,332 3,440 Financing activities (4 ) (8 ) (6 ) (6,504 ) (5,510 ) (7,246 ) (1,368 ) (553 ) (292 ) (7,876 ) (6,071 ) (7,544 ) Net increase (decrease) in consolidated cash $ 214 $ (50 ) $ 197 (1) Business unit cash flows reflect the elimination of intersegment dividends, contributions and borrowings. Property-Liability Lower cash provided by operating activities in 2011 compared to 2010 was primarily due to higher claim payments, partially offset by lower income tax payments. Lower cash provided by operating activities for Property-Liability in 2010 compared to 2009 was primarily due to income tax payments in 2010 compared to income tax refunds in 2009 and lower claim payments. Cash provided by investing activities in 2011 compared to cash used in investing activities in 2010 was primarily due to higher net sales of fixed income and equity securities, partially offset by higher net purchases of fixed income and equity securities. Lower cash used in investing activities in 2010 compared to 2009 was primarily due to decreased net purchases of fixed income and equity securities and higher net sales of fixed income and equity securities, partially offset by net change in short-term investments. Allstate Financial Lower cash provided by operating cash flows in 2011 was primarily due to income tax payments in 2011 compared to income tax refunds in 2010. Operating cash flows for Allstate Financial in 2010 were higher than 2009 as higher premiums and tax refunds received were partially offset by lower investment income and higher life and annuity contract benefits paid. Higher cash provided by investing activities in 2011 compared to 2010 were impacted by lower net purchases of fixed income securities and higher net sales of fixed income securities used to fund reductions in contractholder fund liabilities. Cash flows provided by investing activities in 2010 were impacted by reductions of investments to fund reductions in contractholder fund liabilities. Higher cash used in financing activities in 2011 compared to 2010 was primarily due to higher surrenders and partial withdrawals on fixed annuities and Allstate Bank products and lower deposits on Allstate Bank products and fixed annuities, partially offset by decreased maturities and retirements of institutional products. In 2011, Allstate Bank ceased operations and all funds were returned to customers by December 31, 2011. Lower cash flows used in financing activities in 2010 compared to 2009 were primarily due to decreased maturities and retirements of institutional products, partially offset by lower deposits on fixed annuities. For quantification of the changes in contractholder funds, see the Allstate Financial Segment section of the MD&A. Corporate and Other Fluctuations in the Corporate and Other operating cash flows were primarily due to the timing of intercompany settlements. Investing activities primarily relate to investments in the parent company portfolio, 106 Table of Contents including the acquisition of Esurance and Answer Financial. Financing cash flows of the Corporate and Other segment reflect actions such as fluctuations in short-term debt, repayment of debt, proceeds from the issuance of debt, dividends to shareholders of The Allstate Corporation and share repurchases; therefore, financing cash flows are affected when we increase or decrease the level of these activities. Contractual obligations and commitments Our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2011 and the payments due by period are shown in the following table. ($ in millions) Total Less than 1 year 1-3 years 4-5 years Over 5 years Liabilities for collateral (1) $ 462 $ 462 $ $ $ Contractholder funds (2) 55,368 6,771 12,808 7,651 28,138 Reserve for life-contingent contract benefits (2) 35,097 1,140 2,154 2,067 29,736 Long-term debt (3) 12,086 701 1,887 539 8,959 Capital lease obligations (3) 38 7 14 4 13 Operating leases (3) 591 182 230 113 66 Unconditional purchase obligations (3) 318 125 155 38 Defined benefit pension plans and other postretirement benefit plans (3)(4) 3,207 459 286 294 2,168 Reserve for property-liability insurance claims and claims expense (5) 20,375 9,041 6,148 2,218 2,968 Other liabilities and accrued expenses (6)(7) 3,769 3,530 191 22 26 Net unrecognized tax benefits (8) 25 25 Total contractual cash obligations $ 131,336 $ 22,443 $ 23,873 $ 12,946 $ 72,074 (1) Liabilities for collateral are typically fully secured with cash or short-term investments. We manage our short-term liquidity position to ensure the availability of a sufficient amount of liquid assets to extinguish short-term liabilities as they come due in the normal course of business, including utilizing potential sources of liquidity as disclosed previously. (2) Contractholder funds represent interest-bearing liabilities arising from the sale of products such as interest-sensitive life, fixed annuities, including immediate annuities without life contingencies and institutional products. The reserve for life-contingent contract benefits relates primarily to traditional life insurance, immediate annuities with life contingencies and voluntary accident and health insurance. These amounts reflect the present value of estimated cash payments to be made to contractholders and policyholders. Certain of these contracts, such as immediate annuities without life contingencies and institutional products, involve payment obligations where the amount and timing of the payment is essentially fixed and determinable. These amounts relate to (i) policies or contracts where we are currently making payments and will continue to do so and (ii) contracts where the timing of a portion or all of the payments has been determined by the contract. Other contracts, such as interest-sensitive life, fixed deferred annuities, traditional life insurance, immediate annuities with life contingencies and voluntary accident and health insurance, involve payment obligations where a portion or all of the amount and timing of future payments is uncertain. For these contracts, we are not currently making payments and will not make payments until (i) the occurrence of an insurable event such as death or illness or (ii) the occurrence of a payment triggering event such as the surrender or partial withdrawal on a policy or deposit contract, which is outside of our control. We have estimated the timing of payments related to these contracts based on historical experience and our expectation of future payment patterns. Uncertainties relating to these liabilities include mortality, morbidity, expenses, customer lapse and withdrawal activity, estimated additional deposits for interest-sensitive life contracts, and renewal premium for life policies, which may significantly impact both the timing and amount of future payments. Such cash outflows reflect adjustments for the estimated timing of mortality, retirement, and other appropriate factors, but are undiscounted with respect to interest. As a result, the sum of the cash outflows shown for all years in the table exceeds the corresponding liabilities of $42.33 billion for contractholder funds and $14.45 billion for reserve for life-contingent contract benefits as included in the Consolidated Statements of Financial Position as of December 31, 2011. The liability amount in the Consolidated Statements of Financial Position reflects the discounting for interest as well as adjustments for the timing of other factors as described above. (3) Our payment obligations relating to long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating leases, unconditional purchase obligations and pension and other post employment benefits ("OPEB") contributions are managed within the structure of our intermediate to long-term liquidity management program. Amount differs from the balance presented on the Consolidated Statements of Financial Position as of December 31, 2011 because the long-term debt amount above includes interest. (4) The pension plans' obligations in the next 12 months represent our planned contributions, and the remaining years' contributions are projected based on the average remaining service period using the current underfunded status of the plans. The OPEB plans' obligations are estimated based on the expected benefits to be paid. These liabilities are discounted with respect to interest, and as a result the sum of the cash outflows shown for all years in the table exceeds the corresponding liability amount of $1.89 billion included in other liabilities and accrued expenses on the Consolidated Statements of Financial Position. (5) Reserve for property-liability insurance claims and claims expense is an estimate of amounts necessary to settle all outstanding claims, including claims that have been IBNR as of the balance sheet date. We have estimated the timing of these payments based on our historical experience and our expectation of future payment patterns. However, the timing of these payments may vary significantly from the amounts shown above, especially for IBNR claims. The ultimate cost of losses may vary materially from recorded amounts which are our best estimates. The reserve for property-liability insurance claims and claims expense includes loss reserves related to asbestos and environmental claims as of December 31, 2011, of $1.61 billion and $225 million, respectively. 107 Table of Contents (6) Other liabilities primarily include accrued expenses and certain benefit obligations and claim payments and other checks outstanding. Certain of these long-term liabilities are discounted with respect to interest, as a result the sum of the cash outflows shown for all years in the table exceeds the corresponding liability amount of $3.76 billion. (7) Balance sheet liabilities not included in the table above include unearned and advance premiums of $10.81 billion and deferred tax liabilities of $2.14 billion netted in the net deferred tax asset of $520 million. These items were excluded as they do not meet the definition of a contractual liability as we are not contractually obligated to pay these amounts to third parties. Rather, they represent an accounting mechanism that allows us to present our financial statements on an accrual basis. In addition, other liabilities of $273 million were not included in the table above because they did not represent a contractual obligation or the amount and timing of their eventual payment was sufficiently uncertain. (8) Net unrecognized tax benefits represent our potential future obligation to the taxing authority for a tax position that was not recognized in the consolidated financial statements. We believe it is reasonably possible that the liability balance will be reduced by $25 million within the next twelve months upon the resolution of an outstanding issue resulting from the 2005-2006 Internal Revenue Service examination. The resolution of this obligation may be for an amount different than what we have accrued. Our contractual commitments as of December 31, 2011 and the periods in which the commitments expire are shown in the following table. ($ in millions) Total Less than 1 year 1-3 years 4-5 years Over 5 years Other commitments conditional $ 193 $ 110 $ 7 $ 3 $ 73 Other commitments unconditional 2,015 230 417 1,082 286 Total commitments $ 2,208 $ 340 $ 424 $ 1,085 $ 359 Contractual commitments represent investment commitments such as private placements, limited partnership interests and other loans. We have agreements in place for services we conduct, generally at cost, between subsidiaries relating to insurance, reinsurance, loans and capitalization. All material intercompany transactions have appropriately been eliminated in consolidation. Intercompany transactions among insurance subsidiaries and affiliates have been approved by the appropriate departments of insurance as required. For a more detailed discussion of our off-balance sheet arrangements, see Note 7 of the consolidated financial statements. ENTERPRISE RISK AND RETURN MANAGEMENT Allstate manages enterprise risk under an integrated Enterprise Risk and Return Management ("ERRM") framework with governance and analytics. This framework provides an enterprise view of risks and opportunities and is used by senior leaders and business managers to drive strategic and business decisions. Allstate's risk management strategies adapt to changes in business and market environments and seek to optimize returns. Allstate continually validates and improves its ERRM practices by benchmarking and securing external perspectives for our processes. ERRM governance includes an executive management committee structure, Board oversight and chief risk officers ("CROs"). The Enterprise Risk & Return Council ("ERRC") is Allstate's senior risk management committee. It directs ERRM by establishing risk-return targets, determining economic capital levels and directing integrated strategies and actions from an enterprise perspective. It consists of Allstate's chief executive officer, enterprise and business unit chief risk officers and chief financial officers, general counsel and treasurer. Allstate's Board of Directors and Audit Committee provide ERRM oversight by reviewing enterprise principles, guidelines and limits for Allstate's significant risks and by monitoring strategies and actions management has taken to control these risks. CROs are appointed for the enterprise and for Allstate Protection, Allstate Financial and Allstate Investments. Collectively, the CROs create an integrated approach to risk and return management to ensure risk management practices and strategies are aligned with Allstate's overall enterprise objectives. Our ERRM governance is supported with an analytic framework to manage risk exposure and optimize returns on risk-adjusted capital. Allstate views economic capital primarily on a statutory accounting basis. Management and the ERRC use enterprise stochastic modeling, risk expertise and judgment to determine an appropriate level of enterprise economic capital to hold considering a broad range of risk objectives. These include limiting risks of financial stress, insolvency, likelihood of capital stress and volatility, maintaining stakeholder value and financial strength ratings and satisfying regulatory risk-based capital requirements. Enterprise economic capital approximates a combination of statutory surplus and deployable invested assets at the parent holding company level. 108 Table of Contents Using our governance and analytic framework, Allstate designs business and enterprise strategies that seek to optimize returns on risk-adjusted capital. Examples include shifting Allstate Financial away from spread-based products toward underwritten products, implementing a suite of margin improvement and exposure reduction actions in homeowners insurance and shifting our fixed income securities portfolio from short and long maturities towards intermediate maturities to optimize returns, reductions in certain asset classes such as municipal securities or European sovereign debt and manage risk under a steep and potentially changing interest rate curve. REGULATION AND LEGAL PROCEEDINGS We are subject to extensive regulation and we are involved in various legal and regulatory actions, all of which have an effect on specific aspects of our business. For a detailed discussion of the legal and regulatory actions in which we are involved, see Note 14 of the consolidated financial statements. PENDING ACCOUNTING STANDARDS There are several pending accounting standards that we have not implemented either because the standard has not been finalized or the implementation date has not yet occurred. For a discussion of these pending standards, see Note 2 of the consolidated financial statements. The effect of implementing certain accounting standards on our financial results and financial condition is often based in part on market conditions at the time of implementation of the standard and other factors we are unable to determine prior to implementation. For this reason, we are sometimes unable to estimate the effect of certain pending accounting standards until the relevant authoritative body finalizes these standards or until we implement them. 
