CIK: 899051
Company Name: ALLSTATE CORP
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2010-02-25


Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Page Overview 28 2009 Highlights 28 Consolidated Net Income (Loss) 29 Application of Critical Accounting Estimates 29 Property-Liability 2009 Highlights 42 Property-Liability Operations 43 Allstate Protection Segment 45 Discontinued Lines and Coverages Segment 56 Property-Liability Investment Results 57 Property-Liability Claims and Claims Expense Reserves 58 Allstate Financial 2009 Highlights 69 Allstate Financial Segment 69 Investments 2009 Highlights 80 Investments 80 Fair Value of Assets and Liabilities 102 Market Risk 102 Pension Plans 106 Deferred Taxes 108 Capital Resources and Liquidity 2009 Highlights 109 Capital Resources and Liquidity 110 Enterprise Risk and Return Management 117 Regulation and Legal Proceedings 118 Pending Accounting Standards 118 27 OVERVIEW The following discussion highlights significant factors influencing the consolidated financial position and results of operations of The Allstate Corporation (referred to in this document as "we", "our", "us", the "Company" or "Allstate"). It should be read in conjunction with the 5-year summary of selected financial data, consolidated financial statements and related notes found under Part II, Item 6 and Item 8 contained herein. Further analysis of our insurance segments is provided in the Property-Liability Operations (which includes the Allstate Protection and the Discontinued Lines and Coverages segments) and in the Allstate Financial Segment sections of Management's Discussion and Analysis ("MD&A"). The segments are consistent with the way in which we use financial information to evaluate business performance and to determine the allocation of resources. Allstate is focused on three priorities in 2010: improve customer loyalty, reinvent protection and retirement for the consumer and grow our businesses. The most important factors we monitor to evaluate the financial condition and performance of our company include: For Allstate Protection: premium written, the number of policies in force ("PIF"), retention, price changes, claim frequency (rate of claim occurrence per policy in force) and severity (average cost per claim), catastrophes, loss ratio, expenses, underwriting results and sales of all products and services; For Allstate Financial: benefit and investment spread, amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs, expenses, operating income, net income, invested assets, premiums and deposits and new business returns; For Investments: credit quality/experience, realized capital gains and losses, investment income, unrealized capital gains and losses, stability of long-term returns, total returns, cash flows, and asset and liability duration; and For financial condition: liquidity, parent holding company level deployable invested assets, financial strength ratings, operating leverage, debt leverage, book value per share, and return on equity. 2009 HIGHLIGHTS Consolidated net income was $854 million in 2009 compared to a net loss of $1.68 billion in 2008. Net income per diluted share was $1.58 in 2009 compared to net loss per diluted share of $3.06 in 2008. Property-Liability net income was $1.54 billion in 2009 compared to $228 million in 2008. The Property-Liability combined ratio was 96.2 in 2009 compared to 99.4 in 2008. Allstate Financial had a net loss of $483 million in 2009 compared to a net loss of $1.72 billion in 2008. Total revenues were $32.01 billion in 2009 compared to $29.39 billion in 2008. Property-Liability premiums earned in 2009 totaled $26.19 billion, a decrease of 2.9% from $26.97 billion in 2008. Net realized capital losses were $583 million in 2009 compared to net realized capital losses of $5.09 billion in 2008. Investments as of December 31, 2009 totaled $99.83 billion, an increase of 4.0% from $96.00 billion as of December 31, 2008. Net investment income in 2009 was $4.44 billion, a decrease of 21.0% from $5.62 billion in 2008. Book value per diluted share (ratio of shareholders' equity to total shares outstanding and dilutive potential shares outstanding) was $30.84 as of December 31, 2009, an increase of 31.4% from $23.47 as of December 31, 2008. For the twelve months ended December 31, 2009, return on the average of beginning and ending period shareholders' equity was 5.8%, an increase of 15.5 points from (9.7)% for the twelve months ended December 31, 2008. At December 31, 2009, we had $16.69 billion in capital. This total included $3.07 billion in deployable invested assets at the parent holding company level. 28 CONSOLIDATED NET INCOME (LOSS) ($ in millions) For the years ended December 31, 2009 2008 2007 Revenues Property-liability insurance premiums $ 26,194 $ 26,967 $ 27,233 Life and annuity premiums and contract charges 1,958 1,895 1,866 Net investment income 4,444 5,622 6,435 Realized capital gains and losses: Total other-than-temporary impairment losses (2,376 ) (3,735 ) (310 ) Portion of loss recognized in other comprehensive income 457 Net other-than-temporary impairment losses recognized in earnings (1,919 ) (3,735 ) (310 ) Sales and other realized capital gains and losses 1,336 (1,355 ) 1,545 Total realized capital gains and losses (583 ) (5,090 ) 1,235 Total revenues 32,013 29,394 36,769 Costs and expenses Property-liability insurance claims and claims expense (18,746 ) (20,064 ) (17,667 ) Life and annuity contract benefits (1,617 ) (1,612 ) (1,589 ) Interest credited to contractholder funds (2,126 ) (2,411 ) (2,681 ) Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs (4,754 ) (4,679 ) (4,704 ) Operating costs and expenses (3,007 ) (3,273 ) (3,103 ) Restructuring and related charges (130 ) (23 ) (29 ) Interest expense (392 ) (351 ) (333 ) Total costs and expenses (30,772 ) (32,413 ) (30,106 ) Gain (loss) on disposition of operations 7 (6 ) (10 ) Income tax (expense) benefit (394 ) 1,346 (2,017 ) Net income (loss) $ 854 $ (1,679 ) $ 4,636 Property-Liability $ 1,543 $ 228 $ 4,258 Allstate Financial (483 ) (1,721 ) 465 Corporate and Other (206 ) (186 ) (87 ) Net income (loss) $ 854 $ (1,679 ) $ 4,636 APPLICATION OF CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America ("GAAP") requires management to adopt accounting policies and make estimates and assumptions that affect amounts reported in the consolidated financial statements. The most critical estimates include those used in determining: Fair value of financial assets Impairment of fixed income and equity securities Deferred policy acquisition costs ("DAC") amortization Reserve for Property-Liability insurance claims and claims expense estimation Reserve for life-contingent contract benefits estimation In making these determinations, management makes subjective and complex judgments that frequently require estimates about matters that are inherently uncertain. Many of these policies, estimates and related judgments are common in the insurance and financial services industries; others are specific to our businesses and operations. It is reasonably likely that changes in these estimates could occur from period to period and result in a material impact on our consolidated financial statements. A brief summary of each of these critical accounting estimates follows. For a more detailed discussion of the effect of these estimates on our consolidated financial statements, and the judgments and assumptions related to these 29 estimates, see the referenced sections of this document. For a complete summary of our significant accounting policies, see Note 2 of the consolidated financial statements. Fair value of financial assets Fair value is defined as the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. We categorize our financial assets measured at fair value into a three-level hierarchy based on the observability of inputs to the valuation techniques as follows: Level 1: Financial asset values are based on unadjusted quoted prices for identical assets in an active market that we can access. Level 2: Financial asset values are based on the following: (a) Quoted prices for similar assets in active markets; (b) Quoted prices for identical or similar assets in markets that are not active; or (c) Valuation models whose inputs are observable, directly or indirectly, for substantially the full term of the asset. Level 3: Financial asset values are based on prices or valuation techniques that require inputs that are both unobservable and significant to the overall fair value measurement. Unobservable inputs reflect our estimates of the assumptions that market participants would use in valuing the financial assets. Observable inputs are inputs that reflect the assumptions market participants would use in valuing financial assets that are developed based on market data obtained from independent sources. In the absence of sufficient observable inputs, unobservable inputs reflect our estimates of the assumptions market participants would use in valuing financial assets and are developed based on the best information available in the circumstances. The degree of management judgment involved in determining fair values is inversely related to the availability of market observable information. If valuation inputs used to measure fair value fall into different levels of the fair value hierarchy, the categorization is based on the lowest level input that is significant to the fair value measurement in its entirety. We are responsible for the determination of fair value of financial assets and the supporting assumptions and methodologies. We gain assurance on the overall reasonableness and consistent application of valuation input assumptions, valuation methodologies and compliance with accounting standards for fair value determination through the execution of various processes and controls designed to ensure that our financial assets are appropriately valued. We monitor fair values received from third parties and those derived internally on an ongoing basis. We employ independent third-party valuation service providers, broker quotes and internal pricing methods to determine fair values, which provide a single quote or price for each financial instrument. We obtain or calculate only one quote or price per instrument. Valuation service providers typically obtain data about market transactions and other key valuation model inputs from multiple sources and, through the use of proprietary algorithms, produce valuation information in the form of a single fair value for individual securities for which a fair value has been requested under the terms of our agreements. For certain equity securities, valuation service providers provide market quotations for completed transactions on the measurement date. For other security types, fair values are derived from the valuation service providers' proprietary valuation models. The inputs used by the valuation service providers include, but are not limited to, market prices from recently completed transactions and transactions of comparable securities, interest rate yield curves, credit spreads, liquidity spreads, currency rates, and other information, as applicable. Credit and liquidity spreads are typically implied from completed transactions and transactions of comparable securities. Valuation service providers also use proprietary discounted cash flow models that are widely accepted in the financial services industry and similar to those used by other market participants to value the same financial instruments. The valuation models take into account, among other things, market observable information as of the measurement date, as described above, as well as the specific attributes of the security being valued including its term, interest rate, credit rating, industry sector, and where applicable, collateral quality and other issue or issuer specific information. Executing valuation models effectively requires seasoned professional judgment and experience. In cases where market transactions or other market observable data is limited, the extent to which judgment is applied varies inversely with the availability of market observable information. For certain of our financial assets carried at fair value, where our valuation service providers cannot provide fair value determinations, we obtain a single non-binding price quote from a broker familiar with the security who, similar to our valuation service providers, may consider transactions or activity in similar securities, as applicable, among other information. The brokers providing price quotes are generally from the brokerage divisions of leading financial institutions with market making, underwriting and distribution expertise regarding the security subject to valuation. 30 The fair value of certain financial assets, including privately placed corporate securities, Auction Rate Securities ("ARS") backed by student loans, equity-indexed notes, and certain free-standing derivatives, where our valuation service providers or brokers do not provide fair value determinations, is determined using valuation methods and models widely accepted in the financial services industry. Internally developed valuation models, which include inputs that may not be market observable and as such involve some degree of judgment, are considered appropriate for each class of security to which they are applied. Our internal pricing methods are primarily based on models using discounted cash flow methodologies that develop a single best estimate of fair value. Our models generally incorporate inputs that we believe are representative of inputs other market participants would use to determine fair value of the same instruments, including yield curves, quoted market prices of comparable securities, published credit spreads, and other applicable market data. Additional inputs that are used to model fair value include internally-derived assumptions such as liquidity premium and credit ratings, as well as instrument-specific characteristics that include, but are not limited to, coupon rate, expected cash flows, sector of issuer, and call provisions. Internally assigned credit ratings are generally consistent with external ratings published by the National Association of Insurance Commissioners ("NAIC"); however, they are developed at a more finite level. For example, an NAIC rating of 1 includes securities rated triple, double and single A by at least one nationally recognized statistical rating organization ("NRSRO"). We believe our internal ratings provide for a more reliable estimate of fair value since we can more precisely match these ratings to other market observable valuation inputs, such as credit and sector spreads, when performing these valuations. Due to the existence of non-market observable inputs, such as liquidity premiums, judgment is required in developing these fair values. As a result, the fair value of these financial assets may differ from the amount actually received to sell an asset in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. Moreover, the use of different valuation assumptions may have a material effect on the financial assets' fair values. For the majority of our financial assets measured at fair value, all significant inputs are based on market observable data and significant management judgment does not affect the periodic determination of fair value. The determination of fair value using discounted cash flow models involves management judgment when significant model inputs are not based on market observable data. However, where market observable data is available, it takes precedence, and as a result, no range of reasonably likely inputs exists from which the basis of a sensitivity analysis could be constructed. There is one primary situation where a discounted cash flow model utilizes a significant input that is not market observable. It relates to the determination of fair value for our ARS backed by student loans. The significant input is the assumption about the anticipated date liquidity will return to this market (that is, when auction failures will cease). Determination of this assumption allows for matching to market observable inputs when performing these valuations. The following table displays the sensitivity of reasonably likely changes in the assumption about the anticipated date liquidity will return to the ARS backed by student loans market as of December 31, 2009. The selection of these hypothetical scenarios represents an illustration of the estimated potential proportional effect of alternate assumptions and should not be construed as either a prediction of future events or an indication that it would be reasonably likely that all securities would be similarly affected. ($ in millions) ARS backed by student loans at fair value $ 1,643 Percentage change in fair value resulting from: Decrease in assumption by four months for the anticipated date liquidity will return to this market 0.7 % Increase in assumption by four months for the anticipated date liquidity will return to this market (0.7 )% We believe our most significant exposure to changes in fair value is due to market risk. Our exposure to changes in market conditions is discussed fully in the Market Risk section of the MD&A. We employ specific control processes to determine the reasonableness of the fair values of our financial assets. Our processes are designed to ensure that the values received or internally estimated are accurately recorded and that the data inputs and the valuation techniques utilized are appropriate, consistently applied, and that the assumptions are reasonable and consistent with the objective of determining fair value. For example, on a continuing basis, we assess the reasonableness of individual security values received from valuation service providers and those derived from internal models that exceed certain thresholds as compared to previous values received from those valuation service providers or derived from internal models. In addition, we may validate the reasonableness of fair values by comparing information obtained from our valuation service providers to other third party valuation sources for selected securities. 31 For internal pricing models, we have implemented price validation procedures such as back-testing of actual sales, which corroborates the various model inputs to market observable data. When fair value determinations are expected to be more variable, we validate them through reviews by members of management who have relevant expertise and who are independent of those charged with executing investment transactions. We also perform an analysis to determine whether there has been a significant decrease in the volume and level of activity for the asset when compared to normal market activity, and if so, whether transactions may not be orderly. Among the indicators we consider in determining whether a significant decrease in the volume and level of market activity for a specific asset has occurred include the level of new issuances in the primary market, trading volume in the secondary market, level of credit spreads over historical levels, bid-ask spread, and price consensuses among market participants and sources. If evidence indicates that prices are based on transactions that are not orderly, we place little, if any, weight on the transaction price and will estimate fair value using an internal pricing model. As of December 31, 2009 and 2008, we did not alter fair values provided by our valuation service providers or brokers or substitute them with an internal pricing model. The following table identifies fixed income and equity securities and short-term investments as of December 31, 2009 by source of value determination: ($ in millions) Fair value Percent to total Fair value based on internal sources $ 9,304 10.7 % Fair value based on external sources (1) 77,542 89.3 Total $ 86,846 100.0 % (1) Includes $2.64 billion that are valued using broker quotes. For more detailed information on our accounting policy for the fair value of financial assets and the financial assets by level in the fair value hierarchy, see Notes 2 and 5 of the consolidated financial statements. Impairment of fixed income and equity securities For investments classified as available for sale, the difference between fair value and amortized cost for fixed income securities and cost for equity securities, net of certain other items and deferred income taxes (as disclosed in Note 4), is reported as a component of accumulated other comprehensive income on the Consolidated Statements of Financial Position and is not reflected in the operating results of any period until reclassified to net income upon the consummation of a transaction with an unrelated third party or when the decline in fair value is deemed other than temporary. We have a comprehensive portfolio monitoring process to identify and evaluate each fixed income and equity security whose carrying value may be other-than-temporarily impaired. For each fixed income security in an unrealized loss position, we assess whether management with the appropriate authority has made a decision to sell or whether it is more likely than not we will be required to sell the security before recovery of the amortized cost basis for reasons such as liquidity, contractual or regulatory purposes. If a security meets either of these criteria, the security's decline in fair value is deemed other than temporary and is recorded in earnings. If we have not made the decision to sell the fixed income security and it is not more likely than not we will be required to sell the fixed income security before recovery of its amortized cost basis, we evaluate whether we expect to receive cash flows sufficient to recover the entire amortized cost basis of the security. We use our best estimate of future cash flows expected to be collected from the fixed income security discounted at the security's original or current effective rate, as appropriate, to calculate a recovery value and determine whether a credit loss exists. The determination of cash flow estimates is inherently subjective and methodologies may vary depending on facts and circumstances specific to the security. All reasonably available information relevant to the collectability of the security, including past events, current conditions, and reasonable and supportable assumptions and forecasts, are considered when developing the estimate of cash flows expected to be collected. That information generally includes, but is not limited to, the remaining payment terms of the security, prepayment speeds, foreign exchange rates, the financial condition of the issue or issuer(s), expected defaults, expected recoveries, the value of underlying collateral and current subordination levels, vintage, geographic concentration, available reserves or escrows, third party guarantees and other credit enhancements. Additionally, other information, such as industry analyst reports and forecasts, sector credit ratings, financial condition of the bond insurer for insured fixed income securities, and other market data relevant to the realizability of contractual cash flows, may also be considered. The estimated fair value of collateral may be used to estimate recovery value if we determine that the security is dependent on the liquidation of collateral for ultimate 32 settlement. If the estimated recovery value is less than the amortized cost of the security, a credit loss exists and an other-than-temporary impairment for the difference between the estimated recovery value and amortized cost is recorded in earnings. The unrealized loss deemed to be related to factors other than credit remains classified in other comprehensive income. If we determine that the fixed income security does not have sufficient cash flow or other information to determine a recovery value for the security, we may conclude that the entire decline in fair value is deemed to be credit related and is recorded in earnings. There are a number of assumptions and estimates inherent in evaluating impairments of equity securities and determining if they are other than temporary, including: 1) our ability and intent to hold the investment for a period of time sufficient to allow for an anticipated recovery in value; 2) the length of time and extent to which the fair value has been less than cost; 3) the financial condition, near-term and long-term prospects of the issue or issuer, including relevant industry specific market conditions and trends, geographic location and implications of rating agency actions and offering prices; and 4) the specific reasons that a security is in a significant unrealized loss position, including overall market conditions which could affect liquidity. Once assumptions and estimates are made, any number of changes in facts and circumstances could cause us to subsequently determine that a fixed income or equity security is other than temporary impaired, including: 1) general economic conditions that are worse than previously forecasted or that have a greater adverse effect on a particular issuer or industry sector than originally estimated; 2) changes in the facts and circumstances related to a particular issue or issuer's ability to meet all of its contractual obligations; and 3) changes in facts and circumstances that result in changes to management's intent to sell or result in our assessment that it is more likely than not we will be required to sell before recovery of the amortized cost of a fixed income security or causes a change in our ability or intent to hold an equity security until it recovers in value. Changes in assumptions, facts and circumstances could result in additional charges to earnings in future periods to the extent that losses are realized. The charge to earnings, while potentially significant to net income, would not have a significant effect on shareholders' equity, since the majority of our portfolio is designated as available-for-sale and carried at fair value and as a result, any related unrealized loss, net of deferred income taxes, DAC, DSI and reserves for life-contingent contract benefits, would already be reflected as a component of accumulated other comprehensive income in shareholders' equity. The determination of the amount of impairment is an inherently subjective process based on periodic evaluation of the factors described above. Such evaluations and assessments are revised as conditions change and new information becomes available. We update our evaluations regularly and reflect changes in other-than-temporary impairments in results of operations as such evaluations are revised. The use of different methodologies and assumptions in the determination of the amount of impairments may have a material effect on the amounts presented within the consolidated financial statements. Fixed income securities subject to other-than-temporary impairment write-downs continue to earn investment income when future expected payments are reasonably estimable, and any discount or premium is recognized using the effective yield method over the expected life of the security; otherwise income recognition is discontinued. For additional detail on investment impairments, see Note 4 of the consolidated financial statements. Deferred policy acquisition costs amortization We incur significant costs in connection with acquiring insurance policies and investment contracts. In accordance with GAAP, costs that vary with and are primarily related to acquiring insurance policies and investment contracts are deferred and recorded as an asset on the Consolidated Statements of Financial Position. DAC related to property-liability contracts is amortized into income as premiums are earned, typically over periods of six to twelve months. The amortization methodology for DAC for Allstate Financial policies and contracts includes significant assumptions and estimates. DAC related to traditional life insurance is amortized over the premium paying period of the related policies in proportion to the estimated revenues on such business. Significant assumptions relating to estimated premiums, investment returns, as well as mortality, persistency and expenses to administer the business are established at the time the policy is issued and are generally not revised during the life of the policy. The assumptions for determining the timing and amount of DAC amortization are consistent with the assumptions used to calculate the reserve for life-contingent contract benefits. Any deviations from projected business in force resulting from actual policy terminations differing from expected levels and any estimated premium deficiencies may result in a change to the rate of amortization in the period such events occur. Generally, the amortization periods for these policies approximates the estimated lives of the policies. The recovery of DAC is dependent upon the future profitability of the business. We periodically review the adequacy of reserves and recoverability of DAC for these policies on an aggregate basis using 33 actual experience. We aggregate all traditional life insurance products and immediate annuities with life contingencies in the analysis. In the event actual experience is significantly adverse compared to the original assumptions, a premium deficiency is deemed to exist and any remaining unamortized DAC balance must be expensed to the extent not recoverable and a premium deficiency reserve may be required if the remaining DAC balance is insufficient to absorb the deficiency. In 2009 and 2007, our reviews concluded that no premium deficiency adjustments were necessary, primarily due to projected profit from traditional life insurance more than offsetting the projected losses in immediate annuities with life contingencies. In 2008, for traditional life insurance and immediate annuities with life contingencies, an aggregate premium deficiency of $336 million pre-tax ($219 million after-tax) resulted primarily from a study indicating that the annuitants on certain life-contingent contracts are projected to live longer than we anticipated when the contracts were issued and, to a lesser degree, a reduction in the related investment portfolio yield. The deficiency was recorded through a reduction in DAC. DAC related to interest-sensitive life, fixed annuities and other investment contracts is amortized in proportion to the incidence of the total present value of gross profits, which includes both actual historical gross profits ("AGP") and estimated future gross profits ("EGP") expected to be earned over the estimated lives of the contracts. The amortization is net of interest on the prior period DAC balance using rates established at the inception of the contracts. Actual amortization periods generally range from 15-30 years; however, incorporating estimates of customer surrender rates, partial withdrawals and deaths generally results in the majority of the DAC being amortized during the surrender charge period, which is typically 10-20 years for interest-sensitive life and 5-10 years for fixed annuities. The cumulative DAC amortization is reestimated and adjusted by a cumulative charge or credit to results of operations when there is a difference between the incidence of actual versus expected gross profits in a reporting period or when there is a change in total EGP. AGP and EGP consist primarily of the following components: contract charges for the cost of insurance less mortality costs and other benefits (benefit margin); investment income and realized capital gains and losses less interest credited (investment margin); and surrender and other contract charges less maintenance expenses (expense margin). The principal assumptions for determining the amount of EGP are investment returns, including capital gains and losses on assets supporting contract liabilities, interest crediting rates to contractholders, and the effects of persistency, mortality, expenses, and hedges if applicable, and these assumptions are reasonably likely to have the greatest impact on the amount of DAC amortization. Changes in these assumptions can be offsetting and we are unable to reasonably predict their future movements or offsetting impacts over time. Each reporting period, DAC amortization is recognized in proportion to AGP for that period adjusted for interest on the prior period DAC balance. This amortization process includes an assessment of AGP compared to EGP, the actual amount of business remaining in-force and realized capital gains and losses on investments supporting the product liability. The impact of realized capital gains and losses on amortization of DAC depends upon which product liability is supported by the assets that give rise to the gain or loss. If the AGP is greater than EGP in the period, but the total EGP is unchanged, the amount of DAC amortization will generally increase, resulting in a current period decrease to earnings. The opposite result generally occurs when the AGP is less than the EGP in the period, but the total EGP is unchanged. However, when DAC amortization or a component of gross profits for a quarterly period is potentially negative (which would result in an increase of the DAC balance) as a result of negative AGP, the specific facts and circumstances surrounding the potential negative amortization are considered to determine whether it is appropriate for recognition in the consolidated financial statements. Negative amortization is only recorded when the increased DAC balance is determined to be recoverable based on facts and circumstances. Negative amortization was not recorded for certain fixed annuities during 2009 and 2008 periods in which significant capital losses were realized on their related investment portfolio. For products exposed to investment credit losses in excess of our expectations that may cause periodic AGP to become temporarily negative, EGP and AGP utilized in DAC amortization may be modified to exclude the higher credit losses. Annually, we review and update all assumptions underlying the projections of EGP, including investment returns, comprising investment income and realized capital gains and losses, interest crediting rates, persistency, mortality, expenses and the effect of any hedges. At each reporting period, we assess whether any revisions to assumptions used to determine DAC amortization are required. These reviews and updates may result in amortization acceleration or deceleration, which are commonly referred to as "DAC unlocking". If the update of assumptions causes total EGP to increase, the rate of DAC amortization will generally decrease, resulting in a current period increase to earnings. A decrease to earnings generally occurs when the assumption update causes the total EGP to decrease. Over the past three years, our most significant DAC assumption updates that resulted in a change to EGP and the amortization of DAC have been revisions to expected future investment returns, primarily realized capital losses, 34 mortality, expenses and the number of contracts in force or persistency. The following table provides the effect on DAC amortization of changes in assumptions relating to the gross profit components of investment margin, benefit margin and expense margin during the years ended December 31. ($ in millions) 2009 2008 2007 Investment margin $ (399 ) $ (303 ) $ 11 Benefit margin 129 35 34 Expense margin (7 ) (59 ) (31 ) Net (acceleration) deceleration $ (277 ) $ (327 ) $ 14 DAC amortization acceleration related to changes in the EGP component of investment margin in the first quarter of 2009 was primarily due to an increase in the level of expected realized capital losses in 2009 and 2010. The deceleration related to benefit margin was due to more favorable projected life insurance mortality. The acceleration related to expense margin resulted from current and expected expense levels higher than previously projected. DAC amortization acceleration related to changes in the EGP component of investment margin in 2008 was primarily due to the level of realized capital losses impacting actual gross profits in 2008 and the impact of realized capital losses on expected gross profits in 2009. The deceleration related to benefit margin was due to more favorable projected life insurance mortality. The acceleration related to expense margin resulted from current and expected expense levels higher than previously projected. DAC amortization deceleration related to changes in the EGP component of investment margin in 2007 was due to higher yields from repositioning of the investment portfolio and reduced interest crediting rates on annuities. The deceleration related to benefit margin was due to more favorable projected life insurance mortality. The acceleration related to expense margin was a result of expenses being higher than expected. The following table displays the sensitivity of reasonably likely changes in assumptions included in the gross profit components of investment margin or benefit margin to amortization of the DAC balance as of December 31, 2009. ($ in millions) December 31, 2009 Increase/(reduction) in DAC Increase in future investment margins of 25 basis points $ 52 Decrease in future investment margins of 25 basis points $ (57 ) Decrease in future life mortality by 1% $ 27 Increase in future life mortality by 1% $ (28 ) Any potential changes in assumptions discussed above are measured without consideration of correlation among assumptions. Therefore, it would be inappropriate to add them together in an attempt to estimate overall variability in amortization. For additional detail related to DAC, see the Allstate Financial Segment section of this document. Reserve for Property-Liability insurance claims and claims expense estimation Reserves are established to provide for the estimated costs of paying claims and claims expenses under insurance policies we have issued. Property-Liability underwriting results are significantly influenced by estimates of property-liability insurance claims and claims expense reserves. These reserves are an estimate of amounts necessary to settle all outstanding claims, including claims that have been incurred but not reported ("IBNR"), as of the financial statement date. Characteristics of reserves Reserves are established independently of business segment management for each business segment and line of business based on estimates of the ultimate cost to settle claims, less losses that have been paid. The significant lines of business are auto, homeowners, and other lines for Allstate Protection, and asbestos, environmental, and other discontinued lines for Discontinued Lines and Coverages. Allstate Protection's claims are typically reported promptly with relatively little reporting lag between the date of occurrence and the date the loss is reported. Auto and homeowners liability losses generally take an average of about two years to settle, while auto physical damage, homeowners property and other personal lines have an average settlement time of less than one year. Discontinued Lines and Coverages involve long-tail losses, such as those related to asbestos and environmental claims, which often involve substantial reporting lags and extended times to settle. Reserves are the difference between the estimated ultimate cost of losses incurred and the amount of paid losses as of the reporting date. Reserves are estimated for both reported and unreported claims, and include estimates of all expenses associated with processing and settling all incurred claims. We update the majority of our reserve estimates quarterly and as new information becomes available or as events emerge that may affect the resolution of unsettled 35 claims. Changes in prior year reserve estimates (reserve reestimates), which may be material, are determined by comparing updated estimates of ultimate losses to prior estimates, and the differences are recorded as property-liability insurance claims and claims expense in the Consolidated Statements of Operations in the period such changes are determined. Estimating the ultimate cost of claims and claims expenses is an inherently uncertain and complex process involving a high degree of judgment and is subject to the evaluation of numerous variables. The actuarial methods used to develop reserve estimates Reserve estimates are derived by using several different actuarial estimation methods that are variations on one primary actuarial technique. The actuarial technique is known as a "chain ladder" estimation process in which historical loss patterns are applied to actual paid losses and reported losses (paid losses plus individual case reserves established by claim adjusters) for an accident year or a report year to create an estimate of how losses are likely to develop over time. An accident year refers to classifying claims based on the year in which the claims occurred. A report year refers to classifying claims based on the year in which the claims are reported. Both classifications are used to prepare estimates of required reserves for payments to be made in the future. The key assumptions affecting our reserve estimates comprise data elements including claim counts, paid losses, case reserves, and development factors calculated with this data. In the chain ladder estimation technique, a ratio (development factor) is calculated which compares current period results to results in the prior period for each accident year. A three-year or two-year average development factor, based on historical results, is usually multiplied by the current period experience to estimate the development of losses of each accident year into the next time period. The development factors for the future time periods for each accident year are compounded over the remaining future periods to calculate an estimate of ultimate losses for each accident year. The implicit assumption of this technique is that an average of historical development factors is predictive of future loss development, as the significant size of our experience data base achieves a high degree of statistical credibility in actuarial projections of this type. The effects of inflation are implicitly considered in the reserving process, the implicit assumption being that a multi-year average development factor includes an adequate provision. Occasionally, unusual aberrations in loss patterns are caused by external and internal factors such as changes in claim reporting, settlement patterns, unusually large losses, process changes, legal or regulatory changes, and other influences. In these instances, analyses of alternate development factor selections are performed to evaluate the effect of these factors and actuarial judgment is applied to make appropriate development factor assumptions needed to develop a best estimate of ultimate losses. How reserve estimates are established and updated Reserve estimates are developed at a very detailed level, and the results of these numerous micro-level best estimates are aggregated to form a consolidated reserve estimate. For example, over one thousand actuarial estimates of the types described above are prepared each quarter to estimate losses for each line of insurance, major components of losses (such as coverages and perils), major states or groups of states and for reported losses and IBNR. The actuarial methods described above are used to analyze the settlement patterns of claims by determining the development factors for specific data elements that are necessary components of a reserve estimation process. Development factors are calculated quarterly for data elements such as claim counts reported and settled, paid losses, and paid losses combined with case reserves. The calculation of development factors from changes in these data elements also impacts claim severity trends, which is a common industry reference used to explain changes in reserve estimates. The historical development patterns for these data elements are used as the assumptions to calculate reserve estimates. Often, several different estimates are prepared for each detailed component, incorporating alternative analyses of changing claim settlement patterns and other influences on losses, from which we select our best estimate for each component, occasionally incorporating additional analyses and actuarial judgment, as described above. These micro-level estimates are not based on a single set of assumptions. Actuarial judgments that may be applied to these components of certain micro-level estimates generally do not have a material impact on the consolidated level of reserves. Moreover, this detailed micro-level process does not permit or result in a compilation of a company-wide roll up to generate a range of needed loss reserves that would be meaningful. Based on our review of these estimates, our best estimate of required reserves for each state/line/coverage component is recorded for each accident year, and the required reserves for each component are summed to create the reserve balance carried on our Consolidated Statements of Financial Position. Reserves are reestimated quarterly, by combining historical results with current actual results to calculate new development factors. This process incorporates the historic and latest actual trends, and other underlying changes in the data elements used to calculate reserve estimates. New development factors are likely to differ from previous development factors used in prior reserve estimates because actual results (claims reported or settled, losses paid, or changes to case reserves) occur differently than the implied assumptions contained in the previous development factor 36 calculations. If claims reported, paid losses, or case reserve changes are greater or less than the levels estimated by previous development factors, reserve reestimates increase or decrease. When actual development of these data elements is different than the historical development pattern used in a prior period reserve estimate, a new reserve is determined. The difference between indicated reserves based on new reserve estimates and recorded reserves (the previous estimate) is the amount of reserve reestimate and is recognized as an increase or decrease in property-liability insurance claims and claims expense in the Consolidated Statements of Operations. Total Property-liability reserve reestimates, after-tax, as a percent of net income in 2009, 2008 and 2007 were 8.5%, (6.6)% and 2.4%, respectively. For Property-Liability, the 3-year average of reserve reestimates as a percentage of total reserves was a favorable 0.2%, for Allstate Protection, the 3-year average of reserve estimates was a favorable 0.5% and for Discontinued Lines and Coverages, the 3-year average of reserve reestimates was an unfavorable 1.4%, each of these results being consistent within a reasonable actuarial tolerance for our respective businesses. Allstate Protection reserve reestimates were primarily the result of auto claim severity development that was better than expected, and for Discontinued Lines and Coverages, reestimates were primarily a result of increased reported claim activity (claims frequency). A more detailed discussion of reserve reestimates is presented in the Property-Liability Claims and Claims Expense Reserves section of this document. The following table shows net claims and claims expense reserves by operating segment and line of business as of December 31: ($ in millions) 2009 2008 2007 Allstate Protection Auto $ 10,606 $ 10,220 $ 10,175 Homeowners 2,399 2,824 2,279 Other lines 2,145 2,207 2,131 Total Allstate Protection 15,150 15,251 14,585 Discontinued Lines and Coverages Asbestos 1,180 1,228 1,302 Environmental 198 195 232 Other discontinued lines 500 508 541 Total Discontinued Lines and Coverages 1,878 1,931 2,075 Total Property-Liability $ 17,028 $ 17,182 $ 16,660 Allstate Protection reserve estimates Factors affecting reserve estimates Reserve estimates are developed based on the processes and historical development trends as previously described. These estimates are considered in conjunction with known facts and interpretations of circumstances and factors including our experience with similar cases, actual claims paid, differing payment patterns and pending levels of unpaid claims, loss management programs, product mix and contractual terms, changes in law and regulation, judicial decisions, and economic conditions. When we experience changes of the type previously mentioned, we may need to apply actuarial judgment in the determination and selection of development factors considered more reflective of the new trends, such as combining shorter or longer periods of historical results with current actual results to produce development factors based on two-year, three-year, or longer development periods to reestimate our reserves. For example, if a legal change is expected to have a significant impact on the development of claim severity for a coverage which is part of a particular line of insurance in a specific state, actuarial judgment is applied to determine appropriate development factors that will most accurately reflect the expected impact on that specific estimate. Another example would be when a change in economic conditions is expected to affect the cost of repairs to damaged autos or property for a particular line, coverage, or state, actuarial judgment is applied to determine appropriate development factors to use in the reserve estimate that will most accurately reflect the expected impacts on severity development. As claims are reported, for certain liability claims of sufficient size and complexity, the field adjusting staff establishes case reserve estimates of ultimate cost, based on their assessment of facts and circumstances related to each individual claim. For other claims which occur in large volumes and settle in a relatively short time frame, it is not practical or efficient to set case reserves for each claim, and a statistical case reserve is set for these claims based on estimation techniques previously described. In the normal course of business, we may also supplement our claims processes by utilizing third party adjusters, appraisers, engineers, inspectors, and other professionals and information sources to assess and settle catastrophe and non-catastrophe related claims. 37 Historically, the case reserves set by the field adjusting staff have not proven to be an entirely accurate estimate of the ultimate cost of claims. To provide for this, a development reserve is estimated using previously described processes, and allocated to pending claims as a supplement to case reserves. Typically, the case and supplemental development reserves comprise about 90% of total reserves. Another major component of reserves is IBNR. Typically, IBNR comprises about 10% of total reserves. Generally, the initial reserves for a new accident year are established based on severity assumptions for different business segments, lines and coverages based on historical relationships to relevant inflation indicators, and reserves for prior accident years are statistically determined using processes previously described. Changes in auto current year claim severity are generally influenced by inflation in the medical and auto repair sectors of the economy. We mitigate these effects through various loss management programs. Injury claims are affected largely by medical cost inflation while physical damage claims are affected largely by auto repair cost inflation and used car prices. For auto physical damage coverages, we monitor our rate of increase in average cost per claim against a weighted average of the Maintenance and Repair price index and the Parts and Equipment price index. We believe our claim settlement initiatives, such as improvements to the claim review and settlement process, the use of special investigative units to detect fraud and handle suspect claims, litigation management and defense strategies, as well as various other loss management initiatives underway, contribute to the mitigation of injury and physical damage severity trends. Changes in homeowners current year claim severity are generally influenced by inflation in the cost of building materials, the cost of construction and property repair services, the cost of replacing home furnishings and other contents, the types of claims that qualify for coverage, deductibles and other economic and environmental factors. We employ various loss management programs to mitigate the effect of these factors. As loss experience for the current year develops for each type of loss, it is monitored relative to initial assumptions until it is judged to have sufficient statistical credibility. From that point in time and forward, reserves are reestimated using statistical actuarial processes to reflect the impact actual loss trends have on development factors incorporated into the actuarial estimation processes. Statistical credibility is usually achieved by the end of the first calendar year; however, when trends for the current accident year exceed initial assumptions sooner, they are usually determined to be credible, and reserves are increased accordingly. The very detailed processes for developing reserve estimates, and the lack of a need and existence of a common set of assumptions or development factors, limits aggregate reserve level testing for variability of data elements. However, by applying standard actuarial methods to consolidated historic accident year loss data for major loss types, comprising auto injury losses, auto physical damage losses and homeowner losses, we develop variability analyses consistent with the way we develop reserves by measuring the potential variability of development factors, as described in the section titled "Potential Reserve Estimate Variability" below. Causes of reserve estimate uncertainty Since reserves are estimates of the unpaid portions of claims and claims expenses that have occurred, including IBNR losses, the establishment of appropriate reserves, including reserves for catastrophes, requires regular reevaluation and refinement of estimates to determine our ultimate loss estimate. At each reporting date, the highest degree of uncertainty in estimates of losses arises from claims remaining to be settled for the current accident year and the most recent preceding accident year. The greatest degree of uncertainty exists in the current accident year because the current accident year contains the greatest proportion of losses that have not been reported or settled but must be estimated as of the current reporting date. Most of these losses relate to damaged property such as automobiles and homes, and medical care for injuries from accidents. During the first year after the end of an accident year, a large portion of the total losses for that accident year are settled. When accident year losses paid through the end of the first year following the initial accident year are incorporated into updated actuarial estimates, the trends inherent in the settlement of claims emerge more clearly. Consequently, this is the point in time at which we tend to make our largest reestimates of losses for an accident year. After the second year, the losses that we pay for an accident year typically relate to claims that are more difficult to settle, such as those involving serious injuries or litigation. Private passenger auto insurance provides a good illustration of the uncertainty of future loss estimates: our typical annual percentage payout of reserves for an accident year is approximately 50% in the first year after the end of the accident year, 20% in the second year, 15% in the third year, 5% in the fourth year, and the remaining 10% thereafter. Reserves for catastrophe losses Property-Liability claims and claims expense reserves also include reserves for catastrophe losses. Catastrophe losses are an inherent risk of the property-liability insurance industry that have contributed, and will continue to contribute, to potentially material year-to-year fluctuations in our results of operations and financial position. We define a "catastrophe" as an event that produces pre-tax losses before reinsurance in excess of $1 million and involves multiple first party policyholders, or an event that produces a number of claims in excess of a 38 preset, per-event threshold of average claims in a specific area, occurring within a certain amount of time following the event. Catastrophes are caused by various natural events including high winds, winter storms, tornadoes, hailstorms, wildfires, tropical storms, hurricanes, earthquakes and volcanoes. We are also exposed to man-made catastrophic events, such as certain acts of terrorism or industrial accidents. The nature and level of catastrophes in any period cannot be predicted. The estimation of claims and claims expense reserves for catastrophes also comprises estimates of losses from reported claims and IBNR, primarily for damage to property. In general, our estimates for catastrophe reserves are based on claim adjuster inspections and the application of historical loss development factors as described previously. However, depending on the nature of the catastrophe, as noted above, the estimation process can be further complicated. For example, for hurricanes, complications could include the inability of insureds to promptly report losses, limitations placed on claims adjusting staff affecting their ability to inspect losses, determining whether losses are covered by our homeowners policy (generally for damage caused by wind or wind driven rain) or specifically excluded coverage caused by flood, estimating additional living expenses, and assessing the impact of demand surge, exposure to mold damage, and the effects of numerous other considerations, including the timing of a catastrophe in relation to other events, such as at or near the end of a financial reporting period, which can affect the availability of information needed to estimate reserves for that reporting period. In these situations, we may need to adapt our practices to accommodate these circumstances in order to determine a best estimate of our losses from a catastrophe. As an example, in 2005 to complete an estimate for certain areas affected by Hurricane Katrina and not yet inspected by our claims adjusting staff, or where we believed our historical loss development factors were not predictive, we relied on analysis of actual claim notices received compared to total PIF, as well as visual, governmental and third party information, including aerial photos, area observations, and data on wind speed and flood depth to the extent available. Potential reserve estimate variability The aggregation of numerous micro-level estimates for each business segment, line of insurance, major components of losses (such as coverages and perils), and major states or groups of states for reported losses and IBNR forms the reserve liability recorded in the Consolidated Statements of Financial Position. Because of this detailed approach to developing our reserve estimates, there is not a single set of assumptions that determine our reserve estimates at the consolidated level. Given the numerous micro-level estimates for reported losses and IBNR, management does not believe the processes that we follow will produce a statistically credible or reliable actuarial reserve range that would be meaningful. Reserve estimates, by their very nature, are very complex to determine and subject to significant judgment, and do not represent an exact determination for each outstanding claim. Accordingly, as actual claims, and/or paid losses, and/or case reserve results emerge, our estimate of the ultimate cost to settle will be different than previously estimated. To develop a statistical indication of potential reserve variability within reasonably likely possible outcomes, an actuarial technique (stochastic modeling) is applied to the countrywide consolidated data elements for paid losses and paid losses combined with case reserves separately for injury losses, auto physical damage losses, and homeowners losses excluding catastrophe losses. Based on the combined historical variability of the development factors calculated for these data elements, an estimate of the standard error or standard deviation around these reserve estimates is calculated within each accident year for the last eleven years for each type of loss. The variability of these reserve estimates within one standard deviation of the mean (a measure of frequency of dispersion often viewed to be an acceptable level of accuracy) is believed by management to represent a reasonable and statistically probable measure of potential variability. Based on our products and coverages, historical experience, the statistical credibility of our extensive data and stochastic modeling of actuarial chain ladder methodologies used to develop reserve estimates, we estimate that the potential variability of our Allstate Protection reserves, excluding reserves for catastrophe losses, within a reasonable probability of other possible outcomes, may be approximately plus or minus 4%, or plus or minus $400 million in net income. A lower level of variability exists for auto injury losses, which comprise approximately 70% of reserves, due to their relatively stable development patterns over a longer duration of time required to settle claims. Other types of losses, such as auto physical damage, homeowners losses and other losses, which comprise about 30% of reserves, tend to have greater variability but are settled in a much shorter period of time. Although this evaluation reflects most reasonably likely outcomes, it is possible the final outcome may fall below or above these amounts. Historical variability of reserve estimates is reported in the Property-Liability Claims and Claims Expense Reserves section of this document. Adequacy of reserve estimates We believe our net claims and claims expense reserves are appropriately established based on available methodology, facts, technology, laws and regulations. We calculate and record a single best reserve estimate, in conformance with generally accepted actuarial standards, for each line of insurance, its components (coverages and perils) and state, for reported losses and for IBNR losses, and as a result we believe that no 39 other estimate is better than our recorded amount. Due to the uncertainties involved, the ultimate cost of losses may vary materially from recorded amounts, which are based on our best estimates. Discontinued Lines and Coverages reserve estimates Characteristics of Discontinued Lines exposure We continue to receive asbestos and environmental claims. Asbestos claims relate primarily to bodily injuries asserted by people who were exposed to asbestos or products containing asbestos. Environmental claims relate primarily to pollution and related clean-up costs. Our exposure to asbestos, environmental and other discontinued lines claims arises principally from assumed reinsurance coverage written during the 1960s through the mid-1980s, including reinsurance on primary insurance written on large U.S. companies, and from direct excess insurance written from 1972 through 1985, including substantial excess general liability coverages on large U.S. companies. Additional exposure stems from direct primary commercial insurance written during the 1960s through the mid-1980s. Other discontinued lines exposures primarily relate to general liability and product liability mass tort claims, such as those for medical devices and other products. In 1986, the general liability policy form used by us and others in the property-liability industry was amended to introduce an "absolute pollution exclusion," which excluded coverage for environmental damage claims, and to add an asbestos exclusion. Most general liability policies issued prior to 1987 contain annual aggregate limits for product liability coverage. General liability policies issued in 1987 and thereafter contain annual aggregate limits for product liability coverage and annual aggregate limits for all coverages. Our experience to date is that these policy form changes have limited the extent of our exposure to environmental and asbestos claim risks. Our exposure to liability for asbestos, environmental and other discontinued lines losses manifests differently depending on whether it arises from assumed reinsurance coverage, direct excess insurance or direct primary commercial insurance. The direct insurance coverage we provided that covered asbestos, environmental and other discontinued lines was substantially "excess" in nature. Direct excess insurance and reinsurance involve coverage written by us for specific layers of protection above retentions and other insurance plans. The nature of excess coverage and reinsurance provided to other insurers limits our exposure to loss to specific layers of protection in excess of policyholder retention on primary insurance plans. Our exposure is further limited by the significant reinsurance that we had purchased on our direct excess business. Our assumed reinsurance business involved writing generally small participations in other insurers' reinsurance programs. The reinsured losses in which we participate may be a proportion of all eligible losses or eligible losses in excess of defined retentions. The majority of our assumed reinsurance exposure, approximately 85%, is for excess of loss coverage, while the remaining 15% is for pro-rata coverage. Our direct primary commercial insurance business did not include coverage to large asbestos manufacturers. This business comprises a cross section of policyholders engaged in many diverse business sectors located throughout the country. How reserve estimates are established and updated We conduct an annual review in the third quarter to evaluate and establish asbestos, environmental and other discontinued lines reserves. Changes to reserves are recorded in the reporting period in which they are determined. Using established industry and actuarial best practices and assuming no change in the regulatory or economic environment, this detailed and comprehensive "grounds up" methodology determines asbestos reserves based on assessments of the characteristics of exposure (i.e. claim activity, potential liability, jurisdiction, products versus non-products exposure) presented by individual policyholders, and determines environmental reserves based on assessments of the characteristics of exposure (i.e. environmental damages, respective shares of liability of potentially responsible parties, appropriateness and cost of remediation) to pollution and related clean-up costs. The number and cost of these claims is affected by intense advertising by trial lawyers seeking asbestos plaintiffs, and entities with asbestos exposure seeking bankruptcy protection as a result of asbestos liabilities, initially causing a delay in the reporting of claims, often followed by an acceleration and an increase in claims and claims expenses as settlements occur. After evaluating our insureds' probable liabilities for asbestos and/or environmental claims, we evaluate our insureds' coverage programs for such claims. We consider our insureds' total available insurance coverage, including the coverage we issued. We also consider relevant judicial interpretations of policy language and applicable coverage defenses or determinations, if any. Evaluation of both the insureds' estimated liabilities and our exposure to the insureds depends heavily on an analysis of the relevant legal issues and litigation environment. This analysis is conducted by our specialized claims 40 adjusting staff and legal counsel. Based on these evaluations, case reserves are established by claims adjusting staff and actuarial analysis is employed to develop an IBNR reserve, which includes estimated potential reserve development and claims that have occurred but have not been reported. As of December 31, 2009 and 2008, IBNR was 62.3% and 63.8%, respectively, of combined asbestos and environmental reserves. For both asbestos and environmental reserves, we also evaluate our historical direct net loss and expense paid and incurred experience to assess any emerging trends, fluctuations or characteristics suggested by the aggregate paid and incurred activity. Other Discontinued Lines and Coverages The following table shows reserves for other discontinued lines which provide for remaining loss and loss expense liabilities related to business no longer written by us, other than asbestos and environmental, as of December 31. ($ in millions) 2009 2008 2007 Other mass torts $ 201 $ 177 $ 189 Workers' compensation 122 130 133 Commercial and other 177 201 219 Other discontinued lines $ 500 $ 508 $ 541 Other mass torts describes direct excess and reinsurance general liability coverage provided for cumulative injury losses other than asbestos and environmental. Workers' compensation and commercial and other include run-off from discontinued direct primary, direct excess and reinsurance commercial insurance operations of various coverage exposures other than asbestos and environmental. Reserves are based on considerations similar to those previously described, as they relate to the characteristics of specific individual coverage exposures. Potential reserve estimate variability Establishing Discontinued Lines and Coverages net loss reserves for asbestos, environmental and other discontinued lines claims is subject to uncertainties that are much greater than those presented by other types of claims. Among the complications are lack of historical data, long reporting delays, uncertainty as to the number and identity of insureds with potential exposure and unresolved legal issues regarding policy coverage; unresolved legal issues regarding the determination, availability and timing of exhaustion of policy limits; plaintiffs' evolving and expanding theories of liability; availability and collectability of recoveries from reinsurance; retrospectively determined premiums and other contractual agreements; estimates of the extent and timing of any contractual liability; the impact of bankruptcy protection sought by various asbestos producers and other asbestos defendants; and other uncertainties. There are also complex legal issues concerning the interpretation of various insurance policy provisions and whether those losses are covered, or were ever intended to be covered, and could be recoverable through retrospectively determined premium, reinsurance or other contractual agreements. Courts have reached different and sometimes inconsistent conclusions as to when losses are deemed to have occurred and which policies provide coverage; what types of losses are covered; whether there is an insurer obligation to defend; how policy limits are determined; how policy exclusions and conditions are applied and interpreted; and whether clean-up costs represent insured property damage. Our reserves for asbestos and environmental exposures could be affected by tort reform, class action litigation, and other potential legislation and judicial decisions. Environmental exposures could also be affected by a change in the existing federal Superfund law and similar state statutes. There can be no assurance that any reform legislation will be enacted or that any such legislation will provide for a fair, effective and cost-efficient system for settlement of asbestos or environmental claims. We believe these issues are not likely to be resolved in the near future, and the ultimate costs may vary materially from the amounts currently recorded resulting in material changes in loss reserves. Historical variability of reserve estimates is demonstrated in the Property-Liability Claims and Claims Expense Reserves section of this document. Adequacy of reserve estimates Management believes its net loss reserves for environmental, asbestos and other discontinued lines exposures are appropriately established based on available facts, technology, laws, regulations, and assessments of other pertinent factors and characteristics of exposure (i.e. claim activity, potential liability, jurisdiction, products versus non-products exposure) presented by individual policyholders, assuming no change in the legal, legislative or economic environment. Due to the uncertainties and factors described above, management believes it is not practicable to develop a meaningful range for any such additional net loss reserves that may be required. Further discussion of reserve estimates For further discussion of these estimates and quantification of the impact of reserve estimates, reserve reestimates and assumptions, see Notes 7 and 13 to the consolidated financial statements and the Property-Liability Claims and Claims Expense Reserves section of this document. 41 Reserve for life-contingent contract benefits estimation Due to the long term nature of these policies, benefits are payable over many years; accordingly, the reserves are calculated as the present value of future expected benefits to be paid, reduced by the present value of future expected net premiums. Long-term actuarial assumptions of future investment yields, mortality, morbidity, policy terminations and expenses are used when establishing the reserve for life-contingent contract benefits payable under insurance policies including traditional life insurance, life-contingent immediate annuities and voluntary health products. These assumptions, which for traditional life insurance are applied using the net level premium method, include provisions for adverse deviation and generally vary by characteristics such as type of coverage, year of issue and policy duration. Future investment yield assumptions are determined based upon prevailing investment yields as well as estimated reinvestment yields. Mortality, morbidity and policy termination assumptions are based on our experience and industry experience. Expense assumptions include the estimated effects of inflation and expenses to be incurred beyond the premium-paying period. These assumptions are established at the time the policy is issued, are consistent with assumptions for determining DAC amortization for these policies, and are generally not changed during the policy coverage period. However, if actual experience emerges in a manner that is significantly adverse relative to the original assumptions, adjustments to DAC or reserves may be required resulting in a charge to earnings which could have a material adverse effect on our operating results and financial condition. We periodically review the adequacy of reserves and recoverability of DAC for these policies on an aggregate basis using actual experience. In the event actual experience is significantly adverse compared to the original assumptions, a premium deficiency is deemed to exist and any remaining unamortized DAC balance must be expensed to the extent not recoverable and the establishment of a premium deficiency reserve may be required. In 2009 and 2007, our reviews concluded that no premium deficiency adjustments were necessary, primarily due to profit from traditional life insurance more than offsetting the projected losses in immediate annuities with life contingencies. In 2008, for traditional life insurance and immediate annuities with life contingencies, an aggregate premium deficiency of $336 million pre-tax ($219 million after-tax) resulted primarily from a study indicating that the annuitants on certain life-contingent contracts are projected to live longer than we anticipated when the contracts were issued and, to a lesser degree, a reduction in the related investment portfolio yield. The deficiency was recorded through a reduction in DAC. We will continue to monitor the experience of our traditional life insurance and immediate annuities. We anticipate that mortality, investment and reinvestment yields, and policy terminations are the factors that would be most likely to require premium deficiency adjustments to these reserves or related DAC. For further detail on the reserve for life-contingent contract benefits, see Note 8 of the consolidated financial statements. PROPERTY-LIABILITY 2009 HIGHLIGHTS Premiums written, an operating measure that is defined and reconciled to premiums earned in the Property-Liability Operations section of the MD&A, decreased 2.3% to $25.97 billion in 2009 from $26.58 billion in 2008. Allstate brand standard auto premiums written decreased 1.0% to $15.76 billion in 2009 from $15.92 billion in 2008. Allstate brand homeowners premiums written were $5.64 billion in 2009 and were comparable to 2008. Premium operating measures and statistics contributing to overall Allstate brand standard auto premiums written decline were the following: 1.0% decrease in PIF as of December 31, 2009 compared to December 31, 2008 the six month renewal ratio was 88.9% in 2009 and was comparable to 2008 1.6% increase in the six month policy term average gross premium before reinsurance to $434 in 2009 from $427 in 2008 12.3% increase in new issued applications in 2009 compared to 2008 Premium operating measures and statistics contributing to overall Allstate brand homeowners premiums written were the following: 3.9% decrease in PIF as of December 31, 2009 compared to December 31, 2008 1.1 point increase in the twelve month renewal ratio to 88.1% in 2009 compared to 87.0% in 2008 2.6% increase in the twelve month policy term average gross premium before reinsurance to $883 in 2009 from $861 in 2008 6.4% decrease in new issued applications in 2009 compared to 2008 $96 million decrease in catastrophe reinsurance costs to $561 million in 2009 from $657 million in 2008 Factors contributing to the Allstate brand standard auto loss ratio increase of 1.2 points to 69.3 in 2009 from 68.1 in 2008 were the following: 6.2% increase in standard auto claim frequency for property damage in 2009 compared to 2008 13.1% increase in standard auto claim frequency for bodily injury in 2009 compared to 2008 0.7% decrease in auto claim severities for bodily injury in 2009 compared to 2008 0.7% decrease in auto claim severities for property damage in 2009 compared to 2008 42 Factors contributing to the Allstate brand homeowners loss ratio, which includes catastrophes, decrease of 16.7 points to 79.6 in 2009 from 96.3 in 2008 were the following: 17.5 percentage point decrease in the effect of catastrophe losses to 29.0 points in 2009 compared to 46.5 points in 2008 9.0% increase in homeowner claim frequency, excluding catastrophes, in 2009 compared to 2008 3.0% increase in claim severity, excluding catastrophes, in 2009 compared to 2008 Factors contributing to the $1.27 billion decrease in catastrophe losses to $2.07 billion in 2009 compared to $3.34 billion in 2008 were the following: $169 million of favorable reserve reestimates in 2009 compared to $125 million unfavorable reserve reestimates in 2008 82 events with $2.24 billion of losses in 2009 compared to 123 events with losses of $3.22 billion in 2008 2008 losses included $966 million and $342 million related to Hurricanes Ike and Gustav, respectively Factors contributing to prior year reserve reestimates of $112 million favorable in 2009 compared to $170 million unfavorable in 2008 included: Prior year reserve reestimates related to auto, homeowners and other personal lines in 2009 contributed $57 million favorable, $168 million favorable and $89 million unfavorable, respectively, compared to prior year reserve reestimates in 2008 of $27 million favorable, $124 million unfavorable and $55 million unfavorable, respectively prior year reserve reestimates in 2009 and 2008 are largely attributable to prior year catastrophes and a $45 million IBNR reclassification from auto to other personal lines that occurred in 2008 Property-Liability underwriting income of $995 million in 2009 compared to $164 million in 2008 included the following primary contributing factors: Allstate brand standard auto loss ratio increased 1.2 points to 69.3 in 2009 from 68.1 in 2008 Allstate brand homeowners loss ratio, which includes catastrophes, decreased 16.7 points to 79.6 in 2009 from 96.3 in 2008 Underwriting income, a measure not based on GAAP, is defined below. Property-Liability investments as of December 31, 2009 were $34.53 billion, an increase of 12.0% from $30.84 billion as of December 31, 2008. Net investment income was $1.33 billion in 2009, a decrease of 20.7% from $1.67 billion in 2008. Net realized capital losses were $168 million in 2009 compared to $1.86 billion in 2008. PROPERTY-LIABILITY OPERATIONS Overview Our Property-Liability operations consist of two business segments: Allstate Protection and Discontinued Lines and Coverages. Allstate Protection comprises two brands, the Allstate brand and Encompass brand. Allstate Protection is principally engaged in the sale of personal property and casualty insurance, primarily private passenger auto and homeowners insurance, to individuals in the United States and Canada. Discontinued Lines and Coverages includes results from insurance coverage that we no longer write and results for certain commercial and other businesses in run-off. These segments are consistent with the groupings of financial information that management uses to evaluate performance and to determine the allocation of resources. Underwriting income, a measure that is not based on GAAP and is reconciled to net income below, is calculated as premiums earned, less claims and claims expense ("losses"), amortization of DAC, operating costs and expenses and restructuring and related charges, as determined using GAAP. We use this measure in our evaluation of results of operations to analyze the profitability of the Property-Liability insurance operations separately from investment results. It is also an integral component of incentive compensation. It is useful for investors to evaluate the components of income separately and in the aggregate when reviewing performance. Net income is the GAAP measure most directly comparable to underwriting income. Underwriting income should not be considered as a substitute for net income and does not reflect the overall profitability of the business. The table below includes GAAP operating ratios we use to measure our profitability. We believe that they enhance an investor's understanding of our profitability. They are calculated as follows: Claims and claims expense ("loss") ratio the ratio of claims and claims expense to premiums earned. Loss ratios include the impact of catastrophe losses. Expense ratio the ratio of amortization of DAC, operating costs and expenses, and restructuring and related charges to premiums earned. Combined ratio the ratio of claims and claims expense, amortization of DAC, operating costs and expenses, and restructuring and related charges to premiums earned. The combined ratio is the sum of the loss ratio and the 43 expense ratio. The difference between 100% and the combined ratio represents underwriting income as a percentage of premiums earned. We have also calculated the following impacts of specific items on the GAAP operating ratios because of the volatility of these items between fiscal periods. Effect of catastrophe losses on combined ratio the percentage of catastrophe losses included in claims and claims expense to premiums earned. This ratio includes prior year reserve reestimates of catastrophe losses. Effect of prior year reserve reestimates on combined ratio the percentage of prior year reserve reestimates included in claims and claims expense to premiums earned. This ratio includes prior year reserve reestimates of catastrophe losses. Effect of restructuring and related charges on combined ratio the percentage of restructuring and related charges to premiums earned. Effect of Discontinued Lines and Coverages on combined ratio the ratio of claims and claims expense and other costs and expenses in the Discontinued Lines and Coverages segment to Property-Liability premiums earned. The sum of the effect of Discontinued Lines and Coverages on the combined ratio and the Allstate Protection combined ratio is equal to the Property-Liability combined ratio. Summarized financial data, a reconciliation of underwriting income to net income and GAAP operating ratios for our Property-Liability operations are presented in the following table. ($ in millions, except ratios) 2009 2008 2007 Premiums written $ 25,971 $ 26,584 $ 27,183 Revenues Premiums earned $ 26,194 $ 26,967 $ 27,233 Net investment income 1,328 1,674 1,972 Realized capital gains and losses (168 ) (1,858 ) 1,416 Total revenues 27,354 26,783 30,621 Costs and expenses Claims and claims expense (18,746 ) (20,064 ) (17,667 ) Amortization of DAC (3,789 ) (3,975 ) (4,121 ) Operating costs and expenses (2,559 ) (2,742 ) (2,634 ) Restructuring and related charges (105 ) (22 ) (27 ) Total costs and expenses (25,199 ) (26,803 ) (24,449 ) Income tax (expense) benefit (612 ) 248 (1,914 ) Net income $ 1,543 $ 228 $ 4,258 Underwriting income $ 995 $ 164 $ 2,784 Net investment income 1,328 1,674 1,972 Income tax expense on operations (558 ) (401 ) (1,413 ) Realized capital gains and losses, after-tax (222 ) (1,209 ) 915 Net income $ 1,543 $ 228 $ 4,258 Catastrophe losses (1) $ 2,069 $ 3,342 $ 1,409 GAAP operating ratios Claims and claims expense ratio 71.6 74.4 64.9 Expense ratio 24.6 25.0 24.9 Combined ratio 96.2 99.4 89.8 Effect of catastrophe losses on combined ratio (1) 7.9 12.4 5.2 Effect of prior year reserve reestimates on combined ratio (1) (0.4 ) 0.7 (0.6 ) Effect of restructuring and related charges on combined ratio 0.4 0.1 0.1 Effect of Discontinued Lines and Coverages on combined ratio 0.1 0.1 0.2 (1) Prior year reserve reestimates included in catastrophe losses totaled $169 million favorable in 2009, $125 million unfavorable in 2008 and $127 million unfavorable in 2007. 44 ALLSTATE PROTECTION SEGMENT Overview and strategy The Allstate Protection segment sells primarily private passenger auto and homeowners insurance to individuals through Allstate Exclusive Agencies and directly through call centers and the internet under the Allstate brand. We also sell auto and homeowners insurance through independent agencies under both the Allstate brand and the Encompass brand. Our operating priorities for the Protection segment include achieving profitable market share growth for the auto business as well as earning acceptable returns on the homeowners business. Key goals include: Improving customer loyalty and retention Broadening customer product relationships Improving competitive position through pricing sophistication, claims efficiency and expense management Investing in the effectiveness and reach of our multiple distribution channels Maintaining a strong capital foundation through risk management and effective resource allocation Our customer-focused strategy for the Allstate brand aligns targeted marketing, product innovation, distribution effectiveness, and pricing toward acquiring and retaining an increased share of high lifetime value customers. The Allstate brand will utilize targeted marketing delivered to high lifetime value prospects to promote our strategic priorities, with messaging that continues to communicate affordability and the ease of switching to and doing business with Allstate, as well as highlighting our comprehensive product and coverage options. At Allstate we differentiate ourselves from competitors by offering a comprehensive range of product options as well as product customization, including Allstate Your Choice Auto ("YCA") with options such as safe driving deductibles and a safe driving bonus. We will continue to focus on developing and introducing products and services that further differentiate Allstate and enhance the customer experience. We will broaden customer relationships by identifying the greatest cross sell opportunities such as auto sales to our 3 million monoline property customers and expanding sales of our Emerging Business and Allstate Financial products. Within our multiple distribution channels we are undergoing a focused effort to enhance our capabilities by implementing uniform processes and standards to elevate the level and consistency of the customer experience. We continue to enhance technology to integrate our distribution channels, improve customer service, facilitate the introduction of new products and services and reduce infrastructure costs related to supporting agencies and handling claims. These actions and others are designed to optimize the effectiveness of our distribution and service channels by increasing the productivity of the Allstate brand's exclusive agencies and our direct channel. Our pricing and underwriting are designed to enhance both our competitive position and our profit potential. We will provide and continue to enhance a range of discounts to attract more high lifetime value customer segments. For example, we implemented a new auto discount (the Preferred Package Discount), which was available in 42 states by the end of 2009, for the high lifetime value customer segment. We also increased the discount our homeowners customers receive if they insure their automobiles with Allstate. Pricing sophistication, which underlies our Strategic Risk Management program, uses a number of risk evaluation factors including insurance scoring, to the extent permissible by regulations, based on information that is obtained from credit reports. For Allstate brand auto and homeowners business, we continue to improve our mix of customers towards those who we consider high lifetime value that generally are homeowners that insure multiple autos with us, have better retention and more favorable loss experience. Our strategy for the Encompass brand includes enhancing our Premier Package Policy (a product providing customers with the ability to simplify their insurance needs by consolidating their coverage into one policy, one bill, one premium and one renewal date), increasing distribution effectiveness and improving agency technology interfaces to become the package carrier of choice for aligned agencies and generate stable, consistent earnings growth. The Allstate Protection segment also includes a separate organization called Emerging Businesses which is comprised of Business Insurance (commercial products for small business owners), Consumer Household (specialty products including motorcycles, boats, renters and condominium insurance policies), Allstate Dealer Services (insurance and non-insurance products sold primarily to auto dealers), Allstate Roadside Services (retail and wholesale roadside assistance products) and Ivantage (insurance agency). Premiums written by Emerging Businesses, through all channels including the Direct Channel, were $2.44 billion in 2009. We expect to accelerate profitable growth in Emerging Businesses during 2010. 45 We continue to manage our property catastrophe exposure in order to provide our shareholders an acceptable return on the risks assumed in our property business and to reduce the variability of our earnings, while providing protection to our customers. Our property business includes personal homeowners, commercial property and other property lines. At December 31, 2009, we continue to be within our goal to have no more than a 1% likelihood of exceeding our expected annual aggregate catastrophe losses by $2 billion, net of reinsurance, from hurricanes and earthquakes, based on modeled assumptions and applications currently available. The use of different assumptions and updates to industry models could materially change the projected loss. Property catastrophe exposure management includes purchasing reinsurance in areas that have known exposure to hurricanes, earthquakes, wildfires, fires following earthquakes and other catastrophes. We are working for changes in the regulatory environment, including recognizing the need for and improving appropriate risk based pricing and promoting the creation of government sponsored, privately funded solutions for mega-catastrophes. While the actions that we take will be primarily focused on reducing the catastrophe exposure in our property business, we also consider their impact on our ability to market our auto lines. Pricing of property products is typically intended to establish returns that we deem acceptable over a long-term period. Losses, including losses from catastrophic events and weather-related losses (such as wind, hail, lightning and freeze losses not meeting our criteria to be declared a catastrophe) are accrued on an occurrence basis within the policy period. Therefore, in any reporting period, loss experience from catastrophic events and weather-related losses may contribute to negative or positive underwriting performance relative to the expectations we incorporated into the products' pricing. Additionally, property products are more capital intensive than other personal lines products. Allstate Protection outlook Allstate Protection will emphasize attracting and retaining high lifetime value customers while maintaining pricing discipline. We expect that volatility in the level of catastrophes we experience will contribute to variation in our underwriting results; however, this volatility will be mitigated due to our catastrophe management actions, including the purchase of reinsurance. We will continue to study the efficiencies of our operations and cost structure for additional areas where costs may be reduced. Premiums written , an operating measure, is the amount of premiums charged for policies issued during a fiscal period. Premiums earned is a GAAP measure. Premiums are considered earned and are included in the financial results on a pro-rata basis over the policy period. The portion of premiums written applicable to the unexpired terms of the policies is recorded as unearned premiums on our Consolidated Statements of Financial Position. Since the Allstate brand policy periods are typically 6 months for auto and 12 months for homeowners, and the Encompass standard auto and homeowners policy periods are typically 12 months and non-standard auto policy periods are typically 6 months, rate changes will generally be recognized in premiums earned over a period of 6 to 24 months. The following table shows the unearned premium balance at December 31 and the timeframe in which we expect to recognize these premiums as earned. ($ in millions) % earned after 2009 2008 90 days 180 days 270 days 360 days Allstate brand: Standard auto $ 4,060 $ 4,002 73.4 % 98.2 % 99.6 % 100.0 % Non-standard auto 250 259 71.3 % 96.9 % 99.3 % 100.0 % Homeowners 3,193 3,182 43.6 % 75.7 % 94.3 % 100.0 % Other personal lines (1) 1,295 1,385 39.9 % 69.5 % 87.6 % 94.5 % Total Allstate brand 8,798 8,828 57.7 % 85.9 % 95.9 % 99.2 % Encompass brand: Standard auto 399 506 44.6 % 76.3 % 94.4 % 100.0 % Non-standard auto 4 9 78.3 % 100.0 % 100.0 % 100.0 % Homeowners 233 269 44.5 % 76.4 % 94.5 % 100.0 % Other personal lines (1) 52 60 44.3 % 76.1 % 94.4 % 100.0 % Total Encompass brand 688 844 44.7 % 76.4 % 94.5 % 100.0 % Allstate Protection unearned premiums $ 9,486 $ 9,672 56.7 % 85.2 % 95.8 % 99.3 % (1) Other personal lines include commercial, condominium, renters, involuntary auto and other personal lines. 46 A reconciliation of premiums written to premiums earned is shown in the following table. ($ in millions) 2009 2008 2007 Premiums written: Allstate Protection $ 25,972 $ 26,584 $ 27,183 Discontinued Lines and Coverages (1 ) Property-Liability premiums written 25,971 26,584 27,183 Decrease in unearned premiums 200 383 17 Other 23 33 Property-Liability premiums earned $ 26,194 $ 26,967 $ 27,233 Premiums earned: Allstate Protection $ 26,195 $ 26,967 $ 27,232 Discontinued Lines and Coverages (1 ) 1 Property-Liability $ 26,194 $ 26,967 $ 27,233 Premiums written by brand are shown in the following tables. ($ in millions) Allstate brand Encompass brand Allstate Protection 2009 2008 2007 2009 2008 2007 2009 2008 2007 Standard auto (1) $ 15,763 $ 15,918 $ 16,035 $ 800 $ 1,025 $ 1,125 $ 16,563 $ 16,943 $ 17,160 Non-standard auto (1) 927 1,018 1,179 22 40 68 949 1,058 1,247 Homeowners 5,635 5,639 5,711 408 471 538 6,043 6,110 6,249 Other personal lines 2,317 2,358 2,397 100 115 130 2,417 2,473 2,527 Total $ 24,642 $ 24,933 $ 25,322 $ 1,330 $ 1,651 $ 1,861 $ 25,972 $ 26,584 $ 27,183 (1) 2007 includes the impact from the fourth quarter 2007 discontinuation and reinstatement of mandatory personal injury protection in the state of Florida. Allstate brand premiums written, excluding Allstate Canada, by the direct channel increased 25.4% to $622 million in 2009 from $496 million in 2008, following a 24.6% increase from $398 million in 2007. The direct channel includes call centers and the internet. Premiums earned by brand are shown in the following tables. ($ in millions) Allstate brand Encompass brand Allstate Protection 2009 2008 2007 2009 2008 2007 2009 2008 2007 Standard auto $ 15,735 $ 15,957 $ 15,952 $ 907 $ 1,091 $ 1,127 $ 16,642 $ 17,048 $ 17,079 Non-standard auto 939 1,055 1,232 27 45 76 966 1,100 1,308 Homeowners 5,633 5,758 5,732 444 503 551 6,077 6,261 6,283 Other personal lines 2,402 2,434 2,426 108 124 136 2,510 2,558 2,562 Total $ 24,709 $ 25,204 $ 25,342 $ 1,486 $ 1,763 $ 1,890 $ 26,195 $ 26,967 $ 27,232 Premium operating measures and statistics that are used to analyze the business are calculated and described below. Measures and statistics presented for Allstate brand exclude Allstate Canada, loan protection and specialty auto. PIF: Policy counts are based on items rather than customers. A multi-car customer would generate multiple item (policy) counts, even if all cars were insured under one policy. Average premium-gross written: Gross premiums written divided by issued item count. Gross premiums written include the impacts from discounts and surcharges; and exclude the impacts from mid-term premium adjustments, ceded reinsurance premiums, or premium refund accruals. Allstate brand average gross premiums represent the appropriate policy term for each line, which is 6 months for standard and non-standard auto and 12 months for homeowners. Encompass brand average gross premiums represent the appropriate policy term for each line, which is 12 months for standard auto and homeowners and 6 months for non-standard auto. Renewal ratio: Renewal policies issued during the period, based on contract effective dates, divided by the total policies issued 6 months prior for standard and non-standard auto (12 months prior for Encompass brand standard auto) or 12 months prior for homeowners. 47 New issued applications: Item counts of automobiles or homeowners insurance applications for insurance policies that were issued during the period. Does not include automobiles that are added by existing customers. Standard auto premiums written totaled $16.56 billion in 2009, a decrease of 2.2% from $16.94 billion in 2008, following a 1.3% decrease from $17.16 billion in 2007. Allstate brand Encompass brand Standard Auto 2009 2008 2007 2009 2008 2007 PIF (thousands) 17,744 17,924 18,256 859 1,090 1,103 Average premium-gross written (1) $ 434 $ 427 $ 422 $ 972 $ 961 $ 969 Renewal ratio (%) (1) 88.9 88.9 89.5 69.6 73.9 75.0 (1) Policy term is six months for Allstate brand and twelve months for Encompass brand. Allstate brand standard auto premiums written totaled $15.76 billion in 2009, a decrease of 1.0% from $15.92 billion in 2008, following a 0.7% decrease in 2008 from $16.04 billion in 2007. Contributing to the Allstate brand standard auto premiums written decrease in 2009 compared to 2008 were the following: decrease in PIF as of December 31, 2009 compared to December 31, 2008, due to fewer policies available to renew 12.3% increase in new issued applications on a countrywide basis to 2,029 thousand in 2009 from 1,807 thousand in 2008 increase in average gross premium in 2009 compared to 2008, primarily due to rate changes, partially offset by customers electing to change coverage levels of their policy Allstate brand standard auto premiums written decreased in 2008 compared to 2007. Contributing to the Allstate brand standard auto premiums written decrease in 2008 compared to 2007 were the following: decrease in PIF as of December 31, 2008 compared to December 31, 2007 due to a lower renewal ratio and lower new business production 7.5% decrease in new issued applications on a countrywide basis to 1,807 thousand in 2008 from 1,954 thousand in 2007 increase in average gross premium in 2008 compared to 2007, primarily due to rate changes, partially offset by deductible changes decline in the renewal ratio in 2008 compared to 2007 In late 2008 through 2009, we took actions designed to improve Encompass brand profitability, which will continue through 2010. Some of the actions contributing to the Encompass brand standard auto premiums written decrease in 2009 compared to 2008 were the following: Implemented rate increases where indicated Strengthened underwriting guidelines Revised renewal down payment requirements Terminated relationships with certain independent agencies Non-renewal of underperforming business segments Discontinued writing the Special Value product (middle market auto product focused on segment auto) in certain states Rate increases that are indicated based on loss trend analysis to achieve a targeted return will continue to be pursued. The following table shows the rate changes that were approved for standard auto during 2009 and 2008. These rate changes do not reflect initial rates filed for insurance subsidiaries initially writing business in a state. The following table does not include rating plan enhancements, including the introduction of discounts and surcharges, that result in no change in the overall rate level in the state. # of States Countrywide(%) (1) State Specific(%) (2) (3) 2009 2008 2009 2008 (4) 2009 2008 (4) Allstate brand 36 (5) 32 4.6 1.3 7.2 2.1 Encompass brand 36 33 7.3 2.5 9.3 4.8 (1) Represents the impact in the states where rate changes were approved during 2009 and 2008, respectively, as a percentage of total countrywide prior year-end premiums written. 48 (2) Represents the impact in the states where rate changes were approved during 2009 and 2008, respectively, as a percentage of its respective total prior year-end premiums written in those states. (3) Based on historical premiums written in those states, rate changes approved for standard auto totaled $784 million in 2009 compared to $223 million in 2008. (4) Excluding the impact of a 15.9% rate reduction in California related to an order effective in April 2008, the Allstate brand standard auto rate change is 6.0% on a state specific basis and 3.0% on a countrywide basis in 2008. (5) Includes Washington D.C. Non-standard auto premiums written totaled $949 million in 2009, a decrease of 10.3% from $1.06 billion in 2008, following a 15.2% decrease in 2008 from $1.25 billion in 2007. Allstate brand Encompass brand Non-Standard Auto 2009 2008 2007 2009 2008 2007 PIF (thousands) 719 745 829 20 39 56 Average premium-gross written $ 616 $ 624 $ 616 $ 476 $ 479 $ 526 Renewal ratio (%) 72.5 73.7 76.1 67.1 68.3 65.0 Allstate brand non-standard auto premiums written totaled $927 million in 2009, a decrease of 8.9% from $1.02 billion in 2008, following a 13.7% decrease in 2008 from $1.18 billion in 2007. Contributing to the Allstate brand non-standard auto premiums written decrease in 2009 compared to 2008 were the following: decrease in PIF as of December 31, 2009 compared to December 31, 2008, due to new business production that was insufficient to offset declines in the renewal ratio and polices available to renew 10.7% increase in new issued applications to 363 thousand in 2009 from 328 thousand in 2008 decrease in average gross premium in 2009 compared to 2008 decrease in the renewal ratio in 2009 compared to 2008 Allstate brand non-standard auto premiums written decreased in 2008 compared to 2007. Contributing to the Allstate brand non-standard auto premiums written decrease in 2008 compared to 2007 were the following: decrease in PIF as of December 31, 2008 compared to December 31, 2007 due to new business production that was insufficient to offset declines in the renewal ratio and polices available to renew 10.1% increase in new issued applications to 328 thousand in 2008 from 298 thousand in 2007 due to the continued rollout and momentum of our Allstate Blue product increase in average gross premium in 2008 compared to 2007 due to changes in the mix of customer segments resulting from the implementation of Allstate Blue decrease in the renewal ratio in 2008 compared to 2007 Rate increases that are indicated based on loss trend analysis to achieve a targeted return will continue to be pursued. The following table shows the rate changes that were approved for non-standard auto during 2009 and 2008. These rate changes do not reflect initial rates filed for insurance subsidiaries initially writing business in a state. The following table does not include rating plan enhancements, including the introduction of discounts and surcharges, that result in no change in the overall rate level in the state. # of States Countrywide(%) (1) State Specific(%) (2) (3) 2009 2008 2009 2008 2009 2008 Allstate brand 11 11 (4) 2.6 6.5 Encompass brand 1 4 0.9 4.8 31.7 23.2 (1) Represents the impact in the states where rate changes were approved during 2009 and 2008, respectively, as a percentage of total countrywide prior year-end premiums written. (2) Represents the impact in the states where rate changes were approved during 2009 and 2008, respectively, as a percentage of its respective total prior year-end premiums written in those states. (3) Based on historical premiums written in those states, rate changes approved for non-standard auto totaled $25 million in 2009 compared to $3 million in 2008. (4) Includes Washington D.C. Homeowners premiums written totaled $6.04 billion in 2009, a decrease of 1.1% from $6.11 billion in 2008, following a 2.2% decrease in 2008 from $6.25 billion in 2007. Excluding the cost of catastrophe reinsurance, premiums written 49 declined 2.4% in 2009 compared to 2008. For a more detailed discussion on reinsurance, see the Property-Liability Claims and Claims Expense Reserves section of the MD&A and Note 9 of the consolidated financial statements. Allstate brand Encompass brand Homeowners 2009 2008 2007 2009 2008 2007 PIF (thousands) 6,973 7,255 7,570 371 446 484 Average premium-gross written (12 months) $ 883 $ 861 $ 850 $ 1,265 $ 1,206 $ 1,181 Renewal ratio (%) 88.1 87.0 86.5 78.9 80.6 80.0 Allstate brand homeowners premiums written totaled $5.64 billion in 2009 and were comparable to 2008, following a 1.3% decrease in 2008 from $5.71 billion in 2007. Contributing to the Allstate brand homeowners premiums written in 2009 compared to 2008 were the following: decrease in PIF of 3.9% as of December 31, 2009 compared to December 31, 2008, following a 4.2% decrease as of December 31, 2008 compared to December 31, 2007, due to fewer policies available to renew and fewer new issued applications 6.4% decrease in new issued applications to 556 thousand in 2009 from 594 thousand in 2008 increase in average gross premium in 2009 compared to 2008, primarily due to rate increases, partially offset by the impact of reduced PIF in catastrophe management areas with higher average gross premiums and a state insurance department initiated rate reduction in California increase in the renewal ratio in 2009 compared to 2008 in part driven by less non-renewal activity in coastal states that are more susceptible to major catastrophes decrease in the net cost of our catastrophe reinsurance program Actions taken to manage our catastrophe exposure in areas with known exposure to hurricanes, earthquakes, wildfires, fires following earthquakes and other catastrophes have had an impact on our new business writings and retention for homeowners insurance, and this impact will continue in 2010, although to a lesser degree. For a more detailed discussion on exposure management actions, see the Catastrophe Management section of the MD&A. Allstate brand homeowners premiums written decreased in 2008 compared to 2007. Contributing to the Allstate brand homeowners premiums written decrease in 2008 compared to 2007 were the following: decrease in PIF due to lower new issued applications and policies available to renew 26.0% decrease in new issued applications to 594 thousand in 2008 from 803 thousand in 2007 increase in average gross premium in 2008 compared to 2007, primarily due to higher average renewal premiums related to increases in insured value and approved rate changes, including those taken for our net cost of reinsurance, partially offset by a shift in geographic mix as our catastrophe management actions reduce premiums written in areas with generally higher average gross premiums and state insurance department initiated rate decreases in California and Texas increase in the renewal ratio in 2008 compared to 2007 decrease in the net cost of our catastrophe reinsurance program Rate increases that are indicated based on loss trend analysis to achieve a targeted return will continue to be pursued. The following table shows the rate changes that were approved for homeowners during 2009 and 2008, including rate changes approved based on our net cost of reinsurance. The following table does not include rating plan enhancements, including the introduction of discounts and surcharges, that result in no change in the overall rate level in the state. # of States Countrywide(%) (1) State Specific(%) (2) (3) 2009 2008 2009 2008 2009 2008 Allstate brand (4) (5) 40 35 8.4 (0.9 ) 10.7 (1.3 ) Encompass brand (4) 36 26 4.4 4.2 5.9 7.0 (1) Represents the impact in the states where rate changes were approved during 2009 and 2008, respectively, as a percentage of total countrywide prior year-end premiums written. (2) Represents the impact in the states where rate changes were approved during 2009 and 2008, respectively, as a percentage of its respective total prior year-end premiums written in those states. (3) Based on historical premiums written in those states, rate changes approved for homeowners totaled $534 million in 2009 compared to $(32) million in 2008. (4) Includes Washington D.C. (5) Excluding the impact of a 3.0% rate reduction in Texas and a 28.5% rate reduction in California related to resolutions reached in 2008, the Allstate brand homeowners rate change is 5.8% on a state specific basis and 3.2% on a countrywide basis in 2008. 50 Underwriting results are shown in the following table. ($ in millions) 2009 2008 2007 Premiums written $ 25,972 $ 26,584 $ 27,183 Premiums earned $ 26,195 $ 26,967 $ 27,232 Claims and claims expense (18,722 ) (20,046 ) (17,620 ) Amortization of DAC (3,789 ) (3,975 ) (4,121 ) Other costs and expenses (2,552 ) (2,735 ) (2,626 ) Restructuring and related charges (105 ) (22 ) (27 ) Underwriting income $ 1,027 $ 189 $ 2,838 Catastrophe losses $ 2,069 $ 3,342 $ 1,409 Underwriting income (loss) by line of business Standard auto (1) $ 987 $ 1,247 $ 1,665 Non-standard auto 76 136 264 Homeowners (125 ) (1,175 ) 571 Other personal lines (1) 89 (19 ) 338 Underwriting income $ 1,027 $ 189 $ 2,838 Underwriting income (loss) by brand Allstate brand $ 1,022 $ 220 $ 2,634 Encompass brand 5 (31 ) 204 Underwriting income $ 1,027 $ 189 $ 2,838 (1) During 2008, $45 million of IBNR losses were reclassified from standard auto to other personal lines to be consistent with the recording of excess liability policies' premiums and losses. Allstate Protection experienced underwriting income of $1.03 billion during 2009 compared to $189 million in 2008 primarily due to decreases in homeowners underwriting loss, partially offset by decreases in standard auto underwriting income. Homeowners underwriting loss decreased 89.4% to an underwriting loss of $125 million in 2009 from an underwriting loss of $1.18 billion in 2008, primarily due to lower catastrophes losses, partially offset by increases in homeowner claim frequency and claim severities excluding catastrophes. Standard auto underwriting income decreased 20.9% to $987 million in 2009 from $1.25 billion in 2008, primarily due to increases in auto claim frequency and lower premiums earned. Current year claim severity expectations continue to be consistent with relevant indices for the bodily injury coverages while physical damage coverages were generally lower than the relevant indices. Allstate Protection experienced underwriting income of $189 million during 2008 compared to $2.84 billion in 2007. The decrease was primarily due to increased catastrophe losses, increases in auto severities, increases in homeowners loss frequencies and unfavorable prior year reserve reestimates in the current year compared to favorable prior year reserve reestimates in 2007, partially offset by favorable auto loss frequencies and higher standard auto average premium. For further discussion and quantification of the impact of reserve estimates and assumptions, see the Application of Critical Accounting Estimates and Property-Liability Claims and Claims Expense Reserves sections of the MD&A. Catastrophe losses in 2009 were $2.07 billion as detailed in the table below. This compares to catastrophe losses in 2008 of $3.34 billion. We define a "catastrophe" as an event that produces pre-tax losses before reinsurance in excess of $1 million and involves multiple first party policyholders, or an event that produces a number of claims in excess of a preset, per-event threshold of average claims in a specific area, occurring within a certain amount of time following the event. Catastrophes are caused by various natural events including high winds, winter storms, tornadoes, hailstorms, wildfires, tropical storms, hurricanes, earthquakes and volcanoes. We are also exposed to man-made catastrophic events, such as certain acts of terrorism or industrial accidents. The nature and level of catastrophes in any future period cannot be reliably predicted. 51 Catastrophe losses related to events that occurred by the size of the event are shown in the following table. ($ in millions) 2009 Number of events Claims and claims expense Combined ratio impact Average catastrophe loss per event Size of catastrophe $100 million to $250 million 3 3.7 % $ 442 21.4 % 1.7 $ 147 $50 million to $100 million 11 13.4 825 39.9 3.1 75 Less than $50 million 68 82.9 971 46.9 3.7 14 Total 82 100.0 % $ 2,238 108.2 8.5 27 Prior year reserve reestimates (169 ) (8.2 ) (0.6 ) Total catastrophe losses $ 2,069 100.0 % 7.9 In the years 1995 through 2009, we incurred catastrophe losses of $23.70 billion related to 994 events. Of these total losses, 36.5% related to 10 events with losses greater than $250 million per event, 10.5% related to 16 events with losses between $100 million and $250 million per event, 13.7% related to 46 events with losses between $50 million and $100 million per event, and 39.3% related to 922 events with losses less than $50 million per event. Catastrophe losses in the period 2003 through 2009 amounted to $17.26 billion or 72.8% of the total losses. Catastrophe losses greater than $50 million in the period 2003 through 2009 amounted to 51 events and $12.35 billion or 52.1% of the total losses. Catastrophe losses incurred by the type of event are shown in the following table. ($ in millions) 2009 2008 2007 Number of events Number of events Number of events Hurricanes/Tropical storms $ 48 1 $ 1,381 5 $ 9 3 Tornadoes 384 4 628 19 258 16 Wind/Hail 1,561 67 960 81 542 60 Wildfires 83 5 169 9 350 3 Other events 162 5 79 9 123 9 Prior year reserve reestimates (169 ) 125 127 Total catastrophe losses $ 2,069 82 $ 3,342 123 $ 1,409 91 52 Combined ratio Loss ratios are a measure of profitability. Loss ratios by product, and expense and combined ratios by brand, are shown in the following table. These ratios are defined in the Property-Liability Operations section of the MD&A. Loss ratio (2) Effect of catastrophe losses on the loss ratio Effect of pre-tax reserves reestimates on the combined ratio 2009 2008 2007 2009 2008 2007 2009 2008 2007 Allstate brand loss ratio: Standard auto 69.3 68.1 65.8 1.2 1.5 0.6 (0.3 ) 0.1 (1.1 ) Non-standard auto 67.1 62.3 54.9 0.7 0.9 0.2 (1.6 ) (0.1 ) (7.1 ) Homeowners 79.6 96.3 66.5 29.0 46.5 19.5 (2.6 ) 2.1 2.2 Other personal lines 67.3 69.3 60.4 7.0 10.6 5.0 3.5 0.6 (0.9 ) Total Allstate brand loss ratio 71.4 74.4 64.9 8.1 12.6 5.3 (0.5 ) 0.6 (0.7 ) Allstate brand expense ratio 24.5 24.7 24.7 Allstate brand combined ratio 95.9 99.1 89.6 Encompass brand loss ratio: Standard auto (1) 75.4 66.3 64.2 0.3 0.9 0.4 0.7 (4.2 ) (3.4 ) Non-standard auto 74.1 88.9 75.0 (11.1 ) (6.6 ) Homeowners 66.0 76.4 54.6 14.6 27.8 12.0 (4.3 ) 0.4 (1.6 ) Other personal lines (1) 75.9 112.9 61.8 1.9 8.9 2.2 5.6 33.1 Total Encompass brand loss ratio 72.6 73.0 61.6 4.7 9.1 3.9 (0.7 ) (0.2 ) (2.8 ) Encompass brand expense ratio 27.1 28.8 27.6 Encompass brand combined ratio 99.7 101.8 89.2 Allstate Protection loss ratio 71.5 74.3 64.7 7.9 12.4 5.2 (0.5 ) 0.6 (0.8 ) Allstate Protection expense ratio 24.6 25.0 24.9 Allstate Protection combined ratio 96.1 99.3 89.6 (1) During 2008, $45 million of IBNR losses were reclassified from standard auto to other personal lines to be consistent with the recording of excess liability policies' premiums and losses. (2) Ratios are calculated using the premiums earned for the respective line of business. Standard auto loss ratio for the Allstate brand increased 1.2 points in 2009 compared to 2008 due to higher claim frequencies. In 2009, claim frequencies in the physical damage and bodily injury coverages have returned to historical norms following exceptionally low levels in 2008. Bodily injury severity results increased in line with historical Consumer Price Index ("CPI") trends. Claims severity decreased in 2009 for the physical damage coverages, partially offsetting the increased frequencies. Standard auto loss ratio for the Allstate brand increased 2.3 points in 2008 compared to 2007 due to increased catastrophe losses, unfavorable reserve reestimates in the current year compared to favorable reserve reestimates in the prior year and higher claim severities, partially offset by lower claim frequencies. Excluding catastrophes, the 2008 underlying inflationary increase in severity was in part offset by declines in frequency, reflecting a continuation of a long-term decline in frequency and a decrease in miles driven. Non-standard auto loss ratio for the Allstate brand increased 4.8 points in 2009 compared to 2008 due to higher claim frequencies. Claim frequencies increased for both physical damage and casualty coverages in 2009 compared to 2008. Bodily injury severity results increased in line with historical CPI trends. Claims severity decreased in 2009 for the physical damage coverages, partially offsetting the increased frequencies. Non-standard auto loss ratio for the Allstate brand increased 7.4 points in 2008 compared to 2007 due to lower favorable reserve reestimates related to prior years, increased catastrophe losses and higher claim severities, partially offset by lower claim frequencies. Homeowners loss ratio for the Allstate brand decreased 16.7 points to 79.6 in 2009 from 96.3 in 2008 due to lower catastrophe losses, partially offset by higher frequencies excluding catastrophes and severities. Frequencies excluding catastrophes increased in 2009 compared to 2008, in part, due to inclement weather in 2009, including an increase in freeze related claims, driven by winter weather in the first quarter of 2009. Theft claims also drove part of the increase in frequencies in 2009 compared to 2008. In 2009, homeowner claims severity, excluding catastrophes, increased compared to 2008. Homeowners loss ratio for the Allstate brand increased 29.8 points to 96.3 in 2008 from 66.5 in 2007 due to higher catastrophe losses. 53 Expense ratio for Allstate Protection decreased 0.4 points in 2009 compared to 2008. Restructuring costs increased 0.3 points over prior year, driven by claim office consolidations, reorganization of Business Insurance and technology prioritization and efficiency efforts. Excluding restructuring, the expense ratio for Allstate Protection decreased 0.7 points in 2009 compared to 2008. The impact of lower earned premium was offset by improved operational efficiencies and more focused spending, particularly on technology, and decreases in the net cost of benefits due to favorable investment results. The expense ratio for Allstate Protection increased 0.1 points in 2008 compared to 2007 primarily due to lower earned premiums, increases in the net cost of benefits due to unfavorable investment results, and charges for the write-off of capitalized computer software. The impact of specific costs and expenses on the expense ratio are included in the following tables. Allstate brand Encompass brand Allstate Protection 2009 2008 2007 2009 2008 2007 2009 2008 2007 Amortization of DAC 14.2 14.4 14.8 18.5 19.9 20.1 14.5 14.7 15.1 Other costs and expenses 9.9 10.2 9.8 8.3 8.9 7.5 9.7 10.2 9.7 Restructuring and related charges 0.4 0.1 0.1 0.3 0.4 0.1 0.1 Total expense ratio 24.5 24.7 24.7 27.1 28.8 27.6 24.6 25.0 24.9 The expense ratio for the standard auto and homeowners businesses generally approximates the total Allstate Protection expense ratio. The expense ratio for the non-standard auto business generally is lower than the total Allstate Protection expense ratio due to lower agent commission rates and higher average premiums for non-standard auto as compared to standard auto. The Encompass brand DAC amortization is higher on average than Allstate brand DAC amortization due to higher commission rates. DAC We establish a DAC asset for costs that vary with and are primarily related to acquiring business, principally agents' remuneration, premium taxes, certain underwriting costs and direct mail solicitation expenses. For the Allstate Protection business, DAC is amortized to income over the period in which premiums are earned. The balance of DAC for each product type at December 31, is included in the following table. ($ in millions) Allstate brand Encompass brand Allstate Protection 2009 2008 2009 2008 2009 2008 Standard auto $ 542 $ 544 $ 68 $ 87 $ 610 $ 631 Non-standard auto 35 36 1 35 37 Homeowners 426 420 42 49 468 469 Other personal lines 290 307 7 9 297 316 Total DAC $ 1,293 $ 1,307 $ 117 $ 146 $ 1,410 $ 1,453 Catastrophe management Historical catastrophe experience Since the beginning of 1992, the average annual impact of catastrophes on our Property-Liability loss ratio was 7.5 points. However, this average does not reflect the impact of some of the more significant actions we have taken to limit our catastrophe exposure. Consequently, it is useful to consider the impact of catastrophes after excluding losses that are now partially or substantially covered by the California Earthquake Authority ("CEA"), the Florida Hurricane Catastrophe Fund ("FHCF") or placed with a third party, such as hurricane coverage in Hawaii. The average annual impact of all catastrophes, excluding losses from Hurricanes Andrew and Iniki and losses from California earthquakes, on our Property-Liability loss ratio was 6.3 points since the beginning of 1992. Comparatively, the average annual impact of catastrophes on the homeowners loss ratio for the years 1992 through 2009 is shown in the following table. Average annual impact of catastrophes on the homeowners loss ratio Average annual impact of catastrophes on the homeowners loss ratio excluding losses from hurricanes Andrew and Iniki, and losses from California earthquakes Florida 99.7 48.2 Other hurricane exposure states 28.4 28.2 Total hurricane exposure states 34.4 29.9 All other 22.9 17.8 Total 29.1 24.3 54 Over time, we have limited our aggregate insurance exposure to catastrophe losses in certain regions of the country that are subject to high levels of natural catastrophes. Limitations include our participation in various state facilities, such as the CEA, which provides insurance for California earthquake losses; the FHCF, which provides reimbursements to participating insurers for certain qualifying Florida hurricane losses; and other state facilities, such as wind pools. However, the impact of these actions may be diminished by the growth in insured values, and the effect of state insurance laws and regulations. In addition, in various states we are required to participate in assigned risk plans, reinsurance facilities and joint underwriting associations that provide insurance coverage to individuals or entities that otherwise are unable to purchase such coverage from private insurers. Because of our participation in these and other state facilities such as wind pools, we may be exposed to losses that surpass the capitalization of these facilities and/or to assessments from these facilities. We continue to take actions to maintain an appropriate level of exposure to catastrophic events, including the following: We have increased our utilization of wind storm pools. For example, in Texas we are ceding significant wind exposure related to insured property located in wind pool eligible areas along the coast including the Galveston Islands. We have ceased writing new homeowners business in California. We will continue to renew current policyholders and have a renewal ratio of approximately 92% in California. Encompass Floridian Insurance Company and Encompass Floridian Indemnity Company filed a formal notification with the Florida Office of Insurance Regulation to discontinue providing property insurance in the State of Florida. We ceased offering renewals on certain homeowners insurance policies in New York in certain down-state geographical locations. The level of non-renewals in New York is limited by state statute. Hurricanes We consider the greatest areas of potential catastrophe losses due to hurricanes generally to be major metropolitan centers in counties along the eastern and gulf coasts of the United States. Usually, the average premium on a property policy near these coasts is greater than in other areas. However, average premiums are not considered commensurate with the inherent risk of loss. In addition and as explained in Note 13 of the consolidated financial statements, in various states Allstate is subject to assessments from assigned risk plans, reinsurance facilities and joint underwriting associations providing insurance for wind related property losses. We have addressed our risk of hurricane loss by, among other actions, purchasing reinsurance for specific states and on a countrywide basis for our personal lines property insurance in areas most exposed to hurricanes (for further information on our reinsurance program see the Property-Liability Claims and Claims Expense Reserves section of the MD&A); limiting personal homeowners new business writings in coastal areas in southern and eastern states; and not offering continuing coverage on certain policies in coastal counties in certain states. Our actions are expected to continue during 2010 in northeastern and certain other hurricane prone states. Earthquakes Actions taken to reduce our exposure from earthquake coverage are substantially complete. These actions included purchasing reinsurance on a countrywide basis and in the state of Kentucky; no longer offering new optional earthquake coverage in most states; removing optional earthquake coverage upon renewal in most states; and entering into arrangements in many states to make earthquake coverage available through other insurers for new and renewal business. We expect to retain approximately 40,000 PIF with earthquake coverage due to regulatory and other reasons. We also will continue to have exposure to earthquake risk on certain policies that do not specifically exclude coverage for earthquake losses, including our auto policies, and to fires following earthquakes. Allstate policyholders in the state of California are offered coverage through the CEA, a privately-financed, publicly-managed state agency created to provide insurance coverage for earthquake damage. Allstate is subject to assessments from the CEA under certain circumstances as explained in Note 13 of the consolidated financial statements. Fires Following Earthquakes Actions taken related to our risk of loss from fires following earthquakes include changing homeowners underwriting requirements in California and purchasing additional reinsurance on a countrywide basis excluding Florida and on a statewide basis in California and Kentucky. 55 Wildfires Actions we are taking to reduce our risk of loss from wildfires include changing homeowners underwriting requirements in certain states and including California wildfire losses in our aggregate excess reinsurance agreement and in our state specific California program. Catastrophe losses related to the Southern California wildfires that occurred during 2009, 2008 and 2007 totaled $76 million, $166 million and $350 million, respectively. Reinsurance A description of our current catastrophe reinsurance program and program changes as of June 1, 2010 appears in the catastrophe reinsurance section of this document. DISCONTINUED LINES AND COVERAGES SEGMENT Overview The Discontinued Lines and Coverages segment includes results from insurance coverage that we no longer write and results for certain commercial and other businesses in run-off. Our exposure to asbestos, environmental and other discontinued lines claims is reported in this segment. We have assigned management of this segment to a designated group of professionals with expertise in claims handling, policy coverage interpretation, exposure identification and reinsurance collection. As part of its responsibilities, this group is also regularly engaged in policy buybacks, settlements and reinsurance assumed and ceded commutations. Summarized underwriting results for the years ended December 31, are presented in the following table. ($ in millions) 2009 2008 2007 Premiums written $ (1 ) $ $ Premiums earned $ (1 ) $ $ 1 Claims and claims expense (24 ) (18 ) (47 ) Operating costs and expenses (7 ) (7 ) (8 ) Underwriting loss $ (32 ) $ (25 ) $ (54 ) Underwriting losses of $32 million in 2009 were primarily related to a $13 million unfavorable reestimate of environmental reserves and a $28 million unfavorable reestimate of other reserves, partially offset by an $8 million favorable reestimate of asbestos reserves, primarily as a result of our annual third quarter 2009 review using established industry and actuarial "grounds up" best practices. Additionally, the allowance for future uncollectible reinsurance decreased $23 million, primarily as a result of significant commutation activity related to three reinsurers. The cost of administering claims settlements totaled $13 million for both the years ended December 31, 2009 and 2008 and $14 million for the year ended December 31, 2007. Underwriting losses of $25 million in 2008 primarily related to an $8 million unfavorable reestimate of asbestos reserves and a $13 million unfavorable reestimate of other reserves as a result of the annual third quarter 2008 grounds up reserve review, partially offset by a $16 million reduction of our allowance for future uncollectible reinsurance. Underwriting loss of $54 million in 2007 primarily related to a $63 million unfavorable reestimate of environmental reserves and a $6 million unfavorable reestimate of asbestos reserves as a result of the annual third quarter 2007 grounds up reserve review, partially offset by a $46 million reduction in the allowance for uncollectible reinsurance related to Equitas Limited's improved financial position as a result of its reinsurance coverage with National Indemnity Company. See the Property-Liability Claims and Claims Expense Reserves section of the MD&A for a more detailed discussion. Discontinued Lines and Coverages outlook We may continue to experience asbestos and/or environmental losses in the future. These losses could be due to the potential adverse impact of new information relating to new and additional claims or the impact of resolving unsettled claims based on unanticipated events such as litigation or legislative, judicial and regulatory actions. Environmental losses may also increase as the result of additional funding for environmental site cleanup from the new federal government administration. Because of our annual grounds up review, we believe that our reserves are appropriately established based on available information, technology, laws and regulations. 56 We continue to be encouraged that the pace of industry asbestos claim activity has slowed, perhaps reflecting various state legislative and judicial actions with respect to medical criteria and increased legal scrutiny of the legitimacy of claims. PROPERTY-LIABILITY INVESTMENT RESULTS Net investment income decreased 20.7% or $346 million to $1.33 billion in 2009 compared to $1.67 billion in 2008, after decreasing 15.1% in 2008 compared to 2007. The 2009 decrease was primarily due to reduced portfolio yields, actions to shorten duration and maintain additional liquidity in the portfolio, lower average investment balances and capital contributions to Allstate Life Insurance Company ("ALIC"). The 2008 decrease was due to decreased partnership income and lower average asset balances reflecting dividends paid by Allstate Insurance Company ("AIC") to its parent, The Allstate Corporation (the "Corporation") and capital contributions to ALIC and reduced portfolio yields. The following table presents the average pre-tax investment yields for the year ended December 31. 2009 (1) (2) 2008 (1) (2) 2007 (1) (2) Fixed income securities: tax-exempt 5.1 % 5.1 % 5.1 % Fixed income securities: tax-exempt equivalent 7.4 7.4 7.4 Fixed income securities: taxable 4.1 5.6 5.5 Equity securities 2.1 3.0 2.7 Mortgage loans 4.7 6.1 5.6 Limited partnership interests (3) 0.6 2.3 16.0 Total portfolio 4.1 4.8 5.4 (1) Pre-tax yield is calculated as investment income (including dividend income in the case of equity securities) divided by the average of the investment balances at the beginning and end of period and interim quarters. (2) Amortized cost basis is used to calculate the average investment balance for fixed income securities and mortgage loans. Cost is used for equity securities. Cost or the equity method of accounting basis is used for limited partnership interests. (3) Beginning in the fourth quarter of 2008, income from limited partnerships accounted for on the equity method of accounting ("EMA LP") is reported in realized capital gains and losses and is therefore excluded from the determination of pre-tax investment yields on limited partnership interests. EMA LP income for periods prior to the fourth quarter of 2008 is reported in net investment income and included in the determination of pre-tax investment yields on limited partnership interests. Net realized capital gains and losses are presented in the following table. ($ in millions) 2009 2008 2007 Impairment write-downs $ (534 ) $ (638 ) $ (44 ) Change in intent write-downs (89 ) (501 ) (54 ) Net other-than-temporary impairment losses recognized in earnings (623 ) (1,139 ) (98 ) Sales 611 (635 ) 1,396 Valuation of derivative instruments 52 (296 ) (15 ) Settlements of derivative instruments (203 ) 289 133 EMA LP income (5 ) (77 ) Realized capital gains and losses, pre-tax (168 ) (1,858 ) 1,416 Income tax (expense) benefit (1) (54 ) 649 (501 ) Realized capital gains and losses, after-tax $ (222 ) $ (1,209 ) $ 915 (1) Income tax expense for the year ended December 31, 2009 includes expense of $112 million attributable to an increase in the valuation allowance relating to the deferred tax asset on capital losses recorded in the first quarter of 2009. This valuation allowance was released in connection with the adoption of accounting guidance for the recognition of other-than-temporary impairments of fixed income securities ("new OTTI accounting guidance") on April 1, 2009; however, the release was recorded as an increase to retained income and therefore did not reverse the amount recorded in income tax expense. For a further discussion of changes in this valuation allowance, see the Deferred Taxes section of the MD&A. For a further discussion of net realized capital gains and losses, see the Investments section of the MD&A. 57 PROPERTY-LIABILITY CLAIMS AND CLAIMS EXPENSE RESERVES Property-Liability underwriting results are significantly influenced by estimates of property-liability claims and claims expense reserves. For a description of our reserve process, see Note 7 of the consolidated financial statements and for a further description of our reserving policies and the potential variability in our reserve estimates, see the Application of Critical Accounting Estimates section of the MD&A. These reserves are an estimate of amounts necessary to settle all outstanding claims, including IBNR claims, as of the reporting date. The facts and circumstances leading to our quarterly reestimates of reserves relate to revisions to the development factors used to predict how losses are likely to develop from the end of a reporting period until all claims have been paid. Reestimates occur because actual losses are likely different than that predicted by the estimated development factors used in prior reserve estimates. At December 31, 2009, the impact of a reserve reestimation corresponding to a one percent increase or decrease in net reserves would be a decrease or increase of approximately $110 million in net income. The table below shows total net reserves as of December 31 for Allstate brand, Encompass brand and Discontinued Lines and Coverages lines of business. ($ in millions) 2009 2008 2007 Allstate brand $ 14,123 $ 14,118 $ 13,456 Encompass brand 1,027 1,133 1,129 Total Allstate Protection 15,150 15,251 14,585 Discontinued Lines and Coverages 1,878 1,931 2,075 Total Property-Liability $ 17,028 $ 17,182 $ 16,660 The tables below shows reserves, net of reinsurance, representing the estimated cost of outstanding claims as they were recorded at the beginning of years 2009, 2008 and 2007, and the effect of reestimates in each year. ($ in millions) January 1 reserves 2009 2008 2007 Allstate brand $ 14,118 $ 13,456 $ 13,220 Encompass brand 1,133 1,129 1,236 Total Allstate Protection 15,251 14,585 14,456 Discontinued Lines and Coverages 1,931 2,075 2,154 Total Property-Liability $ 17,182 $ 16,660 $ 16,610 ($ in millions, except ratios) 2009 2008 2007 Reserve reestimate (1) Effect on combined ratio Reserve reestimate (1) Effect on combined ratio Reserve reestimate (1) Effect on combined ratio Allstate brand $ (126 ) (0.5 ) $ 155 0.6 $ (167 ) (0.6 ) Encompass brand (10 ) (3 ) (52 ) (0.2 ) Total Allstate Protection (136 ) (0.5 ) 152 0.6 (219 ) (0.8 ) Discontinued Lines and Coverages 24 0.1 18 0.1 47 0.2 Total Property-Liability $ (112 ) (0.4 ) $ 170 0.7 $ (172 ) (0.6 ) Reserve reestimates, after-tax $ (73 ) $ 111 $ (112 ) Net income (loss) $ 854 $ (1,679 ) $ 4,636 Reserve reestimates as a % of net income (loss) 8.5 % (6.6 )% 2.4 % (1) Favorable reserve reestimates are shown in parentheses. 58 Allstate Protection The tables below shows Allstate Protection net reserves representing the estimated cost of outstanding claims as they were recorded at the beginning of years 2009, 2008 and 2007, and the effect of reestimates in each year. ($ in millions) January 1 reserves 2009 2008 2007 Auto $ 10,220 $ 10,175 $ 9,995 Homeowners 2,824 2,279 2,226 Other personal lines 2,207 2,131 2,235 Total Allstate Protection $ 15,251 $ 14,585 $ 14,456 ($ in millions, except ratios) 2009 2008 2007 Reserve reestimate (1) Effect on combined ratio Reserve reestimate (1) Effect on combined ratio Reserve reestimate (1) Effect on combined ratio Auto $ (57 ) (0.2 ) $ (27 ) (0.1 ) $ (311 ) (1.1 ) Homeowners (168 ) (0.6 ) 124 0.5 115 0.4 Other personal lines 89 0.3 55 0.2 (23 ) (0.1 ) Total Allstate Protection $ (136 ) (0.5 ) $ 152 0.6 $ (219 ) (0.8 ) Underwriting income $ 1,027 $ 189 $ 2,838 Reserve reestimates as a % of underwriting income 13.2 % (80.4 )% 7.7 % (1) Favorable reserve reestimates are shown in parentheses. Auto reserve reestimates in 2009 were primarily the result of auto severity development that was better than expected. Auto reserve reestimates in 2008 were primarily the result of a $45 million reclassification of IBNR losses from standard auto to other personal lines to be consistent with the recording of excess liability policies' premiums and losses. Auto reserve reestimates in 2007 were primarily the result of auto severity development that was better than expected. Favorable homeowners reserve reestimates in 2009 were primarily due to favorable reserve reestimates from Hurricanes Ike and Gustav and a catastrophe related subrogation recovery. Unfavorable homeowners reserve reestimates in 2008 were primarily due to litigation filed in conjunction with a Louisiana deadline for filing suits related to Hurricane Katrina. Unfavorable homeowners reserve reestimates in 2007 were primarily due to catastrophe reserve reestimates attributable to increased claim expense reserves primarily for 2005 events and increased loss reserves including reopened claims arising from litigation filed in conjunction with a Louisiana deadline for filing suits related to Hurricane Katrina. Other personal lines reserve reestimates in 2009 were primarily the result of loss development different than anticipated in previous estimates. Other personal lines reserve reestimates in 2008 were primarily the result of a $45 million reclassification of IBNR losses from standard auto to other personal lines to be consistent with the recording of excess liability policies' premiums and losses. Other personal lines reserve reestimates in 2007 were primarily the result of claim severity development different than anticipated in previous estimates. 59 Pending, new and closed claims for Allstate Protection, for the years ended December 31, are summarized in the following table. Number of claims 2009 2008 2007 Auto Pending, beginning of year 566,394 551,598 522,544 New 5,482,941 5,323,072 5,450,438 Total closed (5,508,911 ) (5,308,276 ) (5,421,384 ) Pending, end of year 540,424 566,394 551,598 Homeowners Pending, beginning of year 74,772 80,229 72,988 New 997,954 1,242,007 805,461 Total closed (1,013,041 ) (1,247,464 ) (798,220 ) Pending, end of year 59,685 74,772 80,229 Other personal lines Pending, beginning of year 41,001 39,951 42,254 New 278,978 301,363 270,962 Total closed (283,442 ) (300,313 ) (273,265 ) Pending, end of year 36,537 41,001 39,951 Total Allstate Protection Pending, beginning of year 682,167 671,778 637,786 New 6,759,873 6,866,442 6,526,861 Total closed (6,805,394 ) (6,856,053 ) (6,492,869 ) Pending, end of year 636,646 682,167 671,778 We believe the net loss reserves for Allstate Protection exposures are appropriately established based on available facts, technology, laws and regulations. The following tables reflect the accident years to which the reestimates shown above are applicable for Allstate brand, Encompass brand and Discontinued Lines and Coverages lines of business. Favorable reserve reestimates are shown in these tables in parentheses. 2009 Prior year reserve reestimates ($ in millions) 1999 & prior 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 Total Allstate brand $ 247 $ 46 $ 58 $ 44 $ 37 $ 85 $ 74 $ (149 ) $ (151 ) $ (417 ) $ (126 ) Encompass brand 3 1 3 6 5 10 8 (7 ) (39 ) (10 ) Total Allstate Protection 247 49 59 47 43 90 84 (141 ) (158 ) (456 ) (136 ) Discontinued Lines and Coverages 24 24 Total Property-Liability $ 271 $ 49 $ 59 $ 47 $ 43 $ 90 $ 84 $ (141 ) $ (158 ) $ (456 ) $ (112 ) 2008 Prior year reserve reestimates ($ in millions) 1998 & prior 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 Total Allstate brand $ 56 $ (7 ) $ 9 $ 34 $ 1 $ (5 ) $ 13 $ 152 $ (71 ) $ (27 ) $ 155 Encompass brand 2 2 (1 ) 2 1 (1 ) 10 (20 ) 2 (3 ) Total Allstate Protection 58 (7 ) 11 33 3 (4 ) 12 162 (91 ) (25 ) 152 Discontinued Lines and Coverages 18 18 Total Property-Liability $ 76 $ (7 ) $ 11 $ 33 $ 3 $ (4 ) $ 12 $ 162 $ (91 ) $ (25 ) $ 170 60 2007 Prior year reserve reestimates ($ in millions) 1997 & prior 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 Total Allstate brand $ 103 $ $ 10 $ 16 $ (5 ) $ 15 $ 5 $ (10 ) $ (225 ) $ (76 ) $ (167 ) Encompass brand (1 ) (4 ) 3 6 (4 ) (39 ) (13 ) (52 ) Total Allstate Protection 103 9 12 (5 ) 18 11 (14 ) (264 ) (89 ) (219 ) Discontinued Lines and Coverages 47 47 Total Property-Liability $ 150 $ $ 9 $ 12 $ (5 ) $ 18 $ 11 $ (14 ) $ (264 ) $ (89 ) $ (172 ) Allstate brand prior year reserve reestimates were $126 million favorable in 2009, $155 million unfavorable in 2008 and $167 million favorable in 2007, respectively. In 2009, this was primarily due to favorable reserve reestimates from Hurricanes Ike and Gustav and a catastrophe related subrogation recovery. The shift of reserves to older accident years is attributable to a reallocation of reserves related to employee postretirement benefits to more accident years, and a reclassification of injury and 2008 non-injury reserves to older years. In 2008, this was primarily due to litigation filed in conjunction with a Louisiana deadline for filing suits related to Hurricane Katrina. In 2007, this was primarily due to auto severity development that was better than expected, partially offset by unfavorable reserve reestimates of catastrophe losses. These trends are primarily responsible for revisions to loss development factors, as previously described, used to predict how losses are likely to develop from the end of a reporting period until all claims have been paid. Because these trends cause actual losses to differ from those predicted by the estimated development factors used in prior reserve estimates, reserves are revised as actuarial studies validate new trends based on the indications of updated development factor calculations. The impact of these reestimates on the Allstate brand underwriting income is shown in the table below. ($ in millions) 2009 2008 2007 Reserve reestimates (1) $ (126 ) $ 155 $ (167 ) Allstate brand underwriting income 1,022 220 2,634 Reserve reestimates as a % of underwriting income 12.3 % (70.5 )% 6.3 % (1) Favorable reserve reestimates are shown in parentheses. Encompass brand Reserve reestimates in 2009, 2008 and 2007 were related to lower than anticipated claim settlement costs. The impact of these reestimates on the Encompass brand underwriting (loss) income is shown in the table below. ($ in millions) 2009 2008 2007 Reserve reestimates (1) $ (10 ) $ (3 ) $ (52 ) Encompass brand underwriting income (loss) 5 (31 ) 204 Reserve reestimates as a % of underwriting income (loss) 200.0 % 9.7 % 25.5 % (1) Favorable reserve reestimates are shown in parentheses. Discontinued Lines and Coverages We conduct an annual review in the third quarter of each year to evaluate and establish asbestos, environmental and other discontinued lines reserves. Reserves are recorded in the reporting period in which they are determined. Using established industry and actuarial best practices and assuming no change in the regulatory or economic environment, this detailed and comprehensive grounds up methodology determines reserves based on assessments of the characteristics of exposure (e.g. claim activity, potential liability, jurisdiction, products versus non-products exposure) presented by policyholders. 61 Reserve reestimates for the Discontinued Lines and Coverages, as shown in the table below, were increased primarily for other discontinued lines in both 2009 and 2008, and environmental in 2007. ($ in millions) 2009 2008 2007 January 1 reserves Reserve reestimate (1) January 1 reserves Reserve reestimate (1) January 1 reserves Reserve reestimate (1) Asbestos Claims $ 1,228 $ (8 ) $ 1,302 $ 8 $ 1,375 $ 17 Environmental Claims 195 13 232 194 63 Other Discontinued Lines 508 19 541 10 585 (33 ) Total Discontinued Lines and coverages $ 1,931 $ 24 $ 2,075 $ 18 $ 2,154 $ 47 Underwriting loss $ (32 ) $ (25 ) $ (54 ) Reserve reestimates as a % of underwriting loss (75.0 )% (72.0 )% (87.0 )% (1) Favorable reserve reestimates are shown in parentheses. Asbestos reserves reestimates in 2009 were $8 million favorable. Reserve additions for asbestos in 2008 and 2007, totaling $8 million and $17 million, respectively, were primarily for products-related coverage. For 2008 and 2007, they were essentially a result of a continuing level of increased claim activity being reported by excess and primary insurance policyholders with existing active claims, excess policyholders with new claims, and reestimates of liabilities for increased assumed reinsurance cessions, as ceding companies (other insurance carriers) also experienced increased claim activity. Higher claim activity over prior estimates has also resulted in an increased estimate for future claims reported. These trends are consistent with the trends of other carriers in the industry, which we believe are related to increased publicity and awareness of coverage, ongoing litigation and bankruptcy actions. The 2007 asbestos reserve addition also includes the write-off of uncollectible reinsurance for a single foreign reinsurer. The reserve additions for environmental in 2009 were primarily related to site-specific remediations where the clean-up cost estimates and responsibility for the clean-up were more fully determined. Normal environmental claim activity resulted in essentially no change in estimated reserves for 2008. The reserve additions for environmental in 2007 were for increased claim activity related to site-specific remediations where the clean-up cost estimates and responsibility for the clean-up have been more fully determined. This increased claim activity over prior estimates has also resulted in an increased estimate for future claims reported. IBNR now represents 65% of total net environmental reserves, 2 points higher than at December 31, 2008. 62 The table below summarizes reserves and claim activity for asbestos and environmental claims before (Gross) and after (Net) the effects of reinsurance for the past three years. ($ in millions, except ratios) 2009 2008 2007 Gross Net Gross Net Gross Net Asbestos claims Beginning reserves $ 1,933 $ 1,228 $ 2,053 $ 1,302 $ 2,198 $ 1,375 Incurred claims and claims expense (3 ) (8 ) 4 8 12 17 Claims and claims expense paid (150 ) (40 ) (124 ) (82 ) (157 ) (90 ) Ending reserves $ 1,780 $ 1,180 $ 1,933 $ 1,228 $ 2,053 $ 1,302 Annual survival ratio 11.9 11.5 15.4 15.1 13.1 14.5 3-year survival ratio 12.4 12.9 13.4 14.4 8.5 9.7 Environmental claims Beginning reserves $ 250 $ 195 $ 340 $ 232 $ 249 $ 194 Incurred claims and claims expense 16 13 (34 ) 120 63 Claims and claims expense paid (19 ) (10 ) (56 ) (37 ) (29 ) (25 ) Ending reserves $ 247 $ 198 $ 250 $ 195 $ 340 $ 232 Annual survival ratio 12.7 12.1 4.5 5.2 11.7 9.4 3-year survival ratio 7.1 7.5 6.8 7.0 11.8 9.3 Combined environmental and asbestos claims Annual survival ratio 12.0 11.6 12.1 12.0 12.9 13.4 3-year survival ratio 11.4 11.7 12.1 12.6 8.8 9.6 Percentage of IBNR in ending reserves 62.3 % 63.8 % 63.2 % The survival ratio is calculated by taking our ending reserves divided by payments made during the year. This is a commonly used but extremely simplistic and imprecise approach to measuring the adequacy of asbestos and environmental reserve levels. Many factors, such as mix of business, level of coverage provided and settlement procedures have significant impacts on the amount of environmental and asbestos claims and claims expense reserves, claim payments and the resultant ratio. As payments result in corresponding reserve reductions, survival ratios can be expected to vary over time. The 2009 net survival ratios in the table above have been adjusted to remove the claims and claims expense paid of $63 million for asbestos and $7 million for environmental attributable to recent commutation activity related to three reinsurers. In 2009, the asbestos net 3-year survival ratio decreased due to lower reserve levels as the result of loss settlements. In 2008, the asbestos net 3-year survival ratio increased due to lower average annual payments. In 2009, the environmental net 3-year survival ratio increased due to lower average annual payments. In 2008, the environmental net 3-year survival ratio declined due to continuing claim payments. 63 Our net asbestos reserves by type of exposure and total reserve additions are shown in the following table. ($ in millions) December 31, 2009 December 31, 2008 December 31, 2007 Active policy- holders Net reserves % of reserves Active policy- holders Net reserves % of reserves Active policy- holders Net reserves % of reserves Direct policyholders: Primary 51 $ 19 1 % 54 $ 21 2 % 52 $ 23 2 % Excess 318 256 22 330 216 17 346 222 17 Total 369 275 23 % 384 237 19 % 398 245 19 % Assumed reinsurance 176 15 205 17 216 16 IBNR 729 62 786 64 841 65 Total net reserves $ 1,180 100 % $ 1,228 100 % $ 1,302 100 % Total reserve additions $ (8 ) $ 8 $ 17 During the last three years, 61 direct primary and excess policyholders reported new claims, and claims of 79 policyholders were closed, decreasing the number of active policyholders by 18 during the period. The 18 decrease comprised (15) from 2009, (9) from 2008 and 6 from 2007. The decrease of 15 from 2009 included 20 new policyholders reporting new claims and the closing of 35 policyholders' claims. IBNR net reserves decreased by $57 million. At December 31, 2009 IBNR represented 62% of total net asbestos reserves, 2 points lower than at December 31, 2008. IBNR provides for reserve development of known claims and future reporting of additional unknown claims from current and new policyholders and ceding companies. Pending, new, total closed and closed without payment claims for asbestos and environmental exposures for the years ended December 31, are summarized in the following table. Number of claims 2009 2008 2007 Asbestos Pending, beginning of year 8,780 9,256 9,175 New 814 601 876 Total closed (1,342 ) (1,077 ) (795 ) Pending, end of year 8,252 8,780 9,256 Closed without payment 469 800 364 Environmental Pending, beginning of year 4,603 4,747 4,771 New 389 291 603 Total closed (878 ) (435 ) (627 ) Pending, end of year 4,114 4,603 4,747 Closed without payment 416 307 370 Property-Liability reinsurance ceded For Allstate Protection, we utilize reinsurance to reduce exposure to catastrophe risk and manage capital, and to support the required statutory surplus and the insurance financial strength ratings of certain subsidiaries such as Castle Key Insurance Company, formerly known as Allstate Floridian Insurance Company, and Allstate New Jersey Insurance Company. We purchase significant reinsurance where we believe the greatest benefit may be achieved relative to our aggregate countrywide exposure. The price and terms of reinsurance and the credit quality of the reinsurer are considered in the purchase process, along with whether the price can be appropriately reflected in the costs that are considered in setting future rates charged to policyholders. We also participate in various reinsurance mechanisms, including industry pools and facilities, which are backed by the financial resources of the property-liability insurance company market participants, and have historically purchased reinsurance to mitigate long-tail liability lines, including environmental, asbestos and other discontinued lines exposures. We retain primary liability as a direct insurer for all risks ceded to reinsurers. 64 The impacts of reinsurance on our reserve for claims and claims expense at December 31 are summarized in the following table, net of allowances we have established for uncollectible amounts. ($ in millions) Reserve for Property-Liability insurance claims and claims expense Reinsurance recoverables, net 2009 2008 2009 2008 Industry pools and facilities $ 2,000 $ 2,012 $ 1,408 $ 1,442 Asbestos and environmental 2,027 2,183 683 795 Other including allowance for future uncollectible reinsurance recoverables 15,140 15,261 121 116 Total Property-Liability $ 19,167 $ 19,456 $ 2,212 $ 2,353 Reinsurance recoverables include an estimate of the amount of property-liability insurance claims and claims expense reserves that may be ceded under the terms of the reinsurance agreements, including incurred but not reported unpaid losses. We calculate our ceded reinsurance estimate based on the terms of each applicable reinsurance agreement, including an estimate of how IBNR losses will ultimately be ceded under the agreement. We also consider other limitations and coverage exclusions under our reinsurance agreements. Accordingly, our estimate of reinsurance recoverables is subject to similar risks and uncertainties as our estimate of reserve for property-liability claims and claims expense. We believe the recoverables are appropriately established; however, as our underlying reserves continue to develop, the amount ultimately recoverable may vary from amounts currently recorded. We regularly evaluate the reinsurers and the respective amounts recoverable, and a provision for uncollectible reinsurance is recorded if needed. The establishment of reinsurance recoverables and the related allowance for uncollectible reinsurance is also an inherently uncertain process involving estimates. Changes in estimates could result in additional changes to the Consolidated Statements of Operations. The allowance for uncollectible reinsurance relates to Discontinued Lines and Coverages reinsurance recoverables and was $142 million and $168 million at December 31, 2009 and 2008, respectively. These amounts represent 16.2% and 16.9%, respectively, of the related reinsurance recoverable balances. The allowance is based upon our ongoing review of amounts outstanding, length of collection periods, changes in reinsurer credit standing, and other relevant factors. In addition, in the ordinary course of business, we may become involved in coverage disputes with certain of our reinsurers which may ultimately result in lawsuits and arbitrations brought by or against such reinsurers to determine the parties' rights and obligations under the various reinsurance agreements. We employ dedicated specialists to manage reinsurance collections and disputes. We also consider recent developments in commutation activity between reinsurers and cedants, and recent trends in arbitration and litigation outcomes in disputes between cedants and reinsurers in seeking to maximize our reinsurance recoveries. Adverse developments in the insurance industry have led to a decline in the financial strength of some of our reinsurance carriers, causing amounts recoverable from them and future claims ceded to them to be considered a higher risk. There has also been consolidation activity in the industry, which causes reinsurance risk across the industry to be concentrated among fewer companies. In addition, over the last several years the industry has increasingly segregated asbestos, environmental, and other discontinued lines exposures into separate legal entities with dedicated capital. Regulatory bodies in certain cases have supported these actions. We are unable to determine the impact, if any, that these developments will have on the collectability of reinsurance recoverables in the future. 65 The largest reinsurance recoverable balances are shown in the following table at December 31, net of the allowance we have established for uncollectible amounts. ($ in millions) A.M. Best financial strength rating (1) Reinsurance recoverable on paid and unpaid claims, net 2009 2008 Industry pools and facilities Michigan Catastrophic Claim Association ("MCCA") N/A $ 1,173 $ 1,108 New Jersey Unsatisfied Claim and Judgment Fund N/A 66 84 North Carolina Reinsurance Facility N/A 60 63 FHCF N/A 53 36 National Flood Insurance Program ("NFIP") N/A 43 138 Other 13 13 Total 1,408 1,442 Asbestos, Environmental and Other Lloyd's of London ("Lloyd's") A 190 227 Westport Insurance Corporation (formerly Employers Reinsurance Corporation) A 77 81 New England Reinsurance Corporation NR 37 21 Clearwater Insurance Company A- 34 39 R&Q Reinsurance Company NR 28 17 Other, including allowance for future uncollectible reinsurance recoverables 438 526 Total 804 911 Total Property-Liability $ 2,212 $ 2,353 (1) N/A and NR reflect not applicable and not rated, respectively. The effects of reinsurance ceded on our property-liability premiums earned and claims and claims expense for the years ended December 31, are summarized in the following table. ($ in millions) 2009 2008 2007 Ceded property-liability premiums earned $ 1,056 $ 1,139 $ 1,356 Ceded property-liability claims and claims expense Industry pool and facilities FHCF $ 47 $ 28 $ 22 NFIP 111 344 65 MCCA 133 148 60 Other 59 60 72 Subtotal industry pools and facilities 350 580 219 Asbestos, Environmental and Other 65 40 151 Ceded property-liability claims and claims expense $ 415 $ 620 $ 370 For the years ended December 31, 2009 and 2008, ceded property-liability premiums earned decreased $83 million and $217 million, respectively, when compared to prior years, primarily as a result of favorable market conditions which were reflected in our catastrophe reinsurance pricing. Ceded property-liability claims and claims expense decreased in 2009 primarily due to amounts ceded to NFIP. Ceded property-liability claims and claims expense increased in 2008 primarily due to amounts ceded to NFIP and 66 MCCA. For further discussion, see the Discontinued Lines and Coverages Segment and Property-Liability Claims and Claims Expense Reserves sections of the MD&A. For a detailed description of the MCCA, FHCF and Lloyd's, see Note 9 of the consolidated financial statements. At December 31, 2009, other than the recoverable balances listed above, no other amount due or estimated to be due from any single Property-Liability reinsurer was in excess of $26 million. We enter into certain intercompany insurance and reinsurance transactions for the Property-Liability operations in order to maintain underwriting control and manage insurance risk among various legal entities. These reinsurance agreements have been approved by the appropriate regulatory authorities. All significant intercompany transactions have been eliminated in consolidation. An affiliate of the company, Allstate Texas Lloyd's ("ATL"), a syndicate insurance company, cedes 100% of its business net of reinsurance with external parties to AIC. At December 31, 2009 and 2008, ATL had $32 million and $66 million, respectively, of reinsurance recoverable primarily related to losses incurred from Hurricane Ike which occurred in 2008. Catastrophe reinsurance Our personal lines catastrophe reinsurance program was designed, utilizing our risk management methodology, to address our exposure to catastrophes nationwide. Our program provides reinsurance protection for catastrophes including storms named or numbered by the National Weather Service, fires following earthquakes, earthquakes and wildfires including California wildfires. These reinsurance agreements are part of our catastrophe management strategy, which is intended to provide our shareholders an acceptable return on the risks assumed in our property business and to reduce variability of earnings, while providing protection to our customers. A description of our catastrophe reinsurance treaties, most of which are placed on a multi-year basis, that reinsure Allstate Protection personal lines property excess catastrophe losses in geographic regions or single states and provide reinsurance for specific perils follows: Aggregate excess agreement comprising three contracts (two contracts effective June 1, 2008 to May 31, 2010 and one contract effective June 1, 2009 to May 31, 2011) providing coverage for Allstate Protection personal lines auto and property business countrywide, except for Florida. The contracts cover losses from storms named or numbered by the National Weather Service, fires following earthquakes, and California wildfires in excess of $2.00 billion in aggregated losses per contract year. The contract expiring May 31, 2011 represents 47.5% of the placement with the Company retaining the option in 2010 to place up to the entire $2.00 billion limit of this contract. For the contract term June 1, 2009 to May 31, 2010, the Company retains 5% of the $2.00 billion reinsurance limit. For the June 1, 2009 to May 31, 2011 term, the Company's multi-peril, South-East, North-East, Texas, California fires following earthquakes and Kentucky agreements are deemed in place, and losses recoverable under these agreements, if any, are excluded when determining coverage under this agreement. Effective June 1, 2010, the two contracts expiring May 31, 2010 will be combined into one contract and renewed with a two year term contract effective June 1, 2010 to May 31, 2012 providing coverage for Allstate Protection personal lines auto and property business countrywide, except for Florida. The two contracts effective June 1, 2010 provide a $2.00 billion limit in excess of $2.00 billion in aggregated losses per contract year for losses from storms named or numbered by the National Weather Service, fires following earthquakes and California wildfires. For the term June 1, 2010 to May 31, 2011, the Company retains 5% of the $2.00 billion reinsurance limit. For the June 1, 2010 to May 31, 2012 contract, the Company's multi-peril, California fires following earthquakes, Texas, Kentucky, Gulf States and Atlantic States agreements are deemed in place, and losses recoverable under these agreements, if any, are excluded when determining coverage under this agreement. Multi-year reinsurance treaties that cover Allstate-brand personal lines property excess catastrophe losses for multiple perils in Connecticut, Rhode Island, New Jersey, New York, Pennsylvania, North Carolina and Texas effective June 1, 2008 to May 31, 2012. Effective June 1, 2010, with the exception of the Texas agreement, the following agreements will be renewed. Connecticut and Rhode Island The current agreement provides a $200 million limit in excess of a $200 million retention and is 80% placed. One contract providing one-third of the limit expires May 31, 2010 and will be 67 replaced with a three year term contract effective June 1, 2010 to May 31, 2013. The two remaining contracts will continue in effect and expire May 31, 2011 and May 31, 2012, respectively. The limit for the contract effective June 1, 2010 will be $250 million. In addition, the placement will be increased to 95% to replace coverage previously provided by the North-East contract which expires June 8, 2010 and will not be replaced. New Jersey The current agreement provides a $300 million limit in excess of a $200 million retention and is 95% placed. One contract providing one-third of the coverage expires May 31, 2010 and will be replaced with a three year term contract effective June 1, 2010 to May 31, 2013. The two remaining contracts will continue in effect and expire May 31, 2011 and May 31, 2012, respectively. The agreement effective June 1, 2010 to May 31, 2013 provides a $300 million limit in excess of a $200 million retention. For the term June 1, 2010 to May 31, 2011 the Company retains 5% of the $300 million reinsurance limit. New Jersey Excess The current agreement provides a $200 million limit in excess of a $500 million retention and is 80% placed. The contract expiring May 31, 2010 will be replaced with a three year term contract effective June 1, 2010 to May 31, 2013. The remaining two contracts will continue in effect and expire May 31, 2011 and May 31, 2012, respectively. The agreement effective June 1, 2010 to May 31, 2013 provides a $200 million limit in excess of a $500 million retention. The June 1, 2010 placement will be increased to 95% to replace coverage previously provided by the North-East contract which expires June 8, 2010 and will not be replaced. New York The current agreement provides a $1.00 billion limit in excess of a $750 million retention and is 80% placed. The contract expiring May 31, 2010 will be replaced with a three year term contract effective June 1, 2010 to May 31, 2013. The remaining two contracts will continue in effect and expire May 31, 2011 and May 31, 2012, respectively. The limit for the agreement effective June 1, 2010 will be $1.00 billion. The retention for the new contract effective June 1, 2010 will be $600 million. The June 1, 2010 placement will be increased to 95% to replace coverage previously provided by the North-East contract which expires June 8, 2010 and will not be replaced. Pennsylvania The Pennsylvania agreement provides coverage for Allstate Protection personal lines property excess catastrophe losses for multi-perils and is effective June 1, 2009 through May 31, 2012. The current agreement provides a $100 million limit in excess of a $100 million retention and is 95% placed. North Carolina The North Carolina agreement effective July 1, 2009 to June 30, 2010 provides a $150 million limit in excess of a $150 million retention for losses to Allstate Protection personal lines property excess catastrophe losses for multi-perils and is 95% placed. Upon its expiration, this agreement will not be replaced as its coverage will be included in the Atlantic States reinsurance contract discussed below. Texas Effective May 31, 2010 the multi-peril Texas agreement will be cancelled as Texas will be included in a new Gulf States reinsurance agreement discussed below. South-East The current South-East agreement provides coverage for Allstate Protection personal lines property excess catastrophe losses for storms named or numbered by the National Weather Service in nine Atlantic and Gulf states (Georgia, South Carolina, North Carolina, Virginia, Maryland, Delaware, Louisiana, Mississippi and Alabama) and the District of Columbia. Effective June 1, 2010, the South-East agreement will be replaced with two new multi-year agreements. Gulf States A new excess catastrophe reinsurance program will be placed effective June 1, 2010, providing coverage for storms named or numbered by the National Weather Service in the states of Texas, Louisiana, Mississippi and Alabama. The Gulf States program will provide a $500 million limit in excess of a $500 million retention with one-third of the coverage expiring May 31, 2011, May 31, 2012 and May 31, 2013, respectively. For the June 1, 2010 to May 31, 2011 term, the Company will retain 5% of the $500 million reinsurance limit. Atlantic States A new excess catastrophe reinsurance program will be placed effective June 1, 2010, providing coverage for storms named or numbered by the National Weather Service in the states of Georgia, South Carolina, North Carolina, Virginia, Maryland and Delaware and the District of Columbia. The Atlantic States program will provide a $500 million limit in excess of a $500 million retention with one-third of the coverage expiring May 31, 2011, May 31, 2012 and May 31, 2013, respectively. For the June 1, 2010 to May 31, 2011 term, the Company will retain 5% of the $500 million reinsurance limit. North-East The North-East agreement provides additional hurricane coverage in the states of New York, New Jersey and Connecticut for Allstate Protection personal lines property and automobile excess catastrophe losses effective June 15, 2007 to June 8, 2010. Upon its expiration, the North-East agreement will not be replaced. 68 Texas The Texas agreement provides additional hurricane coverage for Allstate Protection personal lines property excess catastrophe losses in the state of Texas effective June 18, 2008 to June 17, 2011. California Fires Following Earthquakes This agreement provides coverage for Allstate Protection personal lines property excess catastrophe losses for fires following earthquakes in California and is effective June 1, 2009 to May 31, 2012. The current agreement provides a $750 million limit in excess of a $750 million retention and is 95% placed. One contract providing one-third of the coverage expires May 31, 2010 and will be replaced with a new contract effective June 1, 2010 to May 31, 2013. The new contract will provide multi-peril coverage as opposed to fires following earthquake only coverage, with a $500 million limit in excess of a $500 million retention. The two remaining contracts will continue in effect and expire May 31, 2011 and May 31, 2012, respectively. Kentucky The Kentucky agreement provides coverage for Allstate Protection personal lines property excess catastrophe losses in the state for earthquakes and fires following earthquakes and is effective June 1, 2008 to May 31, 2011. The current agreement provides a $40 million limit in excess of a $10 million limit and is 95% placed. Reinsurance treaties providing coverage for our separately capitalized legal entities in the State of Florida. Florida Five separate agreements are in place providing coverage for Castle Key Insurance Company and its subsidiaries ("Castle Key"), for personal lines property excess catastrophe losses in Florida. The agreements coordinate coverage with our participation in the FHCF and are effective June 1, 2009 to May 31, 2010. We expect to complete our Florida placement in the second quarter 2010. We estimate that the total annualized cost of all catastrophe reinsurance programs for the year beginning June 1, 2010 will be approximately $580 million or $145 million per quarter, compared to $640 million annualized cost for the year beginning June 1, 2009. The total cost of our reinsurance programs during 2009 was $158 million in the first quarter, $156 million in the second quarter, $162 million in the third quarter and $153 million in the fourth quarter. We continue to attempt to capture our reinsurance cost in premium rates as allowed by state regulatory authorities. ALLSTATE FINANCIAL 2009 HIGHLIGHTS Net loss was $483 million in 2009 compared to $1.72 billion in 2008. Net realized capital losses totaled $431 million in 2009 compared to $3.13 billion in 2008. During 2009 and 2008, we recorded $315 million and $397 million, respectively, in accelerated DAC and deferred sales inducement costs ("DSI") amortization related to fixed annuities and interest-sensitive life insurance due to changes in assumptions (which resulted in changes to total EGP). Additional amortization of DAC totaling $336 million was recorded in 2008 in connection with a premium deficiency assessment for traditional life insurance and immediate annuities with life contingencies primarily due to revised annuity mortality assumptions. There was no similar charge in 2009. Investments as of December 31, 2009 totaled $62.22 billion, reflecting an increase in carrying value of $717 million from $61.50 billion as of December 31, 2008. Net investment income decreased 19.6% to $3.06 billion in 2009 from $3.81 billion in 2008. Contractholder fund deposits of $4.58 billion for 2009 relate solely to individual products compared to deposits on individual and institutional products of $6.24 billion and $4.16 billion, respectively, for 2008. Maturities and retirements of institutional products totaled $4.77 billion and $8.60 billion in 2009 and 2008, respectively. Restructuring charges of $25 million in 2009 were recorded in connection with our initiative to lower operating expenses, with targeted annual savings of $90 million relative to 2008 levels beginning in 2011. ALLSTATE FINANCIAL SEGMENT Overview and strategy The Allstate Financial segment is a major provider of life insurance, retirement and investment products, and voluntary accident and health insurance. We serve our customers through Allstate exclusive agencies, the Workplace Division and non-proprietary distribution channels. Allstate Financial's strategic vision is to reinvent protection and retirement for the consumer. We plan to offer a suite of products that are easy for middle market and emerging affluent consumers to understand, meet their protection needs and help them better prepare for retirement. To achieve its vision and reach its financial goals, Allstate Financial's primary objectives are to deepen financial services relationships with Allstate customers, dramatically expand the workplace business and restore profitability through operational excellence and portfolio optimization. Allstate Financial plans to bring value to the Corporation in 69 three principal ways: through profitable growth of Allstate Financial products, improving the economics of the Protection business through increased customer loyalty and renewal rates by cross selling Allstate Financial products to existing customers, and by bringing new customers to Allstate. We plan to continue to shift our product mix by decreasing sales of our spread based products, principally fixed annuities and institutional products, and by growing sales of underwritten products having mortality or morbidity risk, principally life insurance and accident and health products. In addition to focusing on higher return markets, products, and distribution channels, Allstate Financial will continue to emphasize capital efficiency and enterprise risk and return management strategies and actions. Allstate Financial's strategy provides a platform to profitably grow its business. Based upon Allstate's strong financial position and brand, our customers seek assistance in meeting their protection and retirement needs through trusted relationships. We have unique access to potential customers through cross-sell opportunities within the Allstate exclusive agencies and employer relationships through our Workplace Division. Our products include fixed annuities such as deferred and immediate annuities; interest-sensitive, traditional and variable life insurance; voluntary accident and health insurance; and funding agreements backing medium-term notes. Banking products and services are also offered to customers through the Allstate Bank. Our products are sold through multiple distribution channels including Allstate exclusive agencies, which include exclusive financial specialists, independent agents (including master brokerage agencies and workplace enrolling agents), financial service firms such as banks and broker-dealers, and specialized structured settlement brokers. Allstate Bank products can also be obtained directly through a toll-free number. Our institutional product line consists primarily of funding agreements sold to unaffiliated trusts that use them to back medium-term notes issued to institutional and individual investors. Allstate Financial outlook We plan to tailor the focus of product offerings to better serve the needs of everyday Americans and increase the number of customers served through our proprietary and workplace distribution channels. We plan to improve efficiency and are targeting savings at 20% of certain operating expenses relative to 2008 levels, excluding acquisition costs, and expect to yield estimated annual savings of $90 million beginning in 2011. We anticipate a reduction of approximately 1,000 workforce positions relative to December 31, 2008, through a combination of attrition, position elimination and outsourcing. We will continue to focus on improving returns and reducing our concentration in spread based products resulting in lower premiums and deposits and reductions in net contractholder obligations. We expect improved investment spread due to repositioning of our investment portfolio. Summary analysis Summarized financial data for the years ended December 31 is presented in the following table. ($ in millions) 2009 2008 2007 Revenues Life and annuity premiums and contract charges $ 1,958 $ 1,895 $ 1,866 Net investment income 3,064 3,811 4,297 Realized capital gains and losses (431 ) (3,127 ) (193 ) Total revenues 4,591 2,579 5,970 Costs and expenses Life and annuity contract benefits (1,617 ) (1,612 ) (1,589 ) Interest credited to contractholder funds (2,126 ) (2,411 ) (2,681 ) Amortization of DAC (965 ) (704 ) (583 ) Operating costs and expenses (430 ) (520 ) (441 ) Restructuring and related charges (25 ) (1 ) (2 ) Total costs and expenses (5,163 ) (5,248 ) (5,296 ) Gain (loss) on disposition of operations 7 (6 ) (10 ) Income tax benefit (expense) 82 954 (199 ) Net (loss) income $ (483 ) $ (1,721 ) $ 465 Investments at December 31 $ 62,216 $ 61,499 $ 74,256 Net loss was $483 million in 2009 compared to $1.72 billion in 2008 and net income of $465 million in 2007. The improvement of $1.24 billion in 2009 compared to 2008 was primarily due to lower net realized capital losses and, to a 70 lesser extent, decreased interest credited to contractholder funds and operating costs and expenses, partially offset by lower net investment income, higher amortization of DAC and a $142 million increase in the valuation allowance relating to the deferred tax asset on capital losses that was recorded in the first quarter of 2009. This valuation allowance was released in connection with our adoption of new OTTI accounting guidance on April 1, 2009; however, the release was recorded as an increase to retained income and therefore did not reverse the amount recorded in income tax expense. The net loss in 2008 compared to net income in 2007 was primarily the result of higher net realized capital losses and, to a lesser extent, DAC and DSI amortization acceleration for changes in assumptions and additional amortization of DAC that was recorded in connection with a premium deficiency assessment for traditional life insurance and immediate annuities with life contingencies due to revised annuity mortality assumptions. Analysis of revenues Total revenues increased 78.0% or $2.01 billion in 2009 compared to 2008 due primarily to a $2.70 billion decrease in net realized capital losses, partially offset by a $747 million decline in net investment income. Total revenues decreased 56.8% or $3.39 billion in 2008 compared to 2007 due to a $2.93 billion increase in net realized capital losses and a $486 million decrease in net investment income. Life and annuity premiums and contract charges Premiums represent revenues generated from traditional life insurance, immediate annuities with life contingencies, and accident and health insurance products that have significant mortality or morbidity risk. Contract charges are revenues generated from interest-sensitive and variable life insurance and fixed annuities for which deposits are classified as contractholder funds or separate account liabilities. Contract charges are assessed against the contractholder account values for maintenance, administration, cost of insurance and surrender prior to contractually specified dates. As a result, changes in contractholder funds are considered in the evaluation of growth and as indicators of future levels of revenues. The following table summarizes life and annuity premiums and contract charges by product. ($ in millions) 2009 2008 2007 Premiums Traditional life insurance (1) $ 407 $ 399 $ 286 Immediate annuities with life contingencies 102 132 204 Accident and health 460 412 380 Total premiums 969 943 870 Contract charges Interest-sensitive life insurance (1) 944 896 915 Fixed annuities 44 55 79 Bank and other 1 1 2 Total contract charges (2) 989 952 996 Life and annuity premiums and contract charges $ 1,958 $ 1,895 $ 1,866 (1) Beginning in 2008, certain ceded reinsurance premiums previously included as a component of traditional life insurance premiums were reclassified prospectively to be reported as a component of interest-sensitive life insurance contract charges. In 2007, these ceded reinsurance premiums were $95 million. (2) Total contract charges for 2009, 2008 and 2007 include contract charges related to the cost of insurance totaling $616 million, $595 million and $652 million, respectively. Total premiums increased 2.8% in 2009 compared to 2008 due to higher sales of accident and health insurance and, to a lesser extent, increased renewal premium on traditional life insurance, partially offset by lower sales of immediate annuities with life contingencies. The increased sales of accident and health insurance reflect growth through the Allstate Workplace Division. Total premiums increased 8.4% in 2008 compared to 2007 due to the prospective reporting reclassification for certain ceded reinsurance premiums. Excluding the impact of this reporting reclassification, total premiums decreased 2.3% in 2008 compared to 2007 as higher sales of accident and health insurance and traditional life insurance products were more than offset by lower sales of immediate annuities with life contingencies due to highly competitive market conditions and our continued focus on returns. Total contract charges increased 3.9% in 2009 compared to 2008 due primarily to higher contract charges on interest-sensitive life insurance products resulting from increases in certain policy administration fees. 71 Total contract charges decreased 4.4% in 2008 compared to 2007 due to the prospective reporting reclassification for certain ceded reinsurance premiums. Excluding the impact of this reclassification, total contract charges increased 5.7% in 2008 due to higher contract charges on interest-sensitive life insurance policies resulting from increased contract charge rates and growth in business in force, partially offset by decreased contract charges on fixed annuities resulting primarily from lower contract surrenders. Contractholder funds represent interest-bearing liabilities arising from the sale of individual and institutional products, such as interest-sensitive life insurance, fixed annuities, funding agreements and bank deposits. The balance of contractholder funds is equal to the cumulative deposits received and interest credited to the contractholder less cumulative contract maturities, benefits, surrenders, withdrawals and contract charges for mortality or administrative expenses. The following table shows the changes in contractholder funds. ($ in millions) 2009 2008 2007 Contractholder funds, beginning balance $ 58,413 $ 61,975 $ 62,031 Deposits Fixed annuities 1,964 3,802 3,636 Institutional products (funding agreements) 4,158 3,000 Interest-sensitive life insurance 1,438 1,404 1,402 Bank and other deposits 1,178 1,038 953 Total deposits 4,580 10,402 8,991 Interest credited 2,025 2,405 2,689 Maturities, benefits, withdrawals and other adjustments Maturities and retirements of institutional products (4,773 ) (8,599 ) (3,165 ) Benefits (1,588 ) (1,710 ) (1,668 ) Surrenders and partial withdrawals (5,172 ) (5,313 ) (5,872 ) Contract charges (918 ) (870 ) (801 ) Net transfers from separate accounts 11 19 13 Fair value hedge adjustments for institutional products 25 (56 ) 34 Other adjustments (1) (21 ) 160 (277 ) Total maturities, benefits, withdrawals and other adjustments (12,436 ) (16,369 ) (11,736 ) Contractholder funds, ending balance $ 52,582 $ 58,413 $ 61,975 (1) The table above illustrates the changes in contractholder funds, which are presented gross of reinsurance recoverables on the Consolidated Statements of Financial Position. The table above is intended to supplement our discussion and analysis of revenues, which are presented net of reinsurance on the Consolidated Statements of Operations. As a result, the net change in contractholder funds associated with products reinsured to third parties is reflected as a component of the other adjustments line. Contractholder funds decreased 10.0%, 5.8% and 0.1% in 2009, 2008 and 2007, respectively. Average contractholder funds decreased 7.8% in 2009 compared to 2008 and 2.9% in 2008 compared to 2007. Contractholder deposits decreased 56.0% in 2009 compared to 2008 because there were no issuances of institutional products in 2009 compared to $4.16 billion in the prior year and due to lower deposits on fixed annuities in 2009. Sales of our institutional products vary from period to period based on management's assessment of market conditions, investor demand and operational priorities such as our focus beginning in 2009 on reducing our concentration in spread based products. Deposits on fixed annuities decreased 48.3% in 2009 compared to 2008 due to pricing actions to improve returns on new business and reduce our concentration in spread based products. Contractholder deposits increased 15.7% in 2008 compared to 2007 due primarily to higher deposits on institutional products, and to a lesser extent, higher deposits on fixed annuities and Allstate Bank products. Deposits on fixed annuities increased 4.6% in 2008 compared to 2007 due primarily to increased consumer demand as the attractiveness of fixed annuities relative to competing products improved, partially offset by pricing decisions aimed to increase new business returns. 72 Maturities and retirements of institutional products decreased 44.5% to $4.77 billion in 2009 from $8.60 billion in 2008. The decrease was primarily due to lower retirements of extendible institutional market obligations in 2009 compared to 2008, partially offset by the redemption in 2009 of $1.39 billion of institutional product liabilities in accordance with cash tender offers announced in May 2009 to reduce the amount of our outstanding obligations and related interest credited expense. During 2009, we retired all of our remaining outstanding extendible institutional market obligations totaling $1.45 billion. This compares to retirements of extendible institutional market obligations of $5.36 billion in 2008. Maturities and retirements of institutional products increased $5.43 billion in 2008 compared to 2007 due to the retirement of $5.36 billion of extendible institutional market obligations for which investors had elected to non-extend their maturity date through a combination of maturities, calls, and acquisitions in the secondary market. Surrenders and partial withdrawals on deferred fixed annuities, interest-sensitive life insurance products and Allstate Bank products (including maturities of certificates of deposit) decreased 2.7% to $5.17 billion in 2009 from $5.31 billion in 2008 due to lower surrenders and partial withdrawals on traditional fixed annuities, partially offset by higher surrenders and partial withdrawals on market value adjusted annuities and interest-sensitive life insurance. Surrenders and partial withdrawals on deferred fixed annuities, interest-sensitive life insurance products and Allstate Bank products decreased 9.5% to $5.31 billion in 2008 from $5.87 billion in 2007 due to lower surrenders and partial withdrawals on market value adjusted annuities and traditional fixed annuities, partially offset by higher surrenders and partial withdrawals on interest-sensitive life insurance products and, to a lesser extent, increased withdrawals on Allstate Bank products. The surrender and partial withdrawal rate on deferred fixed annuities, interest-sensitive life insurance products and Allstate Bank products, based on the beginning of period contractholder funds, was 11.8% in 2009 compared to 12.2% in 2008 and 13.3% in 2007. The surrender and partial withdrawal rate on deferred fixed annuities was 11.0% in 2009 compared to 11.8% in 2008 and 13.3% in 2007. Net investment income decreased 19.6% or $747 million to $3.06 billion in 2009 from $3.81 billion in 2008. The decline was primarily due to lower yields, actions to shorten duration and maintain additional liquidity in the portfolio, along with reduced average investment balances resulting primarily from reduced contractholder obligations. Lower yields were particularly impacted by short-term and variable rate assets. Net investment income decreased 11.3% in 2008 compared to 2007. The decline in 2008 was primarily due to lower investment yields on floating rate securities, increased short-term investment balances reflecting liquidity management activities, lower average investment balances and lower income from limited partnership interests. Net realized capital gains and losses are presented in the following table for the years ended December 31. ($ in millions) 2009 2008 2007 Impairment write-downs $ (1,021 ) $ (1,256 ) $ (118 ) Change in intent write-downs (268 ) (1,247 ) (93 ) Net other-than-temporary impairment losses recognized in earnings (1,289 ) (2,503 ) (211 ) Sales 638 178 75 Valuation of derivative instruments 315 (985 ) (63 ) Settlements of derivative instruments 41 197 6 EMA LP income (136 ) (14 ) Realized capital gains and losses, pre-tax (431 ) (3,127 ) (193 ) Income tax benefit (1) 14 1,093 68 Realized capital gains and losses, after-tax $ (417 ) $ (2,034 ) $ (125 ) (1) Income tax benefit for 2009 includes expense of $142 million attributable to an increase in the valuation allowance relating to the deferred tax asset on capital losses recorded in the first quarter of 2009. This valuation allowance was released in connection with the adoption of new OTTI accounting guidance on April 1, 2009; however, the release was recorded as an increase to retained income and therefore did not reverse the amount recorded in income tax benefit. For further discussion of changes in this valuation allowance see the Deferred Taxes section of the MD&A. For further discussion of realized capital gains and losses, see the Investments section of the MD&A. 73 Analysis of costs and expenses Total costs and expenses decreased 1.6% or $85 million in 2009 compared to 2008 due primarily to lower interest credited to contractholder funds and operating costs and expenses, partially offset by higher amortization of DAC and restructuring and related charges. Total costs and expenses decreased 0.9% or $48 million in 2008 compared to 2007 due to lower interest credited to contractholder funds, partially offset by higher amortization of DAC, contract benefits and operating costs and expenses. Life and annuity contract benefits increased 0.3% or $5 million in 2009 compared to 2008 due to higher contract benefits on life insurance products and accident and health insurance business, partially offset by lower contract benefits on annuities. The increase in contract benefits on life insurance products was primarily due to higher mortality experience on interest-sensitive life insurance products resulting from an increase in claim experience and policy growth while higher contract benefits on accident and health insurance business was proportionate to growth in premiums. The decrease in contract benefits for annuities was due to improved mortality experience and the impact of lower sales of immediate annuities with life contingencies. Life and annuity contract benefits increased 1.5% or $23 million in 2008 compared to 2007 due primarily to higher contract benefits on life insurance products, partially offset by lower contract benefits on annuities. The increase in contract benefits on life insurance products was primarily due to unfavorable mortality experience, partially offset by the recognition in 2007 of litigation related costs in the form of additional policy benefits. The decline in contract benefits on annuities was due to the impact of lower sales of immediate annuities with life contingencies, partially offset by unfavorable mortality experience. We analyze our mortality and morbidity results using the difference between premiums and contract charges earned for the cost of insurance and life and annuity contract benefits excluding the portion related to the implied interest on immediate annuities with life contingencies ("benefit spread"). This implied interest totaled $558 million, $552 million and $547 million in 2009, 2008 and 2007, respectively. The benefit spread by product group is disclosed in the following table. ($ in millions) 2009 2008 (1) 2007 (1) Life insurance $ 363 $ 363 $ 354 Accident and health 196 177 161 Annuities (33 ) (62 ) (35 ) Total benefit spread $ 526 $ 478 $ 480 (1) To conform to the current year presentation, certain amounts in the prior years have been reclassified. Benefit spread increased 10.0% or $48 million in 2009 compared to 2008 and was consistent in 2008 compared to 2007. The increase in 2009 was primarily due to improved mortality experience on annuities and higher premiums on accident and health insurance business sold through the Allstate Workplace Division. Interest credited to contractholder funds decreased 11.8% or $285 million in 2009 compared to 2008 due primarily to lower average contractholder funds and, to a lesser extent, decreased weighted average interest crediting rates on deferred fixed annuities and institutional products, partially offset by higher amortization of DSI. Amortization of DSI in 2009 and 2008 was $129 million and $53 million, respectively. The increase primarily includes an unfavorable change in amortization relating to realized capital gains and losses of $132 million, partially offset by a $32 million decline in amortization acceleration due to changes in assumptions, which in 2009 and 2008 increased interest credited to contractholder funds by $38 million and $70 million, respectively. Interest credited to contractholder funds decreased 10.1% or $270 million in 2008 compared to 2007 due primarily to a decline in average contractholder funds, decreased weighted average interest crediting rates on institutional products resulting from a decline in market interest rates on floating rate obligations, and a favorable change in amortization of DSI relating to realized capital gains and losses, partially offset by the acceleration of amortization of DSI due to changes in assumptions. The acceleration of amortization of DSI due to changes in assumptions increased interest credited to contractholder funds by $70 million in 2008 compared to amortization deceleration which decreased interest credited to contractholder funds by $5 million in 2007. In order to analyze the impact of net investment income and interest credited to contractholders on net income, we monitor the difference between net investment income and the sum of interest credited to contractholder funds and the implied interest on immediate annuities with life contingencies, which is included as a component of life and annuity contract benefits on the Consolidated Statements of Operations ("investment spread"). 74 The investment spread by product group is shown in the following table. ($ in millions) 2009 2008 (1) 2007 (1) Annuities and institutional products $ 126 $ 460 $ 592 Life insurance 3 48 53 Bank 30 22 18 Accident and health 16 12 10 Net investment income on investments supporting capital 205 306 396 Total investment spread $ 380 $ 848 $ 1,069 (1) To conform to the current year presentation, certain amounts in the prior years have been reclassified. Investment spread declined 55.2% or $468 million in 2009 compared to 2008, and 20.7% or $221 million in 2008 compared to 2007. These declines reflect lower net investment income, partially offset by decreased interest credited to contractholder funds. To further analyze investment spreads, the following table summarizes the weighted average investment yield on assets supporting product liabilities and capital, interest crediting rates and investment spreads for 2009, 2008 and 2007. Weighted average investment yield Weighted average interest crediting rate Weighted average investment spreads 2009 2008 (1) 2007 (1) 2009 2008 (1) 2007 (1) 2009 2008 (1) 2007 (1) Interest-sensitive life insurance 5.5 % 6.0 % 6.2 % 4.6 % 4.6 % 4.6 % 0.9 % 1.4 % 1.6 % Deferred fixed annuities and institutional products 4.5 5.2 5.9 3.4 3.7 4.1 1.1 1.5 1.8 Immediate fixed annuities with and without life contingencies 6.3 6.8 7.1 6.5 6.5 6.5 (0.2 ) 0.3 0.6 Investments supporting capital, traditional life and other products 3.7 5.3 6.1 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A (1) To conform to the current year presentation, certain amounts in the prior years have been reclassified. The following table summarizes our product liabilities as of December 31 and indicates the account value of those contracts and policies in which an investment spread is generated. ($ in millions) 2009 2008 2007 Immediate fixed annuities with life contingencies $ 8,454 $ 8,355 $ 8,294 Other life contingent contracts and other 4,456 4,526 4,918 Reserve for life-contingent contract benefits $ 12,910 $ 12,881 $ 13,212 Interest-sensitive life insurance $ 10,276 $ 9,957 $ 9,539 Deferred fixed annuities 32,194 33,766 34,214 Immediate fixed annuities without life contingencies 3,869 3,894 3,921 Institutional products 4,370 8,974 12,983 Allstate Bank 1,085 949 832 Market value adjustments related to fair value hedges and other 788 873 486 Contractholder funds $ 52,582 $ 58,413 $ 61,975 75 Amortization of DAC increased 37.1% in 2009 compared to 2008 and 20.8% in 2008 compared to 2007. The components of amortization of DAC are summarized in the following table. ($ in millions) 2009 2008 2007 Amortization of DAC before amortization relating to realized capital gains and losses, changes in assumptions and premium deficiency $ (472 ) $ (556 ) $ (614 ) (Amortization) accretion relating to realized capital gains and losses (216 ) 515 17 Amortization (acceleration) deceleration for changes in assumptions ("DAC unlocking") (277 ) (327 ) 14 Amortization charge relating to premium deficiency (336 ) Total amortization of DAC $ (965 ) $ (704 ) $ (583 ) The increase of $261 million in 2009 compared to 2008 was due primarily to an unfavorable change in amortization relating to realized capital gains and losses, partially offset by the absence of additional amortization recorded in 2008 in connection with a premium deficiency assessment, lower amortization resulting from decreased investment spread on deferred fixed annuities, and a decline in amortization acceleration due to changes in assumptions. The increase of $121 million in 2008 compared to 2007 was due primarily to amortization acceleration relating to changes in assumptions and additional amortization recorded in connection with a premium deficiency assessment for traditional life insurance and immediate annuities with life contingencies, partially offset by higher accretion of DAC relating to net realized capital losses. The impact of realized capital gains and losses on amortization of DAC is dependent upon the relationship between the assets that give rise to the gain or loss and the product liability supported by the assets. Fluctuations result from changes in the impact of realized capital gains and losses on actual and expected gross profits. In 2009, DAC amortization relating to realized capital gains and losses resulted primarily from realized capital gains on derivatives. Additionally, DAC amortization reflects our decision in the second half of 2009 not to recapitalize DAC for credit losses on investments supporting certain fixed annuities following concerns that an increase in the level of expected realized capital losses in 2010 and 2011 may reduce EGP and adversely impact the product DAC recoverability. In 2008, DAC accretion resulted primarily from realized capital losses on derivatives and other-than-temporary impairment losses. Despite the recent improvement in the credit markets and the overall economy, the cumulative impact of realized capital losses through December 31, 2009 has negatively impacted both the actual and expected gross profits of our fixed annuity business. In the fourth quarter of 2009, we reviewed and updated the gross profit assumptions used in substantially all of our fixed annuity DAC models to exclude excess realized capital losses when determining gross profits used for calculating DAC amortization. This is consistent with our decision not to record negative amortization related to realized capital losses for these fixed annuities, which is expected to be our practice during periods when realized capital losses are reported. This treatment results in a lower DAC amortization rate for these fixed annuities. The lower rate of amortization will be applied to a higher level of actual gross profits, as gross profits used to determine DAC amortization will exclude excess realized capital losses. The DAC adjustment relating to unrealized capital gains and losses (disclosed in footnote 4 to the table that follows this discussion) represents the amount by which the amortization of DAC would increase or decrease if the unrealized gains or losses in the respective product portfolios were realized. The DAC adjustment balance, subject to limitations, is determined by applying the DAC amortization rate to unrealized net capital gains or losses. The fixed annuity DAC adjustment for unrealized capital gains and losses declined as of December 31, 2009 as a result of lower unrealized capital losses and the lower rate of DAC amortization used for certain fixed annuities discussed above. Changes in the DAC adjustment balance relating to unrealized capital gains and losses are reported through other comprehensive income. Our annual comprehensive review of the profitability of our products to determine DAC balances for our interest-sensitive life, fixed annuities and other investment contracts covers assumptions for investment returns, including capital gains and losses, interest crediting rates to policyholders, the effect of any hedges, persistency, mortality and expenses in all product lines. In the first quarter of 2009, the review resulted in an acceleration of DAC amortization (charge to income) of $277 million pre-tax. $289 million related to fixed annuities, of which $210 million was attributable to market value adjusted annuities, and $18 million related to variable life insurance. Partially offsetting these amounts was amortization deceleration (credit to income) for interest-sensitive life insurance of $30 million. The principal 76 assumption impacting EGP and the related DAC amortization was an increase in the level of expected realized capital losses in 2009 and 2010. This resulted in the majority of the market value adjusted annuity DAC balance being reduced to zero since the products in force were estimated to have no gross profits. Market value adjusted annuity DAC on these inforce contracts will not be recapitalized while there are no estimated gross profits. Reduced EGP for traditional fixed annuities and variable life insurance resulted in accelerated DAC amortization. For our interest-sensitive life insurance products, the amortization deceleration was due to higher EGP due to a favorable change in our mortality assumptions, partially offset by increased expected capital losses. In 2008, DAC amortization acceleration for changes in assumptions recorded in connection with comprehensive reviews of the DAC balances resulted in an increase to amortization of DAC of $327 million. The principle assumption impacting the amortization acceleration in 2008 was the level of realized capital losses impacting actual gross profits in 2008 and the impact of realized capital losses on EGP in 2009. During the fourth quarter of 2008, our assumptions for EGP were impacted by a view of higher impairments in our investment portfolio. In 2007, DAC amortization deceleration for changes in assumptions (credit to income) was $14 million. During 2008, indicators emerged that suggested a study of mortality experience for our immediate annuities with life contingences was warranted. At the same time, the underlying profitability of the traditional life insurance business deteriorated due to lower investment returns and growth. For traditional life insurance and immediate annuities with life contingencies, an aggregate premium deficiency of $336 million, pre-tax, resulted primarily from the experience study indicating that the annuitants on certain life contingent contracts are projected to live longer than we anticipated when the contracts were issued and, to a lesser degree, a reduction in the related investment portfolio yield. The deficiency was recorded through a reduction in DAC. There was no similar charge to income recorded in 2009 or 2007. The changes in the DAC asset are detailed in the following table. ($ in millions) Traditional life and accident and health Interest-sensitive life insurance Fixed annuities Other Total 2009 2008 2009 2008 2009 2008 2009 2008 2009 2008 Beginning balance $ 595 $ 882 $ 2,449 $ 1,911 $ 4,037 $ 1,489 $ 8 $ 9 $ 7,089 $ 4,291 Acquisition costs deferred 162 160 230 304 103 212 8 495 684 Impact of adoption of new OTTI accounting before unrealized impact (1) (6 ) (170 ) (176 ) Impact of adoption of new OTTI accounting effect of unrealized capital gains and losses (2) 6 170 176 Amortization of DAC before amortization relating to realized capital gains and losses, changes in assumptions and premium deficiency (3) (107 ) (111 ) (176 ) (178 ) (186 ) (258 ) (3 ) (9 ) (472 ) (556 ) (Amortization) accretion relating to realized capital gains and losses (3) (4 ) 141 (212 ) 374 (216 ) 515 Amortization (acceleration) deceleration for changes in assumptions ("DAC unlocking") (3) 12 (75 ) (289 ) (252 ) (277 ) (327 ) Amortization charge relating to premium deficiency (3) (336 ) (336 ) Effect of unrealized capital gains and losses (4) (265 ) 346 (2,294 ) 2,472 (2,559 ) 2,818 Ending balance $ 650 $ 595 $ 2,246 $ 2,449 $ 1,159 $ 4,037 $ 5 $ 8 $ 4,060 $ 7,089 (1) The adoption of new OTTI accounting guidance resulted in an adjustment to DAC to reverse previously recorded DAC accretion related to realized capital losses that were reclassified to other comprehensive income upon adoption on April 1, 2009. The adjustment was recorded as a reduction of the DAC balance and retained income. (2) The adoption of new OTTI accounting guidance resulted in an adjustment to DAC due to the change in unrealized capital gains and losses that occurred upon adoption on April 1, 2009 when previously recorded realized capital losses were reclassified to other comprehensive income. The adjustment was recorded as an increase of the DAC balance and unrealized capital gains and losses. (3) Included as a component of amortization of DAC on the Consolidated Statements of Operations. (4) Represents the change in the DAC adjustment for unrealized capital gains and losses. The DAC adjustment balance was $870 million and $3.25 billion as of December 31, 2009 and 2008, respectively, and represents the amount by which the amortization of DAC would increase or decrease if the unrealized gains and losses in the respective product portfolios were realized. Recapitalization of DAC is limited to the originally deferred policy acquisition costs plus interest. 77 Operating costs and expenses decreased 17.3% or $90 million in 2009 compared to 2008, and increased 17.9% or $79 million in 2008 compared to 2007. The following table summarizes operating costs and expenses. ($ in millions) 2009 2008 2007 Non-deferrable acquisition costs $ 156 $ 153 $ 167 Other operating costs and expenses 274 367 274 Total operating costs and expenses $ 430 $ 520 $ 441 Restructuring and related charges $ 25 $ 1 $ 2 Non-deferrable acquisition costs increased 2.0% or $3 million in 2009 compared to 2008 primarily due to higher non-deferrable commissions related to accident and health insurance business sold through the Allstate Workplace Division. Other operating costs and expenses decreased 25.3% or $93 million in 2009 compared to 2008 due primarily to our expense reduction actions, which resulted in lower employee, professional services and sales support expenses. Non-deferrable acquisition costs decreased 8.4% or $14 million in 2008 compared to 2007 primarily due to lower non-deferrable commissions. Other operating costs and expenses increased 33.9% or $93 million in 2008 compared to 2007 due primarily to increased spending on consumer research, product development, marketing and technology related to the effort to reinvent protection and retirement for consumers as well as increases in the net cost of benefits due to unfavorable investment results. In addition, 2007 benefitted to a greater degree from a servicing fee paid by Prudential Financial Inc. ("Prudential") for our servicing of the variable annuity business that we ceded to them during a transition period beginning in 2006 which ended in May 2008. During 2009, restructuring and related charges of $25 million were recorded in connection with our previously announced plan to improve efficiency and narrow our focus of product offerings. In accordance with this plan, among other actions, we continue to anticipate the reduction of approximately 1,000 workforce positions relative to December 31, 2008 levels through a combination of attrition, position elimination and outsourcing. This reduction reflects approximately 30% of Allstate Financial's work force at the time the plan was initiated. Reductions in workforce positions combined with other actions completed as of December 31, 2009 reflect approximately 90% of our targeted annual savings of $90 million beginning in 2011. Income tax benefit of $82 million was recognized for 2009 compared to a benefit of $954 million for 2008 and income tax expense of $199 million for 2007. The decrease in the benefit of $872 million in 2009 was mostly attributable to the decline in the pre-tax net loss. Income tax benefit for 2009 includes expense of $142 million attributable to an increase in the valuation allowance relating to the deferred tax asset on capital losses recorded in the first quarter of 2009. This valuation allowance was released in connection with the adoption of new OTTI accounting guidance on April 1, 2009; however, the release was recorded as an increase to retained income and therefore did not reverse the amount recorded in income tax benefit. For further discussion of changes in this valuation allowance see the Deferred Taxes section of the MD&A. The change to an income tax benefit in 2008 compared to income tax expense in 2007 reflects the shift from net pre-tax income in 2007 to a net pre-tax loss in 2008. Reinsurance ceded We enter into reinsurance agreements with unaffiliated reinsurers to limit our risk of mortality and morbidity losses. In addition, Allstate Financial has used reinsurance to effect the acquisition or disposition of certain blocks of business. We retain primary liability as a direct insurer for all risks ceded to reinsurers. As of both December 31, 2009 and 2008, 47% of our face amount of life insurance in force was reinsured. As of December 31, 2009 and 2008, for certain term life insurance policies, we ceded up to 90% of the mortality risk depending on the year of policy issuance. Additionally, we ceded substantially all of the risk associated with our variable annuity business and we cede 100% of the morbidity risk on substantially all of our long-term care contracts. Beginning in July 2007, for new life insurance contracts, we ceded the mortality risk associated with coverage in excess of $3 million per life for contracts issued to individuals age 70 and over, and we ceded the mortality risk associated with coverage in excess of $5 million per life for most other contracts. Also beginning in July 2007, for certain large contracts that meet specific criteria, our retention limit was increased to $10 million per life. In the period prior to July 2007, but subsequent to August 1998, we ceded the mortality risk associated with coverage in excess of $2 million per life, except in 2006 for certain instances when specific criteria were met, we ceded the mortality risk associated with coverage in excess of $5 million per life. For business sold prior to September 1998, we ceded mortality risk in excess of specific amounts up to $1 million per individual life. 78 Amounts recoverable from reinsurers by type of policy or contract at December 31 are summarized in the following table. ($ in millions) Reinsurance recoverable on paid and unpaid benefits 2009 2008 Annuities (1) $ 1,667 $ 1,734 Life insurance 1,535 1,475 Long-term care 851 746 Other 90 96 Total Allstate Financial $ 4,143 $ 4,051 (1) Reinsurance recoverables as of December 31, 2009 and 2008 include $1.51 billion and $1.57 billion, respectively, for general account reserves related to reinsured variable annuities. The estimation of reinsurance recoverables is impacted by the uncertainties involved in the establishment of reserves. Our reinsurance recoverables, summarized by reinsurer as of December 31, are shown in the following table. ($ in millions) Standard & Poor's Financial Strength Rating (3) Reinsurance recoverable on paid and unpaid benefits 2009 2008 Prudential Insurance Company of America AA- $ 1,507 $ 1,569 Employers Reassurance Corporation A+ 745 644 Transamerica Life Group AA- 374 341 RGA Reinsurance Company AA- 352 342 Swiss Re Life and Health America, Inc. A+ 200 192 Paul Revere Life Insurance Company A- 146 151 Scottish Re Group (1) NR 137 135 Munich American Reassurance AA- 119 113 Mutual of Omaha Insurance AA- 101 100 Security Life of Denver A+ 91 86 Manulife Insurance Company AA+ 71 74 Lincoln National Life Insurance AA- 65 63 Triton Insurance Company NR 61 66 American Health & Life Insurance Co. NR 51 53 Other (2) 123 122 Total $ 4,143 $ 4,051 (1) The reinsurance recoverable on paid and unpaid benefits related to the Scottish Re Group as of December 31, 2009 comprised $74 million related to Scottish Re Life Corporation and $63 million related to Scottish Re (U.S.), Inc. As of December 31, 2008, the reinsurance recoverable on paid and unpaid benefits related to the Scottish Re Group comprised $73 million related to Scottish Re Life Corporation and $62 million related to Scottish Re (U.S.), Inc. (2) As of both December 31, 2009 and 2008, the other category includes $100 million of recoverables due from reinsurers with an investment grade credit rating from Standard & Poor's ("S&P"). (3) NR reflects not rated. Certain of our reinsurers experienced rating downgrades by one or more rating agencies in 2009. These reinsurers include Prudential Insurance Company of America, Transamerica Life Group, Swiss Re Life and Health America, Inc., Scottish Re Group, Security Life of Denver, Manulife Insurance Company and Lincoln National Life Insurance. We continuously monitor the creditworthiness of reinsurers in order to determine our risk of recoverability on an individual and aggregate basis, and a provision for uncollectible reinsurance is recorded if needed. No amounts have been deemed unrecoverable in the three-years ended December 31, 2009. We enter into certain intercompany reinsurance transactions for the Allstate Financial operations in order to maintain underwriting control and manage insurance risk among various legal entities. These reinsurance agreements 79 have been approved by the appropriate regulatory authorities. All significant intercompany transactions have been eliminated in consolidation. INVESTMENTS 2009 HIGHLIGHTS Investments as of December 31, 2009 totaled $99.83 billion, an increase of 4.0% from $96.00 billion as of December 31, 2008. Unrealized net capital losses totaled $2.32 billion as of December 31, 2009, an improvement from $8.81 billion as of December 31, 2008. This resulted from improving fixed income and equity portfolio valuations. The fair value of fixed income securities increased as a result of significant tightening in credit spreads that more than offset a rise in risk-free interest rates. Net investment income was $4.44 billion in 2009, a decrease of 21.0% from $5.62 billion in 2008. Net realized capital losses of $583 million in 2009 primarily included $1.92 billion of net realized capital losses from other-than-temporary impairments partially offset by net realized capital gains of $1.27 billion primarily from the sales of fixed income and equity securities. Net realized capital losses were $5.09 billion in 2008. During 2009, our fixed income and mortgage loan portfolio generated cash flows totaling $11.51 billion which increased our flexibility to take advantage of market opportunities and manage liabilities. Over the last three quarters of 2009 we deployed approximately $16.6 billion of short-term investments and cash receipts into securities, primarily fixed income and equity securities, to generate income and capital appreciation. INVESTMENTS Overview and strategy The return on our investment portfolios is an important component of our financial results. Investment portfolios are segmented between the Property-Liability, Allstate Financial and Corporate and Other operations. While taking into consideration the investment portfolio in aggregate, we manage the underlying portfolios based upon the nature of each respective business and its corresponding liability structure. We employ a strategic asset allocation approach which uses models that consider the nature of the liabilities and risk tolerances, as well as the risk and return parameters of the various asset classes in which we invest. This asset allocation is informed by our global economic and market outlook, as well as other inputs and constraints, including diversification effects, duration, liquidity and capital considerations. We will continue to manage risks associated with rising interest rates, equity market declines, commercial real estate and municipal bonds. The Property-Liability portfolio's investment strategy emphasizes protection of principal and consistent income generation, within a total return framework. This approach, which has produced competitive returns over the long term, is designed to ensure financial strength and stability for paying claims, while maximizing economic value and surplus growth. The Allstate Financial portfolio's investment strategy focuses on the total return of assets needed to support the underlying liabilities and to achieve an appropriate return on capital. Within the ranges set by the strategic asset allocation model, tactical investment decisions are made in consideration of prevailing market conditions. The Corporate and Other portfolio's investment strategy balances the pursuit of competitive returns with the unique liquidity needs of the portfolio in relation to the overall corporate capital structure. The portfolio is primarily invested in high quality, liquid fixed income and short-term securities with additional investments in less liquid holdings in order to enhance overall returns. Risk mitigation We continue to focus our strategic risk mitigation efforts towards managing interest rate, equity, credit and real estate investment risks, while our return optimization efforts focus on investing in market opportunities to generate income and capital appreciation. As a result, during 2009 we took the following actions: Reduced our commercial real estate exposure by 30.3% or $5.36 billion of amortized cost primarily through targeted dispositions and principal repayments from borrowers. Sold $1.95 billion of below investment grade assets primarily corporate fixed income securities and bank loans, as a result of improved market conditions. Reduced our municipal bond exposure by 8.0% or $1.88 billion of amortized cost primarily through targeted dispositions, refunding and scheduled maturities. Managed our exposure to interest rate risk through macro hedging of tail risk and reductions in duration. Duration of the investment portfolio, including the effects of derivatives, declined by approximately 5% (.21 years) over the twelve month period. The decline in duration was the result of proceeds from asset 80 dispositions being reinvested in shorter duration assets and through the use of interest rate derivatives. Our investment portfolio duration is managed in relation to the liabilities of our business segments. Maintained risk mitigation programs that protected our portfolios through macro hedges against interest rate and equity market risk. The appreciation in fair values for fixed income and equity securities significantly exceeded the realized losses of $201 million from derivatives used for macro hedging programs. Investments outlook For 2010, the economies of the U.S. and other developed countries continue to face significant resistance with expectations for limited domestic growth, but with better prospects for growth in developing or emerging economies and markets. Financial markets are anticipated to see moderate returns for fixed income and equities with periods of higher volatility throughout the year, and moderate widening of credit spreads. We also expect continued weakness in commercial real estate fundamentals. In 2010, our return optimization and risk mitigation efforts will focus on the following areas: Optimizing our allocation of assets to reflect changes in Allstate Financial's liabilities. Continuing to explore global investments in areas of emerging opportunity with higher prospects for growth. Balancing our ongoing efforts to mitigate interest rate and equity risks, including continuing our macro hedge program, with near term income enhancement opportunities. Managing our exposure to overall credit risk while managing and selectively reducing exposures to commercial real estate and municipal bonds. As a result of these actions, market conditions, and Allstate Financial's strategic initiatives: Invested assets are expected to decline in line with reductions in contractholder obligations. Our portfolio will continue to generate significant cash flow from maturities, principal and interest receipts which will be available to manage liabilities and pursue market opportunities. Portfolio composition The composition of the investment portfolios at December 31, 2009 is presented in the table below. Also see Notes 2 and 4 of the consolidated financial statements for investment accounting policies and additional information. Property- Liability (5) Allstate Financial (5) Corporate and Other (5) Total ($ in millions) Percent to total Percent to total Percent to total Percent to total Fixed income securities (1) $ 27,285 79.0 % $ 49,286 79.2 % $ 2,195 71.0 % $ 78,766 78.9 % Equity securities (2) 4,840 14.0 184 0.3 5,024 5.0 Mortgage loans 50 0.1 7,885 12.7 7,935 7.9 Limited partnership interests (3) 1,674 4.9 1,032 1.7 38 1.2 2,744 2.8 Short-term (4) 503 1.5 1,697 2.7 856 27.7 3,056 3.1 Other 174 0.5 2,132 3.4 2 0.1 2,308 2.3 Total $ 34,526 100.0 % $ 62,216 100.0 % $ 3,091 100.0 % $ 99,833 100.0 % (1) Fixed income securities are carried at fair value. Amortized cost basis for these securities was $27.59 billion, $51.49 billion and $2.16 billion for Property-Liability, Allstate Financial and Corporate and Other, respectively. (2) Equity securities are carried at fair value. Cost basis for these securities was $4.69 billion and $160 million for Property-Liability and Allstate Financial, respectively. (3) We have commitments to invest in additional limited partnership interests totaling $630 million and $802 million for Property-Liability and Allstate Financial, respectively. (4) Short-term investments are carried at fair value. Amortized cost basis for these investments was $503 million, $1.70 billion and $856 million for Property-Liability, Allstate Financial and Corporate and Other, respectively. (5) Balances reflect the elimination of related party investments between segments. Total investments increased to $99.83 billion at December 31, 2009, from $96.00 billion at December 31, 2008, due primarily to higher valuations for fixed income and equity securities from improved market conditions and operating cash flows that more than offset net reductions in contractholder obligations of $5.83 billion. Fair values of fixed income securities increased as a result of significant tightening in credit spreads that more than offset a rise in risk-free interest rates. Credit spread is the additional yield on fixed income securities above the risk-free rate (typically defined as the yield on U.S. Treasury securities) that market participants require to compensate them for assuming credit, liquidity and/or prepayment risks. Credit spreads vary (i.e., increase or decrease) in response to the market's perception of risk and liquidity in a specific issuer or specific sector. 81 The Property-Liability investment portfolio increased to $34.53 billion at December 31, 2009, from $30.84 billion at December 31, 2008, primarily due to higher valuations for fixed income and equity securities from improved market conditions and operating cash flows. The Allstate Financial investment portfolio increased to $62.22 billion at December 31, 2009, from $61.50 billion at December 31, 2008, primarily due to higher valuations for fixed income securities from improved market conditions and capital contributions of $698 million from the Corporation and AIC that was almost entirely offset by net reductions in contractholder obligations of $5.83 billion primarily from maturities and retirements of institutional products. The Corporate and Other investment portfolio decreased to $3.09 billion at December 31, 2009, from $3.66 billion at December 31, 2008, as dividends paid to shareholders, capital contributions to ALIC and repayment of $750 million of debt more than offset the proceeds of the $1 billion of senior notes issued in May 2009 and higher valuations for fixed income securities from improved market conditions. Fixed income securities The following table shows fixed income securities by type. ($ in millions) Fair value at December 31, 2009 Percent to total investments Fair value at December 31, 2008 Percent to total investments U.S. government and agencies $ 7,536 7.6 % $ 4,234 4.4 % Municipal 21,280 21.3 21,848 22.8 Corporate 33,115 33.2 27,627 28.8 Foreign government 3,197 3.2 2,675 2.8 Residential mortgage-backed securities ("RMBS") 7,987 8.0 6,565 6.8 Commercial mortgage-backed securities ("CMBS") 2,586 2.6 3,846 4.0 Asset-backed securities ("ABS") 3,026 3.0 1,787 1.9 Redeemable preferred stock 39 26 Total fixed income securities $ 78,766 78.9 % $ 68,608 71.5 % At December 31, 2009, 93.7% of the consolidated fixed income securities portfolio was rated investment grade, which is defined as a security having a rating of Aaa, Aa, A or Baa from Moody's, a rating of AAA, AA, A or BBB from S&P, Fitch, Dominion, or Realpoint, a rating of aaa, aa, a, or bbb from A.M. Best, or a comparable internal rating if an externally provided rating is not available, which is consistent with the NAIC rating. The Valuation of Securities Taskforce of the NAIC instituted a new process to be used by insurance companies during the fourth quarter of 2009 for statutory accounting, reporting and estimating risk-based capital requirements for non-agency RMBS, and as a result the NAIC ratings used for statutory reporting may differ from those shown below which are based on credit ratings. The following table summarizes the credit rating of the fixed income securities portfolio at December 31, 2009. ($ in millions) Property-Liability Allstate Financial Corporate and Other Total NAIC rating Credit rating Fair value Percent to total Fair value Percent to total Fair value Percent to total Fair value Percent to total 1 Aaa/Aa/A $ 21,714 79.6 % $ 31,676 64.3 % $ 2,183 99.5 % $ 55,573 70.6 % 2 Baa 3,517 12.9 14,681 29.8 11 0.5 18,209 23.1 Investment grade 25,231 92.5 46,357 94.1 2,194 100.0 73,782 93.7 3 Ba 849 3.1 1,635 3.3 2,484 3.1 4 B 506 1.9 571 1.1 1,077 1.4 5 Caa or lower 552 2.0 628 1.3 1,180 1.5 6 In or near default 147 0.5 95 0.2 1 243 0.3 Below investment grade 2,054 7.5 2,929 5.9 1 4,984 6.3 Total $ 27,285 100.0 % $ 49,286 100.0 % $ 2,195 100.0 % $ 78,766 100.0 % The table above includes 107 securities with a fair value totaling $551 million that have not yet received an NAIC rating, for which we have assigned a comparable internal rating. Due to lags between the funding of an investment, execution of final legal documents, filing with the Securities Valuation Office ("SVO") of the NAIC, and rating by the SVO, we generally have a small number of securities that have a pending NAIC rating. 82 The following table summarizes the fair value and unrealized net capital gains and losses for fixed income securities by credit rating as of December 31, 2009. ($ in millions) Aaa Aa A Fair value Unrealized gain/(loss) Fair value Unrealized gain/(loss) Fair value Unrealized gain/(loss) U.S. government and agencies $ 7,536 $ 203 $ $ $ $ Municipal Tax exempt 1,605 106 5,839 175 4,385 53 Taxable 133 1 2,003 (83 ) 1,481 (114 ) ARS 1,350 (50 ) 71 (4 ) 85 (7 ) Corporate Public 1,985 20 1,685 36 5,444 219 Privately placed 653 23 1,108 31 3,286 113 Hybrid 95 5 564 (92 ) Foreign government 1,974 234 396 6 455 37 RMBS U.S. government sponsored entities ("U.S. Agency") 5,011 108 Prime residential mortgage-backed securities ("Prime") 498 (26 ) 65 (12 ) 54 (12 ) Alt-A residential mortgage-backed securities ("Alt-A") 73 (9 ) 34 (8 ) 34 (12 ) Subprime residential mortgage-backed securities ("Subprime") 211 (29 ) 446 (198 ) 126 (115 ) CMBS 1,368 (108 ) 282 (153 ) 268 (176 ) ABS Collateralized debt obligations ("CDO") 48 (10 ) 349 (27 ) 449 (75 ) Consumer and other asset-backed securities ("Consumer and other ABS") 662 (7 ) 259 (3 ) 235 (9 ) Redeemable preferred stock 2 Total fixed income securities $ 23,107 $ 456 $ 12,632 $ (235 ) $ 16,868 $ (190 ) Baa Ba or lower Total Fair value Unrealized gain/(loss) Fair value Unrealized gain/(loss) Fair value Unrealized gain/(loss) U.S. government and agencies $ $ $ $ $ 7,536 $ 203 Municipal Tax exempt 2,474 (73 ) 725 (102 ) 15,028 159 Taxable 785 (181 ) 163 (78 ) 4,565 (455 ) ARS 78 (22 ) 103 (24 ) 1,687 (107 ) Corporate Public 8,530 273 1,047 (41 ) 18,691 507 Privately placed 6,237 33 1,501 (77 ) 12,785 123 Hybrid 614 (154 ) 366 (44 ) 1,639 (285 ) Foreign government 361 14 11 3,197 291 RMBS U.S. Agency 5,011 108 Prime 11 (7 ) 75 (30 ) 703 (87 ) Alt-A 136 (38 ) 361 (186 ) 638 (253 ) Subprime 115 (75 ) 737 (851 ) 1,635 (1,268 ) CMBS 312 (152 ) 356 (336 ) 2,586 (925 ) ABS CDO 234 (96 ) 429 (244 ) 1,509 (452 ) Consumer and other ABS 310 (9 ) 51 (8 ) 1,517 (36 ) Redeemable preferred stock 31 6 39 Total fixed income securities $ 20,228 $ (487 ) $ 5,931 $ (2,021 ) $ 78,766 $ (2,477 ) U.S. government and agencies securities totaled $7.54 billion, with 100.0% rated Aaa, at December 31, 2009. Municipal Bonds , including tax exempt, taxable and ARS securities, totaled $21.28 billion as of December 31, 2009 with an unrealized net capital loss of $403 million. Taxable municipal bonds have an unrealized net capital loss of $455 million resulting from wider credit spreads than at initial purchase, which is largely due to the macroeconomic conditions and credit market deterioration that persisted throughout 2009, as well as specific issue or issuer conditions. 83 ARS totaled $1.69 billion with an unrealized net capital loss of $107 million as of December 31, 2009. Our holdings primarily have a credit rating of Aaa. $1.64 billion of our holdings are collateralized by pools of student loans for which at least 85% of the collateral was insured by the U.S. Department of Education at the time we purchased the security. As of December 31, 2009, $1.09 billion of our ARS backed by student loans was 100% insured by the U.S. Department of Education, $336 million was 90% to 99% insured and $158 million was 80% to 89% insured. All of our student loan ARS holdings are experiencing failed auctions and we receive the failed auction rate or, for those which contain maximum reset rate formulas, we receive the contractual maximum rate. We anticipate that failed auctions may persist and most of our holdings will continue to pay the failed auction rate or, for those that contain maximum rate reset formulas, the maximum rate. Auctions continue to be conducted as scheduled for each of the securities. At December 31, 2009, interest on $111 million of our ARS has reset using the maximum rate reset formula. Also, included in our municipal bond holdings at December 31, 2009 are $1.25 billion of municipal securities which are not rated by third party credit rating agencies, but are rated by the NAIC and also internally rated. These holdings include $629 million of below investment grade municipal bonds that provide the opportunity to achieve incremental returns. Our initial investment decisions and ongoing monitoring procedures for these securities are based on a thorough due diligence process which includes, but is not limited to, an assessment of the credit quality, structure, and liquidity risks of each issue. 48.2% or $10.26 billion of our municipal bond portfolio is insured by nine bond insurers and 38.2% of these securities have a credit rating of Aaa or Aa. Our practices for acquiring and monitoring municipal bonds primarily are based on the credit quality of the primary obligor. As of December 31, 2009, we believe valuations substantially reflected the decline in the value of the insurance, and further related valuation declines, if any, are not expected to be material. While the valuation of these holdings may be temporarily impacted by negative market developments, we expect to receive all of the contractual cash flows. As of December 31, 2009, 47.1% of our insured municipal bond portfolio was insured by National Public Finance Guarantee Corporation, Inc., 24.5% by Ambac Assurance Corporation, 22.0% by Financial Guaranty Assurance Corporation and 2.7% by Assured Guaranty Ltd. Corporate bonds , including publicly traded, privately placed and hybrid securities, totaled $33.12 billion as of December 31, 2009 with an unrealized net capital gain of $345 million. Privately placed securities primarily consist of corporate issued senior debt securities that are in unregistered form or are directly negotiated with the borrower. Privately placed corporate securities are rated by the NAIC in instances when information is provided to them. 47.7% of the privately placed corporate securities in our portfolio are rated by an independent rating agency. Our portfolio of privately placed securities are broadly diversified by issuer, industry sector and country. The portfolio is made up of 560 issuers with each issue averaging $24 million. Privately placed corporate obligations generally have higher yields and contain structural security features such as financial covenants and call protections that provide investors greater protection against credit deterioration, reinvestment risk or fluctuations in interest rates than those typically found in publicly registered debt securities. Additionally, investments in these securities are made after extensive due diligence of the issuer, typically including direct discussions with senior management and on-site visits to company facilities. Ongoing monitoring includes direct periodic dialog with senior management of the issuer and continuous monitoring of operating performance and financial position. Every issue not rated by an independent rating agency is internally rated with a formal rating affirmation approximately once a year. The following table shows details of hybrid securities as of December 31, 2009. ($ in millions) Public Privately placed Total Fair value Unrealized gain/(loss) Fair value Unrealized gain/(loss) Fair value Unrealized gain/(loss) United Kingdom ("UK") $ 108 $ (9 ) $ 111 $ (18 ) $ 219 $ (27 ) Europe (non-UK) 198 (3 ) 345 (69 ) 543 (72 ) Asia/Australia 16 268 (42 ) 284 (42 ) North America 383 (86 ) 210 (58 ) 593 (144 ) Total $ 705 $ (98 ) $ 934 $ (187 ) $ 1,639 $ (285 ) Hybrid securities have attributes most similar to those of fixed income securities such as stated interest rates, mandatory redemption dates or an interest rate step-up feature which is intended to incent the issuer to redeem the security at a specified call date. Hybrid securities include publicly-traded and privately placed securities. While hybrid securities are generally issued by investment grade-rated financial institutions, they have structural features which make them more sensitive to credit market deterioration. Specifically, features allowing deferral of payment have 84 significantly impacted prices as the issuers continue to be impacted by the stress in the global financial system. $1.39 billion of our hybrid securities with $272 million of unrealized net capital losses are Tier 1 securities, and $248 million with $13 million of unrealized net capital losses are Tier 2 securities. Tier 1 securities are lower in the capital structure than Tier 2 securities. Foreign government securities totaled $3.20 billion, with 99.7% rated investment grade, at December 31, 2009. Of these securities, 36.8% are backed by the U.S. government, 19.6% are in Canadian governmental securities held in our Canadian subsidiary and the remaining 43.6% are highly diversified in other foreign governments. RMBS, CMBS and ABS are structured securities that are primarily collateralized by residential and commercial real estate related loans and other consumer related borrowings. The cash flows are generally applied in a pre-determined order and are designed so that each security issued qualifies for a specific original rating. The security issue is typically referred to as the "class". For example, the "senior" portion or "top" of the capital structure, or rating class, which would originally qualify for a rating of Aaa typically has priority in receiving the principal repayments on the collateral. In a sequential structure, underlying collateral principal repayments are directed to the most senior rated Aaa class in the structure until paid in full, after which principal repayments are directed to the next most senior Aaa class in the structure until it is paid in full. Senior Aaa classes generally share any losses from the underlying collateral on a pro-rata basis after losses are absorbed by classes with lower original ratings and include other "junior" or "subordinate" securities. The collateral can have fixed interest rates, variable interest rates (such as adjustable rate mortgages ("ARM")) or may contain features of both fixed and variable rate mortgages. RMBS , including U.S. Agency, Prime, Alt-A and Subprime totaled $7.99 billion, with 85.0% rated investment grade, at December 31, 2009. The RMBS portfolio is subject to interest rate risk, but unlike other fixed income securities, is additionally subject to significant prepayment risk from the underlying mortgages. The credit risk associated with our RMBS is mitigated due to the fact that 62.7% of the portfolio consists of securities that were issued by, or have underlying collateral that is guaranteed by, U.S. government agencies. The unrealized net capital loss of $1.50 billion at December 31, 2009 on our RMBS portfolio was the result of wider credit spreads than at initial purchase on non-U.S. Agency securities, which is largely due to the macroeconomic conditions and credit market deterioration, including the impact of real estate valuations, that persisted throughout 2009. The following table shows our RMBS portfolio at December 31, 2009 based upon vintage year. ($ in millions) U.S. Agency Prime Alt-A Subprime Total RMBS Fair value Unrealized gain/(loss) Fair value Unrealized gain/(loss) Fair value Unrealized gain/(loss) Fair value Unrealized gain/(loss) Fair value Unrealized gain/(loss) 2009 $ 1,024 $ 1 $ $ $ $ $ $ $ 1,024 $ 1 2008 1,093 13 1,093 13 2007 439 8 89 (14 ) 114 (95 ) 396 (440 ) 1,038 (541 ) 2006 297 9 78 (18 ) 192 (53 ) 494 (409 ) 1,061 (471 ) 2005 551 14 147 (36 ) 147 (55 ) 398 (266 ) 1,243 (343 ) Pre-2005 1,607 63 389 (19 ) 185 (50 ) 347 (153 ) 2,528 (159 ) Total $ 5,011 $ 108 $ 703 $ (87 ) $ 638 $ (253 ) $ 1,635 $ (1,268 ) $ 7,987 $ (1,500 ) Prime are collateralized by residential mortgage loans issued to prime borrowers. As of December 31, 2009, $536 million of the Prime were fixed rate and $167 million were variable rate. Alt-A includes securities collateralized by residential mortgage loans issued to borrowers with stronger credit profiles than subprime borrowers, but who do not qualify for prime financing terms due to high loan-to-value ratios or limited supporting documentation. As of December 31, 2009, $453 million of the Alt-A were fixed rate and $185 million were variable rate. Subprime includes securities that are collateralized by mortgage loans issued to borrowers that cannot qualify for Prime or Alt-A financing terms due in part to weak or limited credit history. It also includes securities that are collateralized by certain second lien mortgages regardless of the borrower's credit history. The Subprime portfolio consisted of $1.35 billion and $282 million of first lien and second lien securities, respectively. Subprime included $845 million of fixed rate and $790 million of variable rate securities. At December 31, 2009, $348 million or 21.3% of the total Subprime securities are insured by seven bond insurers. CMBS totaled $2.59 billion, with 95.7% rated investment grade, at December 31, 2009. The CMBS portfolio is subject to credit risk, but unlike certain other structured securities, is generally not subject to prepayment risk due to protections within the underlying commercial mortgages whereby borrowers are effectively restricted from prepaying 85 their mortgages due to changes in interest rates. Of the CMBS investments, 90.6% are traditional conduit transactions collateralized by pools of commercial mortgages, broadly diversified across property types and geographical area. The remainder consists of non-traditional CMBS such as small balance transactions, large loan pools and single borrower transactions. The following table shows our CMBS portfolio at December 31, 2009 based upon vintage year. ($ in millions) Fair value Unrealized gain/(loss) 2007 $ 740 $ (290 ) 2006 537 (451 ) 2005 373 (118 ) Pre-2005 936 (66 ) Total CMBS $ 2,586 $ (925 ) The unrealized net capital loss of $925 million at December 31, 2009 on our CMBS portfolio was the result of wider credit spreads than at initial purchase, which is largely due to the macroeconomic conditions and credit market deterioration, including the impact of real estate valuations, that persisted throughout 2009. While CMBS spreads tightened during 2009, credit spreads in most rating classes remain wider than at initial purchase, which is particularly evident in our 2005-2007 vintage year subordinated senior Aaa and non-traditional CMBS, as well as our 2005-2007 vintage year Aa and lower rated securities. These holdings accounted for $772 million, or 83.5%, of the unrealized net capital loss. ABS , including CDO and Consumer and other ABS, totaled $3.03 billion, with 85.9% rated investment grade, at December 31, 2009. Credit risk is managed by monitoring the performance of the collateral. In addition, many of the securities in the ABS portfolio are credit enhanced with features such as overcollateralization, subordinated structures, reserve funds, guarantees and/or insurance. A portion of the ABS portfolio is also subject to interest rate risk since price volatility and the ultimate realized yields are affected by the rate of prepayment of the underlying assets. The unrealized net capital loss of $488 million at December 31, 2009 on our ABS portfolio was the result of wider credit spreads than at initial purchase. CDO totaled $1.51 billion, with 71.6% rated investment grade, at December 31, 2009. CDO consist primarily of obligations secured by high yield and investment grade corporate credits including $1.15 billion of cash flow collateralized loan obligations ("CLO") and $100 million of synthetic CDO with unrealized losses of $224 million and $97 million, respectively. The remaining $255 million of securities consisted of trust preferred CDO, market value CDO, project finance CDO, CDOs that invest in CDOs, collateralized bond obligations and other CLO with unrealized losses of $131 million. Cash flow CLO are structures where the underlying assets are primarily comprised of below investment grade senior secured corporate loans. The collateral is actively managed by external managers that monitor the collateral performance. The underlying investments are well diversified across industries and among issuers. A transaction will typically issue notes with various capital structure classes (i.e. Aaa, Aa, A, etc.) as well as equity-like tranches. In general, these securities are structured with overcollateralization ratios and performance is impacted by downgrades, defaults and recoveries of the underlying assets within the structures. Downgrades of underlying assets, along with increased defaults reduce overcollateralization ratios over time. A violation of the senior overcollateralization test could result in an event of default of the structure. This would give the controlling class, defined as the majority of the senior lenders, certain rights which could include diverting cash flows or liquidating the underlying portfolio to pay off the senior liabilities. Synthetic CDO primarily consist of a portfolio of corporate credit default swaps ("CDS") which are collateralized by Aaa rated LIBOR-based securities (i.e. "fully funded" synthetic CDO). Our synthetic CDO collateral primarily is actively managed by external managers monitoring the CDS selection and performance. Consumer and other ABS totaled $1.52 billion, with 96.6% rated investment grade, at December 31, 2009. Consumer and other ABS consists of $868 million of auto, $150 million of student loan, $90 million of credit card and $409 million of other securities with unrealized gains of $10 million, and unrealized losses of $6 million, $1 million and $39 million, respectively. At December 31, 2009, $437 million or 28.8% of Consumer and other ABS securities are insured by five bond insurers. 86 Equity securities Equity securities include common stocks, real estate investment trust equity investments and non-redeemable preferred stocks. The equity securities portfolio was $5.02 billion at December 31, 2009 compared to $2.81 billion at December 31, 2008. The increase is attributable to purchases and increased equity valuations. Net unrealized gains totaled $179 million at December 31, 2009 compared to net unrealized losses of $332 million at December 31, 2008. Mortgage loans Our mortgage loan portfolio, which is primarily held in the Allstate Financial portfolio, totaled $7.94 billion at December 31, 2009, compared to $10.23 billion at December 31, 2008, and primarily comprised loans secured by first mortgages on developed commercial real estate. Key considerations used to manage our exposure include property type and geographic diversification. Our exposure to any metropolitan area is also highly diversified, with the largest exposure not exceeding 9.3% of the portfolio. The portfolio is diversified across several property types, with the largest concentrations of 35.3% in office and 24.2% in retail property types. Debt service coverage ratio represents the amount of cash flows from the property available to the borrower to meet principal and interest payment obligations. The average debt service coverage ratio of the portfolio as of December 31, 2009 was 1.9, and 5.8% of the mortgage loan portfolio had a debt service coverage ratio under 1.0. Mortgage loans with debt service coverage ratios below 1.0 generally have a higher level of risk, with 18.4% of these loans having valuation allowances totaling $26 million. Mortgage loans with debt service coverage below 1.0 for which valuation allowances have not been established, primarily relate to instances where the borrower has the financial capacity to fund the revenue shortfalls from the properties for the foreseeable term, the decrease in occupancy is considered temporary, or there are other risk mitigating circumstances such as additional collateral, escrow balances or borrower guarantees. In 2009, $853 million of commercial mortgage loans were contractually due. Of these, 67% were paid as due, 23% were extended generally for less than one year, 9% were refinanced and 1% were foreclosed or in the process of foreclosure. In addition, $1.27 billion that were not contractually due in 2009 were paid in full. We also currently have four loans totaling $37 million that were not contractually due in 2009 that are in the process of foreclosure. In total we have five loans totaling $49 million that are in foreclosure. We are aggressively pursuing workout solutions for all delinquent loans that are not in the process of foreclosure, which total $72 million, including refinancing, extensions and sales. We closely monitor our commercial mortgage loan portfolio on a loan-by-loan basis. Loans with an estimated collateral value less than the loan balance, as well as loans with other characteristics indicative of higher than normal credit risks, are reviewed at least quarterly for purposes of establishing valuation allowances and placing loans on non-accrual status as necessary. Accrual of income is suspended for mortgage loans that are in default or when full and timely collection of principal and interest payments is not probable. The underlying collateral values are based upon either discounted property cash flow projections or a commonly used valuation method that utilizes a one-year projection of expected annual income divided by a market based expected rate of return. The net carrying value of impaired loans at December 31, 2009 and 2008 was $409 million and $163 million, respectively. Total valuation allowances of $95 million and $4 million were held on impaired loans at December 31, 2009 and 2008, respectively. We recognized $97 million of realized capital losses related to increases in the valuation allowances on impaired loans for the year ended December 31, 2009 primarily due to deteriorating debt service coverage resulting from a decrease in occupancy and the risk associated with refinancing near-term maturities due to declining collateral valuations. We recognized $4 million of realized capital losses related to valuation allowances on impaired loans for the year ended December 31, 2008. Realized capital losses recognized on mortgage loans held for sale totaled $6 million and $74 million for the years ended December 31, 2009 and 2008, respectively. For further detail, see Note 4 to the consolidated financial statements. Limited partnership interests consist of investments in private equity/debt funds, real estate funds and hedge funds. The overall limited partnership interests portfolio is well diversified across a number of characteristics including 87 fund sponsors, vintage years, strategies, geography (including international), and company/property types. The following table presents information about our limited partnership interests as of December 31, 2009. ($ in millions) Private equity/debt funds Real estate funds Hedge funds Total Cost method of accounting ("Cost") $ 769 $ 272 $ 62 $ 1,103 Equity method of accounting ("EMA") 631 288 722 1,641 Total $ 1,400 $ 560 $ 784 $ 2,744 Number of sponsors 84 40 11 Number of individual funds 133 88 75 Largest exposure to single fund $ 39 $ 36 $ 108 Our aggregate limited partnership exposure represented 2.8% and 2.9% of total invested assets as of December 31, 2009 and December 31, 2008, respectively. The following table shows the results from our limited partnership interests by fund type and accounting classification for the year ended December 31. ($ in millions) 2009 2008 Cost EMA (1) Total income Impairment write-downs (2) Cost EMA (1) Total income Impairment write-downs (2) Private equity/debt funds $ 16 $ (61 ) $ (45 ) $ (79 ) $ 28 $ 87 $ 115 $ (47 ) Real estate funds 1 (181 ) (180 ) (223 ) 8 (35 ) (27 ) (59 ) Hedge funds 101 101 (6 ) 1 (124 ) (123 ) (6 ) Total $ 17 $ (141 ) $ (124 ) $ (308 ) $ 37 $ (72 ) $ (35 ) $ (112 ) (1) Beginning in the fourth quarter of 2008, EMA LP income is reported in realized capital gains and losses. EMA LP income for periods prior to the fourth quarter of 2008 is reported in net investment income. (2) Impairment write-downs related to Cost limited partnerships were $297 million and $83 million in years ended December 31, 2009 and 2008, respectively. Impairment write-downs related to EMA LP were $11 million and $29 million in the years ended December 31, 2009 and 2008, respectively. Limited partnership interests, excluding impairment write-downs, produced losses of $124 million in 2009 compared to losses of $35 million in 2008. The loss from limited partnership interests in 2009 compared to 2008 is primarily related to losses from partnerships accounted for under the equity method of accounting resulting from lower net asset valuations of the real estate partnerships. Income on EMA LP is recognized on a delay due to the availability of the related financial statements. The recognition of income on hedge funds is primarily on a one-month delay and the income recognition on private equity/debt funds and real estate funds are generally on a three-month delay. Limited partnership interests accounted for under the cost method of accounting recognize income only upon cash distributions by the partnership. Short-term investments Our short-term investment portfolio was $3.06 billion and $8.91 billion at December 31, 2009 and 2008, respectively. The decrease in short-term investments was primarily due to funding reductions in contractholder obligations and purchases of fixed income securities. Other investments Our other investments as of December 31, 2009 are comprised primarily of $1.13 billion of policy loans, $548 million of certain derivatives and $420 million of bank loans. Policy loans are carried at the unpaid principal balances. Bank loans are comprised primarily of senior secured corporate loans and are carried at amortized cost. For further detail on our use of derivatives, see the Net Realized Capital Gains and Losses section of the MD&A and Note 6 of the consolidated financial statements. Unrealized net capital losses See Note 4 of the consolidated financial statements for further disclosures regarding unrealized losses on fixed income and equity securities and factors considered in determining whether securities are other-than-temporarily impaired. Unrealized net capital losses totaled $2.32 billion as of December 31, 2009, compared to unrealized net capital losses of $8.81 billion as of December 31, 2008. The improvement since December 31, 2008 for fixed income securities was primarily a result of tightening credit spreads on certain fixed income securities during 2009 that more than offset the rise in risk-free interest rates. The unrealized net capital gain for equity securities as of December 31, 2009 compared to unrealized net capital loss as of December 31, 2008 was a result 88 of improvements in equity security valuations as a result of improving equity market conditions. The following table presents unrealized net capital gains and losses, pre-tax and after-tax at December 31. ($ in millions) 2009 2008 U.S. government and agencies $ 203 $ 962 Municipal (403 ) (1,717 ) Corporate 345 (3,413 ) Foreign government 291 469 RMBS (1,500 ) (1,445 ) CMBS (925 ) (1,994 ) ABS (488 ) (1,348 ) Redeemable preferred stock (10 ) Fixed income securities (1) (2,477 ) (8,496 ) Equity securities 179 (332 ) Short-term investments 3 Derivatives (23 ) 11 Unrealized net capital gains and losses, pre-tax (2,321 ) (8,814 ) Amounts recognized for: Insurance reserves (2) (378 ) DAC and DSI (3) 990 3,500 Amounts recognized 990 3,122 Deferred income taxes 461 1,954 Unrealized net capital gains and losses, after-tax $ (870 ) $ (3,738 ) (1) Unrealized net capital gains and losses for fixed income securities as of December 31, 2009 comprises $(679) million related to unrealized net capital losses on fixed income securities with other-than-temporary impairment and $(1,798) million related to other unrealized net capital gains and losses. (2) The insurance reserves adjustment represents the amount by which the reserve balance would increase if the net unrealized gains in the applicable product portfolios were realized and reinvested at current lower interest rates, resulting in a premium deficiency. Although we evaluate premium deficiencies on the combined performance of our life insurance and immediate annuities with life contingencies, the adjustment primarily relates to structured settlement annuities with life contingencies, in addition to annuity buy-outs and certain payout annuities with life contingencies. (3) The DAC and DSI adjustment balance represents the amount by which the amortization of DAC and DSI would increase or decrease if the unrealized gains or losses in the respective product portfolios were realized. Only the unrealized net capital gains and losses on the Allstate Financial fixed annuity and interest-sensitive life product portfolios are used in this calculation. The DAC and DSI adjustment balance, subject to limitations, is determined by applying the DAC and DSI amortization rate to unrealized net capital gains or losses. Recapitalization of the DAC and DSI balances is limited to the originally deferred costs plus interest. The DAC and DSI adjustment balance was limited as of December 31, 2008 because the calculated amount, when added to the DAC and DSI balance before the impact of unrealized capital gains and losses, was greater than originally deferred costs plus interest. The DAC and DSI adjustment balance is below the limitation as of December 31, 2009. The limitation amount changes from period to period based on changes in the DAC and DSI balance before the impact of unrealized capital gains and losses, as well as new deferrals and interest. The net unrealized loss for the fixed income portfolio totaled $2.48 billion, comprised of $2.47 billion of gross unrealized gains and $4.95 billion of gross unrealized losses at December 31, 2009. This is compared to a net unrealized loss for the fixed income portfolio totaling $8.50 billion, comprised of $2.54 billion of gross unrealized gains and $11.04 billion of gross unrealized losses at December 31, 2008. 89 Gross unrealized gains and losses as of December 31, 2009 on fixed income securities by type and sector are provided in the table below. Gross unrealized Amortized cost as a percent of par value (2) Fair value as a percent of par value (2) ($ in millions) Par value (1) Amortized cost Fair value Gains Losses Corporate: Banking $ 4,345 $ 4,131 $ 81 $ (367 ) $ 3,845 95.1 % 88.5 % Financial services 3,482 3,370 95 (100 ) 3,365 96.8 96.6 Utilities 5,752 5,755 291 (79 ) 5,967 100.1 103.7 Consumer goods (cyclical and non-cyclical) 4,872 4,917 202 (75 ) 5,044 100.9 103.5 Transportation 1,670 1,684 59 (50 ) 1,693 100.8 101.4 Capital goods 3,363 3,367 127 (42 ) 3,452 100.1 102.6 Communications 1,841 1,826 83 (26 ) 1,883 99.2 102.3 Basic industry 1,501 1,520 68 (21 ) 1,567 101.3 104.4 Technology 1,132 1,157 40 (13 ) 1,184 102.2 104.6 Energy 2,132 2,143 89 (13 ) 2,219 100.5 104.1 FDIC guaranteed 1,513 1,523 18 1,541 100.7 101.9 Other 1,528 1,377 39 (61 ) 1,355 90.1 88.7 Total corporate fixed income portfolio 33,131 32,770 1,192 (847 ) 33,115 98.9 100.0 U.S. government and agencies 7,580 7,333 219 (16 ) 7,536 96.7 99.4 Municipal 27,425 21,683 537 (940 ) 21,280 79.1 77.6 Foreign government 3,375 2,906 306 (15 ) 3,197 86.1 94.7 RMBS 9,984 9,487 130 (1,630 ) 7,987 95.0 80.0 CMBS 3,790 3,511 30 (955 ) 2,586 92.6 68.2 ABS 3,974 3,514 62 (550 ) 3,026 88.4 76.1 Redeemable preferred stock 47 39 1 (1 ) 39 83.0 83.0 Total fixed income securities $ 89,306 $ 81,243 $ 2,477 $ (4,954 ) $ 78,766 91.0 88.2 (1) Included in par value are zero-coupon securities that are generally purchased at a deep discount to the par value that is received at maturity. These primarily included corporate, municipal, foreign government and U.S. government and agencies zero-coupon securities with par value of $882 million, $8.19 billion, $1.42 billion, and $792 million, respectively. (2) Excluding the impact of zero-coupon securities, the percentage of amortized cost to par value would be 99.5% for corporates, 100.0% for municipals, 103.9% for foreign governments and 101.6% for U.S. government and agencies. Similarly, excluding the impact of zero-coupon securities, the percentage of fair value to par value would be 100.4% for corporates, 99.5% for municipals, 108.8% for foreign governments and 102.7% for U.S. government and agencies. The banking, financial services, utilities and consumer goods sectors had the highest concentration of gross unrealized losses in our corporate fixed income securities portfolio at December 31, 2009. While credit spreads have tightened in the last three quarters of 2009 from the historically high levels observed in the fourth quarter of 2008 and the first quarter of 2009, they remain wider than at initial purchase for certain securities in the portfolio. 90 The scheduled maturity dates for fixed income securities in a gross unrealized loss position at December 31, 2009 are shown below. Actual maturities may differ from those scheduled as a result of prepayments by the issuers. ($ in millions) Unrealized loss Percent to total Fair value Percent to total Due in one year or less $ (14 ) 0.3 % $ 458 1.5 % Due after one year through five years (171 ) 3.4 6,645 21.8 Due after five years through ten years (302 ) 6.1 4,300 14.1 Due after ten years (2,287 ) 46.2 13,551 44.4 RMBS and ABS (1) (2,180 ) 44.0 5,574 18.2 Total $ (4,954 ) 100.0 % $ 30,528 100.0 % (1) Because of the potential for prepayment, these securities are not categorized based on their contractual maturities. The equity portfolio is comprised of securities in the following sectors at December 31, 2009. Gross unrealized Amortized cost Fair value ($ in millions) Gains Losses Consumer goods (cyclical and non-cyclical) $ 1,045 $ 65 $ (33 ) $ 1,077 Financial services 425 17 (31 ) 411 Banking 318 28 (18 ) 328 Communications 300 18 (10 ) 308 Energy 411 50 (9 ) 452 Capital goods 311 24 (8 ) 327 Technology 499 53 (6 ) 546 Utilities 159 6 (6 ) 159 Real estate 112 7 (4 ) 115 Basic industry 215 35 (3 ) 247 Transportation 81 7 (3 ) 85 Other (1) 969 71 (71 ) 969 Total equity securities $ 4,845 $ 381 $ (202 ) $ 5,024 (1) Other consists primarily of index-based securities. The net unrealized gain for the equity portfolio totaled $179 million, comprised of $381 million of unrealized gains and $202 million of unrealized losses at December 31, 2009. This is compared to a net unrealized loss for the equity portfolio totaling $332 million, comprised of $112 million of unrealized gains and $444 million of unrealized losses at December 31, 2008. Within the equity portfolio, the losses were primarily concentrated in index-based securities and the consumer goods, financial services, banking, communications and energy sectors. The unrealized losses in these sectors were company and sector specific. As of December 31, 2009, we have the intent and ability to hold our equity securities with unrealized losses until recovery. Other-than-temporary impairment evaluation We have a comprehensive portfolio monitoring process to identify and evaluate each fixed income and equity security whose carrying value may be other-than-temporarily impaired. The process includes a quarterly review of all securities through a screening process which identifies instances where the fair value compared to amortized cost for fixed income securities and cost for equity securities is below established thresholds, and also includes the monitoring of other criteria such as ratings, ratings downgrades or payment defaults. The securities identified, in addition to other securities for which we may have a concern, are evaluated based on facts and circumstances for inclusion on our watch-list. All investments in an unrealized loss position at December 31, 2009 were included in our portfolio monitoring process for determining whether declines in value were other than temporary. Due to recent market conditions and liquidity concerns, as well as wider credit spreads than at initial purchase which persist in certain markets, particularly related to structured assets, the extent and duration of a decline in fair value have become less indicative of when the market may believe there has been credit deterioration with respect to an 91 issue or issuer. While we continue to use declines in fair value and the length of time a security is in an unrealized loss position as indicators of potential credit deterioration, our determination of whether a security's decline in fair value is other-than-temporary has placed greater emphasis on our analysis of the underlying credit and collateral. The following table summarizes fixed income and equity securities in a gross unrealized loss position according to significance, aging and investment grade classification. ($ in millions, except number of issues) December 31, 2009 December 31, 2008 Fixed income Fixed income Investment grade Below investment grade Equity Total Investment grade Below investment grade Equity Total Category (I): Unrealized loss less than 20% of cost (1) (2) Number of issues 2,626 290 1,517 4,433 4,303 275 112 4,690 Fair value $ 24,260 $ 1,724 $ 1,703 $ 27,687 $ 29,070 $ 1,172 $ 1,269 $ 31,511 Unrealized $ (1,198 ) $ (181 ) $ (167 ) $ (1,546 ) $ (2,523 ) $ (147 ) $ (74 ) $ (2,744 ) Category (II): Unrealized loss greater than or equal to 20% of cost for a period of less than 6 consecutive months (1) (2) Number of issues 81 30 171 282 1,216 356 221 1,793 Fair value $ 444 $ 191 $ 68 $ 703 $ 8,445 $ 1,555 $ 676 $ 10,676 Unrealized $ (142 ) $ (77 ) $ (24 ) $ (243 ) $ (5,365 ) $ (902 ) $ (365 ) $ (6,632 ) Category (III): Unrealized loss greater than or equal to 20% of cost for a period of 6 or more consecutive months, but less than 12 consecutive months (1) (2) Number of issues 26 30 3 59 208 29 1 238 Fair value $ 196 $ 167 $ 14 $ 377 $ 878 $ 136 $ 2 $ 1,016 Unrealized $ (112 ) $ (86 ) $ (6 ) $ (204 ) $ (1,686 ) $ (197 ) $ (1 ) $ (1,884 ) Category (IV): Unrealized loss greater than or equal to 20% of cost for 12 or more consecutive months (1) (2) Number of issues 415 257 2 674 41 5 1 47 Fair value $ 2,118 $ 1,428 $ 14 $ 3,560 $ 79 $ 16 $ 3 $ 98 Unrealized $ (1,689 ) $ (1,469 ) $ (5 ) $ (3,163 ) $ (200 ) $ (21 ) $ (4 ) $ (225 ) Total number of issues 3,148 607 1,693 5,448 5,768 665 335 6,768 Total fair value $ 27,018 $ 3,510 $ 1,799 $ 32,327 $ 38,472 $ 2,879 $ 1,950 $ 43,301 Total unrealized losses $ (3,141 ) $ (1,813 ) $ (202 ) $ (5,156 ) $ (9,774 ) $ (1,267 ) $ (444 ) $ (11,485 ) (1) For fixed income securities, cost represents amortized cost. (2) At December 31, 2009, gross unrealized losses resulting from factors other than credit on fixed income securities with other-than-temporary impairments for which we have recorded a credit loss in earnings are included as follows: Category (I) $17 million, Category (II) $24 million, Category (III) $31 million, and Category (IV) $677 million. Categories (I) and (II) have generally been adversely affected by overall economic conditions including interest rate increases and the market's evaluation of certain sectors. The degree to which and/or length of time that the securities have been in an unrealized loss position does not suggest that these securities pose a high risk of being other-than-temporarily impaired. The largest individual unrealized loss was $57 million for category (I) and $13 million for category (II) as of December 31, 2009. Gross unrealized losses on fixed income securities in Category (II) decreased $6.05 billion since December 31, 2008. This change was primarily the result of improved market conditions resulting in higher valuations, which either caused a shift to Category (I) or created an overall gross unrealized gain position. The remainder of the reduction in Category (II) is a result of losses shifting into Category (III) and (IV) due to continued aging of losses in a continuous unrealized loss position of greater than or equal to 20% of amortized cost and the resetting of unrealized losses to the historical point of impairment for securities impacted by the adoption of new OTTI accounting guidance on April 1, 2009. Categories (III) and (IV) are affected by macroeconomic and credit pressures upon real estate valuations and borrowers, and issue, issuer or industry specific conditions. The degree to which and/or length of time these securities have been in an unrealized loss position subject them to increased scrutiny through our portfolio monitoring process. The largest individual unrealized loss was $28 million for Category (III) and $48 million for Category (IV) as of 92 December 31, 2009. Category (III) and (IV) fixed income securities at December 31, 2009 are listed in the following table by fixed income security type and investment quality classification. ($ in millions) Investment grade Category (III) Category (IV) Total Fair value Unrealized losses Fair value Unrealized losses Fair value Unrealized losses Municipal $ 96 $ (47 ) $ 290 $ (219 ) $ 386 $ (266 ) Corporate 50 (39 ) 342 (138 ) 392 (177 ) RMBS 46 (24 ) 460 (385 ) 506 (409 ) CMBS 652 (727 ) 652 (727 ) ABS 4 (2 ) 374 (220 ) 378 (222 ) $ 196 $ (112 ) $ 2,118 $ (1,689 ) $ 2,314 $ (1,801 ) Below investment grade Category (III) Category (IV) Total Fair value Unrealized losses Fair value Unrealized losses Fair value Unrealized losses Municipal $ 77 $ (24 ) $ 185 $ (106 ) $ 262 $ (130 ) Corporate 31 (15 ) 97 (41 ) 128 (56 ) RMBS 55 (41 ) 783 (992 ) 838 (1,033 ) CMBS 63 (119 ) 63 (119 ) ABS 4 (6 ) 300 (211 ) 304 (217 ) $ 167 $ (86 ) $ 1,428 $ (1,469 ) $ 1,595 $ (1,555 ) Total $ 363 $ (198 ) $ 3,546 $ (3,158 ) $ 3,909 $ (3,356 ) As of December 31, 2009, our gross unrealized losses in Category (III) and (IV) were primarily concentrated in structured securities, as we have experienced declines in fair value since the time of initial purchase. As of December 31, 2009, RMBS, CMBS and ABS comprised $1.54 billion and $1.21 billion of investment grade and below investment grade securities in Category (III) and (IV), respectively. Consistent with their rating, our portfolio monitoring indicates that the investment grade securities have a relatively low risk of default. Securities rated below investment grade, whether at issue or upon subsequent downgrade, have a higher level of risk and can be more volatile. A key consideration in the determination of other-than-temporary impairment for structured securities is whether the present value of loss adjusted cash flows from the underlying collateral will be sufficient to recover our amortized cost basis. This evaluation focuses on the adequacy of credit enhancement relative to the performance of the underlying collateral, adjusted for projected defaults and prepayments. Credit enhancement includes, but is not limited to, structural subordination, guarantees and reserves. Key future collateral performance considerations include historical default/prepayment trends, as well as projected macroeconomic variables such as unemployment rates and interest rates. In general, securities with credit enhancement in excess of projected loss-adjusted collateral performance are deemed not other-than-temporarily impaired. Securities with deficient credit enhancement are deemed other-than-temporarily impaired and the difference between the estimated recovery value and amortized cost is recorded in earnings as a credit loss. A description of the other-than-temporary impairment assessment for our RMBS and CMBS, which comprise a majority of our Category (III) and (IV) unrealized losses, follows: The credit loss evaluation for non-agency RMBS securities, including Prime, Alt-A and Subprime securities, primarily relies on projections of losses based on future collateral performance, taking into account security specific delinquency and loss severity trends on the underlying mortgage collateral to date. The expected performance of each transaction considers projected collateral losses and credit enhancement levels, as well as an assessment of the origination practices of the transaction sponsor, geographic diversification, overall transaction structure, collateral type and quality, transaction vintage year and other considerations that may be of concern. Our default estimates on the underlying mortgage collateral are forward looking and generally based upon security specific performance trends to date as well as our overall economic outlook, with a focus on housing, unemployment and GDP expectations, and consider other factors that may influence future 93 borrower behaviors. Our loss severity estimates are forward looking and incorporate estimates of future house price appreciation/depreciation expectations and estimates of foreclosure timing and expenses. The credit loss evaluation for CMBS primarily relies on model-driven projections of future collateral performance, taking into account all reasonably available information specific to the underlying commercial mortgage loans including estimates of current and future property value, current and projected rental income and the credit enhancement levels. Estimates of future property value and rental income consider specific property-type and metro area economic trends such as property vacancy rates and rental rates, employment indicators and building industry fundamentals. Other considerations include borrower payment history, the origination practices of the transaction sponsor, overall collateral quality and diversification, transaction vintage year, maturity date, overall structure of the transaction and other factors that may influence performance. Actual realized losses in the CMBS market have historically been low, therefore our projection of collateral performance is informed by credit opinions obtained from third parties, such as nationally recognized credit rating agencies, industry analysts and a CMBS loss modeling advisory service. For structured securities deemed other-than-temporarily impaired, we recognized the estimated credit loss in earnings, while $700 million of unrealized losses related to factors other than credit remains classified in OCI. Structured securities deemed not other-than-temporarily impaired are current on contractual or expected payments and our detailed analysis of the underlying credit and related cash flows has concluded that our amortized cost basis is recoverable or the securities are reliably insured. The declines in fair value are primarily due to credit spread widening in the structured security marketplace and increased liquidity discounts. We believe that the unrealized losses on our fixed income securities are not predictive of their ultimate performance and the unrealized losses should reverse over the remaining lives of the securities. We anticipate that these securities will recover in line with our best estimate of the expected cash flows which are used for other-than-temporary impairment evaluations as well as managing the portfolio. As of December 31, 2009, we do not have the intent to sell and it is not more likely than not we will be required to sell these securities before the recovery of their amortized cost basis. Our evaluation of whether it is more likely than not we will be required to sell a security before recovery of its amortized cost basis is supported by our liquidity position, which cushions us from the need to liquidate securities with significant unrealized losses to meet cash obligations. Additionally, whenever our initial analysis indicates that a fixed income security's unrealized loss of 20% or more for at least 36 months or any equity security's unrealized loss of 20% or more for at least 12 months is temporary, additional evaluations and management approvals are required to substantiate that the unrealized loss is related to other factors and recognition of a credit loss write-down is not appropriate. As of December 31, 2009, one perpetual preferred equity security with an unrealized loss of $4 million met these criteria. We also monitor the quality of our fixed income and bank loan portfolios by categorizing certain investments as "problem," "restructured," or "potential problem." Problem fixed income securities and bank loans are in default with respect to principal or interest and/or are investments issued by companies that have gone into bankruptcy subsequent to our acquisition or loan. Fixed income and bank loan investments are categorized as restructured when the debtor is in financial difficulty and we grant a concession. Potential problem fixed income or bank loan investments are current with respect to contractual principal and/or interest, but because of other facts and circumstances, we have concerns regarding the borrower's ability to pay future principal and interest according to the original terms, which causes us to believe these investments may be classified as problem or restructured in the future. 94 The following table summarizes problem, restructured and potential problem fixed income securities and bank loans, which are reported in other investments, at December 31. ($ in millions) 2009 Par value (1) Amortized cost (1) Amortized cost as a percent of par value Fair value (2) Fair value as a percent of par value Percent of total fixed income and bank loan portfolios Restructured $ 115 $ 93 80.9 % $ 81 70.4 % 0.1 % Problem 823 321 39.0 221 26.9 0.3 Potential problem 2,630 1,651 62.8 977 37.1 1.2 Total $ 3,568 $ 2,065 $ 1,279 1.6 % Cumulative write-downs recognized (3) $ 1,188 2008 Par value (1) Amortized cost (1) Amortized cost as a percent of par value Fair value (2) Fair value as a percent of par value Percent of total fixed income and bank loan portfolios Restructured $ 101 $ 86 85.2 % $ 76 75.3 % 0.1 % Problem 1,027 228 22.2 186 18.1 0.3 Potential problem 1,896 707 37.3 517 27.3 0.7 Total $ 3,024 $ 1,021 33.8 $ 779 25.8 1.1 % Cumulative write-downs recognized (3) $ 1,673 (1) The difference between par value and amortized cost of $1.50 billion at December 31, 2009 and $2.00 billion at December 31, 2008 is primarily attributable to write-downs. Par value has been reduced by principal payments. (2) Bank loans are reflected at amortized cost. (3) Cumulative write-downs recognized only reflects impairment write-downs related to investments within the problem, potential problem and restructured categories. At December 31, 2009, amortized cost for the problem category was $321 million and was comprised of $143 million of Subprime, $69 million of corporates (primarily privately placed) and $68 million of municipal bonds. Also included were $25 million of bank loans, $8 million of Consumer and other ABS, $5 million of Alt-A and $3 million of CDO. The increase of $93 million over December 31, 2008 is primarily attributable to additional Subprime. The amortized cost of problem investments with a fair value less than 80% of amortized cost totaled $159 million with unrealized losses of $102 million and fair value of $57 million. At December 31, 2009, amortized cost for the potential problem category was $1.65 billion and was comprised of $538 million of Subprime, $408 million of Alt-A, $213 million of corporates (primarily privately placed) and $196 million of CMBS. Also included were $129 million of CDO, $72 million of Prime, $62 million of municipal bonds, $26 million of bank loans and $7 million of Consumer and other ABS. The increase of $944 million from December 31, 2008 is primarily attributable to additional Subprime, Alt-A, CMBS and corporates (primarily privately placed). The amortized cost of potential problem investments with a fair value less than 80% of amortized cost totaled $1.29 billion with unrealized losses of $709 million and fair value of $585 million. 95 Net investment income The following table presents net investment income for the years ended December 31. ($ in millions) 2009 2008 2007 Fixed income securities $ 3,998 $ 4,783 $ 5,459 Equity securities 80 120 114 Mortgage loans 498 618 600 Limited partnership interests 17 62 293 Short-term 27 195 221 Other (10 ) 54 191 Investment income, before expense 4,610 5,832 6,878 Investment expense (166 ) (210 ) (443 ) Net investment income (1) $ 4,444 $ 5,622 $ 6,435 (1) Beginning in the fourth quarter of 2008, income from EMA LP is reported in realized capital gains and losses. EMA LP income for periods prior to the fourth quarter of 2008 is reported in net investment income. The amount of EMA LP income included in net investment income was $24 million in 2008 and $198 million in 2007. Net investment income decreased 21.0% or $1.18 billion in 2009 compared to 2008, primarily due to lower yields, actions to shorten duration and maintain additional liquidity in the portfolio, along with reduced average investment balances. Lower yields were particularly impacted by short-term and variable rate assets. Also contributing to the decline in 2009 was lower income on limited partnership interests and decreased dividends on equity securities. During 2009, our fixed income and mortgage loan portfolio continued to generate significant cash flows from maturities, principal and interest receipts totaling $11.51 billion. These cash flows increased our flexibility to take advantage of market opportunities and manage liabilities. Increased market stability drove a more positive market outlook and improved liquidity in the portfolios, which led us to deploy $16.6 billion of short-term investments and cash receipts into securities, primarily fixed income and equities, to generate income and capital appreciation. Total investment expenses decreased $233 million in 2008 compared to 2007. The 2008 decrease was primarily due to lower expenses associated with a lower amount of collateral received in connection with securities lending transactions. Net realized capital gains and losses The following table presents the components of realized capital gains and losses and the related tax effect for the years ended December 31. ($ in millions) 2009 2008 2007 Impairment write-downs $ (1,562 ) $ (1,983 ) $ (163 ) Change in intent write-downs (357 ) (1,752 ) (147 ) Net other-than-temporary impairment losses recognized in earnings (1,919 ) (3,735 ) (310 ) Sales 1,272 (464 ) 1,483 Valuation of derivative instruments 367 (1,280 ) (77 ) Settlements of derivative instruments (162 ) 486 139 EMA LP income (141 ) (97 ) Realized capital gains and losses, pre-tax (583 ) (5,090 ) 1,235 Income tax (expense) benefit (1) (45 ) 1,779 (437 ) Realized capital gains and losses, after-tax $ (628 ) $ (3,311 ) $ 798 (1) Income tax expense for the year ended December 31, 2009 includes expense of $254 million attributable to an increase in the valuation allowance relating to the deferred tax asset on capital losses recorded in the first quarter of 2009. This valuation allowance was released in connection with the adoption of new OTTI accounting guidance on April 1, 2009; however, the release was recorded as an increase to retained income and therefore did not reverse the amount recorded in income tax expense. For a further discussion of changes in this valuation allowance, see the Deferred Taxes section of the MD&A. 96 Impairment write-downs for the years ended December 31 are presented in the following table. ($ in millions) 2009 2008 2007 Fixed income securities $ (886 ) $ (1,507 ) $ (109 ) Equity securities (237 ) (328 ) (25 ) Mortgage loans (97 ) (4 ) Limited partnership interests (308 ) (112 ) (25 ) Short-term investments (1 ) Other investments (34 ) (32 ) (3 ) Impairment write-downs $ (1,562 ) $ (1,983 ) $ (163 ) Impairment write-downs in 2009 were primarily the result of recovery assessments related to investments with commercial real estate exposure, including limited partnership interests, equity securities, mortgage loans and CMBS; RMBS which experienced deterioration in expected cash flows; ABS, including CDO squared, cash flow CDO and synthetic CDO, and hybrid corporate fixed income securities. $218 million of the fixed income security write-downs in 2009 related to securities that were subsequently disposed. Of the remaining, $516 million or 77.2% of the fixed income security write-downs in 2009 related to impaired securities that were performing in line with anticipated or contractual cash flows but were written down primarily because of expected deterioration in the performance of the underlying collateral or our assessment of the probability of future default. For these securities, as of December 31, 2009, there have either been no defaults or defaults have only impacted classes lower than our position in the capital structure. $125 million of the fixed income security write-downs in 2009 related to securities experiencing a significant departure from anticipated cash flows; however, we believe they retain economic value. $27 million in 2009 related to fixed income securities for which future cash flows are very uncertain. Hybrid corporate fixed income securities are assessed for other-than-temporary impairment as fixed income securities, when they are expected to perform like a fixed income security. However, when credit-related reasons increase the risk of deferred payment, they may be assessed for other-than-temporary impairment in a manner similar to equity securities. In 2009, hybrid securities issued primarily by European financial institutions were assessed as equity securities and written down for other-than-temporary impairment resulting in $142 million of realized capital losses. These hybrid securities that were still held as of December 31, 2009 had a fair value of $130 million. Equity securities were written down primarily due to the length of time and extent fair value was below cost, considering our assessment of the financial condition, near-term and long-term prospects of the issuer, including relevant industry conditions and trends. Limited partnership impairment write-downs related primarily to Cost limited partnerships which experienced significant declines in portfolio valuations and we could not assert the recovery period would be temporary. To determine if an other-than-temporary impairment has occurred related to a Cost limited partnership, we evaluate whether an impairment indicator has occurred in the period that may have a significant adverse effect on the carrying value of the investment. Impairment indicators may include: significantly reduced valuations of the investments held by the limited partnerships; actual recent cash flows received being significantly less than expected cash flows; reduced valuations based on financing completed at a lower value; completed sale of a material underlying investment at a price significantly lower than expected; or any other recent adverse events since the last financial statements received that might affect the fair value of the investee's capital. Change in intent write-downs for the years ended December 31 are presented in the following table. ($ in millions) 2009 2008 2007 Fixed income securities $ (318 ) $ (1,555 ) $ (84 ) Equity securities (27 ) (120 ) (32 ) Mortgage loans (6 ) (74 ) (30 ) Other investments (6 ) (3 ) (1 ) Change in intent write-downs $ (357 ) $ (1,752 ) $ (147 ) Beginning April 1, 2009, change in intent write-downs for fixed income securities reflect instances where we have made the decision to sell the security or it is more likely than not we will be required to sell the security before recovery of its amortized cost basis. For periods prior to April 1, 2009 for fixed income securities and all periods for equity securities, change in intent write-downs reflect instances where we could not assert a positive intent to hold until 97 recovery. Change in intent write-downs for mortgage loans and other investments reflect instances where the loans have been classified as held for sale. The change in intent write-downs in 2009 were a result of ongoing comprehensive reviews of our portfolios resulting in write-downs of individually identified investments. The change in intent write-downs in 2008 were a result of our risk mitigation and return optimization programs, enterprise asset allocations and ongoing comprehensive reviews of our portfolios. Sales generated $1.27 billion of net realized gains in 2009 primarily due to $445 million and $636 million of gains on sales of equity and U.S. and foreign government fixed income securities, respectively. Sales of equity securities were primarily in connection with a change in strategy that uses a more passive portfolio management approach with a greater emphasis on asset allocation decisions. Net realized losses from sales in 2008 were due to net realized losses on equity securities of $701 million comprised of gross losses of $1.45 billion and gross gains of $751 million. The gross losses in 2008 primarily resulted from the execution of tax planning strategies primarily within our equity portfolios that are effectively carried on a lower of cost or fair value basis to realize capital loss carryback benefits. Valuation and settlement of derivative instruments recorded as net realized capital gains totaling $205 million for the year ended December 31, 2009 included $367 million of gains on the valuation of derivative instruments and $162 million of losses on the settlement of derivative instruments. For the year ended December 31, 2008, net realized capital losses on the valuation and settlement of derivative instruments totaled $794 million. Losses from the risk management programs primarily occurred in the equity hedge program and related to a decrease in volatility and increase in the equity index. A changing interest rate environment will drive changes in our portfolio duration targets at a tactical level. A duration target and range is established with an economic view of liabilities relative to a long-term investment portfolio view. Tactical duration management is accomplished through both cash market transactions, sales and new purchases and derivative activities that generate realized gains and losses. As a component of our approach to managing portfolio duration, realized gains and losses on certain derivative instruments are most appropriately considered in conjunction with the unrealized gains and losses on the fixed income portfolio. This approach mitigates the impacts of general interest rate changes to our overall financial condition. At December 31, 2009, our securities with embedded options totaled $1.41 billion, a decrease in fair value of $51 million from December 31, 2008, resulting in realized capital gains on valuation of $120 million, net sales activity of $325 million, and unrealized net capital gains reported in other comprehensive income ("OCI") of $154 million for the host securities. Net unrealized capital gains were further decreased by $42 million due to amortization and impairment write-downs on the host securities. The change in fair value of embedded options is bifurcated from the host securities, separately valued and reported in realized capital gains and losses, while the change in the difference between the fair value and the amortized cost of the host securities is reported in OCI. Total amortized cost exceeded total fair value by $1 million at December 31, 2009. Valuation gains and losses are converted into cash for securities with embedded options upon our election to sell these securities. In the event the economic value of the options is not realized, we will recover the par value if held to maturity unless the issuer of the note defaults. Total par value exceeded fair value by $3 million at December 31, 2009. 98 The table below presents the realized capital gains and losses (pre-tax) on the valuation and settlement of derivative instruments shown by underlying exposure and derivative strategy for the years ended December 31. ($ in millions) 2009 2008 2007 2009 Explanations Valuation Settlements Total Total Total Risk management Property Liability Portfolio duration management $ 15 $ 18 $ 33 $ (10 ) $ (50 ) Interest rate swaps are used to offset the effects of changing interest rates on a portion of the Property-Liability fixed income portfolio that is reported in unrealized net capital gains or losses in OCI. The 2009 gains, resulting from increasing interest rates, are offset in net unrealized capital gains and losses in OCI to the extent it relates to changes in risk-free rates. Interest rate spike exposure (50 ) (8 ) (58 ) (97 ) (20 ) Interest rate swaption contracts, with terms of less than one year, and exchange traded options on treasury futures, with three month terms, provide an offset to declines in fixed income market values resulting from potential rising interest rates. As of December 31, 2009, the notional of our over-the-counter ("OTC") swaption positions totaled $9.50 billion and the notional of our exchange traded options totaled $3.00 billion. Exchange traded options on treasury futures are utilized to supplement the protection provided by swaption contracts without increasing the counterparty risk associated with OTC contracts. The 2009 loss primarily relates to the impact of the decline in volatility on the option on treasury futures and swaption contracts. If interest rates do not increase above the strike rate, the maximum loss on swaptions and options on treasury futures is limited to the amount of the premium paid. The program is anticipated to be revised throughout the year as capital market conditions change. Hedging unrealized gains on equity securities 34 (260 ) (226 ) 420 61 Exchange traded put options provide an offset to significant declines in our equity portfolio from equity market declines below a targeted level. Options can expire, terminate early or the option can be exercised. If the price level of the equity index does not fall below the put's strike price, the maximum loss on purchased puts is limited to the amount of the premium paid. The 2009 settlement losses on options were primarily the result of a decrease in volatility and an increase in the price levels of the equity index and were partially offset by net unrealized capital gains and losses of our equity portfolio reflected in OCI to the extent it relates to changes in price levels of the equity index. In addition, short S&P futures are used to provide an offset to declines in valuations in our equity securities portfolio reported in unrealized net capital gains or losses in accumulated OCI. The futures contracts are exchange traded, daily cash settled and can be exited at any time for minimal additional cost. The 2009 settlement losses on futures were primarily the result of an increase in the price levels of the equity index and were partially offset by net unrealized capital gains and losses of our equity portfolio reflected in OCI to the extent it relates to changes in the equity index price levels. Foreign currency contracts 15 (11 ) 4 (27 ) 6 Credit risk reduction (31 ) (14 ) (45 ) 48 8 Losses are primarily the result of tightening credit spreads on referenced credit entities. Other 2 2 (29 ) (16 ) Allstate Financial Duration gap management 225 63 288 (503 ) (27 ) Interest rate caps, floors and swaps are used by Allstate Financial to balance interest-rate sensitivities of its assets and liabilities. The contracts settle based on differences between current market rates and a contractually specified fixed rate through expiration. The contracts can be terminated and settled at any time with minimal additional cost. The maximum loss on caps and floors is limited to the amount of premiums paid. The change in valuation reflects the changing value of expected future settlements from changing interest rates, which may vary over the period of the contracts. The 2009 gains, resulting from increasing interest rates, are offset in unrealized capital gains and losses of our fixed income securities in OCI to the extent it relates to changes in risk-free rates. Anticipatory hedging (7 ) (11 ) (18 ) 153 (30 ) Futures and interest rate swaps are used to protect investment spread from interest rate changes during mismatches in the timing of cash flows between product sales and the related investment activity. The futures contracts are exchange traded, daily cash settled and can be exited at any time for minimal additional cost. If the cash flow mismatches are such that a positive net investment position is being hedged, there is an offset for the related investments unrealized loss in OCI. The 2009 losses were caused by an increase in risk-free interest rates over the life of the net short position as liability issuances exceeded asset acquisitions. Hedging of interest rate exposure in annuity contracts 10 10 (29 ) (22 ) Value of expected future settlements on interest rate caps and the associated value of future credited interest, which is reportable in future periods when incurred, increased due to an increase in interest rates. 99 ($ in millions) 2009 2008 2007 2009 Explanations Valuation Settlements Total Total Total Hedging unrealized gains on equity indexed notes 7 1 Hedge ineffectiveness (1 ) (1 ) (4 ) (13 ) The hedge ineffectiveness of $(1) million includes $176 million in realized capital gains on swaps that were offset by $177 million in realized capital losses on the hedged risk. Foreign currency contracts 3 3 (1 ) (13 ) Credit risk reduction (26 ) (24 ) (50 ) 17 Losses are primarily the result of tightening credit spreads on referenced credit entities. Other 1 (1 ) Total Risk management $ 187 $ (245 ) $ (58 ) $ (54 ) $ (116 ) Income generation The 2009 changes in valuation are due to tightening credit spreads on referenced credit entities, and would only be converted to cash upon disposition, which can be done at any time, or if the credit event specified in the contract occurs. For further discussion on CDS, see Note 6 of the consolidated financial statements. Asset replication credit exposure Property Liability $ 9 $ 4 $ 13 $ (41 ) $ (12 ) Allstate Financial 51 13 64 (62 ) (18 ) Total 60 17 77 (103 ) (30 ) Asset replication equity exposure Property Liability 66 66 (84 ) 16 Exchange traded equity index future contracts are used to replicate equity market returns. The 2009 gains were the result of an increase in price levels of the equity index. Commodity derivatives Property Liability (44 ) 106 Total Income generation $ 60 $ 83 $ 143 $ (231 ) $ 92 Accounting Equity indexed notes Allstate Financial $ 28 $ $ 28 $ (290 ) $ 38 Equity-indexed notes are fixed income securities that contain embedded options. The changes in valuation of the embedded equity indexed call options are reported in realized capital gains and losses. The results generally track the performance of underlying equity indices. Valuation gains and losses are converted into cash upon sale or maturity. In the event the economic value of the options is not realized, we will recover the par value of the host fixed income security if held to maturity unless the issuer of the note defaults. Par value exceeded fair value by $45 million at December 31, 2009. Equity-indexed notes are subject to our comprehensive portfolio monitoring and watchlist processes to identify and evaluate when the carrying value may be other-than-temporarily impaired. The following table compares the December 31, 2009 and December 31, 2008 holdings, respectively. ($ in millions) December 31, 2009 Change in fair value Change due to net sale activity December 31, 2008 Par value $ 475 $ $ (325 ) $ 800 Amortized cost of host contract $ 344 $ 21 $ (163 ) $ 486 Fair value of equity-indexed call option 89 28 (71 ) 132 Total amortized cost $ 433 $ 49 $ (234 ) $ 618 Total fair value $ 430 $ 62 $ (265 ) $ 633 Unrealized gain/loss $ (3 ) $ 13 $ (31 ) $ 15 100 ($ in millions) 2009 2008 2007 2009 Explanations Valuation Settlements Total Total Total Conversion options in fixed income securities Property Liability 60 60 (143 ) 19 Allstate Financial 32 32 (77 ) 28 Convertible bonds are fixed income securities that contain embedded options. Changes in valuation of the embedded option are reported in realized capital gains and losses. The results generally track the performance of underlying equities. Valuation gains and losses are converted into cash upon our election to sell these securities. In the event the economic value of the options is not realized, we will recover the par value of the host fixed income security if held to maturity unless the issuer of the note defaults. Fair value exceeded par value by $42 million at December 31, 2009. Convertible bonds are subject to our comprehensive portfolio monitoring and watchlist processes to identify and evaluate when the carrying value may be other-than-temporarily impaired. The following table compares the December 31, 2009 and December 31, 2008 holdings, respectively. Total 92 92 (220 ) 47 ($ in millions) December 31, 2009 Change in fair value Change due to net sale activity December 31, 2008 Par value $ 936 $ $ (69 ) $ 1,005 Amortized cost of host contract $ 664 $ 21 $ (19 ) $ 662 Fair value of conversion option 312 92 19 201 Total amortized cost $ 976 $ 113 $ $ 863 Total fair value $ 978 $ 212 $ (60 ) $ 826 Unrealized gain/loss $ 2 $ 99 $ (60 ) $ (37 ) Total Accounting $ 120 $ $ 120 $ (510 ) $ 85 Other 1 1 Total $ 367 $ (162 ) $ 205 $ (794) (1) $ 62 Total Property-Liability $ 52 $ (203 ) $ (151 ) $ (7 ) $ 118 Total Allstate Financial 315 41 356 (788 ) (57 ) Other 1 1 Total $ 367 $ (162 ) $ 205 $ (794) (1) $ 62 (1) Does not include $1 million of derivative gains related to the termination of fair value hedges and cash flow hedges which are included in sales and reported with the hedged risk. Included in the table above are net realized capital losses on the valuation and settlement of derivative instruments related to our risk mitigation and return optimization programs totaling $241 million for the year ended December 31, 2009. These realized capital gains and losses are detailed in the following table for the year ended December 31, 2009. ($ in millions) Valuation Settlement Total Portfolio duration management $ 15 $ 18 $ 33 Interest rate spike exposure (50 ) (8 ) (58 ) Hedging unrealized gains on equity securities 34 (210 ) (176 ) Credit risk hedging (19 ) (21 ) (40 ) Total $ (20 ) $ (221 ) $ (241 ) 101 FAIR VALUE OF ASSETS AND LIABILITIES We have two types of situations where we have classified investments as Level 3 in the fair value hierarchy disclosures in Note 5 of the consolidated financial statements. The first is where quotes continue to be received from independent third-party valuation service providers and all significant inputs are market observable; however there has been a significant decrease in the volume and level of activity for the asset when compared to normal market activity such that the degree of market observability has declined to a point where categorization as a Level 3 measurement is considered appropriate. Among the indicators we consider in determining whether a significant decrease in the volume and level of activity for a specific asset has occurred include the following: Level of new issuances in the primary market; Trading volume in the secondary market; Level of credit spreads over historical levels; Bid-ask spread; and Price consensus among market participants and sources. The second situation where we have classified securities in Level 3 is where specific inputs to our fair value estimation models which are considered significant are not market observable. This has occurred in two principal categories. The first is for broker quotes. The second is our ARS backed by student loans for which a principal assumption, the anticipated date liquidity will return to this market, is not market observable. During 2009, certain Alt-A RMBS, Prime RMBS and ABS-credit card and auto were transferred into Level 2 from Level 3 as a result of increased liquidity in these markets (see Level 3 rollforward in Note 5 of the consolidated financial statements). This was evidenced by increased trading volume and the narrowing of bid-ask spreads for our specific holdings. Additionally, privately placed corporate fixed income securities that are valued using internal pricing models were transferred into Level 2 from Level 3 as a result of enhancements to the valuation methodology, refinements to model inputs and corroboration of our internal credit rating process by comparison to available external ratings. We have also implemented price validation procedures such as back-testing of actual sales, which corroborates the various model inputs to market observable data. When transferring these securities into Level 2, we do not change the source of fair value estimates or modify the estimates received from independent third-party valuation service providers or the internal valuation approach. Accordingly, for securities included within this group, there was no change in fair value resulting in a realized or unrealized gain or loss. During 2009, certain CMBS were transferred into Level 3 from Level 2 as a result of decreased liquidity in these markets. This was evidenced by decreased trading volume and the widening of bid-ask spreads for these holdings. Transfers into Level 3 during 2009 also included situations where a fair value quote is not provided by our independent third-party valuation service provider and as a result the price is stale or has been replaced with a broker quote resulting in the security being classified as Level 3. Transfers out of Level 3 during 2009 also included situations where a broker quote was used in the prior period and a fair value quote is now available from our independent third-party valuation service provider. A quote utilizing the new pricing source is not available as of the prior period, and any gains or losses related to the change in valuation source for individual securities are not significant. MARKET RISK Market risk is the risk that we will incur losses due to adverse changes in equity, interest, credit spreads, commodity, or currency exchange rates and prices. Adverse changes to these rates and prices may occur due to changes in the liquidity of a market or market segment, insolvency or financial distress of key market makers or participants or changes in market perceptions of credit worthiness and/or risk tolerance. Our primary market risk exposures are to changes in interest rates, credit spreads and equity prices, although we also have a smaller exposure to changes in foreign currency exchange rates and commodity prices. The active management of market risk is integral to our results of operations. We may use the following approaches to manage exposure to market risk within defined tolerance ranges: 1) rebalancing existing asset or liability portfolios, 2) changing the character of investments purchased in the future and 3) using derivative instruments to modify the market risk characteristics of existing assets and liabilities or assets expected to be purchased. For a more detailed discussion of our use of derivative financial instruments, see Note 6 of the consolidated financial statements. Overview In formulating and implementing guidelines for investing funds, we seek to earn returns that enhance our ability to offer competitive rates and prices to customers while contributing to attractive and stable profits and long-term capital growth. Accordingly, our investment decisions and objectives are a function of the underlying risks and product profiles of each business. 102 Investment policies define the overall framework for managing market and other investment risks, including accountability and controls over risk management activities. Subsidiaries that conduct investment activities follow policies that have been approved by their respective boards of directors. These investment policies specify the investment limits and strategies that are appropriate given the liquidity, surplus, product profile and regulatory requirements of the subsidiary. Executive oversight of investment activities is conducted primarily through subsidiaries' boards of directors and investment committees. For Allstate Financial, its asset-liability management ("ALM") policies further define the overall framework for managing market and investment risks. ALM focuses on strategies to enhance yields, mitigate market risks and optimize capital to improve profitability and returns for Allstate Financial. Allstate Financial ALM activities follow asset-liability policies that have been approved by their respective boards of directors. These ALM policies specify limits, ranges and/or targets for investments that best meet Allstate Financial's business objectives in light of its product liabilities. We manage our exposure to market risk through the use of asset allocation, duration, simulation, and as appropriate, through the use of stress tests. We have asset allocation limits that place restrictions on the total funds that may be invested within an asset class. We have duration limits on the Property-Liability and Allstate Financial investment portfolios and, as appropriate, on individual components of these portfolios. These duration limits place restrictions on the amount of interest rate risk that may be taken. Comprehensive day-to-day management of market risk within defined tolerance ranges occurs as portfolio managers buy and sell within their respective markets based upon the acceptable boundaries established by investment policies. For Allstate Financial, this day-to-day management is integrated with and informed by the activities of the ALM organization. This integration is intended to result in a prudent, methodical and effective adjudication of market risk and return, conditioned by the unique demands and dynamics of Allstate Financial's product liabilities and supported by the continuous application of advanced risk technology and analytics. Although we apply a similar overall philosophy to market risk, the underlying business frameworks and the accounting and regulatory environments differ considerably between the Property-Liability and Allstate Financial businesses affecting investment decisions and risk parameters. Interest rate risk is the risk that we will incur a loss due to adverse changes in interest rates relative to the interest rate characteristics of interest bearing assets and liabilities. This risk arises from many of our primary activities, as we invest substantial funds in interest-sensitive assets and issue interest-sensitive liabilities. Interest rate risk includes risks related to changes in U.S. Treasury yields and other key risk-free reference yields. We manage the interest rate risk in our assets relative to the interest rate risk in our liabilities. One of the measures used to quantify this exposure is duration. Duration measures the price sensitivity of the assets and liabilities to changes in interest rates. For example, if interest rates increase 100 basis points, the fair value of an asset with a duration of 5 is expected to decrease in value by approximately 5%. At December 31, 2009, the difference between our asset and liability duration was (0.24), compared to a 0.02 gap at December 31, 2008. A negative duration gap indicates that the fair value of our liabilities is more sensitive to interest rate movements than the fair value of our assets. The Property-Liability segment generally maintains a positive duration gap between its assets and liabilities due to the relatively short duration of auto and homeowners claims, which are its primary liabilities. The Allstate Financial segment may have a positive or negative duration gap, as the duration of its assets and liabilities vary with its product mix and investing activity. At December 31, 2009, Property-Liability had a positive duration gap while Allstate Financial had a negative duration gap. In the management of investments supporting the Property-Liability business, we adhere to an objective of emphasizing safety of principal and consistency of income within a total return framework. This approach is designed to ensure our financial strength and stability for paying claims, while maximizing economic value and surplus growth. For the Allstate Financial business, we seek to invest premiums, contract charges and deposits to generate future cash flows that will fund future claims, benefits and expenses, and that will earn stable spreads across a wide variety of interest rate and economic scenarios. To achieve this objective and limit interest rate risk for Allstate Financial, we adhere to a philosophy of managing the duration of assets and related liabilities within predetermined tolerance levels. This philosophy is executed using duration targets for fixed income investments in addition to interest rate swaps, futures, forwards, caps, floors and swaptions to reduce the interest rate risk resulting from mismatches between existing assets and liabilities, and financial futures and other derivative instruments to hedge the interest rate risk of anticipated purchases and sales of investments and product sales to customers. We pledge and receive collateral on certain types of derivative contracts. For futures and option contracts traded on exchanges, we have pledged securities and cash as margin deposits totaling $19 million as of December 31, 2009. For OTC derivative transactions including interest rate swaps, foreign currency swaps, interest rate caps, interest rate floors 103 and CDS, master netting agreements are used. These agreements allow us to net payments due for transactions covered by the agreements and, when applicable, we are required to post collateral. As of December 31, 2009, we held cash of $209 million pledged by counterparties as collateral for OTC instruments; we pledged securities of $171 million as collateral to counterparties. We performed a sensitivity analysis on OTC derivative collateral requirements by assuming a hypothetical reduction in our S&P insurance financial strength ratings from AA- to A and a 100 basis point decline in interest rates. The analysis indicated that we would have to post an estimated $327 million in additional collateral with 67.3% attributable to Allstate Financial. The selection of these hypothetical scenarios should not be construed as our prediction of future events, but only as an illustration of the estimated potential effect of such events. We also actively manage our counterparty credit risk exposure by monitoring the level of collateral posted by our counterparties with respect to our receivable positions. To calculate the duration gap between assets and liabilities, we project asset and liability cash flows and calculate their net present value using a risk-free market interest rate adjusted for credit quality, sector attributes, liquidity and other specific risks. Duration is calculated by revaluing these cash flows at alternative interest rates and determining the percentage change in aggregate fair value. The cash flows used in this calculation include the expected maturity and repricing characteristics of our derivative financial instruments, all other financial instruments, and certain other items including unearned premiums, property-liability insurance claims and claims expense reserves, annuity liabilities and other interest-sensitive liabilities. The projections include assumptions (based upon historical market experience and our experience) that reflect the effect of changing interest rates on the prepayment, lapse, leverage and/or option features of instruments, where applicable. The preceding assumptions relate primarily to mortgage-backed securities, collateralized mortgage obligations, municipal housing bonds, callable municipal and corporate obligations, and fixed rate single and flexible premium deferred annuities. Additionally, the calculations include assumptions regarding the renewal of property-liability policies. Based upon the information and assumptions used in the duration calculation, and interest rates in effect at December 31, 2009, we estimate that a 100 basis point immediate, parallel increase in interest rates ("rate shock") would decrease the net fair value of the assets and liabilities by $378 million, compared to $81 million at December 31, 2008. Reflected in the duration calculation are the effects of a program that uses options on Treasury futures to manage the Property-Liability interest rate risk exposures relative to duration targets, as well as a program that uses interest rate swaptions to manage the risk of a large rate increase. In calculating the impact of a 100 basis point increase on the value of the derivatives, we have assumed interest rate volatility remains constant. Based on the option on Treasury futures and swaption contracts in place at December 31, 2009, we would recognize realized capital gains totaling $433 million in the event of a 100 basis point immediate, parallel interest rate increase and $108 million in realized capital losses in the event of a 100 basis point immediate, parallel interest rate decrease on these derivatives. The selection of a 100 basis point immediate parallel change in interest rates should not be construed as our prediction of future market events, but only as an illustration of the potential effect of such an event. There are $8.12 billion of assets supporting life insurance products such as traditional and interest-sensitive life that are not financial instruments. These assets and the associated liabilities have not been included in the above estimate. The $8.12 billion of assets excluded from the calculation has increased from the $6.79 billion reported at December 31, 2008 as fixed income valuations have improved as a result of significant tightening of credit spreads. Based on assumptions described above, in the event of a 100 basis point immediate increase in interest rates, the assets supporting life insurance products would decrease in value by $459 million, compared to a decrease of $515 million at December 31, 2008. To the extent that conditions differ from the assumptions we used in these calculations, duration and rate shock measures could be significantly impacted. Additionally, our calculations assume that the current relationship between short-term and long-term interest rates (the term structure of interest rates) will remain constant over time. As a result, these calculations may not fully capture the effect of non-parallel changes in the term structure of interest rates and/or large changes in interest rates. Credit spread risk is the risk that we will incur a loss due to adverse changes in credit spreads ("spreads"). This risk arises from many of our primary activities, as we invest substantial funds in spread-sensitive fixed income assets. We manage the spread risk in our assets. One of the measures used to quantify this exposure is spread duration. Spread duration measures the price sensitivity of the assets to changes in spreads. For example, if spreads increase 100 basis points, the fair value of an asset exhibiting a spread duration of 5 is expected to decrease in value by approximately 5%. Spread duration is calculated similarly to interest rate duration. At December 31, 2009, the spread duration of Property-Liability assets was 5.02, compared to 5.46 at December 31, 2008 and the spread duration of Allstate Financial 104 assets was 4.79, compared to 4.30 at December 31, 2008. Based upon the information and assumptions we use in this spread duration calculation, and spreads in effect at December 31, 2009, we estimate that a 100 basis point immediate, parallel increase in spreads across all asset classes, industry sectors and credit ratings ("spread shock") would decrease the net fair value of the assets by $3.85 billion, compared to $3.61 billion at December 31, 2008. Reflected in the duration calculation are the effects of our risk mitigation actions that use CDS to manage spread risk. Based on contracts in place at December 31, 2009, we would recognize realized capital gains totaling $47 million in the event of a 100 basis point immediate, parallel spread increase and $47 million in realized capital losses in the event of a 100 basis point immediate, parallel spread decrease. The selection of a 100 basis point immediate parallel change in spreads should not be construed as our prediction of future market events, but only as an illustration of the potential effect of such an event. Equity price risk is the risk that we will incur losses due to adverse changes in the general levels of the equity markets. At December 31, 2009, we held $4.77 billion in common stocks and Exchange Traded Funds ("ETFs") and $3.86 billion in other securities with equity risk (including primarily convertible securities, limited partnership interests, non-redeemable preferred securities and equity-linked notes), compared to $2.54 billion and $3.65 billion, respectively, at December 31, 2008. 97.3% and 57.1% of these totals, respectively, represented assets of the Property-Liability operations at December 31, 2009, compared to 100.0% and 49.1%, respectively, at December 31, 2008. Additionally, we had 24,000 contracts in long Standard & Poor's 500 Composite Price Index ("S&P 500") puts at December 31, 2009 with a fair value of $50 million. At December 31, 2009, our portfolio of common stocks and other securities with equity risk had a cash market portfolio beta of 0.73, compared to a beta of 0.66 at December 31, 2008. Beta represents a widely used methodology to describe, quantitatively, an investment's market risk characteristics relative to an index such as the S&P 500. Based on the beta analysis, we estimate that if the S&P 500 increases or decreases by 10%, the fair value of our equity investments will increase or decrease by 7.3%, respectively. Based upon the information and assumptions we used to calculate beta at December 31, 2009, including the effect of the S&P 500 puts, we estimate that an immediate decrease in the S&P 500 of 10% would decrease the net fair value of our equity investments identified above by $605 million, compared to $343 million at December 31, 2008, and an immediate increase in the S&P 500 of 10% would increase the net fair value by $615 million compared to $368 million at December 31, 2008. In calculating the impact of a 10% S&P index perturbation on the value of the puts, we have assumed index volatility remains constant. Based on the S&P 500 index put options in place at December 31, 2009, we would recognize losses totaling $17 million in the event of a 10% increase in the S&P 500 index and $27 million in gains in the event of a 10% decrease. The selection of a 10% immediate decrease or increase in the S&P 500 should not be construed as our prediction of future market events, but only as an illustration of the potential effect of such an event. The beta of our common stocks and other securities with equity risk was determined using Barra's predictive beta. This beta is based on a company's fundamental data. The illustrations noted above may not reflect our actual experience if the future composition of the portfolio (hence its beta) and correlation relationships differ from the historical relationships. At December 31, 2009 and 2008, we had separate accounts assets related to variable annuity and variable life contracts with account values totaling $9.07 billion and $8.24 billion, respectively. Equity risk exists for contract charges based on separate account balances and guarantees for death and/or income benefits provided by our variable products. In 2006, we disposed of substantially all of the variable annuity business through reinsurance agreements with Prudential and therefore mitigated this aspect of our risk. Equity risk for our variable life business relates to contract charges and policyholder benefits. Total variable life contract charges for 2009 and 2008 were $85 million and $95 million, respectively. Separate account liabilities related to variable life contracts were $708 million and $561 million in December 31, 2009 and 2008, respectively. At December 31, 2009 and 2008 we had $4.47 billion and $4.11 billion, respectively, in equity-indexed annuity liabilities that provide customers with interest crediting rates based on the performance of the S&P 500. We hedge the risk associated with these liabilities using equity-indexed options and futures, interest rate swaps, and eurodollar futures, maintaining risk within specified value-at-risk limits. Foreign currency exchange rate risk is the risk that we will incur economic losses due to adverse changes in foreign currency exchange rates. This risk primarily arises from our foreign equity investments, including real estate funds and private equity funds, and our Canadian operations. We also have certain funding agreement programs and fixed income securities that are denominated in foreign currencies; however, derivatives are used to hedge the foreign currency risk of these funding agreements and approximately 82% of the fixed income securities. At both December 31, 2009 and 2008, we had $713 million in funding agreements denominated in foreign currencies. 105 At December 31, 2009, we had $1.38 billion in foreign currency denominated equity investments, $686 million net investment in our foreign subsidiaries, and $148 million in unhedged non-dollar pay fixed income securities. These amounts were $593 million, $482 million, and $103 million, respectively, at December 31, 2008. 88.2% of the foreign currency exposure is in the Property-Liability business. Based upon the information and assumptions used at December 31, 2009, we estimate that a 10% immediate unfavorable change in each of the foreign currency exchange rates to which we are exposed to would decrease the value of our foreign currency denominated instruments by $222 million, compared with an estimated $118 million decrease at December 31, 2008. The selection of a 10% immediate decrease in all currency exchange rates should not be construed as our prediction of future market events, but only as an illustration of the potential effect of such an event. Our currency exposure is diversified across 39 currencies at December 31, 2009, compared to 38 currencies at December 31, 2008. Our largest individual foreign currency exposures at December 31, 2009 were to the Canadian dollar (35.5%) and the Euro (22.9%). The largest individual foreign currency exposures at December 31, 2008 were to the Canadian dollar (43.2%) and the Euro (19.2%). Our primary regional exposure is to Western Europe, with 40.5% at December 31, 2009, compared to 33.2% at December 31, 2008. The modeling technique we use to report our currency exposure does not take into account correlation among foreign currency exchange rates. Even though we believe it is very unlikely that all of the foreign currency exchange rates that we are exposed to would simultaneously decrease by 10%, we nonetheless stress test our portfolio under this and other hypothetical extreme adverse market scenarios. Our actual experience may differ from these results because of assumptions we have used or because significant liquidity and market events could occur that we did not foresee. Commodity price risk is the risk that we will incur economic losses due to adverse changes in the prices of commodities. This risk arises from commodity linked investments, such as the Dow Jones AIG Commodity Index and Goldman Sachs Commodity Index which is a broad based, oil dominated index. At December 31, 2009 and 2008, we had no exposure to the indices. PENSION PLANS We have defined benefit pension plans, which cover most full-time and certain part-time employees and employee-agents. See Note 16 of the consolidated financial statements for a complete discussion of these plans and their effect on the consolidated financial statements. The pension and other postretirement plans may be amended or terminated at any time. Any revisions could result in significant changes to our obligations and our obligation to fund the plans. We report unrecognized pension and other postretirement benefit cost in the Consolidated Statements of Financial Position as a component of accumulated other comprehensive income in shareholders' equity. It represents differences between the fair value of plan assets and the projected benefit obligation for pension plans and the accumulated postretirement benefit obligation for other postretirement plans that have not yet been recognized as a component of net periodic cost. The measurement of the unrecognized pension and other postretirement benefit cost can vary based upon the fluctuations in the fair value of the plan assets and the actuarial assumptions used for the plans as discussed below. The unrecognized pension and other postretirement benefit cost at December 31, 2009 was $1.28 billion, an increase of $214 million from $1.07 billion at December 31, 2008. The increase was the result of a decrease in the discount rate used to value liabilities partially offset by increases in the value of plan assets. As of December 31, 2009 and 2008, each of our qualified pension plans had projected benefit obligations that exceeded plan assets. The market-related value component of expected returns recognizes plan losses and gains on equity securities over a five-year period, which we believe is consistent with the long-term nature of pension obligations. As a result, the effect of changes in fair value of equity securities on our net periodic pension cost may be experienced in periods subsequent to those in which the fluctuations actually occur. Net periodic pension cost in 2010 is estimated to be $348 million based on current assumptions, including settlement charges. This represents an increase compared to 2009 expense due to the effect of equity losses during the 2008 fiscal year and the decrease in discount rates experienced at the end of 2009. Net periodic pension cost decreased in 2009 due to the increase in discount rate for each pension plan, which resulted in lower amortization of net actuarial loss. Net periodic pension cost decreased in 2008 principally due to lower service cost, higher expected returns on plan assets, and lower amortization of net actuarial loss due to higher plan asset values. In 2008 and 2007, net pension cost included non-cash settlement charges primarily resulting from lump sum distributions made to agents. Additional settlement charges occurred during 2009, 2008 and 2007 also related to the Supplemental Retirement Income Plan as a result of lump sum payments made from the plan. Settlement charges are likely to continue for some period in the future as we settle our remaining agent pension obligations by making lump sum distributions to agents. 106 Amounts recorded for pension cost and accumulated other comprehensive income are significantly affected by fluctuations in the returns on plan assets and the amortization of unrecognized actuarial gains and losses. Plan assets sustained net losses in prior periods primarily due to declines in equity and credit markets. These asset losses, combined with all other unrecognized actuarial gains and losses, resulted in amortization of net actuarial loss (and additional net periodic pension cost) of $15 million in 2009 and $37 million in 2008. We anticipate that the unrealized loss for our pension plans will exceed 10% of the greater of the projected benefit obligations or the market-related value of assets in 2011 and into the foreseeable future, resulting in additional amortization and net periodic pension cost. Amounts recorded for net periodic pension cost and accumulated other comprehensive income are also significantly affected by changes in the assumptions used to determine the weighted average discount rate and the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets. The weighted average discount rate is based on rates at which expected pension benefits attributable to past employee service could effectively be settled on a present value basis at the measurement date. We develop the assumed weighted average discount rate by utilizing the weighted average yield of a theoretical dedicated portfolio derived from bonds available in the Barclays corporate bond universe having ratings of at least "AA" by S&P or at least "Aa" by Moody's on the measurement date with cash flows that match expected plan benefit requirements. Significant changes in discount rates, such as those caused by changes in the credit spreads, yield curve, the mix of bonds available in the market, the duration of selected bonds and expected benefit payments, may result in volatility in pension cost and accumulated other comprehensive income. Holding other assumptions constant, a hypothetical decrease of 100 basis points in the weighted average discount rate would result in an increase of $43 million in net periodic pension cost and a $373 million increase in the unrecognized pension and other postretirement benefit cost liability of our pension plans recorded as accumulated other comprehensive income as of December 31, 2009, compared to an increase of $37 million in net periodic pension cost and a $314 million increase in the unrecognized pension and other postretirement benefit cost liability as of December 31, 2008. A hypothetical increase of 100 basis points in the weighted average discount rate would decrease net periodic pension cost by $38 million and would decrease the unrecognized pension and other postretirement benefit cost liability of our pension plans recorded as accumulated other comprehensive income by $317 million as of December 31, 2009, compared to a decrease in net periodic pension cost of $8 million and a $267 million decrease in the unrecognized pension and other postretirement benefit cost liability of our pension plans recorded as accumulated other comprehensive income as of December 31, 2008. This non-symmetrical range results from the non-linear relationship between discount rates and pension obligations, and changes in the amortization of unrealized net actuarial gains and losses. The expected long-term rate of return on plan assets reflects the average rate of earnings expected on plan assets. While this rate reflects long-term assumptions and is consistent with long-term historical returns, sustained changes in the market or changes in the mix of plan assets may lead to revisions in the assumed long-term rate of return on plan assets that may result in variability of pension cost. Differences between the actual return on plan assets and the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets are a component of unrecognized gains or losses, which may be amortized as a component of net actuarial gains and losses and recorded in accumulated other comprehensive income. As a result, the effect of changes in fair value on our pension cost may be experienced in results of operations in periods subsequent to those in which the fluctuations actually occur. Holding other assumptions constant, a hypothetical decrease of 100 basis points in the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets would result in an increase of $39 million in pension cost at December 31, 2009, compared to $48 million at December 31, 2008. A hypothetical increase of 100 basis points in the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets would result in a decrease in net periodic pension cost of $39 million at December 31, 2009, compared to $48 million at December 31, 2008. We target funding levels that do not restrict the payment of plan benefits in our domestic plans and were within our targeted range as of December 31, 2009. In 2009, we contributed $526 million to our pension plans, including $91 million of contributions as discussed below. We expect to contribute $340 million for the 2010 plan year to maintain the plans' funded status. This estimate could change significantly following either a dramatic improvement or decline in investment markets. In 2009, we became aware of allegations that some employees responsible for trading equity securities in certain portfolios of two AIC defined benefit pension plans and certain portfolios of AIC and an AIC subsidiary may have timed the execution of certain trades in order to enhance their individual performance under incentive compensation plans, without regard to whether such timing adversely impacted the actual investment performance of the portfolios. 107 We retained outside counsel, who in turn engaged an independent economic consulting firm to conduct a review and assist us in understanding the facts surrounding, and the potential implications of, the alleged timing of these trades for the period from June 2003 to May 2009. The consulting firm reported that it was unable to determine from our records the precise amounts by which portfolio performance might have been adversely impacted during that period. Accordingly, the economic consultant applied economic modeling techniques and assumptions reasonably designed to estimate the potential adverse impact on the pension plans and the company accounts, taking into account, among other things, the distinctions between the pension plans and the company portfolios. Based on their work, the economic consultants estimated that the performance of the pension plans' portfolios could have been adversely impacted by approximately $91 million (including interest) and that the performance of the company portfolios could have been adversely impacted by approximately $116 million (including interest) in the aggregate over the six-year period under review. We believe that our financial statements and those for the pension plans properly reflected the portfolios' actual investment performance results during the entire period that was reviewed. In December 2009, based on the economic consultant's modeled estimates, we paid an aggregate of $91 million into the two defined benefit pension plans. These payments had no material impact on our reported earnings or shareholders' equity, but reduced our assets, operating cash flows, and unfunded pension liability to the plans. At December 31, 2009, our total assets, operating cash flows and shareholders' equity were $132.65 billion, $4.30 billion and $16.69 billion, respectively. At all times during this period, the plans were adequately funded pursuant to applicable regulatory and actuarial requirements. As a result of these additional funds in the plans, our future contributions to the plans, based on actuarial analysis, may be reduced. Using the economic consultant's calculation of the potential adverse impact on the portfolios, we currently estimate that the additional compensation paid to all the employees working in the affected group was approximately $1.2 million over the six-year period as a result of these activities. In late 2009, we retained an independent investment firm to conduct portfolio management and trading activity for the specific portfolios impacted by these activities. We have reported this matter to the U.S. Department of Labor and the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission and have advised both agencies that we will respond to any questions they might have. DEFERRED TAXES We evaluate whether a valuation allowance for our deferred tax assets is required each reporting period. A valuation allowance is established if, based on the weight of available evidence, it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred income tax asset will not be realized. In determining whether a valuation allowance is needed, all available evidence is considered. This includes the potential for capital and ordinary loss carryback, future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences, tax planning strategies that we may employ to avoid a tax benefit from expiring unused and future taxable income exclusive of reversing temporary differences. With respect to our evaluation of the need for a valuation allowance related to the deferred tax asset on capital losses that have been realized but have not yet been recognized for tax purposes, we utilize prudent and feasible tax planning strategies that optimize the ability to carry back capital losses as well as the ability to offset future capital losses with unrealized capital gains that could be recognized for tax purposes. We have remaining capital loss carryback capacity of $1.47 billion and $465 million from 2007 and 2009, respectively. With respect to our evaluation of the need for a valuation allowance related to the deferred tax asset on unrealized capital losses on fixed income and equity securities, our tax planning strategies first consider the availability of unrealized capital gains to offset future capital losses and then we rely on our assertion that we have the intent and ability to hold certain securities with unrealized losses to recovery. As a result, the unrealized losses on these securities would not be expected to materialize and no valuation allowance on the associated deferred tax asset is needed. 108 The total deferred tax valuation allowance was $11 million at December 31, 2009, $6 million at both September 30, 2009 and June 30, 2009, $379 million at March 31, 2009 and $49 million at December 31, 2008. The following table shows how changes in the valuation allowance were recorded in the consolidated financial statements in 2009. ($ in millions) Adjustments recorded in the three months ended March 31, 2009 Adjustments recorded in the nine months ended December 31, 2009 Impact of adoption of new OTTI accounting guidance as of April 1, 2009 Balance as of December 31, 2008 Decrease to income Decrease (increase) to other comprehensive income Increase in retained income Increase in other comprehensive income Increase to income Increase to other comprehensive income Balance as of December 31, 2009 Property-Liability $ 38 $ 112 $ 79 $ (111 ) $ (32 ) $ (4 ) $ (78 ) $ 4 Allstate Financial 11 142 (3 ) (142 ) (1 ) 7 Total $ 49 $ 254 $ 76 $ (253 ) $ (32 ) $ (4 ) $ (79 ) $ 11 Income tax expense for the year ended December 31, 2009 includes expense of $254 million attributable to an increase in the valuation allowance relating to the deferred tax asset on capital losses recorded in the first quarter of 2009. Of the $254 million, $142 million was attributable to Allstate Financial and was primarily related to other-than-temporary impairment write-downs that were not deductible for tax purposes as of March 31, 2009. $112 million was attributable to Property-Liability and was primarily related to unrealized losses on equity securities as of December 31, 2008 for which we were unable to demonstrate a tax planning offset with future capital gains as of March 31, 2009. This valuation allowance was released in connection with the adoption of new OTTI accounting guidance on April 1, 2009; however, the release was recorded as an increase to retained income and therefore did not reverse the amount recorded in income tax expense. The release of the valuation allowance is related to the reclassification of previously recorded other-than-temporary impairment write-downs from retained income to unrealized capital losses. CAPITAL RESOURCES AND LIQUIDITY 2009 HIGHLIGHTS Shareholders' equity as of December 31, 2009 was $16.69 billion, an increase of 32.0% from $12.64 billion as of December 31, 2008. Deployable cash and investments at the parent holding company level totaled $3.07 billion at December 31, 2009 compared to $3.64 billion at December 31, 2008. As of December 31, 2009, AIC statutory surplus is approximately $15.03 billion compared to $13.02 billion at December 31, 2008. These amounts include ALIC's statutory surplus of approximately $3.47 billion at December 31, 2009, compared to $3.25 billion at December 31, 2008. At December 31, 2009, we held 35.3% of our total consolidated cash and investment portfolio, or $35.50 billion, in cash and liquid investments that are saleable within one quarter without significant additional net realized capital losses. On January 2, 2009, we paid a quarterly shareholder dividend of $0.41. On April 1, 2009, July 1, 2009 and October 1, 2009, we paid a quarterly shareholder dividend of $0.20, respectively. On November 10, 2009, we declared a quarterly shareholder dividend of $0.20 payable on January 5, 2010. On February 23, 2010, we declared a quarterly shareholder dividend of $0.20 payable on April 1, 2010. 109 CAPITAL RESOURCES AND LIQUIDITY Capital resources consist of shareholders' equity and debt, representing funds deployed or available to be deployed to support business operations or for general corporate purposes. The following table summarizes our capital resources at December 31. ($ in millions) 2009 2008 2007 Common stock, retained income and other shareholders' equity items $ 18,798 $ 17,442 $ 21,228 Accumulated other comprehensive (loss) income (2,106 ) (4,801 ) 623 Total shareholders' equity 16,692 12,641 21,851 Debt 5,910 5,659 5,640 Total capital resources $ 22,602 $ 18,300 $ 27,491 Ratio of debt to shareholders' equity 35.4% 44.8% 25.8% Ratio of debt to capital resources 26.1% 30.9% 20.5% Shareholders' equity increased in 2009, due primarily to decreases in unrealized net capital losses on investments and net income, partially offset by dividends paid to shareholders. Shareholders' equity decreased in 2008, due to unrealized net capital losses on investments, net loss, share repurchases, dividends paid to shareholders and an increase in the unrecognized pension and other postretirement benefit cost. The decrease to shareholders' equity resulting from the increase in the unrecognized pension and other postretirement benefit cost in 2008 was the result of unfavorable investment returns partially offset by the effects of higher discount rates. The change to the unrecognized pension and other postretirement benefit cost had an impact on shareholders' equity of $822 million unfavorable for pension, and $98 million favorable for other post employment benefits ("OPEB"). On January 2, 2009, we paid a quarterly shareholder dividend of $0.41. On April 1, 2009, July 1, 2009 and October 1, 2009, we paid a quarterly shareholder dividend of $0.20, respectively. On November 10, 2009, we declared a quarterly shareholder dividend of $0.20 payable on January 5, 2010. On February 23, 2010, we declared a quarterly shareholder dividend of $0.20 payable on April 1, 2010. Debt increased $251 million in 2009 compared to December 31, 2008 and $19 million in 2008 compared to December 31, 2007 due to net increases in long-term debt. In May 2009, we issued $300 million of 6.20% Senior Notes due 2014 and $700 million of 7.45% Senior Notes due 2019, utilizing the registration statement filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on May 8, 2009. The proceeds of this issuance were used for general corporate purposes, and to facilitate the repayment of the $750 million of 7.20% Senior Notes that matured on December 1, 2009. Except for $42 million in long-term debt related to the synthetic leases scheduled to mature in 2011, we do not have any required principal payments until 2012 when the $350 million of 6.125% Senior Notes is due. For further information on debt issuances, see Note 11 of the consolidated financial statements. At December 31, 2009 and 2008, there were no outstanding commercial paper borrowings. Share repurchases We suspended our $2.00 billion share repurchase program in October, 2008 and did not complete it by the target date of March 31, 2009. No shares were repurchased under the program subsequent to October 2008. The share repurchase authorization expired on March 31, 2009 and no new share repurchase program has been authorized. Since 1995, we have acquired 457 million shares of our common stock at a cost of $19.09 billion, primarily as part of various stock repurchase programs. We have reissued 95 million shares since 1995, primarily associated with our equity incentive plans, the 1999 acquisition of American Heritage Life Investment Corporation and the 2001 redemption of certain mandatorily redeemable preferred securities. Since 1995, the impact of total shares outstanding has been a net reduction of 359 million shares or 40.1%, primarily due to our repurchase programs. 110 Financial ratings and strength The following table summarizes our debt, commercial paper and insurance financial strength ratings at December 31, 2009. Moody's Standard & Poor's A.M. Best The Allstate Corporation (senior long-term debt) A3 A- a- The Allstate Corporation (commercial paper) P-2 A-2 AMB-1 Allstate Insurance Company (insurance financial strength) Aa3 AA- A+ Allstate Life Insurance Company (insurance financial strength) A1 AA- A+ Our ratings are influenced by many factors including our operating and financial performance, asset quality, liquidity, asset/liability management, overall portfolio mix, financial leverage (i.e., debt), exposure to risks such as catastrophes and the current level of operating leverage. On November 20, 2009, A.M. Best affirmed The Allstate Corporation's debt rating of a- as well as the A+ financial strength ratings of AIC and ALIC. The outlook for ALIC was revised to negative from stable while the outlook for The Allstate Corporation and AIC remained stable. On November 23, 2009, S&P affirmed The Allstate Corporation's debt rating of A- as well as the AA- financial strength ratings of AIC and ALIC. The outlook for all S&P ratings remained negative. On January 29, 2009, S&P downgraded the rating for The Allstate Corporation to A- from A+, the financial strength ratings for AIC and ALIC to AA- from AA, and the commercial paper rating of The Allstate Corporation to A-2 from A-1. On November 5, 2009, Moody's affirmed The Allstate Corporation's debt rating of A3, AIC's financial strength rating of Aa3 and ALIC's financial strength rating of A1. The outlook for the Moody's ratings remained stable. On January 29, 2009, Moody's downgraded the rating for The Allstate Corporation to A3 from A2, the financial strength rating of AIC to Aa3 from Aa2, the financial strength rating of ALIC to A1 from Aa3, and the commercial paper rating of The Allstate Corporation to P-2 from P-1. We have distinct and separately capitalized groups of subsidiaries licensed to sell property and casualty insurance in New Jersey and Florida that maintain separate group ratings. The ratings of these groups are influenced by the risks that relate specifically to each group. Many mortgage companies require property owners to have insurance from an insurance carrier with a secure financial strength rating from an accredited rating agency. On December 22, 2009, A.M. Best affirmed the ratings of A- for Allstate New Jersey Insurance Company and Encompass Insurance Company of New Jersey, which write auto and homeowners insurance. Allstate New Jersey Insurance Company also has a Financial Stability Rating of A" from Demotech. The outlook for these ratings is stable. On July 7, 2009, A.M. Best downgraded the financial strength ratings for the Castle Key Insurance Company and its subsidiaries (which underwrites personal lines property insurance in Florida) to B- from B+. The outlook for the ratings of Castle Key Insurance Company and its subsidiaries remain negative. On June 17, 2009, Demotech affirmed its Financial Stability Ratings of A' for Castle Key Insurance Company and its subsidiaries. ALIC, AIC and the Corporation are party to the Amended and Restated Intercompany Liquidity Agreement ("Liquidity Agreement") which allows for short-term advances of funds to be made between parties for liquidity and other general corporate purposes. The Liquidity Agreement does not establish a commitment to advance funds on the part of any party. ALIC and AIC each serve as a lender and borrower and the Corporation serves only as a lender. AIC also has a capital support agreement with ALIC. Under the capital support agreement, AIC is committed to provide capital to ALIC to maintain an adequate capital level. The maximum amount of potential funding under each of these agreements is $1.00 billion. On June 16, 2009, the Corporation advanced $750 million to AIC under the Liquidity Agreement to facilitate investing activity. This amount was repaid on December 1, 2009 to provide funds for the Corporation to repay the $750 million of 7.20% Senior Notes that matured on December 1, 2009. In addition to the Liquidity Agreement, the Corporation also has an intercompany loan agreement with certain of its subsidiaries, which include, but are not limited to, AIC and ALIC. The amount of intercompany loans available to the Corporation's subsidiaries is at the discretion of the Corporation. The maximum amount of loans the Corporation will have outstanding to all its eligible subsidiaries at any given point in time is limited to $1.00 billion. The Corporation may use commercial paper borrowings, bank lines of credit and repurchase agreements to fund intercompany borrowings. Allstate's domestic property-liability and life insurance subsidiaries prepare their statutory-basis financial statements in conformity with accounting practices prescribed or permitted by the insurance department of the applicable state of domicile. Statutory surplus is a measure that is often used as a basis for determining dividend paying capacity, operating leverage and premium growth capacity, and it is also reviewed by rating agencies in determining their ratings. As of December 31, 2009, AIC's statutory surplus is approximately $15.03 billion compared to $13.02 billion 111 at December 31, 2008. These amounts include ALIC's statutory surplus of approximately $3.47 billion at December 31, 2009, compared to $3.25 billion at December 31, 2008. The ratio of net premiums written to statutory surplus is a common measure of operating leverage used in the property-casualty insurance industry and serves as an indicator of a company's premium growth capacity. Ratios in excess of 3 to 1 are typically considered outside the usual range by insurance regulators and rating agencies. AIC's premium to surplus ratio was 1.7x on December 31, 2009 compared to 2.0x in the prior year. State laws specify regulatory actions if an insurer's risk-based capital ("RBC"), a measure of an insurer's solvency, falls below certain levels. The NAIC has a standard formula for annually assessing RBC. The formula for calculating RBC for property-liability companies takes into account asset and credit risks but places more emphasis on underwriting factors for reserving and pricing. The formula for calculating RBC for life insurance companies takes into account factors relating to insurance, business, asset and interest rate risks. At December 31, 2009, the RBC for each of our domestic insurance companies was within the range that we target. The NAIC has also developed a set of financial relationships or tests known as the Insurance Regulatory Information System to assist state regulators in monitoring the financial condition of insurance companies and identifying companies that require special attention or actions by insurance regulatory authorities. The NAIC analyzes financial data provided by insurance companies using prescribed ratios, each with defined "usual ranges". Generally, regulators will begin to monitor an insurance company if its ratios fall outside the usual ranges for four or more of the ratios. If an insurance company has insufficient capital, regulators may act to reduce the amount of insurance it can issue. The ratios of our domestic insurance companies are within these ranges. Liquidity sources and uses Our potential sources of funds principally include activities shown in the following table. Property- Liability Allstate Financial Corporate and Other Receipt of insurance premiums X X Allstate Financial contractholder fund deposits X Reinsurance recoveries X X Receipts of principal, interest and dividends on investments X X X Sales of investments X X X Funds from investment repurchase agreements, securities lending, commercial paper and line of credit agreements X X X Intercompany loans X X X Capital contributions from parent X X Dividends from subsidiaries X X Tax refunds/settlements X X X Funds from periodic issuance of additional securities X Funds from the settlement of our benefit plans X Our potential uses of funds principally include activities shown in the following table. Property- Liability Allstate Financial Corporate and Other Payment of claims and related expenses X Payment of contract benefits, maturities, surrenders and withdrawals X Reinsurance cessions and payments X X Operating costs and expenses X X X Purchase of investments X X X Repayment of investment repurchase agreements, securities lending, commercial paper and line of credit agreements X X X Payment or repayment of intercompany loans X X X Capital contributions to subsidiaries X X Dividends to shareholders/parent company X X X Tax payments/settlements X X Share repurchases X Debt service expenses and repayment X X X Settlement payments of employee and agent benefit plans X X X 112 We actively manage our financial position and liquidity levels in light of changing market, economic, and business conditions. Liquidity is managed at both the entity and enterprise level across the Company, and is assessed on both base and stressed level liquidity needs. We believe we have sufficient liquidity to meet these needs, with $35.50 billion of cash and liquid investments saleable within 90 days without generating significant additional capital losses (35.3% of the total cash and investment portfolio). We expect $10.38 billion of investment portfolio cashflows from maturities, calls, and interest receipts over the next 12 months. Additionally, we have existing intercompany agreements in place that facilitate liquidity management across the Company to enhance flexibility. Parent company capital capacity At the parent holding company level, we have deployable cash and investments totaling $3.07 billion as of December 31, 2009. These assets include liquid cash and investments that are generally saleable within one quarter totaling $2.64 billion. The substantial earnings capacity of the operating subsidiaries is the primary source of capital generation for the Corporation. In 2010, AIC will have the capacity to pay dividends currently estimated at $1.50 billion without prior regulatory approval. We do not anticipate that ALIC will pay dividends to AIC in 2010. In addition, we have access to $1.00 billion of funds from either commercial paper issuance or an unsecured revolving credit facility. This provides funds for the parent company's relatively low fixed charges. In March 2009, the Corporation and AIC completed a previously approved capital contribution of $250 million of cash to ALIC. This capital contribution was funded by a dividend of $250 million paid to the Corporation in cash by Kennett Capital Holdings, LLC, a wholly owned subsidiary of the Corporation. In December 2009, AIC made a capital contribution to ALIC in the form of non-cash assets in the amount of $448 million. Pursuant to authority granted by its board in December 2009, AIC may make approximately $300 million in additional funds available to ALIC on or before March 1, 2010 by making capital contributions in cash or securities or by purchasing surplus notes or other securities from ALIC. The Corporation has access to additional borrowing to support liquidity as follows: A commercial paper facility with a borrowing limit of $1.00 billion to cover short-term cash needs. As of December 31, 2009, there were no balances outstanding and therefore the remaining borrowing capacity was $1.00 billion; however, the outstanding balance can fluctuate daily. Our primary credit facility is available for short-term liquidity requirements and backs our commercial paper facility. Our $1.00 billion unsecured revolving credit facility has an initial term of five years expiring in 2012 with two optional one-year extensions that can be exercised at the end of any of the remaining anniversary years of the facility upon approval of existing or replacement lenders providing more than two-thirds of the commitments to lend. The program is fully subscribed among 11 lenders with the largest commitment being $185 million. The commitments of the lenders are several and no lender is responsible for any other lender's commitment if such lender fails to make a loan under the facility. This facility contains an increase provision that would allow up to an additional $500 million of borrowing provided the increased portion could be fully syndicated at a later date among existing or new lenders. This facility has a financial covenant requiring that we not exceed a 37.5% debt to capital resources ratio as defined in the agreement. This ratio at December 31, 2009 was 19.9%. Although the right to borrow under the facility is not subject to a minimum rating requirement, the costs of maintaining the facility and borrowing under it are based on the ratings of our senior, unsecured, nonguaranteed long-term debt. There were no borrowings under the credit facility during 2009. The total amount outstanding at any point in time under the combination of the commercial paper program and the credit facility cannot exceed the amount that can be borrowed under the credit facility. A universal shelf registration statement was filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on May 8, 2009. We can use our current shelf registration to issue an unspecified amount of debt securities, common stock (including 363 million shares of treasury stock as of December 31, 2009), preferred stock, depositary shares, warrants, stock purchase contracts, stock purchase units and securities of trust subsidiaries. The specific terms of any securities we issue under this registration statement will be provided in the applicable prospectus supplements. 113 Liquidity exposure Contractholder funds as of December 31, 2009 were $52.58 billion. The following table summarizes contractholder funds by their contractual withdrawal provisions at December 31, 2009. ($ in millions) Percent to total Not subject to discretionary withdrawal $ 8,916 17.0 % Subject to discretionary withdrawal with adjustments: Specified surrender charges (1) 22,341 42.5 Market value adjustments (2) 9,019 17.1 Subject to discretionary withdrawal without adjustments (3) 12,306 23.4 Total contractholder funds (4) $ 52,582 100.0 % (1) Includes $10.61 billion of liabilities with a contractual surrender charge of less than 5% of the account balance. (2) $7.52 billion of the contracts with market value adjusted surrenders have a 30-45 day period at the end of their initial and subsequent interest rate guarantee periods (which are typically 5 or 6 years) during which there is no surrender charge or market value adjustment. (3) 98% of these contracts have a minimum interest crediting rate guarantee of 3% or higher. (4) Includes $1.32 billion of contractholder funds on variable annuities reinsured to Prudential effective June 1, 2006. While we are able to quantify remaining scheduled maturities for our institutional products anticipating retail product surrenders is less precise. Retail life and annuity products may be surrendered by customers for a variety of reasons. Reasons unique to individual customers include a current or unexpected need for cash or a change in life insurance coverage needs. Other key factors that may impact the likelihood of customer surrender include the level of the contract surrender charge, the length of time the contract has been in force, distribution channel, market interest rates, equity market conditions and potential tax implications. In addition, the propensity for retail life insurance policies to lapse is lower than it is for fixed annuities because of the need for the insured to be re-underwritten upon policy replacement. Surrenders and partial withdrawals for our retail annuities decreased 7.8% in 2009 compared to 2008. The annualized surrender and partial withdrawal rate on deferred annuities, interest-sensitive life insurance and Allstate Bank products, based on the beginning of year contractholder funds, was 11.8% and 12.2% in 2009 and 2008, respectively. The annualized surrender and partial withdrawal rate on deferred fixed annuities was 11.0% in 2009 compared to 11.8% in 2008. Allstate Financial strives to promptly pay customers who request cash surrenders, however, statutory regulations generally provide up to six months in most states to fulfill surrender requests. Our institutional products are primarily funding agreements backing medium-term notes. As of December 31, 2009, total institutional products outstanding were $4.35 billion. The following table presents the remaining scheduled maturities for our institutional products outstanding as of December 31, 2009. ($ in millions) 2010 $ 1,715 2011 760 2012 40 2013 1,750 2016 85 $ 4,350 Our asset-liability management practices limit the differences between the cash flows generated by our investment portfolio and the expected cash flow requirements of our life insurance, annuity and institutional product obligations. Certain remote events and circumstances could constrain our liquidity. Those events and circumstances include, for example, a catastrophe resulting in extraordinary losses, a downgrade in our long-term debt rating of A3, A- and a- (from Moody's, S&P and A.M. Best, respectively) to non-investment grade status of below Baa3/BBB-/bb, a downgrade in AIC's financial strength rating from Aa3, AA- and A+ (from Moody's, S&P and A.M. Best, respectively) to below Baa2/BBB/A-, or a downgrade in ALIC's financial strength ratings from A1, AA- and A+ (from Moody's, S&P and A.M. Best, respectively) to below A1/AA-/A. The rating agencies also consider the interdependence of our individually rated entities, therefore, a rating change in one entity could potentially affect the ratings of other related entities. 114 The following table summarizes consolidated cash flow activities by business segment. ($ in millions) Property-Liability (1) Allstate Financial (1) Corporate and Other (1) Consolidated 2009 2008 2007 2009 2008 2007 2009 2008 2007 2009 2008 2007 Net cash provided by (used in): Operating activities $ 2,183 $ 1,746 $ 2,421 $ 2,196 $ 2,203 $ 2,930 $ (78 ) $ (39 ) $ 82 $ 4,301 $ 3,910 $ 5,433 Investing activities (1,919 ) 2,012 1,255 4,755 2,779 266 604 (1,003 ) (1,636 ) 3,440 3,788 (115 ) Financing activities (6 ) (16 ) 66 (7,246 ) (5,510 ) (1,997 ) (292 ) (2,179 ) (3,408 ) (7,544 ) (7,705 ) (5,339 ) Net increase (decrease) in consolidated cash $ 197 $ (7 ) $ (21 ) (1) Business unit cash flows reflect the elimination of intersegment dividends, contributions and borrowings. Property-Liability Higher cash provided by operating activities for Property-Liability in 2009 compared to 2008 was primarily due to income tax refunds in 2009 compared to tax payments in 2008 and lower claim payments. Lower cash provided by operating activities for Property-Liability in 2008 compared to 2007 was primarily due to higher claim payments resulting from 2008 catastrophe losses and lower investment income. Cash used in investing activities in 2009 compared to cash provided by investing activities in 2008 was primarily due to increased net purchases of fixed income and equity securities, partially offset by net change in short-term investments. Cash flows provided by investing activities increased in 2008 compared to 2007 was primarily due to decreased purchases of fixed income securities, partially offset by increases in equity securities purchases, lower sales of fixed income securities, and net change in short-term investments. Lower cash flows used in financing activities in 2009 compared to 2008 was primarily due to lower tax benefits of share based compensation arrangements in 2009. Cash used in financing activities in 2008 compared to cash provided by in 2007 was primarily due to decreased tax benefits of share based compensation arrangements in 2008. There were no dividends paid by AIC to its parent, the Corporation, in 2009. In 2008 and 2007, cash flows were impacted by dividends paid by AIC to its parent, the Corporation, totaling $3.40 billion and $4.92 billion, respectively. Cash flows were also impacted by capital contributions paid by AIC to ALIC totaling $250 million in 2009. In 2008, cash flows were also impacted by capital contributions paid by the Corporation to AIC totaling $1.00 billion and capital contributions paid by AIC to ALIC totaling $1.41 billion. There were no capital contributions to ALIC in 2007. Allstate Financial paid dividends to AIC and the Corporation totaling $742 million in 2007. Allstate Financial Operating cash flows for Allstate Financial in 2009 were consistent with 2008 as higher income tax refunds and lower expenses were offset by lower net investment income. The increase in income tax refunds received in 2009 was related to the carryback of 2008 ordinary losses to prior tax years. Lower operating cash flows for Allstate Financial in 2008 compared to 2007 were primarily related to a decrease in investment income and lower premiums, partially offset by income tax refunds in 2008 compared to 2007. Higher cash flows provided by investing activities in 2009 compared to 2008 were primarily due to reductions of short-term investments to fund reductions in contractholder fund liabilities. Cash flows provided by investing activities increased in 2008 compared to 2007, primarily due to decreased purchases of fixed income securities and mortgage loans, partially offset by lower investment collections and net change in short-term investments. Higher cash flows used in financing activities in 2009 compared to 2008 were primarily due to the absence of issuances of institutional products in 2009 compared to $4.16 billion in 2008 and lower deposits on fixed annuities, partially offset by lower maturities and retirements of institutional products. Higher cash flows used in financing activities in 2008 compared to 2007 were primarily due to higher maturities and retirements of institutional products, partially offset by higher contractholder fund deposits. For quantification of the changes in contractholder funds, see the Allstate Financial Segment section of the MD&A. In 2009, Allstate Financial cash flows were impacted by a return of capital by American Heritage Life Investment Corporation to the Corporation totaling $13 million. There were no dividends paid by Allstate Financial in 2008. In 2007, cash flows were impacted by dividends paid by Allstate Financial totaling $742 million. Allstate Financial cash flows were also impacted by capital contributions paid in cash by AIC to ALIC totaling $250 million in 2009. Cash flows in 2009 exclude capital contributions to ALIC comprising the transfer to ALIC from AIC of non-cash assets totaling $448 million and the transfer of a $25 million surplus note to Kennett Capital Inc. from ALIC in exchange for a note receivable with a principal sum equal to that of the surplus note, which was originally issued to 115 ALIC by a subsidiary of ALIC. In 2008, Allstate Financial cash flows were also impacted by funds paid by AIC to ALIC totaling $1.41 billion. The $1.41 billion includes capital contributions paid in cash totaling $607 million and the issuance of two surplus notes, each with a principal sum of $400 million, to AIC in exchange for cash totaling $800 million. Allstate Financial cash flows in 2008 exclude capital contributions to ALIC comprising the transfer to ALIC from AIC of non-cash assets totaling $342 million and the transfer of a $50 million surplus note to Kennett Capital Inc. from ALIC in exchange for a note receivable with a principal sum equal to that of the surplus note, which was originally issued to ALIC by a subsidiary of ALIC. One of the surplus notes issued to AIC in 2008 was subsequently canceled and forgiven by AIC resulting in the recognition of a capital contribution equal to the outstanding principal balance of the surplus note of $400 million. There were no capital contributions to ALIC in 2007. Corporate and Other Fluctuations in the Corporate and Other operating cash flows were primarily due to the timing of intercompany settlements. Investing activities primarily relate to investments in the portfolios of Kennett Capital Holdings, LLC. Financing cash flows of the Corporate and Other segment reflect actions such as fluctuations in short-term debt, repayment of debt, proceeds from the issuance of debt, dividends to shareholders of The Allstate Corporation and share repurchases; therefore, financing cash flows are affected when we increase or decrease the level of these activities. Contractual obligations and commitments Our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2009 and the payments due by period are shown in the following table. ($ in millions) Total Less than 1 year 1-3 years 4-5 years Over 5 years Liabilities for collateral and repurchase agreements (1) $ 658 $ 658 $ $ $ Contractholder funds (2) 65,815 9,440 14,068 12,282 30,025 Reserve for life-contingent contract benefits (2) 37,106 1,307 2,556 2,501 30,742 Long-term debt (3) 12,806 361 1,102 1,841 9,502 Capital lease obligations (3) 50 12 10 11 17 Operating leases (3) 702 205 276 129 92 Unconditional purchase obligations (3) 254 126 90 36 2 Defined benefit pension plans and other postretirement benefit plans (3)(4) 3,504 383 325 330 2,466 Reserve for property-liability insurance claims and claims expense (5) 19,456 8,487 5,813 2,100 3,056 Other liabilities and accrued expenses (6)(7) 3,211 3,067 97 22 25 Net unrecognized tax benefits (8) 22 22 Total contractual cash obligations $ 143,584 $ 24,068 $ 24,337 $ 19,252 $ 75,927 (1) Liabilities for collateral and repurchase agreements are typically fully secured with cash. We manage our short-term liquidity position to ensure the availability of a sufficient amount of liquid assets to extinguish short-term liabilities as they come due in the normal course of business, including utilizing potential sources of liquidity as disclosed previously. (2) Contractholder funds represent interest-bearing liabilities arising from the sale of products such as interest-sensitive life, fixed annuities, including immediate annuities without life contingencies, bank deposits and institutional products. The reserve for life-contingent contract benefits relates primarily to traditional life and immediate annuities with life contingencies. These amounts reflect the present value of estimated cash payments to be made to contractholders and policyholders. Certain of these contracts, such as immediate annuities without life contingencies and institutional products, involve payment obligations where the amount and timing of the payment is essentially fixed and determinable. These amounts relate to (i) policies or contracts where we are currently making payments and will continue to do so and (ii) contracts where the timing of a portion or all of the payments has been determined by the contract. Other contracts, such as interest-sensitive life, fixed deferred annuities, traditional life and immediate annuities with life contingencies and voluntary accident and health insurance, involve payment obligations where a portion or all of the amount and timing of future payments is uncertain. For these contracts and bank deposits, we are not currently making payments and will not make payments until (i) the occurrence of an insurable event such as death or illness or (ii) the occurrence of a payment triggering event such as the surrender or partial withdrawal on a policy or deposit contract, which is outside of our control. We have estimated the timing of payments related to these contracts based on historical experience and our expectation of future payment patterns. Uncertainties relating to these liabilities include mortality, morbidity, expenses, customer lapse and withdrawal activity, estimated additional deposits for interest-sensitive life contracts, and renewal premium for life policies, which may significantly impact both the timing and amount of future payments. Such cash outflows reflect adjustments for the estimated timing of mortality, retirement, and other appropriate factors, but are undiscounted with respect to interest. As a result, the sum of the cash outflows shown for all years in the table exceeds the corresponding liabilities of $52.58 billion for contractholder funds and $12.91 billion for reserve for life-contingent contract benefits as included in the Consolidated Statements of Financial Position as of December 31, 2009. The liability amount in the Consolidated Statements of Financial Position reflects the discounting for interest as well as adjustments for the timing of other factors as described above. 116 (3) Our payment obligations relating to long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating leases, unconditional purchase obligations and pension and OPEB contributions are managed within the structure of our intermediate to long-term liquidity management program. Amount differs from the balance presented on the Consolidated Statements of Financial Position as of December 31, 2009 because the long-term debt amount above includes interest. (4) The pension plans' obligations in the next 12 months represent our planned contributions, and the remaining years' contributions are projected based on the average remaining service period using the current underfunded status of the plans. The OPEB plans' obligations are estimated based on the expected benefits to be paid. These liabilities are discounted with respect to interest, and as a result the sum of the cash outflows shown for all years in the table exceeds the corresponding liability amount of $1.81 billion included in other liabilities and accrued expenses on the Consolidated Statements of Financial Position. (5) Reserve for property-liability insurance claims and claims expense is an estimate of amounts necessary to settle all outstanding claims, including claims that have been IBNR as of the balance sheet date. We have estimated the timing of these payments based on our historical experience and our expectation of future payment patterns. However, the timing of these payments may vary significantly from the amounts shown above, especially for IBNR claims. The ultimate cost of losses may vary materially from recorded amounts which are our best estimates. The reserve for property-liability insurance claims and claims expense includes loss reserves related to asbestos and environmental claims as of December 31, 2009, of $1.78 billion and $247 million, respectively. (6) Other liabilities primarily include accrued expenses and certain benefit obligations and claim payments and other checks outstanding. Certain of these long-term liabilities are discounted with respect to interest, as a result the sum of the cash outflows shown for all years in the table exceeds the corresponding liability amount of $3.19 billion. (7) Balance sheet liabilities not included in the table above include unearned and advance premiums of $10.65 billion and deferred tax liabilities of $1.16 billion netted in the net deferred tax asset of $1.87 billion. These items were excluded as they do not meet the definition of a contractual liability as we are not contractually obligated to pay these amounts to third parties. Rather, they represent an accounting mechanism that allows us to present our financial statements on an accrual basis. In addition, other liabilities of $436 million were not included in the table above because they did not represent a contractual obligation or the amount and timing of their eventual payment was sufficiently uncertain. (8) Net unrecognized tax benefits represent our potential future obligation to the taxing authority for a tax position that was not recognized in the consolidated financial statements. We believe it is reasonably possible that the liability balance will be reduced by $22 million within the next twelve months upon the resolution of an outstanding issue resulting from the 2005-2006 Internal Revenue Service examination. The resolution of this obligation may be for an amount different than what we have accrued. Our contractual commitments as of December 31, 2009 and the periods in which the commitments expire are shown in the following table. ($ in millions) Total Less than 1 year 1-3 years 4-5 years Over 5 years Other commitments conditional $ 22 $ 20 $ 2 $ $ Other commitments unconditional 1,452 191 675 519 67 Total commitments $ 1,474 $ 211 $ 677 $ 519 $ 67 Contractual commitments represent investment commitments such as private placements, limited partnership interests and mortgage loans. We have agreements in place for services we conduct, generally at cost, between subsidiaries relating to insurance, reinsurance, loans and capitalization. All material intercompany transactions have appropriately been eliminated in consolidation. Intercompany transactions among insurance subsidiaries and affiliates have been approved by the appropriate departments of insurance as required. For a more detailed discussion of our off-balance sheet arrangements, see Note 6 of the consolidated financial statements. ENTERPRISE RISK AND RETURN MANAGEMENT Enterprise Risk and Return Management's ("ERRM") role is to ensure Allstate's continued financial health and success. ERRM is a disciplined, holistic, integrated and interactive approach to risk that: Identifies potential risks and events that could significantly impact the company Provides a shared viewpoint and thorough understanding of risks and opportunities Creates value by understanding risk-return interrelationships and tradeoff opportunities Increases transparency and provides greater assurance of achieving objectives At Allstate, we have ERRM programs, risk committees and control structures to manage our enterprise portfolio of risk and return. These programs include governance policies with established tolerances and risk limits, Board and senior management involvement, enterprise modeling, risk-return analytics and communication and reporting. Our perspective of risk, return and capital needs promotes capital and financial management. Allstate's senior management risk committee, the Enterprise Risk & Return Council, drives ERRM by establishing enterprise risk tolerance and risk-return requirements and directing integrated strategies and actions from a holistic 117 enterprise perspective. Allstate's Board of Directors and Audit Committee provide ERRM oversight by reviewing enterprise principles, guidelines and limits for Allstate's significant risks and by monitoring strategies and actions management has taken to control these risks. Managers, risk professionals and chief risk officers in the various business units design and execute individual risk-return strategies that align with our overall enterprise standards. These include managing exposure to hurricanes and other severe weather events; managing impacts to invested assets and liabilities related to changes in risk-free interest rates, credit spreads, equity markets and defaults; optimizing liquidity levels in light of changing market, economic and business conditions; and implementing practices to effectively identify, monitor and control operational and strategic risks. Our comprehensive enterprise stochastic model captures the unique and specific nature and interaction of risks inherent in our various businesses and serves as the foundation of our economic capital framework. We determine an appropriate level of enterprise economic capital to hold considering a broad range of risk perspectives, including capital stress scenarios, risks of financial distress and insolvency, volatility, shareholder value, rating agency constraints and regulatory RBC requirements. Strategic allocation of economic capital to lines of business is based on contribution to enterprise risk, return and diversification benefit and is used for ongoing evaluation of business units and products. We were proactive in the face of the financial market and economic crisis by quickly reducing exposures in "at risk" asset classes, implementing risk mitigation and return optimization programs designed to protect our investment portfolio values and enhancing our liquidity position. We have adapted our ERRM processes over the past year to be more fluid and dynamic in a changing environment with enhanced scenario analysis, more frequent risk committee discussions, streamlined risk reporting and evolving strategies to target return opportunities as market conditions improve. For continuous ERRM validation and improvement, we benchmark and secure external perspectives on our processes. REGULATION AND LEGAL PROCEEDINGS We are subject to extensive regulation and we are involved in various legal and regulatory actions, all of which have an effect on specific aspects of our business. For a detailed discussion of the legal and regulatory actions in which we are involved, see Note 13 of the consolidated financial statements. PENDING ACCOUNTING STANDARDS There are several pending accounting standards that we have not implemented either because the standard has not been finalized or the implementation date has not yet occurred. For a discussion of these pending standards, see Note 2 of the consolidated financial statements. The effect of implementing certain accounting standards on our financial results and financial condition is often based in part on market conditions at the time of implementation of the standard and other factors we are unable to determine prior to implementation. For this reason, we are sometimes unable to estimate the effect of certain pending accounting standards until the relevant authoritative body finalizes these standards or until we implement them. 
