CIK: 899051
Company Name: ALLSTATE CORP
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2013-02-20


Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Page Overview 29 2012 Highlights 29 Consolidated Net Income 30 Application of Critical Accounting Estimates 31 Property-Liability 2012 Highlights 43 Property-Liability Operations 43 Allstate Protection Segment 45 Discontinued Lines and Coverages Segment 58 Property-Liability Investment Results 59 Property-Liability Claims and Claims Expense Reserves 60 Allstate Financial 2012 Highlights 69 Allstate Financial Segment 69 Investments 2012 Highlights 78 Investments 78 Market Risk 88 Pension Plans 91 Goodwill 94 Capital Resources and Liquidity 2012 Highlights 95 Capital Resources and Liquidity 95 Enterprise Risk and Return Management 102 Regulation and Legal Proceedings 103 Pending Accounting Standards 103 28 Table of Contents OVERVIEW The following discussion highlights significant factors influencing the consolidated financial position and results of operations of The Allstate Corporation (referred to in this document as "we," "our," "us," the "Company" or "Allstate"). It should be read in conjunction with the 5-year summary of selected financial data, consolidated financial statements and related notes found under Part II. Item 6. and Item 8. contained herein. Further analysis of our insurance segments is provided in the Property-Liability Operations (which includes the Allstate Protection and the Discontinued Lines and Coverages segments) and in the Allstate Financial Segment sections of Management's Discussion and Analysis ("MD&A"). The segments are consistent with the way in which we use financial information to evaluate business performance and to determine the allocation of resources. Allstate is focused on the following priorities in 2013: grow insurance premiums; maintain auto profitability; raise returns in homeowners and annuity businesses; proactively manage investments; and reduce our cost structure. The most important factors we monitor to evaluate the financial condition and performance of our company include: For Allstate Protection: premium written, the number of policies in force ("PIF"), retention, price changes, claim frequency (rate of claim occurrence per policy in force) and severity (average cost per claim), catastrophes, loss ratio, expenses, underwriting results, and sales of all products and services; For Allstate Financial: benefit and investment spread, amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs ("DAC"), expenses, operating income, net income, invested assets, and premiums and contract charges; For Investments: credit quality/experience, total return, investment income, cash flows, realized capital gains and losses, unrealized capital gains and losses, stability of long-term returns, and asset and liability duration; and For financial condition: liquidity, parent holding company level of deployable invested assets, financial strength ratings, operating leverage, debt leverage, book value per share, and return on equity. Summary of Results: Consolidated net income was $2.31 billion in 2012 compared to $787 million in 2011 and $911 million in 2010. The increase in 2012 compared to 2011 was primarily due to higher net income from Property-Liability, partially offset by lower net income from Allstate Financial. The decrease in 2011 compared to 2010 was primarily due to lower net income from Property-Liability, partially offset by higher net income from Allstate Financial. Net income per diluted share was $4.68, $1.50 and $1.68 in 2012, 2011 and 2010, respectively. Allstate Protection had underwriting income of $1.25 billion in 2012 compared to an underwriting loss of $857 million in 2011 and underwriting income of $525 million in 2010. The underwriting income in 2012 compared to the underwriting loss in 2011 was primarily due to underwriting income in homeowners and other personal lines in 2012 compared to underwriting losses in 2011, partially offset by a decrease in standard auto underwriting income. The decrease in 2011 compared to 2010 was primarily due to increases in homeowners underwriting losses and decreases in other personal lines and standard auto underwriting income. The Allstate Protection combined ratio was 95.3, 103.3 and 98.0 in 2012, 2011 and 2010, respectively. Underwriting income (loss), a measure not based on accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America ("GAAP"), is defined in the Property-Liability Operations section of the MD&A. Allstate Financial net income was $541 million in 2012 compared to $590 million in 2011 and $42 million in 2010. The decrease in 2012 compared to 2011 was primarily due to net realized capital losses in 2012 compared to net realized capital gains in 2011, lower net investment income and higher life and annuity contract benefits, partially offset by decreased interest credited to contractholder funds and lower amortization of DAC. The increase in 2011 compared to 2010 was primarily due to net realized capital gains in 2011 compared to net realized capital losses in 2010 and decreased interest credited to contractholder funds, partially offset by higher amortization of DAC and lower net investment income. 2012 HIGHLIGHTS Consolidated net income was $2.31 billion in 2012 compared to $787 million in 2011. Net income per diluted share was $4.68 in 2012 compared to $1.50 in 2011. 29 Table of Contents Property-Liability net income was $1.97 billion in 2012 compared to $403 million in 2011. The Property-Liability combined ratio was 95.5 in 2012 compared to 103.4 in 2011. Allstate Financial net income was $541 million in 2012 compared to $590 million in 2011. Total revenues were $33.32 billion in 2012 compared to $32.65 billion in 2011. Property-Liability premiums earned totaled $26.74 billion in 2012 compared to $25.94 billion in 2011. Investments totaled $97.28 billion as of December 31, 2012, an increase of 1.7% from $95.62 billion as of December 31, 2011. Net investment income was $4.01 billion in 2012, an increase of 1.0% from $3.97 billion in 2011. Net realized capital gains were $327 million in 2012 compared to $503 million in 2011. Book value per diluted share (ratio of shareholders' equity to total shares outstanding and dilutive potential shares outstanding) was $42.39 as of December 31, 2012, an increase of 17.2% from $36.18 as of December 31, 2011. For the twelve months ended December 31, 2012, return on the average of beginning and ending period shareholders' equity was 11.9%, an increase of 7.6 points from 4.3% for the twelve months ended December 31, 2011. As of December 31, 2012, shareholders' equity was $20.58 billion. This total included $2.06 billion in deployable invested assets at the parent holding company level. CONSOLIDATED NET INCOME ($ in millions) For the years ended December 31, 2012 2011 2010 Revenues Property-liability insurance premiums $ 26,737 $ 25,942 $ 25,957 Life and annuity premiums and contract charges 2,241 2,238 2,168 Net investment income 4,010 3,971 4,102 Realized capital gains and losses: Total other-than-temporary impairment losses (239 ) (563 ) (937 ) Portion of loss recognized in other comprehensive income 6 (33 ) (64 ) Net other-than-temporary impairment losses recognized in earnings (233 ) (596 ) (1,001 ) Sales and other realized capital gains and losses 560 1,099 174 Total realized capital gains and losses 327 503 (827 ) Total revenues 33,315 32,654 31,400 Costs and expenses Property-liability insurance claims and claims expense (18,484 ) (20,161 ) (18,951 ) Life and annuity contract benefits (1,818 ) (1,761 ) (1,815 ) Interest credited to contractholder funds (1,316 ) (1,645 ) (1,807 ) Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs (3,884 ) (3,971 ) (3,807 ) Operating costs and expenses (4,118 ) (3,739 ) (3,542 ) Restructuring and related charges (34 ) (44 ) (30 ) Interest expense (373 ) (367 ) (367 ) Total costs and expenses (30,027 ) (31,688 ) (30,319 ) Gain (loss) on disposition of operations 18 (7 ) 19 Income tax expense (1,000 ) (172 ) (189 ) Net income $ 2,306 $ 787 $ 911 Property-Liability $ 1,968 $ 403 $ 1,053 Allstate Financial 541 590 42 Corporate and Other (203 ) (206 ) (184 ) Net income $ 2,306 $ 787 $ 911 30 Table of Contents APPLICATION OF CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to adopt accounting policies and make estimates and assumptions that affect amounts reported in the consolidated financial statements. The most critical estimates include those used in determining: Fair value of financial assets Impairment of fixed income and equity securities Deferred policy acquisition costs amortization Reserve for property-liability insurance claims and claims expense estimation Reserve for life-contingent contract benefits estimation In making these determinations, management makes subjective and complex judgments that frequently require estimates about matters that are inherently uncertain. Many of these policies, estimates and related judgments are common in the insurance and financial services industries; others are specific to our businesses and operations. It is reasonably likely that changes in these estimates could occur from period to period and result in a material impact on our consolidated financial statements. A brief summary of each of these critical accounting estimates follows. For a more detailed discussion of the effect of these estimates on our consolidated financial statements, and the judgments and assumptions related to these estimates, see the referenced sections of this document. For a complete summary of our significant accounting policies, see the notes to the consolidated financial statements. Fair value of financial assets Fair value is defined as the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. We are responsible for the determination of fair value of financial assets and the supporting assumptions and methodologies. We use independent third-party valuation service providers, broker quotes and internal pricing methods to determine fair values. We obtain or calculate only one single quote or price for each financial instrument. Valuation service providers typically obtain data about market transactions and other key valuation model inputs from multiple sources and, through the use of proprietary models, produce valuation information in the form of a single fair value for individual fixed income and other securities for which a fair value has been requested under the terms of our agreements. The inputs used by the valuation service providers include, but are not limited to, market prices from recently completed transactions and transactions of comparable securities, interest rate yield curves, credit spreads, liquidity spreads, currency rates, and other information, as applicable. Credit and liquidity spreads are typically implied from completed transactions and transactions of comparable securities. Valuation service providers also use proprietary discounted cash flow models that are widely accepted in the financial services industry and similar to those used by other market participants to value the same financial instruments. The valuation models take into account, among other things, market observable information as of the measurement date, as described above, as well as the specific attributes of the security being valued including its term, interest rate, credit rating, industry sector, and where applicable, collateral quality and other issue or issuer specific information. Executing valuation models effectively requires seasoned professional judgment and experience. For certain equity securities, valuation service providers provide market quotations for completed transactions on the measurement date. In cases where market transactions or other market observable data is limited, the extent to which judgment is applied varies inversely with the availability of market observable information. For certain of our financial assets measured at fair value, where our valuation service providers cannot provide fair value determinations, we obtain a single non-binding price quote from a broker familiar with the security who, similar to our valuation service providers, may consider transactions or activity in similar securities among other information. The brokers providing price quotes are generally from the brokerage divisions of leading financial institutions with market making, underwriting and distribution expertise regarding the security subject to valuation. The fair value of certain financial assets, including privately placed corporate fixed income securities, auction rate securities ("ARS") backed by student loans, equity-indexed notes, and certain free-standing derivatives, for which our valuation service providers or brokers do not provide fair value determinations, is determined using valuation methods and models widely accepted in the financial services industry. Our internal pricing methods are primarily based on models using discounted cash flow methodologies that develop a single best estimate of fair value. Our models generally incorporate inputs that we believe are representative of inputs other market participants would use to determine fair value of the same instruments, including yield curves, quoted market prices of comparable securities, published credit spreads, and other applicable market data as well as instrument-specific characteristics that include, but are not limited to, coupon rates, expected cash flows, sector of the issuer, and call provisions. Judgment is required 31 Table of Contents in developing these fair values. As a result, the fair value of these financial assets may differ from the amount actually received to sell an asset in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. Moreover, the use of different valuation assumptions may have a material effect on the financial assets' fair values. For most of our financial assets measured at fair value, all significant inputs are based on or corroborated by market observable data and significant management judgment does not affect the periodic determination of fair value. The determination of fair value using discounted cash flow models involves management judgment when significant model inputs are not based on or corroborated by market observable data. However, where market observable data is available, it takes precedence, and as a result, no range of reasonably likely inputs exists from which the basis of a sensitivity analysis could be constructed. There is one primary situation where a discounted cash flow model utilizes a significant input that is not market observable, and it relates to the determination of fair value for our ARS backed by student loans. The significant input utilized is the anticipated date liquidity will return to this market (that is, when auction failures will cease). Determination of this assumption allows for matching to market observable inputs when performing these valuations. The fair value of our ARS backed by student loans is $394 million as of December 31, 2012. We performed a sensitivity analysis of reasonably likely changes in the anticipated date liquidity will return to the student loan ARS market as of December 31, 2012. If the anticipated date liquidity will return to this market increased or decreased by six months, the fair value of our ARS backed by student loans would decrease or increase by 1.5%, respectively. The selection of these hypothetical scenarios represents an illustration of the estimated potential proportional effect of alternate assumptions and should not be construed as either a prediction of future events or an indication that it would be reasonably likely that all securities would be similarly affected. We gain assurance that our financial assets are appropriately valued through the execution of various processes and controls designed to ensure the overall reasonableness and consistent application of valuation methodologies, including inputs and assumptions, and compliance with accounting standards. For fair values received from third parties or internally estimated, our processes and controls are designed to ensure that the valuation methodologies are appropriate and consistently applied, the inputs and assumptions are reasonable and consistent with the objective of determining fair value, and the fair values are accurately recorded. For example, on a continuing basis, we assess the reasonableness of individual fair values that have stale security prices or that exceed certain thresholds as compared to previous fair values received from valuation service providers or brokers or derived from internal models. We perform procedures to understand and assess the methodologies, processes and controls of valuation service providers. In addition, we may validate the reasonableness of fair values by comparing information obtained from valuation service providers or brokers to other third party valuation sources for selected securities. We perform ongoing price validation procedures such as back-testing of actual sales, which corroborate the various inputs used in internal models to market observable data. When fair value determinations are expected to be more variable, we validate them through reviews by members of management who have relevant expertise and who are independent of those charged with executing investment transactions. We also perform an analysis to determine whether there has been a significant decrease in the volume and level of activity for the asset when compared to normal market activity, and if so, whether transactions may not be orderly. Among the indicators we consider in determining whether a significant decrease in the volume and level of market activity for a specific asset has occurred include the level of new issuances in the primary market, trading volume in the secondary market, level of credit spreads over historical levels, bid-ask spread, and price consensuses among market participants and sources. If evidence indicates that prices are based on transactions that are not orderly, we place little, if any, weight on the transaction price and will estimate fair value using an internal model. As of December 31, 2012 and 2011, we did not alter fair values provided by our valuation service providers or brokers or substitute them with an internal model for such securities. 32 Table of Contents The following table identifies fixed income and equity securities and short-term investments as of December 31, 2012 by source of fair value determination: ($ in millions) Fair value Percent to total Fair value based on internal sources $ 6,277 7.5 % Fair value based on external sources (1) 77,113 92.5 Total $ 83,390 100.0 % (1) Includes $3.78 billion that are valued using broker quotes. For additional detail on fair value measurements, see Note 6 of the consolidated financial statements. Impairment of fixed income and equity securities For investments classified as available for sale, the difference between fair value and amortized cost for fixed income securities and cost for equity securities, net of certain other items and deferred income taxes (as disclosed in Note 5), is reported as a component of accumulated other comprehensive income on the Consolidated Statements of Financial Position and is not reflected in the operating results of any period until reclassified to net income upon the consummation of a transaction with an unrelated third party or when a write-down is recorded due to an other-than-temporary decline in fair value. We have a comprehensive portfolio monitoring process to identify and evaluate each fixed income and equity security whose carrying value may be other-than-temporarily impaired. For each fixed income security in an unrealized loss position, we assess whether management with the appropriate authority has made the decision to sell or whether it is more likely than not we will be required to sell the security before recovery of the amortized cost basis for reasons such as liquidity, contractual or regulatory purposes. If a security meets either of these criteria, the security's decline in fair value is considered other than temporary and is recorded in earnings. If we have not made the decision to sell the fixed income security and it is not more likely than not we will be required to sell the fixed income security before recovery of its amortized cost basis, we evaluate whether we expect to receive cash flows sufficient to recover the entire amortized cost basis of the security. We use our best estimate of future cash flows expected to be collected from the fixed income security, discounted at the security's original or current effective rate, as appropriate, to calculate a recovery value and determine whether a credit loss exists. The determination of cash flow estimates is inherently subjective and methodologies may vary depending on facts and circumstances specific to the security. All reasonably available information relevant to the collectability of the security, including past events, current conditions, and reasonable and supportable assumptions and forecasts, are considered when developing the estimate of cash flows expected to be collected. That information generally includes, but is not limited to, the remaining payment terms of the security, prepayment speeds, foreign exchange rates, the financial condition and future earnings potential of the issue or issuer, expected defaults, expected recoveries, the value of underlying collateral, vintage, geographic concentration, available reserves or escrows, current subordination levels, third party guarantees and other credit enhancements. Other information, such as industry analyst reports and forecasts, sector credit ratings, financial condition of the bond insurer for insured fixed income securities, and other market data relevant to the realizability of contractual cash flows, may also be considered. The estimated fair value of collateral will be used to estimate recovery value if we determine that the security is dependent on the liquidation of collateral for ultimate settlement. If the estimated recovery value is less than the amortized cost of the security, a credit loss exists and an other-than-temporary impairment for the difference between the estimated recovery value and amortized cost is recorded in earnings. The portion of the unrealized loss related to factors other than credit remains classified in accumulated other comprehensive income. If we determine that the fixed income security does not have sufficient cash flow or other information to estimate a recovery value for the security, we may conclude that the entire decline in fair value is deemed to be credit related and the loss is recorded in earnings. There are a number of assumptions and estimates inherent in evaluating impairments of equity securities and determining if they are other than temporary, including: 1) our ability and intent to hold the investment for a period of time sufficient to allow for an anticipated recovery in value; 2) the length of time and extent to which the fair value has been less than cost; 3) the financial condition, near-term and long-term prospects of the issue or issuer, including relevant industry specific market conditions and trends, geographic location and implications of rating agency actions and offering prices; and 4) the specific reasons that a security is in an unrealized loss position, including overall market conditions which could affect liquidity. 33 Table of Contents Once assumptions and estimates are made, any number of changes in facts and circumstances could cause us to subsequently determine that a fixed income or equity security is other-than-temporarily impaired, including: 1) general economic conditions that are worse than previously forecasted or that have a greater adverse effect on a particular issuer or industry sector than originally estimated; 2) changes in the facts and circumstances related to a particular issue or issuer's ability to meet all of its contractual obligations; and 3) changes in facts and circumstances that result in changes to management's intent to sell or result in our assessment that it is more likely than not we will be required to sell before recovery of the amortized cost basis of a fixed income security or causes a change in our ability or intent to hold an equity security until it recovers in value. Changes in assumptions, facts and circumstances could result in additional charges to earnings in future periods to the extent that losses are realized. The charge to earnings, while potentially significant to net income, would not have a significant effect on shareholders' equity, since our securities are designated as available for sale and carried at fair value and as a result, any related unrealized loss, net of deferred income taxes and related DAC, deferred sales inducement costs and reserves for life-contingent contract benefits, would already be reflected as a component of accumulated other comprehensive income in shareholders' equity. The determination of the amount of other-than-temporary impairment is an inherently subjective process based on periodic evaluations of the factors described above. Such evaluations and assessments are revised as conditions change and new information becomes available. We update our evaluations regularly and reflect changes in other-than-temporary impairments in results of operations as such evaluations are revised. The use of different methodologies and assumptions in the determination of the amount of other-than-temporary impairments may have a material effect on the amounts presented within the consolidated financial statements. For additional detail on investment impairments, see Note 5 of the consolidated financial statements. Deferred policy acquisition costs amortization We incur significant costs in connection with acquiring insurance policies and investment contracts. In accordance with GAAP, costs that are related directly to the successful acquisition of new or renewal insurance policies and investment contracts are deferred and recorded as an asset on the Consolidated Statements of Financial Position. DAC related to property-liability contracts is amortized into income as premiums are earned, typically over periods of six or twelve months. The amortization methodology for DAC related to Allstate Financial policies and contracts includes significant assumptions and estimates. DAC related to traditional life insurance is amortized over the premium paying period of the related policies in proportion to the estimated revenues on such business. Significant assumptions relating to estimated premiums, investment returns, as well as mortality, persistency and expenses to administer the business are established at the time the policy is issued and are generally not revised during the life of the policy. The assumptions for determining the timing and amount of DAC amortization are consistent with the assumptions used to calculate the reserve for life-contingent contract benefits. Any deviations from projected business in force resulting from actual policy terminations differing from expected levels and any estimated premium deficiencies may result in a change to the rate of amortization in the period such events occur. Generally, the amortization periods for these policies approximates the estimated lives of the policies. The recovery of DAC is dependent upon the future profitability of the business. We periodically review the adequacy of reserves and recoverability of DAC for these policies on an aggregate basis using actual experience. We aggregate all traditional life insurance products and immediate annuities with life contingencies in the analysis. In the event actual experience is significantly adverse compared to the original assumptions and a premium deficiency is determined to exist, any remaining unamortized DAC balance must be expensed to the extent not recoverable and a premium deficiency reserve may be required if the remaining DAC balance is insufficient to absorb the deficiency. In 2012, 2011 and 2010, our reviews concluded that no premium deficiency adjustments were necessary, primarily due to projected profit from traditional life insurance more than offsetting the projected losses in immediate annuities with life contingencies. DAC related to interest-sensitive life, fixed annuities and other investment contracts is amortized in proportion to the incidence of the total present value of gross profits, which includes both actual historical gross profits ("AGP") and estimated future gross profits ("EGP") expected to be earned over the estimated lives of the contracts. The amortization is net of interest on the prior period DAC balance using rates established at the inception of the contracts. Actual amortization periods generally range from 15-30 years; however, incorporating estimates of the rate of customer surrenders, partial withdrawals and deaths generally results in the majority of the DAC being amortized during the surrender charge period, which is typically 10-20 years for interest-sensitive life and 5-10 years for fixed annuities. The cumulative DAC amortization is reestimated and adjusted by a cumulative charge or credit to income when there is a difference between the incidence of actual versus expected gross profits in a reporting period or when there is a change in total EGP. 34 Table of Contents AGP and EGP primarily consist of the following components: contract charges for the cost of insurance less mortality costs and other benefits (benefit margin); investment income and realized capital gains and losses less interest credited (investment margin); and surrender and other contract charges less maintenance expenses (expense margin). The principal assumptions for determining the amount of EGP are persistency, mortality, expenses, investment returns, including capital gains and losses on assets supporting contract liabilities, interest crediting rates to contractholders, and the effects of any hedges, and these assumptions are reasonably likely to have the greatest impact on the amount of DAC amortization. Changes in these assumptions can be offsetting and we are unable to reasonably predict their future movements or offsetting impacts over time. Each reporting period, DAC amortization is recognized in proportion to AGP for that period adjusted for interest on the prior period DAC balance. This amortization process includes an assessment of AGP compared to EGP, the actual amount of business remaining in force and realized capital gains and losses on investments supporting the product liability. The impact of realized capital gains and losses on amortization of DAC depends upon which product liability is supported by the assets that give rise to the gain or loss. If the AGP is greater than EGP in the period, but the total EGP is unchanged, the amount of DAC amortization will generally increase, resulting in a current period decrease to earnings. The opposite result generally occurs when the AGP is less than the EGP in the period, but the total EGP is unchanged. However, when DAC amortization or a component of gross profits for a quarterly period is potentially negative (which would result in an increase of the DAC balance) as a result of negative AGP, the specific facts and circumstances surrounding the potential negative amortization are considered to determine whether it is appropriate for recognition in the consolidated financial statements. Negative amortization is only recorded when the increased DAC balance is determined to be recoverable based on facts and circumstances. Negative amortization was not recorded for certain fixed annuities during 2012, 2011 and 2010 periods in which capital losses were realized on their related investment portfolio. For products whose supporting investments are exposed to capital losses in excess of our expectations which may cause periodic AGP to become temporarily negative, EGP and AGP utilized in DAC amortization may be modified to exclude the excess capital losses. Annually, we review and update all assumptions underlying the projections of EGP, including persistency, mortality, expenses, investment returns, comprising investment income and realized capital gains and losses, interest crediting rates and the effect of any hedges. At each reporting period, we assess whether any revisions to assumptions used to determine DAC amortization are required. These reviews and updates may result in amortization acceleration or deceleration, which are commonly referred to as "DAC unlocking". If the update of assumptions causes total EGP to increase, the rate of DAC amortization will generally decrease, resulting in a current period increase to earnings. A decrease to earnings generally occurs when the assumption update causes the total EGP to decrease. The following table provides the effect on DAC amortization of changes in assumptions relating to the gross profit components of investment margin, benefit margin and expense margin during the years ended December 31. ($ in millions) 2012 2011 2010 Investment margin $ 3 $ (3 ) $ (9 ) Benefit margin 33 (6 ) 22 Expense margin (2 ) 16 (29 ) Net acceleration (deceleration) $ 34 $ 7 $ (16 ) In 2012, DAC amortization acceleration for changes in the investment margin component of EGP primarily related to fixed annuities and was due to lower projected investment returns. The acceleration related to benefit margin was primarily due to increased projected mortality on variable life insurance, partially offset by increased projected persistency on interest-sensitive life insurance. The deceleration related to expense margin related to interest-sensitive life insurance and fixed annuities and was due to a decrease in projected expenses. In 2011, DAC amortization deceleration related to changes in the investment margin component of EGP primarily related to equity-indexed annuities and was due to an increase in projected investment margins. The deceleration related to benefit margin was primarily due to increased projected persistency on interest-sensitive life insurance. The acceleration related to expense margin primarily related to interest-sensitive life insurance and was due to an increase in projected expenses. In 2010, DAC amortization deceleration related to changes in the investment margin component of EGP primarily related to interest-sensitive life insurance and was due to higher than previously projected investment income and lower interest credited, partially offset by higher projected realized capital losses. The acceleration related to benefit margin was primarily due to lower projected renewal premium (which is also expected to reduce persistency) on interest-sensitive life insurance, partially offset by higher than previously projected revenues associated with variable life insurance due to 35 Table of Contents appreciation in the underlying separate account valuations. The deceleration related to expense margin resulted from current and expected expense levels lower than previously projected. The following table displays the sensitivity of reasonably likely changes in assumptions included in the gross profit components of investment margin or benefit margin to amortization of the DAC balance as of December 31, 2012. ($ in millions) Increase/(reduction) in DAC Increase in future investment margins of 25 basis points $ 68 Decrease in future investment margins of 25 basis points $ (76 ) Decrease in future life mortality by 1% $ 15 Increase in future life mortality by 1% $ (16 ) Any potential changes in assumptions discussed above are measured without consideration of correlation among assumptions. Therefore, it would be inappropriate to add them together in an attempt to estimate overall variability in amortization. For additional detail related to DAC, see the Allstate Financial Segment section of this document. Reserve for property-liability insurance claims and claims expense estimation Reserves are established to provide for the estimated costs of paying claims and claims expenses under insurance policies we have issued. Property-Liability underwriting results are significantly influenced by estimates of property-liability insurance claims and claims expense reserves. These reserves are an estimate of amounts necessary to settle all outstanding claims, including claims that have been incurred but not reported ("IBNR"), as of the financial statement date. Characteristics of reserves Reserves are established independently of business segment management for each business segment and line of business based on estimates of the ultimate cost to settle claims, less losses that have been paid. The significant lines of business are auto, homeowners, and other lines for Allstate Protection, and asbestos, environmental, and other discontinued lines for Discontinued Lines and Coverages. Allstate Protection's claims are typically reported promptly with relatively little reporting lag between the date of occurrence and the date the loss is reported. Auto and homeowners liability losses generally take an average of about two years to settle, while auto physical damage, homeowners property and other personal lines have an average settlement time of less than one year. Discontinued Lines and Coverages involve long-tail losses, such as those related to asbestos and environmental claims, which often involve substantial reporting lags and extended times to settle. Reserves are the difference between the estimated ultimate cost of losses incurred and the amount of paid losses as of the reporting date. Reserves are estimated for both reported and unreported claims, and include estimates of all expenses associated with processing and settling all incurred claims. We update most of our reserve estimates quarterly and as new information becomes available or as events emerge that may affect the resolution of unsettled claims. Changes in prior year reserve estimates (reserve reestimates), which may be material, are determined by comparing updated estimates of ultimate losses to prior estimates, and the differences are recorded as property-liability insurance claims and claims expense in the Consolidated Statements of Operations in the period such changes are determined. Estimating the ultimate cost of claims and claims expenses is an inherently uncertain and complex process involving a high degree of judgment and is subject to the evaluation of numerous variables. The actuarial methods used to develop reserve estimates Reserve estimates are derived by using several different actuarial estimation methods that are variations on one primary actuarial technique. The actuarial technique is known as a "chain ladder" estimation process in which historical loss patterns are applied to actual paid losses and reported losses (paid losses plus individual case reserves established by claim adjusters) for an accident year or a report year to create an estimate of how losses are likely to develop over time. An accident year refers to classifying claims based on the year in which the claims occurred. A report year refers to classifying claims based on the year in which the claims are reported. Both classifications are used to prepare estimates of required reserves for payments to be made in the future. The key assumptions affecting our reserve estimates comprise data elements including claim counts, paid losses, case reserves, and development factors calculated with this data. In the chain ladder estimation technique, a ratio (development factor) is calculated which compares current period results to results in the prior period for each accident year. A three-year or two-year average development factor, based on historical results, is usually multiplied by the current period experience to estimate the development of losses of each accident year into the next time period. The development factors for the future time periods for each accident year are compounded over the remaining future periods to calculate an estimate of ultimate losses for each accident year. The implicit assumption of this technique is that an average of historical development factors is predictive of future loss 36 Table of Contents development, as the significant size of our experience database achieves a high degree of statistical credibility in actuarial projections of this type. The effects of inflation are implicitly considered in the reserving process, the implicit assumption being that a multi-year average development factor includes an adequate provision. Occasionally, unusual aberrations in loss patterns are caused by external and internal factors such as changes in claim reporting, settlement patterns, unusually large losses, process changes, legal or regulatory changes, and other influences. In these instances, analyses of alternate development factor selections are performed to evaluate the effect of these factors and actuarial judgment is applied to make appropriate development factor assumptions needed to develop a best estimate of ultimate losses. How reserve estimates are established and updated Reserve estimates are developed at a very detailed level, and the results of these numerous micro-level best estimates are aggregated to form a consolidated reserve estimate. For example, over one thousand actuarial estimates of the types described above are prepared each quarter to estimate losses for each line of insurance, major components of losses (such as coverages and perils), major states or groups of states and for reported losses and IBNR. The actuarial methods described above are used to analyze the settlement patterns of claims by determining the development factors for specific data elements that are necessary components of a reserve estimation process. Development factors are calculated quarterly and periodically throughout the year for data elements such as claim counts reported and settled, paid losses, and paid losses combined with case reserves. The calculation of development factors from changes in these data elements also impacts claim severity trends, which is a common industry reference used to explain changes in reserve estimates. The historical development patterns for these data elements are used as the assumptions to calculate reserve estimates. Often, several different estimates are prepared for each detailed component, incorporating alternative analyses of changing claim settlement patterns and other influences on losses, from which we select our best estimate for each component, occasionally incorporating additional analyses and actuarial judgment, as described above. These micro-level estimates are not based on a single set of assumptions. Actuarial judgments that may be applied to these components of certain micro-level estimates generally do not have a material impact on the consolidated level of reserves. Moreover, this detailed micro-level process does not permit or result in a compilation of a company-wide roll up to generate a range of needed loss reserves that would be meaningful. Based on our review of these estimates, our best estimate of required reserves for each state/line/coverage component is recorded for each accident year, and the required reserves for each component are summed to create the reserve balance carried on our Consolidated Statements of Financial Position. Reserves are reestimated quarterly and periodically throughout the year, by combining historical results with current actual results to calculate new development factors. This process incorporates the historic and latest actual trends, and other underlying changes in the data elements used to calculate reserve estimates. New development factors are likely to differ from previous development factors used in prior reserve estimates because actual results (claims reported or settled, losses paid, or changes to case reserves) occur differently than the implied assumptions contained in the previous development factor calculations. If claims reported, paid losses, or case reserve changes are greater or less than the levels estimated by previous development factors, reserve reestimates increase or decrease. When actual development of these data elements is different than the historical development pattern used in a prior period reserve estimate, a new reserve is determined. The difference between indicated reserves based on new reserve estimates and recorded reserves (the previous estimate) is the amount of reserve reestimate and is recognized as an increase or decrease in property-liability insurance claims and claims expense in the Consolidated Statements of Operations. Total Property-Liability reserve reestimates, after-tax, as a percent of net income were favorable 18.7%, 27.7% and 11.3% in 2012, 2011 and 2010, respectively. The 3-year average of reserve reestimates as a percentage of total reserves was a favorable 2.2% for Property-Liability, a favorable 2.7% for Allstate Protection and an unfavorable 1.9% for Discontinued Lines and Coverages, each of these results being consistent within a reasonable actuarial tolerance for our respective businesses. A more detailed discussion of reserve reestimates is presented in the Property-Liability Claims and Claims Expense Reserves section of this document. 37 Table of Contents The following table shows net claims and claims expense reserves by segment and line of business as of December 31: ($ in millions) 2012 2011 2010 Allstate Protection Auto $ 11,383 $ 11,404 $ 11,034 Homeowners 2,008 2,439 2,442 Other lines 2,250 2,237 2,141 Total Allstate Protection 15,641 16,080 15,617 Discontinued Lines and Coverages Asbestos 1,026 1,078 1,100 Environmental 193 185 201 Other discontinued lines 418 444 478 Total Discontinued Lines and Coverages 1,637 1,707 1,779 Total Property-Liability $ 17,278 $ 17,787 $ 17,396 Allstate Protection reserve estimates Factors affecting reserve estimates Reserve estimates are developed based on the processes and historical development trends described above. These estimates are considered in conjunction with known facts and interpretations of circumstances and factors including our experience with similar cases, actual claims paid, historical trends involving claim payment patterns and pending levels of unpaid claims, loss management programs, product mix and contractual terms, changes in law and regulation, judicial decisions, and economic conditions. When we experience changes of the type previously mentioned, we may need to apply actuarial judgment in the determination and selection of development factors considered more reflective of the new trends, such as combining shorter or longer periods of historical results with current actual results to produce development factors based on two-year, three-year, or longer development periods to reestimate our reserves. For example, if a legal change is expected to have a significant impact on the development of claim severity for a coverage which is part of a particular line of insurance in a specific state, actuarial judgment is applied to determine appropriate development factors that will most accurately reflect the expected impact on that specific estimate. Another example would be when a change in economic conditions is expected to affect the cost of repairs to damaged autos or property for a particular line, coverage, or state, actuarial judgment is applied to determine appropriate development factors to use in the reserve estimate that will most accurately reflect the expected impacts on severity development. As claims are reported, for certain liability claims of sufficient size and complexity, the field adjusting staff establishes case reserve estimates of ultimate cost, based on their assessment of facts and circumstances related to each individual claim. For other claims which occur in large volumes and settle in a relatively short time frame, it is not practical or efficient to set case reserves for each claim, and a statistical case reserve is set for these claims based on estimation techniques described above. In the normal course of business, we may also supplement our claims processes by utilizing third party adjusters, appraisers, engineers, inspectors, and other professionals and information sources to assess and settle catastrophe and non-catastrophe related claims. Historically, the case reserves set by the field adjusting staff have not proven to be an entirely accurate estimate of the ultimate cost of claims. To provide for this, a development reserve is estimated using the processes described above, and allocated to pending claims as a supplement to case reserves. Typically, the case and supplemental development reserves comprise about 90% of total reserves. Another major component of reserves is IBNR. Typically, IBNR comprises about 10% of total reserves. Generally, the initial reserves for a new accident year are established based on severity assumptions for different business segments, lines and coverages based on historical relationships to relevant inflation indicators, and reserves for prior accident years are statistically determined using processes described above. Changes in auto current year claim severity are generally influenced by inflation in the medical and auto repair sectors of the economy. We mitigate these effects through various loss management programs. Injury claims are affected largely by medical cost inflation while physical damage claims are affected largely by auto repair cost inflation and used car prices. For auto physical damage coverages, we monitor our rate of increase in average cost per claim against a weighted average of the Maintenance and Repair price index and the Parts and Equipment price index. We believe our claim settlement initiatives, such as improvements to the claim review and settlement process, the use of special investigative units to detect fraud and 38 Table of Contents handle suspect claims, litigation management and defense strategies, as well as various other loss management initiatives underway, contribute to the mitigation of injury and physical damage severity trends. Changes in homeowners current year claim severity are generally influenced by inflation in the cost of building materials, the cost of construction and property repair services, the cost of replacing home furnishings and other contents, the types of claims that qualify for coverage, deductibles and other economic and environmental factors. We employ various loss management programs to mitigate the effect of these factors. As loss experience for the current year develops for each type of loss, it is monitored relative to initial assumptions until it is judged to have sufficient statistical credibility. From that point in time and forward, reserves are reestimated using statistical actuarial processes to reflect the impact actual loss trends have on development factors incorporated into the actuarial estimation processes. Statistical credibility is usually achieved by the end of the first calendar year; however, when trends for the current accident year exceed initial assumptions sooner, they are usually determined to be credible, and reserves are increased accordingly. The very detailed processes for developing reserve estimates, and the lack of a need and existence of a common set of assumptions or development factors, limits aggregate reserve level testing for variability of data elements. However, by applying standard actuarial methods to consolidated historic accident year loss data for major loss types, comprising auto injury losses, auto physical damage losses and homeowner losses, we develop variability analyses consistent with the way we develop reserves by measuring the potential variability of development factors, as described in the section titled "Potential Reserve Estimate Variability" below. Causes of reserve estimate uncertainty Since reserves are estimates of unpaid portions of claims and claims expenses that have occurred, including IBNR losses, the establishment of appropriate reserves, including reserves for catastrophe losses, requires regular reevaluation and refinement of estimates to determine our ultimate loss estimate. At each reporting date, the highest degree of uncertainty in estimates of losses arises from claims remaining to be settled for the current accident year and the most recent preceding accident year. The greatest degree of uncertainty exists in the current accident year because the current accident year contains the greatest proportion of losses that have not been reported or settled but must be estimated as of the current reporting date. Most of these losses relate to damaged property such as automobiles and homes, and medical care for injuries from accidents. During the first year after the end of an accident year, a large portion of the total losses for that accident year are settled. When accident year losses paid through the end of the first year following the initial accident year are incorporated into updated actuarial estimates, the trends inherent in the settlement of claims emerge more clearly. Consequently, this is the point in time at which we tend to make our largest reestimates of losses for an accident year. After the second year, the losses that we pay for an accident year typically relate to claims that are more difficult to settle, such as those involving serious injuries or litigation. Private passenger auto insurance provides a good illustration of the uncertainty of future loss estimates: our typical annual percentage payout of reserves for an accident year is approximately 45% in the first year after the end of the accident year, 20% in the second year, 15% in the third year, 10% in the fourth year, and the remaining 10% thereafter. Reserves for catastrophe losses Property-Liability claims and claims expense reserves also include reserves for catastrophe losses. Catastrophe losses are an inherent risk of the property-liability insurance industry that have contributed, and will continue to contribute, to potentially material year-to-year fluctuations in our results of operations and financial position. We define a "catastrophe" as an event that produces pre-tax losses before reinsurance in excess of $1 million and involves multiple first party policyholders, or an event that produces a number of claims in excess of a preset, per-event threshold of average claims in a specific area, occurring within a certain amount of time following the event. Catastrophes are caused by various natural events including high winds, winter storms, tornadoes, hailstorms, wildfires, tropical storms, hurricanes, earthquakes and volcanoes. We are also exposed to man-made catastrophic events, such as certain types of terrorism or industrial accidents. The nature and level of catastrophes in any period cannot be predicted. The estimation of claims and claims expense reserves for catastrophe losses also comprises estimates of losses from reported claims and IBNR, primarily for damage to property. In general, our estimates for catastrophe reserves are based on claim adjuster inspections and the application of historical loss development factors as described above. However, depending on the nature of the catastrophe, as noted above, the estimation process can be further complicated. For example, for hurricanes, complications could include the inability of insureds to promptly report losses, limitations placed on claims adjusting staff affecting their ability to inspect losses, determining whether losses are covered by our homeowners policy (generally for damage caused by wind or wind driven rain) or specifically excluded coverage caused by flood, estimating additional living expenses, and assessing the impact of demand surge, exposure to 39 Table of Contents mold damage, and the effects of numerous other considerations, including the timing of a catastrophe in relation to other events, such as at or near the end of a financial reporting period, which can affect the availability of information needed to estimate reserves for that reporting period. In these situations, we may need to adapt our practices to accommodate these circumstances in order to determine a best estimate of our losses from a catastrophe. As an example, in 2005 to complete an estimate for certain areas affected by Hurricane Katrina and not yet inspected by our claims adjusting staff, or where we believed our historical loss development factors were not predictive, we relied on analysis of actual claim notices received compared to total PIF, as well as visual, governmental and third party information, including aerial photos, area observations, and data on wind speed and flood depth to the extent available. Potential reserve estimate variability The aggregation of numerous micro-level estimates for each business segment, line of insurance, major components of losses (such as coverages and perils), and major states or groups of states for reported losses and IBNR forms the reserve liability recorded in the Consolidated Statements of Financial Position. Because of this detailed approach to developing our reserve estimates, there is not a single set of assumptions that determine our reserve estimates at the consolidated level. Given the numerous micro-level estimates for reported losses and IBNR, management does not believe the processes that we follow will produce a statistically credible or reliable actuarial reserve range that would be meaningful. Reserve estimates, by their very nature, are very complex to determine and subject to significant judgment, and do not represent an exact determination for each outstanding claim. Accordingly, as actual claims, and/or paid losses, and/or case reserve results emerge, our estimate of the ultimate cost to settle will be different than previously estimated. To develop a statistical indication of potential reserve variability within reasonably likely possible outcomes, an actuarial technique (stochastic modeling) is applied to the countrywide consolidated data elements for paid losses and paid losses combined with case reserves separately for injury losses, auto physical damage losses, and homeowners losses excluding catastrophe losses. Based on the combined historical variability of the development factors calculated for these data elements, an estimate of the standard error or standard deviation around these reserve estimates is calculated within each accident year for the last twenty years for each type of loss. The variability of these reserve estimates within one standard deviation of the mean (a measure of frequency of dispersion often viewed to be an acceptable level of accuracy) is believed by management to represent a reasonable and statistically probable measure of potential variability. Based on our products and coverages, historical experience, the statistical credibility of our extensive data and stochastic modeling of actuarial chain ladder methodologies used to develop reserve estimates, we estimate that the potential variability of our Allstate Protection reserves, excluding reserves for catastrophe losses, within a reasonable probability of other possible outcomes, may be approximately plus or minus 4%, or plus or minus $470 million in net income. A lower level of variability exists for auto injury losses, which comprise approximately 80% of reserves, due to their relatively stable development patterns over a longer duration of time required to settle claims. Other types of losses, such as auto physical damage, homeowners losses and other losses, which comprise about 20% of reserves, tend to have greater variability but are settled in a much shorter period of time. Although this evaluation reflects most reasonably likely outcomes, it is possible the final outcome may fall below or above these amounts. Historical variability of reserve estimates is reported in the Property-Liability Claims and Claims Expense Reserves section of this document. Adequacy of reserve estimates We believe our net claims and claims expense reserves are appropriately established based on available methodology, facts, technology, laws and regulations. We calculate and record a single best reserve estimate, in conformance with generally accepted actuarial standards, for each line of insurance, its components (coverages and perils) and state, for reported losses and for IBNR losses, and as a result we believe that no other estimate is better than our recorded amount. Due to the uncertainties involved, the ultimate cost of losses may vary materially from recorded amounts, which are based on our best estimates. Discontinued Lines and Coverages reserve estimates Characteristics of Discontinued Lines exposure Our exposure to asbestos, environmental and other discontinued lines claims arises principally from assumed reinsurance coverage written during the 1960s through the mid-1980s, including reinsurance on primary insurance written on large U.S. companies, and from direct excess insurance written from 1972 through 1985, including substantial excess general liability coverages on large U.S. companies. Additional exposure stems from direct primary commercial insurance written during the 1960s through the mid-1980s. Asbestos claims relate primarily to bodily injuries asserted by people who were exposed to asbestos or products containing asbestos. Environmental claims relate primarily to pollution and related clean-up costs. Other discontinued lines exposures primarily relate to general liability and product liability mass tort claims, such as those for medical devices and other products, workers' compensation claims and claims for various other coverage exposures other than asbestos and environmental. 40 Table of Contents In 1986, the general liability policy form used by us and others in the property-liability industry was amended to introduce an "absolute pollution exclusion," which excluded coverage for environmental damage claims, and to add an asbestos exclusion. Most general liability policies issued prior to 1987 contain annual aggregate limits for product liability coverage. General liability policies issued in 1987 and thereafter contain annual aggregate limits for product liability coverage and annual aggregate limits for all coverages. Our experience to date is that these policy form changes have limited the extent of our exposure to environmental and asbestos claim risks. Our exposure to liability for asbestos, environmental and other discontinued lines losses manifests differently depending on whether it arises from assumed reinsurance coverage, direct excess insurance or direct primary commercial insurance. The direct insurance coverage we provided that covered asbestos, environmental and other discontinued lines was substantially "excess" in nature. Direct excess insurance and reinsurance involve coverage written by us for specific layers of protection above retentions and other insurance plans. The nature of excess coverage and reinsurance provided to other insurers limits our exposure to loss to specific layers of protection in excess of policyholder retention on primary insurance plans. Our exposure is further limited by the significant reinsurance that we had purchased on our direct excess business. Our assumed reinsurance business involved writing generally small participations in other insurers' reinsurance programs. The reinsured losses in which we participate may be a proportion of all eligible losses or eligible losses in excess of defined retentions. The majority of our assumed reinsurance exposure, approximately 85%, is for excess of loss coverage, while the remaining 15% is for pro-rata coverage. Our direct primary commercial insurance business did not include coverage to large asbestos manufacturers. This business comprises a cross section of policyholders engaged in many diverse business sectors located throughout the country. How reserve estimates are established and updated We conduct an annual review in the third quarter to evaluate and establish asbestos, environmental and other discontinued lines reserves. Changes to reserves are recorded in the reporting period in which they are determined. Using established industry and actuarial best practices and assuming no change in the regulatory or economic environment, this detailed and comprehensive methodology determines asbestos reserves based on assessments of the characteristics of exposure (i.e. claim activity, potential liability, jurisdiction, products versus non-products exposure) presented by individual policyholders, and determines environmental reserves based on assessments of the characteristics of exposure (i.e. environmental damages, respective shares of liability of potentially responsible parties, appropriateness and cost of remediation) to pollution and related clean-up costs. The number and cost of these claims is affected by intense advertising by trial lawyers seeking asbestos plaintiffs, and entities with asbestos exposure seeking bankruptcy protection as a result of asbestos liabilities, initially causing a delay in the reporting of claims, often followed by an acceleration and an increase in claims and claims expenses as settlements occur. After evaluating our insureds' probable liabilities for asbestos and/or environmental claims, we evaluate our insureds' coverage programs for such claims. We consider our insureds' total available insurance coverage, including the coverage we issued. We also consider relevant judicial interpretations of policy language and applicable coverage defenses or determinations, if any. Evaluation of both the insureds' estimated liabilities and our exposure to the insureds depends heavily on an analysis of the relevant legal issues and litigation environment. This analysis is conducted by our specialized claims adjusting staff and legal counsel. Based on these evaluations, case reserves are established by claims adjusting staff and actuarial analysis is employed to develop an IBNR reserve, which includes estimated potential reserve development and claims that have occurred but have not been reported. As of December 31, 2012 and 2011, IBNR was 57.8% and 59.0%, respectively, of combined net asbestos and environmental reserves. For both asbestos and environmental reserves, we also evaluate our historical direct net loss and expense paid and incurred experience to assess any emerging trends, fluctuations or characteristics suggested by the aggregate paid and incurred activity. 41 Table of Contents Other Discontinued Lines and Coverages The following table shows reserves for other discontinued lines which provide for remaining loss and loss expense liabilities related to business no longer written by us, other than asbestos and environmental, as of December 31. ($ in millions) 2012 2011 2010 Other mass torts $ 166 $ 169 $ 188 Workers' compensation 112 117 116 Commercial and other 140 158 174 Other discontinued lines $ 418 $ 444 $ 478 Other mass torts describes direct excess and reinsurance general liability coverage provided for cumulative injury losses other than asbestos and environmental. Workers' compensation and commercial and other include run-off from discontinued direct primary, direct excess and reinsurance commercial insurance operations of various coverage exposures other than asbestos and environmental. Reserves are based on considerations similar to those described above, as they relate to the characteristics of specific individual coverage exposures. Potential reserve estimate variability Establishing Discontinued Lines and Coverages net loss reserves for asbestos, environmental and other discontinued lines claims is subject to uncertainties that are much greater than those presented by other types of claims. Among the complications are lack of historical data, long reporting delays, uncertainty as to the number and identity of insureds with potential exposure and unresolved legal issues regarding policy coverage; unresolved legal issues regarding the determination, availability and timing of exhaustion of policy limits; plaintiffs' evolving and expanding theories of liability; availability and collectability of recoveries from reinsurance; retrospectively determined premiums and other contractual agreements; estimates of the extent and timing of any contractual liability; the impact of bankruptcy protection sought by various asbestos producers and other asbestos defendants; and other uncertainties. There are also complex legal issues concerning the interpretation of various insurance policy provisions and whether those losses are covered, or were ever intended to be covered, and could be recoverable through retrospectively determined premium, reinsurance or other contractual agreements. Courts have reached different and sometimes inconsistent conclusions as to when losses are deemed to have occurred and which policies provide coverage; what types of losses are covered; whether there is an insurer obligation to defend; how policy limits are determined; how policy exclusions and conditions are applied and interpreted; and whether clean-up costs represent insured property damage. Our reserves for asbestos and environmental exposures could be affected by tort reform, class action litigation, and other potential legislation and judicial decisions. Environmental exposures could also be affected by a change in the existing federal Superfund law and similar state statutes. There can be no assurance that any reform legislation will be enacted or that any such legislation will provide for a fair, effective and cost-efficient system for settlement of asbestos or environmental claims. We believe these issues are not likely to be resolved in the near future, and the ultimate costs may vary materially from the amounts currently recorded resulting in material changes in loss reserves. Historical variability of reserve estimates is demonstrated in the Property-Liability Claims and Claims Expense Reserves section of this document. Adequacy of reserve estimates Management believes its net loss reserves for environmental, asbestos and other discontinued lines exposures are appropriately established based on available facts, technology, laws, regulations, and assessments of other pertinent factors and characteristics of exposure (i.e. claim activity, potential liability, jurisdiction, products versus non-products exposure) presented by individual policyholders, assuming no change in the legal, legislative or economic environment. Due to the uncertainties and factors described above, management believes it is not practicable to develop a meaningful range for any such additional net loss reserves that may be required. Further discussion of reserve estimates For further discussion of these estimates and quantification of the impact of reserve estimates, reserve reestimates and assumptions, see Notes 8 and 14 to the consolidated financial statements and the Property-Liability Claims and Claims Expense Reserves section of this document. Reserve for life-contingent contract benefits estimation Due to the long term nature of traditional life insurance, life-contingent immediate annuities and voluntary accident and health insurance products, benefits are payable over many years; accordingly, the reserves are calculated as the present value of future expected benefits to be paid, reduced by the present value of future expected net premiums. Long-term actuarial assumptions of future investment yields, mortality, morbidity, policy terminations and expenses are used when establishing the reserve for life-contingent contract benefits payable under these insurance policies. These assumptions, which for traditional life insurance are applied using the net level premium method, include provisions for adverse deviation and generally vary by characteristics such as type of coverage, year of issue and policy duration. Future investment yield assumptions are determined based upon prevailing investment yields as well as estimated reinvestment yields. Mortality, morbidity and 42 Table of Contents policy termination assumptions are based on our experience and industry experience. Expense assumptions include the estimated effects of inflation and expenses to be incurred beyond the premium-paying period. These assumptions are established at the time the policy is issued, are consistent with assumptions for determining DAC amortization for these policies, and are generally not changed during the policy coverage period. However, if actual experience emerges in a manner that is significantly adverse relative to the original assumptions, adjustments to DAC or reserves may be required resulting in a charge to earnings which could have a material effect on our operating results and financial condition. We periodically review the adequacy of reserves and recoverability of DAC for these policies on an aggregate basis using actual experience. In the event actual experience is significantly adverse compared to the original assumptions and a premium deficiency is determined to exist, any remaining unamortized DAC balance must be expensed to the extent not recoverable and the establishment of a premium deficiency reserve may be required. In 2012, 2011 and 2010, our reviews concluded that no premium deficiency adjustments were necessary, primarily due to profit from traditional life insurance more than offsetting the projected losses in immediate annuities with life contingencies. We will continue to monitor the experience of our traditional life insurance and immediate annuities. We anticipate that mortality, investment and reinvestment yields, and policy terminations are the factors that would be most likely to require premium deficiency adjustments to these reserves or related DAC. For further detail on the reserve for life-contingent contract benefits, see Note 9 of the consolidated financial statements. PROPERTY-LIABILITY 2012 HIGHLIGHTS Property-Liability net income was $1.97 billion in 2012 compared to $403 million in 2011. Property-Liability premiums written totaled $27.03 billion in 2012, an increase of 4.0% from $25.98 billion in 2011. The Property-Liability loss ratio was 69.1 in 2012 compared to 77.7 in 2011. Catastrophe losses were $2.35 billion in 2012 compared to $3.82 billion 2011. Prior year reserve reestimates totaled $665 million favorable in 2012 compared to $335 million favorable in 2011. Property-Liability underwriting income was $1.20 billion in 2012 compared to an underwriting loss of $882 million in 2011. Underwriting income (loss), a measure not based on GAAP, is defined below. Property-Liability investments were $38.22 billion as of December 31, 2012, an increase of 6.2% from $36.00 billion as of December 31, 2011. Net investment income was $1.33 billion in 2012, an increase of 10.4% from $1.20 billion in 2011. Net realized capital gains were $335 million in 2012 compared to $85 million in 2011. PROPERTY-LIABILITY OPERATIONS Overview Our Property-Liability operations consist of two reporting segments: Allstate Protection and Discontinued Lines and Coverages. Allstate Protection comprises three brands: Allstate, Encompass and Esurance. Allstate Protection is principally engaged in the sale of personal property and casualty insurance, primarily private passenger auto and homeowners insurance, to individuals in the United States and Canada. Discontinued Lines and Coverages includes results from insurance coverage that we no longer write and results for certain commercial and other businesses in run-off. These segments are consistent with the groupings of financial information that management uses to evaluate performance and to determine the allocation of resources. Underwriting income (loss), a measure that is not based on GAAP and is reconciled to net income (loss) below, is calculated as premiums earned, less claims and claims expense ("losses"), amortization of DAC, operating costs and expenses and restructuring and related charges, as determined using GAAP. We use this measure in our evaluation of results of operations to analyze the profitability of the Property-Liability insurance operations separately from investment results. It is also an integral component of incentive compensation. It is useful for investors to evaluate the components of income separately and in the aggregate when reviewing performance. Net income (loss) is the GAAP measure most directly comparable to underwriting income (loss). Underwriting income (loss) should not be considered as a substitute for net income and does not reflect the overall profitability of the business. The table below includes GAAP operating ratios we use to measure our profitability. We believe that they enhance an investor's understanding of our profitability. They are calculated as follows: Claims and claims expense ("loss") ratio the ratio of claims and claims expense to premiums earned. Loss ratios include the impact of catastrophe losses. Expense ratio the ratio of amortization of DAC, operating costs and expenses, and restructuring and related charges to premiums earned. Combined ratio the ratio of claims and claims expense, amortization of DAC, operating costs and expenses, and restructuring and related charges to premiums earned. The combined ratio is the sum of the loss ratio and the 43 Table of Contents expense ratio. The difference between 100% and the combined ratio represents underwriting income (loss) as a percentage of premiums earned, or underwriting margin. We have also calculated the following impacts of specific items on the GAAP operating ratios because of the volatility of these items between fiscal periods. Effect of catastrophe losses on combined ratio the percentage of catastrophe losses included in claims and claims expense to premiums earned. This ratio includes prior year reserve reestimates of catastrophe losses. Effect of prior year reserve reestimates on combined ratio the percentage of prior year reserve reestimates included in claims and claims expense to premiums earned. This ratio includes prior year reserve reestimates of catastrophe losses. Effect of business combination expenses and the amortization of purchased intangible assets on combined and expense ratio the percentage of business combination expenses and the amortization of purchased intangible assets to premiums earned. Effect of restructuring and related charges on combined ratio the percentage of restructuring and related charges to premiums earned. Effect of Discontinued Lines and Coverages on combined ratio the ratio of claims and claims expense and operating costs and expenses in the Discontinued Lines and Coverages segment to Property-Liability premiums earned. The sum of the effect of Discontinued Lines and Coverages on the combined ratio and the Allstate Protection combined ratio is equal to the Property-Liability combined ratio. 44 Table of Contents Summarized financial data, a reconciliation of underwriting income (loss) to net income, and GAAP operating ratios for our Property-Liability operations are presented in the following table. ($ in millions, except ratios) 2012 2011 2010 Premiums written $ 27,027 $ 25,980 $ 25,907 Revenues Premiums earned $ 26,737 $ 25,942 $ 25,957 Net investment income 1,326 1,201 1,189 Realized capital gains and losses 335 85 (321 ) Total revenues 28,398 27,228 26,825 Costs and expenses Claims and claims expense (18,484 ) (20,161 ) (18,951 ) Amortization of DAC (3,483 ) (3,477 ) (3,517 ) Operating costs and expenses (3,536 ) (3,143 ) (2,962 ) Restructuring and related charges (34 ) (43 ) (33 ) Total costs and expenses (25,537 ) (26,824 ) (25,463 ) Gain on disposition of operations 5 Income tax expense (893 ) (1 ) (314 ) Net income $ 1,968 $ 403 $ 1,053 Underwriting income (loss) $ 1,200 $ (882 ) $ 494 Net investment income 1,326 1,201 1,189 Income tax (expense) benefit on operations (779 ) 30 (426 ) Realized capital gains and losses, after-tax 221 54 (207 ) Gain on disposition of operations, after-tax 3 Net income $ 1,968 $ 403 $ 1,053 Catastrophe losses (1) $ 2,345 $ 3,815 $ 2,207 GAAP operating ratios Claims and claims expense ratio 69.1 77.7 73.0 Expense ratio 26.4 25.7 25.1 Combined ratio 95.5 103.4 98.1 Effect of catastrophe losses on combined ratio (1) 8.8 14.7 8.5 Effect of prior year reserve reestimates on combined ratio (1) (2.5 ) (1.3 ) (0.6 ) Effect of business combination expenses and the amortization of purchased intangible assets on combined ratio 0.5 0.2 Effect of restructuring and related charges on combined ratio 0.1 0.2 0.1 Effect of Discontinued Lines and Coverages on combined ratio 0.2 0.1 0.1 (1) Prior year reserve reestimates included in catastrophe losses totaled $410 million favorable in 2012, $130 million favorable in 2011 and $163 million favorable in 2010. ALLSTATE PROTECTION SEGMENT Overview and strategy The Allstate Protection segment primarily sells private passenger auto and homeowners insurance to individuals through Allstate exclusive agencies supported by call centers and the internet under the Allstate brand. We sell auto and homeowners insurance through independent agencies under both the Allstate brand and the Encompass brand. We also sell auto insurance direct to consumers online, through call centers and through select agents, including Answer Financial, under the Esurance brand. Our strategy is to position our products and distribution systems to meet the changing needs of the customer in managing the risks they face. This includes customers who want advice and assistance and those who are self-directed. In addition, there are customers who are brand-sensitive and those who are brand-neutral. Our strategy is to serve all four of these consumer segments with unique products and in unique and innovative ways while leveraging our claims, 45 Table of Contents pricing and operational capabilities. When we do not offer a product our customers need, we may make available non-proprietary products that meet their needs. Allstate is executing a multi-year effort to drive the customer experience. We utilize specific customer value propositions for each brand to improve our competitive position and performance. Over time, delivering on these customer value propositions may include investments in resources and require significant changes to our products and capabilities. Our operating priorities for the Protection segment include achieving profitable market share growth for our auto business as well as earning acceptable returns on our homeowners business. Key goals include: Improving customer loyalty and retention; Deepening customer product relationships; Improving auto competitive position for a greater share of consumers; Improving the profitability of our homeowners business; Investing in the effectiveness and reach of our multiple distribution channels including self-directed consumers through our Esurance brand; and Maintaining a strong capital foundation through risk management and effective resource allocation. Our strategy for the Allstate brand focuses on customers who prefer local personal advice and service and are brand-sensitive. Our customer-focused strategy for the Allstate brand aligns targeted marketing, product innovation, distribution effectiveness, and pricing toward acquiring and retaining an increased share of our target customers, which generally refers to consumers who want to purchase multiple products from one insurance provider including auto, homeowners and financial products, who have better retention and potentially present more favorable prospects for profitability over the course of their relationships with us. As a result of this strategy, the majority of the Allstate brand's policies are owned by customers with multiple products. The Allstate brand utilizes marketing delivered to target customers to promote our strategic priorities, with messaging that continues to communicate ease of doing business with Allstate and Allstate agencies, good value, as well as the importance of having proper coverage by highlighting our comprehensive product and coverage options. The Allstate brand differentiates itself from competitors by offering a comprehensive range of innovative product options and features as well as product customization, including Allstate Your Choice Auto with options such as accident forgiveness, safe driving deductible rewards and a safe driving bonus, and Allstate House and Home that provides options of coverage for roof damage including graduated coverage and pricing based on roof type and age. In addition, we offer a Claim Satisfaction Guarantee sm that promises a return of premium to Allstate brand standard auto insurance customers dissatisfied with their claims experience. Our DRIVEWISE program enables participating customers to be eligible for discounts based on driving performance as measured by a device installed in the vehicle. We will continue to focus on developing and introducing products and services that benefit today's consumers and further differentiate Allstate and enhance the customer experience. We will deepen customer relationships through value-added customer interactions and expanding our presence in households with multiple products by providing financial protection for customer needs. In certain areas with higher risk of catastrophes, we offer a homeowners product from North Light Specialty Insurance Company ("North Light"), our excess and surplus lines carrier. When an Allstate product is not available, we make available non-proprietary products for customers through brokering arrangements. For example, in hurricane exposed areas, Allstate agencies sell non-proprietary property insurance products to customers who prefer to use a single agent for all their insurance needs. We are undergoing a focused effort to enhance our capabilities by implementing uniform processes and standards to elevate the level and consistency of our customer experience. We continue to enhance technology to integrate our distribution channels, improve customer service, facilitate the introduction of new products and services and reduce infrastructure costs related to supporting agencies and handling claims. These actions and others are designed to optimize the effectiveness of our distribution and service channels by increasing the productivity of the Allstate brand's exclusive agencies. Since Allstate brand customers prefer personal advice and assistance, beginning in 2013 all Allstate brand customers who purchased their policies directly through call centers and the internet will be assigned an Allstate exclusive agency relationship. Our pricing and underwriting strategies and decisions are designed to enhance both our competitive position and our profit potential. Sophisticated pricing uses a number of risk evaluation factors including insurance scoring, to the extent permissible by regulations, based on information that is obtained from credit reports. Our updated auto risk evaluation pricing model was implemented for 9 states in 2012. Our pricing strategy involves marketplace pricing and underwriting decisions that are based on these risk evaluation models and an evaluation of competitors. We will utilize 46 Table of Contents sophisticated pricing to increase our price competiveness to a greater share of target customers. A combination of underwriting information, pricing and discounts are used to achieve a higher close rate on quotes. We will also use these factors on our non-standard business to offer competitive prices to customers with risk profiles indicating greater likelihood of renewal. We also continue to enhance our pricing to attract a larger share of customers. For the Allstate brand auto and homeowners business, we continue to shift our mix towards customers that have better retention and thus potentially present more favorable prospects for profitability over the course of their relationship with us. For homeowners, we continue to address rate adequacy and improve underwriting and claim effectiveness. We also consider various strategic options to improve our homeowners insurance business returns. Allstate brand also includes Emerging Businesses which comprises Consumer Household (specialty auto products including motorcycle, trailer, motor home and off-road vehicle insurance policies and specialty property products including renter, landlord, boat, umbrella, manufactured home and condominium insurance policies), Allstate Roadside Services (roadside assistance products), Allstate Dealer Services (guaranteed automobile protection and vehicle service products sold primarily through auto dealers), Ivantage (insurance agency) and Commercial Lines (commercial products for small business owners). Premiums written by Emerging Businesses were $2.56 billion in 2012 compared to $2.49 billion in 2011. Our strategy for the Encompass brand centers around our highly differentiated product that simplifies the insurance experience through an expanded coverage single annual policy with one premium, one bill, one policy deductible and one renewal date. It appeals to customers with broad personal lines coverage needs who prefer an independent agent. As part of its package policy strategy, Encompass is focused on increased agency engagement through ease of doing business initiatives and increased package commissions, and de-emphasizing mono-line auto and property products. Our strategy for the Esurance brand focuses on self-directed and web-savvy consumers. To best serve these customers, Esurance develops its technology and website to continuously improve its hassle-free purchase and claims experience. Esurance began offering renters insurance in 2012 and plans to continue to broaden its product offerings. Esurance is also focused on increasing its preferred driver mix, while raising advertising investment and marketing effectiveness to support growth. We continue to manage our property catastrophe exposure with the goal of providing shareholders an acceptable return on the risks assumed in our property business and to reduce the variability of our earnings. Our property business includes personal homeowners, commercial property and other property insurance lines. As of December 31, 2012, we are below our goal to have no more than a 1% likelihood of exceeding average annual aggregate catastrophe losses by $2 billion, net of reinsurance, from hurricanes and earthquakes, based on modeled assumptions and applications currently available. The use of different assumptions and updates to industry models could materially change the projected loss. Our growth strategies include areas previously restricted where we believe we can earn an appropriate return for the risk and as a result we may move closer to our goal in the future. In addition, we have exposure to severe weather events which impact catastrophe losses. Property catastrophe exposure management includes purchasing reinsurance to provide coverage for known exposure to hurricanes, earthquakes, wildfires, fires following earthquakes and other catastrophes. We are also working for changes in the regulatory environment, including recognizing the need for better catastrophe preparedness, improving appropriate risk-based pricing and promoting the creation of government sponsored, privately funded solutions for mega-catastrophes that will make insurance more available and affordable. Pricing of property products is typically intended to establish returns that we deem acceptable over a long-term period. Losses, including losses from catastrophic events and weather-related losses (such as wind, hail, lightning and freeze losses not meeting our criteria to be declared a catastrophe), are accrued on an occurrence basis within the policy period. Therefore, in any reporting period, loss experience from catastrophic events and weather-related losses may contribute to negative or positive underwriting performance relative to the expectations we incorporated into the products' pricing. We pursue rate increases where indicated, taking into consideration potential customer disruption, the impact on our ability to market our auto lines, regulatory limitations, our competitive position and profitability, using a methodology that appropriately addresses the changing costs of losses from catastrophes such as severe weather and the net cost of reinsurance. Allstate Protection outlook Allstate Protection will continue to focus on its strategy of offering differentiated products and services to our target customers while maintaining pricing discipline. 47 Table of Contents We expect that volatility in the level of catastrophes we experience will contribute to variation in our underwriting results; however, this volatility will be mitigated due to our catastrophe management actions, including the purchase of reinsurance. We will continue to study the efficiencies of our operations and cost structure for additional areas where costs may be reduced. Premiums written is the amount of premiums charged for policies issued during a fiscal period. Premiums are considered earned and are included in the financial results on a pro-rata basis over the policy period. The portion of premiums written applicable to the unexpired terms of the policies is recorded as unearned premiums on our Consolidated Statements of Financial Position. The following table shows the unearned premium balance as of December 31 and the timeframe in which we expect to recognize these premiums as earned. ($ in millions) % earned after 2012 2011 Three months Six months Nine months Twelve months Allstate brand: Standard auto $ 4,188 $ 4,120 71.6 % 96.8 % 99.2 % 100.0 % Non-standard auto 200 216 67.1 % 93.6 % 98.5 % 100.0 % Homeowners 3,396 3,314 43.5 % 75.6 % 94.2 % 100.0 % Other personal lines (1) 1,370 1,293 39.4 % 67.1 % 84.0 % 90.6 % Total Allstate brand 9,154 8,943 56.3 % 84.5 % 95.1 % 98.6 % Encompass brand: Standard auto 321 311 43.5 % 75.2 % 94.0 % 100.0 % Homeowners 222 202 43.3 % 75.2 % 94.1 % 100.0 % Other personal lines (1) 50 47 43.8 % 75.6 % 94.2 % 100.0 % Total Encompass brand 593 560 43.4 % 75.2 % 94.0 % 100.0 % Esurance brand Standard auto 265 208 74.2 % 98.8 % 99.7 % 100.0 % Allstate Protection unearned premiums $ 10,012 $ 9,711 56.0 % 84.3 % 95.1 % 98.7 % (1) Other personal lines include commercial, renters, condominium, involuntary auto and other personal lines. A reconciliation of premiums written to premiums earned is shown in the following table. ($ in millions) 2012 2011 2010 Premiums written: Allstate Protection $ 27,026 $ 25,981 $ 25,906 Discontinued Lines and Coverages 1 (1 ) 1 Property-Liability premiums written 27,027 25,980 25,907 (Increase) decrease in unearned premiums (322 ) (33 ) 19 Other 32 (5 ) 31 Property-Liability premiums earned $ 26,737 $ 25,942 $ 25,957 Premiums earned: Allstate Protection $ 26,737 $ 25,942 $ 25,955 Discontinued Lines and Coverages 2 Property-Liability $ 26,737 $ 25,942 $ 25,957 48 Table of Contents Premiums written by brand are shown in the following table. ($ in millions) Allstate brand Encompass brand Esurance brand Allstate Protection 2012 2011 2010 2012 2011 2010 2012 2011 (1) 2012 2011 2010 Standard auto $ 15,700 $ 15,703 $ 15,842 $ 618 $ 604 $ 644 $ 1,024 $ 181 $ 17,342 $ 16,488 $ 16,486 Non-standard auto 698 775 883 1 6 698 776 889 Homeowners 6,060 5,893 5,753 398 362 357 6,458 6,255 6,110 Other personal lines 2,431 2,372 2,331 97 90 90 2,528 2,462 2,421 Total $ 24,889 $ 24,743 $ 24,809 $ 1,113 $ 1,057 $ 1,097 $ 1,024 $ 181 $ 27,026 $ 25,981 $ 25,906 (1) Represents period from October 7, 2011 to December 31, 2011. Premiums earned by brand are shown in the following table. Allstate brand Encompass brand Esurance brand Allstate Protection ($ in millions) 2012 2011 2010 2012 2011 2010 2012 2011 2012 2011 2010 Standard auto $ 15,637 $ 15,679 $ 15,814 $ 609 $ 620 $ 716 $ 967 $ 201 $ 17,213 $ 16,500 $ 16,530 Non-standard auto 715 797 896 2 9 715 799 905 Homeowners 5,980 5,835 5,693 379 365 385 6,359 6,200 6,078 Other personal lines 2,357 2,352 2,348 93 91 94 2,450 2,443 2,442 Total $ 24,689 $ 24,663 $ 24,751 $ 1,081 $ 1,078 $ 1,204 $ 967 $ 201 $ 26,737 $ 25,942 $ 25,955 Premium measures and statistics that are used to analyze the business are calculated and described below. Measures and statistics presented exclude Allstate Canada and specialty auto. PIF: Policy counts are based on items rather than customers. A multi-car customer would generate multiple item (policy) counts, even if all cars were insured under one policy. Average premium-gross written: Gross premiums written divided by issued item count. Gross premiums written include the impacts from discounts, surcharges and ceded reinsurance premiums and exclude the impacts from mid-term premium adjustments and premium refund accruals. Allstate brand average gross premiums represent the appropriate policy term for each line, which is 6 months for standard and non-standard auto and 12 months for homeowners. Encompass brand average gross premiums represent the appropriate policy term for each line, which is 12 months for standard auto and homeowners and 6 months for non-standard auto. Esurance brand average gross premiums represent the appropriate policy term, which is 6 months for standard auto. Renewal ratio: Renewal policies issued during the period, based on contract effective dates, divided by the total policies issued 6 months prior for standard and non-standard auto (12 months prior for Encompass brand standard auto) or 12 months prior for homeowners. New issued applications: Item counts of automobiles or homeowners insurance applications for insurance policies that were issued during the period, regardless of whether the customer was previously insured by another Allstate Protection market segment. Does not include automobiles that are added by existing customers. Standard auto premiums written totaled $17.34 billion in 2012, a 5.2% increase from $16.49 billion in 2011, following a comparable $16.49 billion in both 2011 and 2010. Allstate brand Encompass brand Esurance brand Standard Auto 2012 2011 2010 2012 2011 2010 2012 2011 PIF (thousands) 16,929 17,213 17,484 708 673 689 1,029 786 Average premium-gross written (1) $ 450 $ 444 $ 443 $ 912 $ 935 $ 979 $ 493 N/A Renewal ratio (%) 88.9 89.0 88.7 75.8 69.5 69.2 80.5 78.5 (8) Approved rate changes (2) : # of states 39 33 45 (6) 31 19 24 29 N/A Countrywide (%) (3) 3.1 4.7 1.4 4.1 3.5 1.4 4.4 N/A State specific (%) (4) (5) 5.0 8.1 (7) 2.2 5.2 6.1 2.7 5.6 N/A (1) Policy term is six months for Allstate and Esurance brands and twelve months for Encompass brand. (2) Rate changes that are indicated based on loss trend analysis to achieve a targeted return will continue to be pursued. Rate changes do not include rating plan enhancements, including the introduction of discounts and surcharges that result in no change in the overall rate level in the state. These rate changes do not reflect initial rates filed for insurance subsidiaries initially writing business in a state. Rate changes exclude Allstate Canada and specialty auto. 49 Table of Contents (3) Represents the impact in the states where rate changes were approved during the period as a percentage of total countrywide prior year-end premiums written. (4) Represents the impact in the states where rate changes were approved during the period as a percentage of its respective total prior year-end premiums written in those states. (5) Based on historical premiums written in those states, rate changes approved for standard auto totaled $530 million, $731 million and $218 million in 2012, 2011 and 2010, respectively. (6) Includes Washington D.C. (7) 2011 includes the impact of Florida rate increases averaging 18.5% and New York rate increases averaging 11.2% taken across multiple companies. (8) The Esurance brand renewal ratio for 2011 was restated to conform to the computation methodology used for Allstate and Encompass brand. N/A reflects not available. Allstate brand standard auto premiums written total of $15.70 billion in 2012 was comparable to 2011. Excluding Florida and New York, Allstate brand standard auto premiums written totaled $12.67 billion in 2012, a 1.5% increase from $12.49 billion in 2011. Factors impacting premiums written were the following: 1.6% decrease in PIF as of December 31, 2012 compared to December 31, 2011 due to fewer new issued applications and fewer policies available to renew. Excluding Florida and New York, PIF decreased 1.0% as of December 31, 2012 compared to December 31, 2011. 4.3% decrease in new issued applications to 1,826 thousand in 2012 from 1,908 thousand in 2011. Excluding Florida and New York, new issued applications decreased 4.9% to 1,614 thousand in 2012 from 1,697 thousand in 2011. New issued applications increased in 11 states in 2012 compared to 2011. increase in average gross premium in 2012 compared to 2011 0.1 point decrease in the renewal ratio in 2012 compared to 2011. In 2012, 27 states had favorable comparisons to 2011. Allstate brand standard auto premiums written totaled $15.70 billion in 2011, a 0.9% decrease from $15.84 billion in 2010. Factors impacting premiums written were the following: 1.5% decrease in PIF as of December 31, 2011 compared to December 31, 2010 due to fewer new issued applications and fewer policies available to renew. Excluding Florida and New York, PIF as of December 31, 2011 were comparable to December 31, 2010. 5.8% decrease in new issued applications to 1,908 thousand in 2011 from 2,025 thousand in 2010. Excluding Florida and New York, new issued applications decreased 0.1% to 1,697 thousand in 2011 from 1,699 thousand in 2010. New issued applications increased in 17 states in 2011 compared to 2010. increase in average gross premium in 2011 compared to 2010 0.3 point increase in the renewal ratio in 2011 compared to 2010. In 2011, 39 states had favorable comparisons to 2010. Encompass brand standard auto premiums written totaled $618 million in 2012, a 2.3% increase from $604 million in 2011. Excluding Florida, Encompass brand standard auto premiums written totaled $599 million in 2012, a 3.1% increase from $581 million in 2011. The increase was primarily due to a 5.2% increase in PIF as of December 31, 2012 compared to December 31, 2011 and actions taken to enhance our highly differentiated package policy. New issued applications increased 25.7% in 2012 compared to 2011 primarily due to increases in efforts to improve agency engagement. The renewal ratio increased 6.3 points in 2012 compared to 2011 driven primarily by retaining more package business as a result of our package-focused strategy. Encompass discontinued writing new auto business in Florida as of September 2012 and non-renewals will begin in 2013. Encompass previously withdrew from the Florida property insurance market in 2009. Encompass brand standard auto premiums written totaled $604 million in 2011, a 6.2% decrease from $644 million in 2010. The decrease was primarily due to the following actions taken: aligned pricing and underwriting with strategic direction, terminated relationships with certain independent agencies, non-renewal of underperforming business, discontinued writing the Special Value product (middle market auto product focused on segment auto) and Deerbrook (non-standard auto) in certain states, and non-renewal of property in Florida. Esurance brand standard auto premiums written totaled $1.02 billion in 2012. Esurance brand standard auto premiums written totaled $181 million in 2011 for the period from the October 7, 2011 acquisition date to December 31, 2011. PIF increased 30.9% as of December 31, 2012 compared to December 31, 2011. 50 Table of Contents Non-standard auto premiums written totaled $698 million in 2012, a 10.1% decrease from $776 million in 2011, following a 12.7% decrease in 2011 from $889 million in 2010. Allstate brand Non-Standard Auto 2012 2011 2010 PIF (thousands) 508 571 640 Average premium-gross written (6 months) $ 600 $ 606 $ 624 Renewal ratio (%) (6 months) 70.2 70.4 71.4 Approved rate changes: # of states 12 13 (2) 11 (2) Countrywide (%) 1.2 6.0 4.6 State specific (%) (1) 4.3 12.8 9.6 (1) Based on historical premiums written in those states, rate changes approved for non-standard auto totaled $8 million, $49 million and $41 million in 2012, 2011 and 2010, respectively. (2) Includes Washington D.C. Allstate brand non-standard auto premiums written totaled $698 million in 2012, a 9.9% decrease from $775 million in 2011. The decrease was primarily due to a decrease in PIF due to fewer number of policies available to renew; a 3.9% decrease in new issued applications to 246 thousand in 2012 from 256 thousand in 2011; and decreases in average gross premium and the renewal ratio. Allstate brand non-standard auto premiums written totaled $775 million in 2011, a 12.2% decrease from $883 million in 2010. The decrease was primarily due to a decrease in PIF due to a decline in the number of policies available to renew, a lower retention rate and fewer new issued applications; a 17.2% decrease in new issued applications to 256 thousand in 2011 from 309 thousand in 2010, driven in large part by management actions in Florida through October 2011; and decreases in average gross premium and the renewal ratio. Homeowners premiums written totaled $6.46 billion in 2012, a 3.2% increase from $6.26 billion in 2011, following a 2.4% increase in 2011 from $6.11 billion in 2010. Excluding the cost of catastrophe reinsurance, premiums written increased 2.8% in 2012 compared to 2011. For a more detailed discussion on reinsurance, see the Property-Liability Claims and Claims Expense Reserves section of the MD&A and Note 10 of the consolidated financial statements. Allstate brand Encompass brand Homeowners 2012 2011 2010 2012 2011 2010 PIF (thousands) (1) 5,974 6,369 6,690 327 306 314 Average premium-gross written (12 months) $ 1,087 $ 999 $ 943 $ 1,311 $ 1,297 $ 1,298 Renewal ratio (%) (12 months) 87.3 88.3 88.4 83.3 79.8 78.1 Approved rate changes (2) : # of states 42 41 (4) 32 (4) 33 (4) 27 (4) 23 (4) Countrywide (%) 6.3 8.6 7.0 6.0 3.1 0.7 State specific (%) (3) 8.6 11.0 10.0 6.4 4.1 1.4 (1) Beginning in 2012, excess and surplus lines PIF are not included in the homeowners PIF totals. Previously, these policy counts were included in the homeowners totals. Excess and surplus lines represent policies written by North Light. All other total homeowners measures and statistics include excess and surplus lines except for new issued applications. (2) Includes rate changes approved based on our net cost of reinsurance. Rate changes exclude excess and surplus lines. (3) Based on historical premiums written in those states, rate changes approved for homeowners totaled $412 million, $533 million and $424 million in the 2012, 2011 and 2010, respectively. (4) Includes Washington D.C. Allstate brand homeowners premiums written totaled $6.06 billion in 2012, a 2.8% increase from $5.89 billion in 2011. Factors impacting premiums written were the following: 6.2% decrease in PIF as of December 31, 2012 compared to December 31, 2011 due to fewer policies available to renew and fewer new issued applications 3.1% decrease in new issued applications to 442 thousand in 2012 from 456 thousand in 2011. We have new business underwriting restrictions in certain states. We also continue to take actions to maintain an appropriate level of exposure to catastrophic events while continuing to meet the needs of our customers, including selectively not offering continuing coverage in coastal areas of certain states. 51 Table of Contents increase in average gross premium in 2012 compared to 2011 primarily due to rate changes 1.0 point decrease in the renewal ratio in 2012 compared to 2011 $14 million decrease in the cost of our catastrophe reinsurance program to $481 million in 2012 from $495 million in 2011 Actions taken to manage our catastrophe exposure in areas with known exposure to hurricanes, earthquakes, wildfires, fires following earthquakes and other catastrophes have had an impact on our new business writings and retention for homeowners insurance. Allstate brand homeowners PIF has declined 1,281 thousand or 17.7% in the five years ended December 31, 2012. This impact will continue in 2013, although to a lesser degree. For a more detailed discussion on exposure management actions, see the Catastrophe Management section of the MD&A. We have different plans across the country to improve the growth and profitability of our homeowners business. In states that do not have severe weather issues and that have acceptable returns, we are seeking to grow. We are also seeking to selectively grow homeowners in some currently restricted areas where we believe we will earn an appropriate return for the risk. We will continue to pursue profit actions in states that are not at targeted returns. In states with severe weather and risk, North Light and non-proprietary products will remain a critical component to our overall homeowners strategy to profitably grow and serve our customers. Our Allstate House and Home product provides options of coverage for roof damage including graduated coverage and pricing based on roof type and age and uses a number of factors to determine the pricing, some of which relate to underwriting information normally obtained to evaluate auto insurance risks. The Allstate House and Home product has been rolled out to 17 states as of December 31, 2012 and we expect a continued countrywide roll out for new business over the next two years. Allstate brand homeowners premiums written totaled $5.89 billion in 2011, a 2.4% increase from $5.75 billion in 2010. Factors impacting premiums written were the following: 4.8% decrease in PIF as of December 31, 2011 compared to December 31, 2010, due to fewer policies available to renew and fewer new issued applications 14.9% decrease in new issued applications to 456 thousand in 2011 from 536 thousand in 2010. During the second quarter of 2011, our Castle Key Indemnity Company subsidiary completed a 2008 regulatory consent decree to sell 50,000 new homeowners policies in Florida by November 2011. increase in average gross premium in 2011 compared to 2010, primarily due to rate changes 0.1 point decrease in the renewal ratio in 2011 compared to 2010 decrease in the cost of our catastrophe reinsurance program in 2011 compared to 2010 Encompass brand homeowners premiums written totaled $398 million in 2012, a 9.9% increase from $362 million in 2011, following a 1.4% increase in 2011 from $357 million in 2010. The increase in 2012 compared to 2011 was primarily due to a 6.9% increase in PIF as of December 31, 2012 compared to December 31, 2011 and actions taken to enhance our highly differentiated package policy. New issued applications increased 40.0% in 2012 compared to 2011. The renewal ratio increased 3.5 points in 2012 compared to 2011 driven primarily by retaining more package business. Other personal lines Allstate brand other personal lines premiums written totaled $2.43 billion in 2012, a 2.5% increase from $2.37 billion in 2011, following a 1.8% increase in 2011 from $2.33 billion in 2010. Allstate brand other personal lines includes Emerging Businesses other personal lines (renters, condominium, other property, Allstate Roadside Services and Allstate Dealer Services) for which premiums written increased 4.3% to $1.86 billion in 2012 from $1.79 billion in 2011, following a 5.4% increase in 2011 from $1.70 billion in 2010. 52 Table of Contents Underwriting results are shown in the following table. ($ in millions) 2012 2011 2010 Premiums written $ 27,026 $ 25,981 $ 25,906 Premiums earned $ 26,737 $ 25,942 $ 25,955 Claims and claims expense (18,433 ) (20,140 ) (18,923 ) Amortization of DAC (3,483 ) (3,477 ) (3,517 ) Other costs and expenses (3,534 ) (3,139 ) (2,957 ) Restructuring and related charges (34 ) (43 ) (33 ) Underwriting income (loss) $ 1,253 $ (857 ) $ 525 Catastrophe losses $ 2,345 $ 3,815 $ 2,207 Underwriting income (loss) by line of business Standard auto $ 367 $ 561 $ 692 Non-standard auto 102 102 74 Homeowners 690 (1,331 ) (336 ) Other personal lines 94 (189 ) 95 Underwriting income (loss) $ 1,253 $ (857 ) $ 525 Underwriting income (loss) by brand Allstate brand $ 1,515 $ (667 ) $ 568 Encompass brand (70 ) (146 ) (43 ) Esurance brand (192 ) (44 ) Underwriting income (loss) $ 1,253 $ (857 ) $ 525 Allstate Protection had underwriting income of $1.25 billion in 2012 compared to an underwriting loss of $857 million in 2011, primarily due to underwriting income in homeowners and other personal lines in 2012 compared to underwriting losses in 2011, partially offset by a decrease in standard auto underwriting income. Homeowners underwriting income was $690 million in the 2012 compared to an underwriting loss of $1.33 billion in 2011, primarily due to decreases in catastrophe losses and average earned premiums increasing faster than loss costs, partially offset by higher expenses. Other personal lines underwriting income was $94 million in 2012 compared to an underwriting loss of $189 million in 2011, primarily due to decreases in catastrophe losses including favorable reserve reestimates. Standard auto underwriting income decreased $194 million to $367 million in 2012 from $561 million in 2011 primarily due to the inclusion of a full year of Esurance brand's underwriting losses in 2012 and increases in catastrophe losses. Allstate Protection experienced an underwriting loss of $857 million in 2011 compared to underwriting income of $525 million in 2010, primarily due to an increase in homeowners underwriting loss, an underwriting loss for other personal lines in 2011 compared to an underwriting gain in 2010, and a decrease in standard auto underwriting income. Homeowners underwriting loss increased $995 million to $1.33 billion in 2011 from $336 million in 2010, primarily due to increases in catastrophe losses and higher expenses partially offset by average earned premiums increasing faster than loss costs. Other personal lines underwriting income decreased $284 million to an underwriting loss of $189 million in 2011 from underwriting income of $95 million in 2010, primarily due to increases in catastrophe losses, unfavorable reserve reestimates and higher expenses. Standard auto underwriting income decreased $131 million to $561 million in 2011 from $692 million in 2010, primarily due to increases in catastrophe losses and higher expenses, partially offset by favorable reserve reestimates. Catastrophe losses were $2.35 billion in 2012 compared to $3.82 billion in 2011 and $2.21 billion in 2010. $1.12 billion of the 2012 catastrophe losses related to Sandy, comprising approximately 179,000 expected claims of which approximately 170,000 claims have been reported. Through February 4, 2013, approximately 98% of the property and auto claim counts related to Sandy are closed and approximately 95% of our expected net losses have been paid. We expect substantially all of our remaining estimated net losses related to Sandy to be paid during 2013. 2012 catastrophe losses also include $8 million of accelerated and reinstatement catastrophe reinsurance premiums incurred as a result of Sandy. We define a "catastrophe" as an event that produces pre-tax losses before reinsurance in excess of $1 million and involves multiple first party policyholders, or an event that produces a number of claims in excess of a preset, per-event threshold of average claims in a specific area, occurring within a certain amount of time following the event. 53 Table of Contents Catastrophes are caused by various natural events including high winds, winter storms, tornadoes, hailstorms, wildfires, tropical storms, hurricanes, earthquakes and volcanoes. We are also exposed to man-made catastrophic events, such as certain types of terrorism or industrial accidents. The nature and level of catastrophes in any period cannot be reliably predicted. Catastrophe losses by the size of event are shown in the following table. ($ in millions) 2012 Number of events Claims and claims expense Combined ratio impact Average catastrophe loss per event Size of catastrophe loss Greater than $250 million 1 1.2 % $ 1,117 47.6 % 4.2 $ 1,117 $101 million to $250 million 5 5.9 690 29.4 2.6 138 $50 million to $100 million 4 4.8 301 12.9 1.1 75 Less than $50 million 74 88.1 647 27.6 2.4 9 Total 84 100.0 % 2,755 117.5 10.3 33 Prior year reserve reestimates (410 ) (17.5 ) (1.5 ) Total catastrophe losses $ 2,345 100.0 % 8.8 Catastrophe losses by the type of event are shown in the following table. ($ in millions) 2012 2011 2010 Number of events Number of events Number of events Hurricanes/Tropical storms $ 1,200 3 $ 619 3 $ 15 1 Tornadoes 297 5 1,234 7 174 7 Wind/Hail 1,198 64 1,775 68 1,908 74 Wildfires 53 11 67 9 15 1 Other events 7 1 250 4 258 7 Prior year reserve reestimates (410 ) (130 ) (163 ) Total catastrophe losses $ 2,345 84 $ 3,815 91 $ 2,207 90 Catastrophe losses, including prior year reserve reestimates, excluding hurricanes named or numbered by the National Weather Service, fires following earthquakes and earthquakes totaled $1.32 billion, $3.30 billion and $2.27 billion in 2012, 2011 and 2010, respectively. 54 Table of Contents Combined ratio Loss ratios by product, and expense and combined ratios by brand, are shown in the following table. Loss ratio (1) Effect of catastrophe losses on combined ratio Effect of prior year reserve reestimates on combined ratio Effect of business combination expenses and the amortization of purchased intangible assets on combined ratio 2012 2011 2010 2012 2011 2010 2012 2011 2010 2012 2011 Allstate brand loss ratio: Standard auto 70.7 70.6 70.7 3.9 2.6 1.0 (2.0 ) (2.3 ) (0.9 ) Non-standard auto 61.8 62.8 67.2 0.8 1.1 0.3 (3.2 ) (4.9 ) (3.6 ) Homeowners 64.1 98.0 82.1 23.2 50.0 31.3 (5.2 ) (1.2 ) (0.3 ) Other personal lines 64.8 76.0 66.4 8.0 13.6 7.2 (0.9 ) 4.0 0.7 Total Allstate brand loss ratio 68.3 77.3 72.8 8.9 14.8 8.5 (2.7 ) (1.5 ) (0.7 ) Allstate brand expense ratio 25.6 25.4 24.9 0.1 Allstate brand combined ratio 93.9 102.7 97.7 8.9 14.8 8.5 (2.7 ) (1.5 ) (0.7 ) 0.1 Encompass brand loss ratio: Standard auto 79.1 81.8 75.4 3.6 1.8 0.8 (3.3 ) 2.4 Non-standard auto 150.0 100.0 (50.0 ) Homeowners 76.5 88.5 74.3 28.8 39.7 23.1 (3.2 ) 0.3 (1.3 ) Other personal lines 67.7 83.5 73.4 5.4 9.9 4.3 (9.7 ) (1.1 ) Total Encompass brand loss ratio 76.9 84.3 75.1 12.6 15.3 8.2 (4.2 ) 1.4 (0.5 ) Encompass brand expense ratio 29.6 29.2 28.5 Encompass brand combined ratio 106.5 113.5 103.6 12.6 15.3 8.2 (4.2 ) 1.4 (0.5 ) Esurance brand loss ratio: Standard auto 77.2 78.1 1.6 Total Esurance brand loss ratio 77.2 78.1 1.6 Esurance brand expense ratio 42.7 43.8 10.1 20.9 Esurance brand combined ratio 119.9 121.9 1.6 10.1 20.9 Allstate Protection loss ratio 68.9 77.6 72.9 8.8 14.7 8.5 (2.7 ) (1.4 ) (0.7 ) Allstate Protection expense ratio 26.4 25.7 25.1 0.5 0.2 Allstate Protection combined ratio 95.3 103.3 98.0 8.8 14.7 8.5 (2.7 ) (1.4 ) (0.7 ) 0.5 0.2 (1) Ratios are calculated using the premiums earned for the respective line of business. Standard auto loss ratio for the Allstate brand increased 0.1 points in 2012 compared to 2011 primarily due to higher catastrophe losses and lower favorable reserve reestimates. Excluding the impact of catastrophe losses, the Allstate brand standard auto loss ratio improved 1.2 points in 2012 compared to 2011. Florida results have shown improvement with loss ratios, including prior year reserve reestimates, of 69.0 in 2012 compared to 72.6 in 2011. For New York, the trend was also favorable through September 2012, but higher catastrophe losses in the fourth quarter of 2012 caused the year-end ratio to deteriorate to 83.6 in 2012 compared to 77.6 in 2011. Excluding the impact of Sandy, the loss ratio in New York was 67.9 in 2012. Excluding the impact of catastrophe losses, both states have experienced improvement from prior year as a result of management actions, including rate increases, underwriting restrictions, increased claims staffing and review, and on-going efforts to combat fraud and abuse. However, we continue to focus on profitability given ongoing developments in these two states. Claim frequencies in the bodily injury and property damage coverages decreased 0.9% and 1.9%, respectively, in 2012 compared to 2011. Bodily injury and property damage coverage paid claim severities increased 4.1% and 3.0%, respectively, in 2012 compared to 2011. In 2012, severity increased in line with historical Consumer Price Index ("CPI") trends. Standard auto loss ratio for the Allstate brand decreased 0.1 points in 2011 compared to 2010 primarily due to favorable reserve reestimates, partially offset by higher catastrophe losses. Excluding the impact of catastrophe losses, the Allstate brand standard auto loss ratio improved 1.7 points in 2011 compared to 2010. In 2011, claim frequencies in the bodily injury and physical damage coverages have decreased compared to 2010. Bodily injury and physical damage coverages severity results in 2011 increased in line with historical CPI trends. 55 Table of Contents Encompass brand standard auto loss ratio decreased 2.7 points in 2012 compared to 2011 primarily due to favorable reserve reestimates, partially offset by higher catastrophe losses. Standard auto loss ratio for the Encompass brand increased 6.4 points in 2011 compared to 2010 primarily due to unfavorable reserve reestimates and higher catastrophe losses. Esurance brand standard auto loss ratio decreased 0.9 points in 2012 compared to 2011. In 2012, Esurance implemented a number of profitability management actions, including rate increases in 23 out of 30 states, and underwriting actions in Florida and Michigan. Homeowners loss ratio for the Allstate brand decreased 33.9 points to 64.1 in 2012 from 98.0 in 2011 primarily due to lower catastrophe losses and average earned premiums increasing faster than loss costs. Claim frequency excluding catastrophe losses decreased 8.4% in 2012 compared to 2011. Paid claim severity excluding catastrophe losses increased 3.3% in 2012 compared to 2011. Homeowners loss ratio for the Allstate brand increased 15.9 points to 98.0 in 2011 from 82.1 in 2010 due to higher catastrophe losses. Excluding the impact of catastrophe losses, the Allstate brand homeowners loss ratio improved 2.8 points in 2011 compared to 2010 due to average earned premiums increasing faster than loss costs. Encompass brand homeowners loss ratio decreased 12.0 points in 2012 compared to 2011 primarily due to lower catastrophe losses and favorable reserve reestimates. Homeowners loss ratio for the Encompass brand increased 14.2 points in 2011 compared to 2010 primarily due to higher catastrophe losses. Expense ratio for Allstate Protection increased 0.7 points in 2012 compared to 2011 primarily due to additional marketing costs and higher amortization of purchased intangible assets related to Esurance. The expense ratio for Allstate Protection increased 0.6 points in 2011 compared to 2010 driven by additional marketing, including $78 million spent on the Grow to Win initiative, and other growth initiative costs, and reduced guaranty fund accrual levels in 2010. The impact of specific costs and expenses on the expense ratio are shown in the following table. Allstate brand Encompass brand Esurance brand Allstate Protection 2012 2011 2010 2012 2011 2010 2012 2011 2012 2011 2010 Amortization of DAC 13.2 13.3 13.3 17.5 17.4 17.8 2.5 0.5 12.9 13.3 13.6 Advertising expenses 2.7 3.0 2.6 0.5 0.1 0.1 15.4 10.9 3.1 2.9 2.5 Business combination expenses and amortization of purchased intangible assets 0.1 10.1 20.9 0.5 0.2 Other costs and expenses 9.5 8.9 8.9 11.6 11.7 10.0 14.7 11.5 9.8 9.1 8.9 Restructuring and related charges 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.6 0.1 0.2 0.1 Total expense ratio 25.6 25.4 24.9 29.6 29.2 28.5 42.7 43.8 26.4 25.7 25.1 The Encompass brand DAC amortization is higher on average than Allstate brand DAC amortization due to higher commission rates. The Esurance brand expense ratio is higher than Allstate and Encompass brands due to business combination expenses and amortization of purchased intangible assets. Purchased intangible assets will be amortized on an accelerated basis with over 80% of the amortization taking place by 2016. Since Esurance uses a direct distribution model, its primary acquisition-related costs are advertising as opposed to commissions for the Allstate and Encompass brands. Advertising costs are not capitalized as DAC while commission costs are capitalized as DAC. As a result, the Esurance expense and combined ratios will be higher during periods of growth since the expenses will be recognized prior to the premium earned. Based on our analysis, Esurance's acquisition costs, primarily advertising, are in line with other distribution channels when considering the cumulative earned premiums of policies sold. DAC We establish a DAC asset for costs that are related directly to the successful acquisition of new or renewal insurance policies, principally agents' remuneration and premium taxes. For the Allstate Protection business, DAC is 56 Table of Contents amortized to income over the period in which premiums are earned. The DAC balance as of December 31 by brand and product type are shown in the following table. ($ in millions) Allstate brand Encompass brand Esurance brand Allstate Protection 2012 2011 2012 2011 2012 2011 2012 2011 Standard auto $ 508 $ 506 $ 54 $ 50 $ 7 $ 25 (1) $ 569 $ 581 Non-standard auto 23 25 23 25 Homeowners 436 422 36 34 472 456 Other personal lines 325 280 7 6 332 286 Total DAC $ 1,292 $ 1,233 $ 97 $ 90 $ 7 $ 25 $ 1,396 $ 1,348 (1) Includes $21 million of present value of future profits, which was fully amortized in the first quarter of 2012. Catastrophe management Historical catastrophe experience For the last ten years, the average annual impact of catastrophes on our Property-Liability loss ratio was 9.7 points. The average annual impact of catastrophes on the homeowners loss ratio for the last ten years was 32.4 points. Over time, we have limited our aggregate insurance exposure to catastrophe losses in certain regions of the country that are subject to high levels of natural catastrophes. Limitations include our participation in various state facilities, such as the California Earthquake Authority ("CEA"), which provides insurance for California earthquake losses; the Florida Hurricane Catastrophe Fund ("FHCF"), which provides reimbursements to participating insurers for certain qualifying Florida hurricane losses; and other state facilities, such as wind pools. However, the impact of these actions may be diminished by the growth in insured values, and the effect of state insurance laws and regulations. In addition, in various states we are required to participate in assigned risk plans, reinsurance facilities and joint underwriting associations that provide insurance coverage to individuals or entities that otherwise are unable to purchase such coverage from private insurers. Because of our participation in these and other state facilities such as wind pools, we may be exposed to losses that surpass the capitalization of these facilities and to assessments from these facilities. We have continued to take actions to maintain an appropriate level of exposure to catastrophic events while continuing to meet the needs of our customers, including the following: Selectively not offering continuing coverage of homeowners policies in coastal areas of certain states. This includes New York and New Jersey where our homeowners PIF decreased 29.4% and 32.6%, respectively, since 2006. Increased capacity in our brokerage platform for customers not offered a renewal. North Light expanded to 5 new states in 2012, bringing the total number of active states to 31. In Texas we have been ceding wind exposure related to insured property located in wind pool eligible areas along the coast including the Galveston Islands. We ceased writing new homeowners business in California in 2007. We continue to renew current policyholders. We ceased writing new homeowners business in Florida in 2011 beyond a modest stance for existing customers who replace their currently-insured home with an acceptable property. The Encompass companies operating in Florida withdrew from the property lines in 2009. Tropical cyclone deductibles are in place for a large portion of coastal insured properties though contract language varies across states and companies, allowing for these higher deductibles to be triggered differently across our customer base. We have additional catastrophe exposure, beyond the property lines, for auto customers who have purchased physical damage coverage. Auto physical damage coverage generally includes coverage for flood-related loss. We manage this additional exposure through inclusion of auto losses in our nationwide reinsurance program (which excludes New Jersey and Florida). Hurricanes We consider the greatest areas of potential catastrophe losses due to hurricanes generally to be major metropolitan centers in counties along the eastern and gulf coasts of the United States. Usually, the average premium on a property policy near these coasts is greater than in other areas. However, average premiums are often not considered commensurate with the inherent risk of loss. In addition and as explained in Note 14 of the consolidated financial statements, in various states Allstate is subject to assessments from assigned risk plans, reinsurance facilities and joint underwriting associations providing insurance for wind related property losses. 57 Table of Contents We have addressed our risk of hurricane loss by, among other actions, purchasing reinsurance for specific states and on a countrywide basis for our personal lines property insurance in areas most exposed to hurricanes, limiting personal homeowners new business writings in coastal areas in southern and eastern states, implementing tropical cyclone deductibles where appropriate, and not offering continuing coverage on certain policies in coastal counties in certain states. We continue to seek appropriate returns for the risks we write. This may require further actions, similar to those already taken, in geographies where we are not getting appropriate returns. However, we may maintain or opportunistically increase our presence in areas where we achieve adequate returns and do not materially increase our hurricane risk. Earthquakes Actions taken to reduce our exposure from earthquake coverage are substantially complete. These actions included purchasing reinsurance on a countrywide basis and in the state of Kentucky, no longer offering new optional earthquake coverage in most states, removing optional earthquake coverage upon renewal in most states, and entering into arrangements in many states to make earthquake coverage available through other insurers for new and renewal business. We expect to retain approximately 30,000 PIF with earthquake coverage due to regulatory and other reasons. We also will continue to have exposure to earthquake risk on certain policies that do not specifically exclude coverage for earthquake losses, including our auto policies, and to fires following earthquakes. Allstate policyholders in the state of California are offered coverage through the CEA, a privately-financed, publicly-managed state agency created to provide insurance coverage for earthquake damage. Allstate is subject to assessments from the CEA under certain circumstances as explained in Note 14 of the consolidated financial statements. Fires Following Earthquakes Actions taken related to our risk of loss from fires following earthquakes include changing homeowners underwriting requirements in California, purchasing reinsurance for Kentucky personal lines property risks, and purchasing nationwide occurrence reinsurance, excluding Florida and New Jersey. Wildfires Actions we are taking to reduce our risk of loss from wildfires include changing homeowners underwriting requirements in certain states and purchasing nationwide occurrence reinsurance. Reinsurance A description of our current catastrophe reinsurance program appears in Note 10 of the consolidated financial statements. DISCONTINUED LINES AND COVERAGES SEGMENT Overview The Discontinued Lines and Coverages segment includes results from insurance coverage that we no longer write and results for certain commercial and other businesses in run-off. Our exposure to asbestos, environmental and other discontinued lines claims is reported in this segment. We have assigned management of this segment to a designated group of professionals with expertise in claims handling, policy coverage interpretation, exposure identification and reinsurance collection. As part of its responsibilities, this group may at times be engaged in policy buybacks, settlements and reinsurance assumed and ceded commutations. Summarized underwriting results for the years ended December 31 are presented in the following table. ($ in millions) 2012 2011 2010 Premiums written $ 1 $ (1 ) $ 1 Premiums earned $ $ $ 2 Claims and claims expense (51 ) (21 ) (28 ) Operating costs and expenses (2 ) (4 ) (5 ) Underwriting loss $ (53 ) $ (25 ) $ (31 ) The underwriting loss of $53 million in 2012 related to a $26 million unfavorable reestimate of asbestos reserves, a $22 million unfavorable reestimate of environmental reserves and a $5 million unfavorable reestimate of other reserves, primarily as a result of our annual review using established industry and actuarial best practices, partially offset by a $14 million decrease in our allowance for future uncollectable reinsurance. The cost of administering claims settlements totaled $11 million for each of 2012 and 2011 and $13 million in 2010. 58 Table of Contents The underwriting loss of $25 million in 2011 related to a $26 million unfavorable reestimate of asbestos reserves and a $5 million unfavorable reestimate of other reserves, primarily as a result of our annual review using established industry and actuarial best practices, partially offset by a $26 million decrease in our allowance for future uncollectable reinsurance. Environmental reserves were essentially unchanged. The underwriting loss of $31 million in 2010 related to an $18 million unfavorable reestimate of environmental reserves and a $5 million unfavorable reestimate of asbestos reserves, partially offset by a $4 million favorable reestimate of other reserves, primarily as a result of our annual review using established industry and actuarial best practices. See the Property-Liability Claims and Claims Expense Reserves section of the MD&A for a more detailed discussion. Discontinued Lines and Coverages outlook We may continue to experience asbestos and/or environmental losses in the future. These losses could be due to the potential adverse impact of new information relating to new and additional claims or the impact of resolving unsettled claims based on unanticipated events such as litigation or legislative, judicial and regulatory actions. Environmental losses may also increase as the result of additional funding for environmental site cleanup. Because of our annual review, we believe that our reserves are appropriately established based on available information, technology, laws and regulations. We continue to be encouraged that the pace of industry asbestos claim activity has slowed, perhaps reflecting various state legislative and judicial actions with respect to medical criteria and increased legal scrutiny of the legitimacy of claims. PROPERTY-LIABILITY INVESTMENT RESULTS Net investment income increased 10.4% to $1.33 billion in 2012 from $1.20 billion in 2011, after increasing 1.0% in 2011 compared to 2010. The 2012 increase was primarily due to income from limited partnerships and higher average investment balances, partially offset by lower fixed income yields. We continue to reduce interest rate risk by selling longer term fixed income securities and investing the proceeds in securities with shorter maturities, resulting in realized capital gains and lower net investment income, and positioning for reinvestment when interest rates rise. The 2011 increase was primarily due to higher yields, partially offset by lower average investment balances. The following table presents the average pre-tax investment yields for the years ended December 31. Pre-tax yield is calculated as investment income (including dividend income in the case of equity securities) divided by the average of the investment balances at the beginning and end of the year and interim quarters. Investment balances, for purposes of the pre-tax yield calculation, exclude unrealized capital gains and losses. Limited partnerships accounted for under the equity method of accounting ("EMA") are included in the 2012 yields since their income is reported in net investment income. 2012 2011 2010 Fixed income securities: tax-exempt 4.3 % 4.8 % 4.9 % Fixed income securities: tax-exempt equivalent 6.3 7.0 7.1 Fixed income securities: taxable 3.7 3.8 3.5 Equity securities 3.5 2.8 2.3 Mortgage loans 4.3 4.0 5.7 Limited partnership interests 6.3 5.6 3.1 Total portfolio 3.9 3.9 3.8 59 Table of Contents Net realized capital gains and losses are presented in the following table. ($ in millions) 2012 2011 2010 Impairment write-downs $ (134 ) $ (250 ) $ (295 ) Change in intent write-downs (31 ) (49 ) (62 ) Net other-than-temporary impairment losses recognized in earnings (165 ) (299 ) (357 ) Sales 511 469 455 Valuation of derivative instruments 5 (54 ) (331 ) Settlements of derivative instruments (16 ) (127 ) (143 ) EMA limited partnership income (1) 96 55 Realized capital gains and losses, pre-tax 335 85 (321 ) Income tax (expense) benefit (114 ) (31 ) 114 Realized capital gains and losses, after-tax $ 221 $ 54 $ (207 ) (1) Income from EMA limited partnerships is reported in net investment income in 2012 and realized capital gains and losses in 2011 and 2010. For a further discussion of net realized capital gains and losses, see the Investments section of the MD&A. PROPERTY-LIABILITY CLAIMS AND CLAIMS EXPENSE RESERVES Property-Liability underwriting results are significantly influenced by estimates of property-liability claims and claims expense reserves. For a description of our reserve process, see Note 8 of the consolidated financial statements and for a further description of our reserving policies and the potential variability in our reserve estimates, see the Application of Critical Accounting Estimates section of the MD&A. These reserves are an estimate of amounts necessary to settle all outstanding claims, including IBNR claims, as of the reporting date. The facts and circumstances leading to our reestimates of reserves relate to revisions to the development factors used to predict how losses are likely to develop from the end of a reporting period until all claims have been paid. Reestimates occur because actual losses are likely different than those predicted by the estimated development factors used in prior reserve estimates. As of December 31, 2012, the impact of a reserve reestimation corresponding to a one percent increase or decrease in net reserves would be a decrease or increase of approximately $112 million in net income. We believe the net loss reserves for Allstate Protection exposures are appropriately established based on available facts, technology, laws and regulations. The table below shows total net reserves as of December 31 by line of business. ($ in millions) 2012 2011 2010 Allstate brand $ 14,364 $ 14,792 $ 14,696 Encompass brand 807 859 921 Esurance brand 470 429 Total Allstate Protection 15,641 16,080 15,617 Discontinued Lines and Coverages 1,637 1,707 1,779 Total Property-Liability $ 17,278 $ 17,787 $ 17,396 60 Table of Contents The tables below show reserves, net of reinsurance, representing the estimated cost of outstanding claims as they were recorded at the beginning of years 2012, 2011 and 2010, and the effect of reestimates in each year. ($ in millions) January 1 reserves 2012 2011 2010 Allstate brand $ 14,792 $ 14,696 $ 14,123 Encompass brand 859 921 1,027 Esurance brand 429 Total Allstate Protection 16,080 15,617 15,150 Discontinued Lines and Coverages 1,707 1,779 1,878 Total Property-Liability $ 17,787 $ 17,396 $ 17,028 ($ in millions, except ratios) 2012 2011 2010 Reserve reestimate (1) Effect on combined ratio (2) Reserve reestimate (1) Effect on combined ratio (2) Reserve reestimate (1) Effect on combined ratio (2) Allstate brand $ (671 ) (2.5 ) $ (371 ) (1.4 ) $ (181 ) (0.7 ) Encompass brand (45 ) (0.2 ) 15 (6 ) Esurance brand Total Allstate Protection (716 ) (2.7 ) (356 ) (1.4 ) (187 ) (0.7 ) Discontinued Lines and Coverages 51 0.2 21 0.1 28 0.1 Total Property-Liability (3) $ (665 ) (2.5 ) $ (335 ) (1.3 ) $ (159 ) (0.6 ) Reserve reestimates, after-tax $ (432 ) $ (218 ) $ (103 ) Consolidated net income $ 2,306 $ 787 $ 911 Reserve reestimates as a % of net income 18.7 % 27.7 % 11.3 % (1) Favorable reserve reestimates are shown in parentheses. (2) Ratios are calculated using Property-Liability premiums earned. (3) Prior year reserve reestimates included in catastrophe losses totaled $410 million favorable in 2012, $130 million favorable in 2011 and $163 million favorable in 2010. The effect of catastrophe losses included in prior year reserve reestimates on the combined ratio totaled 1.5 favorable, 0.5 favorable and 0.6 favorable in 2012, 2011 and 2010, respectively. Allstate Protection The tables below show Allstate Protection net reserves representing the estimated cost of outstanding claims as they were recorded at the beginning of years 2012, 2011 and 2010, and the effect of reestimates in each year. ($ in millions) January 1 reserves 2012 2011 2010 Auto $ 11,404 $ 11,034 $ 10,606 Homeowners 2,439 2,442 2,399 Other personal lines 2,237 2,141 2,145 Total Allstate Protection $ 16,080 $ 15,617 $ 15,150 61 Table of Contents ($ in millions, except ratios) 2012 2011 2010 Reserve reestimate Effect on combined ratio Reserve reestimate Effect on combined ratio Reserve reestimate Effect on combined ratio Auto $ (365 ) (1.4 ) $ (381 ) (1.5 ) $ (179 ) (0.7 ) Homeowners (321 ) (1.2 ) (69 ) (0.3 ) (23 ) (0.1 ) Other personal lines (30 ) (0.1 ) 94 0.4 15 0.1 Total Allstate Protection $ (716 ) (2.7 ) $ (356 ) (1.4 ) $ (187 ) (0.7 ) Underwriting income (loss) $ 1,253 $ (857 ) $ 525 Reserve reestimates as a % of underwriting income (loss) 57.1 % 41.5 % 35.6 % Auto reserve reestimates in 2012, 2011 and 2010 were primarily due to claim severity development that was better than expected. 2010 was also impacted by a litigation settlement. Favorable homeowners reserve reestimates in 2012, 2011 and 2010 were primarily due to favorable catastrophe reserve reestimates. 2010 was also impacted by a litigation settlement. Other personal lines reserve reestimates in 2012 were primarily due to favorable catastrophe reserve reestimates. Other personal lines reserve reestimates in 2011 and 2010 were primarily the result of loss development higher than anticipated in previous estimates. Pending, new and closed claims for Allstate Protection are summarized in the following table for the years ended December 31. The increase in pending claims as of December 31, 2012 compared to December 31, 2011 relates to catastrophes, primarily Sandy, for all lines as well as the inclusion of Esurance claims for auto. Number of claims 2012 2011 (1) 2010 Auto Pending, beginning of year 436,972 490,459 540,424 New 5,807,557 5,656,687 5,571,199 Total closed (5,772,451 ) (5,710,174 ) (5,621,164 ) Pending, end of year 472,078 436,972 490,459 Homeowners Pending, beginning of year 44,134 51,031 59,685 New 1,003,493 1,214,792 991,962 Total closed (999,209 ) (1,221,689 ) (1,000,616 ) Pending, end of year 48,418 44,134 51,031 Other personal lines Pending, beginning of year 31,871 33,388 36,537 New 337,257 333,209 282,137 Total closed (315,917 ) (334,726 ) (285,286 ) Pending, end of year 53,211 31,871 33,388 Total Allstate Protection Pending, beginning of year 512,977 574,878 636,646 New 7,148,307 7,204,688 6,845,298 Total closed (7,087,577 ) (7,266,589 ) (6,907,066 ) Pending, end of year 573,707 512,977 574,878 (1) Excludes Esurance brand number of claims since not available. 62 Table of Contents The following tables reflect the accident years to which the reestimates shown above are applicable by line of business. Favorable reserve reestimates are shown in parentheses. 2012 Prior year reserve reestimates ($ in millions) 2002 & prior 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 Total Allstate brand $ 102 $ (9 ) $ (10 ) $ (36 ) $ 11 $ (11 ) $ (36 ) $ (33 ) $ (147 ) $ (502 ) $ (671 ) Encompass brand (1 ) (12 ) (1 ) (5 ) (4 ) (14 ) (8 ) (45 ) Esurance brand Total Allstate Protection 102 (10 ) (10 ) (48 ) 10 (11 ) (41 ) (37 ) (161 ) (510 ) (716 ) Discontinued Lines and Coverages 51 51 Total Property- Liability $ 153 $ (10 ) $ (10 ) $ (48 ) $ 10 $ (11 ) $ (41 ) $ (37 ) $ (161 ) $ (510 ) $ (665 ) 2011 Prior year reserve reestimates ($ in millions) 2001 & prior 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 Total Allstate brand $ 123 $ 16 $ 26 $ 8 $ 5 $ 7 $ $ (28 ) $ (150 ) $ (378 ) $ (371 ) Encompass brand 2 (1 ) 1 1 (1 ) 2 2 9 15 Total Allstate Protection 125 16 25 8 6 8 (1 ) (26 ) (148 ) (369 ) (356 ) Discontinued Lines and Coverages 21 21 Total Property- Liability $ 146 $ 16 $ 25 $ 8 $ 6 $ 8 $ (1 ) $ (26 ) $ (148 ) $ (369 ) $ (335 ) 2010 Prior year reserve reestimates ($ in millions) 2000 & prior 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 Total Allstate brand $ 262 $ (1 ) $ (7 ) $ (18 ) $ (15 ) $ (51 ) $ (106 ) $ (86 ) $ (45 ) $ (114 ) $ (181 ) Encompass brand 1 1 1 2 6 (6 ) (1 ) (10 ) (6 ) Total Allstate Protection 263 (1 ) (6 ) (17 ) (13 ) (45 ) (106 ) (92 ) (46 ) (124 ) (187 ) Discontinued Lines and Coverages 28 28 Total Property- Liability $ 291 $ (1 ) $ (6 ) $ (17 ) $ (13 ) $ (45 ) $ (106 ) $ (92 ) $ (46 ) $ (124 ) $ (159 ) Allstate brand prior year reserve reestimates were $671 million favorable in 2012, $371 million favorable in 2011 and $181 million favorable in 2010. In 2012, this was primarily due to favorable catastrophe reserve reestimates and severity development that was better than expected. The increased reserves in accident years 2002 & prior is due to a reclassification of injury reserves to older years and reserve strengthening. In 2011, this was primarily due to severity development that was better than expected and favorable catastrophe reserve reestimates. The increased reserves in accident years 2001 & prior is due to a reclassification of injury reserves to older years and reserve strengthening. In 2010, this was primarily due to favorable catastrophe reserve reestimates and severity development that was better than expected, partially offset by litigation settlements. The increased reserves in accident years 2000 & prior is due to the litigation settlements of $100 million, a reclassification of injury reserves to older years and reserve strengthening. 63 Table of Contents These trends are primarily responsible for revisions to loss development factors, as described above, used to predict how losses are likely to develop from the end of a reporting period until all claims have been paid. Because these trends cause actual losses to differ from those predicted by the estimated development factors used in prior reserve estimates, reserves are revised as actuarial studies validate new trends based on the indications of updated development factor calculations. The impact of these reestimates on the Allstate brand underwriting income (loss) is shown in the table below. ($ in millions) 2012 2011 2010 Reserve reestimates $ (671 ) $ (371 ) $ (181 ) Allstate brand underwriting income (loss) 1,515 (667 ) 568 Reserve reestimates as a % of underwriting income (loss) 44.3 % 55.6 % 31.9 % Encompass brand prior year reserve reestimates in 2012 were related to lower than anticipated claim settlement costs and favorable catastrophe reserve reestimates. Reserve reestimates in 2011 were related to higher than anticipated claim settlement costs. 2010 Encompass brand reserve reestimates were related to lower than anticipated claim settlement costs. The impact of these reestimates on the Encompass brand underwriting loss is shown in the table below. ($ in millions) 2012 2011 2010 Reserve reestimates $ (45 ) $ 15 $ (6 ) Encompass brand underwriting loss (70 ) (146 ) (43 ) Reserve reestimates as a % of underwriting loss 64.3 % (10.3 )% 14.0 % Esurance brand There were no prior year reserve reestimates for Esurance in 2012. However, the Esurance opening balance sheet reserves were reestimated in 2012 resulting in a $13 million reduction in reserves due to lower severity. The adjustment was recorded as a reduction in goodwill and an increase in payables to the seller under the terms of the purchase agreement and therefore had no impact on claims expense or the loss ratio. Discontinued Lines and Coverages We conduct an annual review in the third quarter of each year to evaluate and establish asbestos, environmental and other discontinued lines reserves. Reserves are recorded in the reporting period in which they are determined. Using established industry and actuarial best practices and assuming no change in the regulatory or economic environment, this detailed and comprehensive methodology determines reserves based on assessments of the characteristics of exposure (e.g. claim activity, potential liability, jurisdiction, products versus non-products exposure) presented by policyholders. Reserve reestimates for the Discontinued Lines and Coverages, as shown in the table below, were increased primarily for asbestos and environmental in 2012, asbestos in 2011 and environmental in 2010. ($ in millions) 2012 2011 2010 January 1 reserves Reserve reestimate January 1 reserves Reserve reestimate January 1 reserves Reserve reestimate Asbestos claims $ 1,078 $ 26 $ 1,100 $ 26 $ 1,180 $ 5 Environmental claims 185 22 201 198 18 Other discontinued lines 444 3 478 (5 ) 500 5 Total Discontinued Lines and Coverages $ 1,707 $ 51 $ 1,779 $ 21 $ 1,878 $ 28 Underwriting loss $ (53 ) $ (25 ) $ (31 ) Reserve reestimates as a % of underwriting loss (96.2 )% (84.0 )% (90.3 )% Reserve additions for asbestos in 2012 and 2011 were primarily for products related coverage due to increases for the assumed reinsurance portion of discontinued lines where we are reliant on our ceding companies to report claims. Reserve additions for asbestos in 2010 were primarily for products related coverage. The reserve additions for environmental in 2012 were primarily related to site-specific remediations where the clean-up cost estimates and responsibility for the clean-up were more fully determined. Normal environmental claim activity resulted in essentially no change in estimated reserves for 2011. The reserve additions for environmental in 2010 64 Table of Contents were primarily related to site-specific remediations where the clean-up cost estimates and responsibility for the clean-up were more fully determined. The table below summarizes reserves and claim activity for asbestos and environmental claims before (Gross) and after (Net) the effects of reinsurance for the past three years. ($ in millions, except ratios) 2012 2011 2010 Gross Net Gross Net Gross Net Asbestos claims Beginning reserves $ 1,607 $ 1,078 $ 1,655 $ 1,100 $ 1,780 $ 1,180 Incurred claims and claims expense 34 26 38 26 (7 ) 5 Claims and claims expense paid (119 ) (78 ) (86 ) (48 ) (118 ) (85 ) Ending reserves $ 1,522 $ 1,026 $ 1,607 $ 1,078 $ 1,655 $ 1,100 Annual survival ratio 12.8 13.2 18.7 22.5 14.0 12.9 3-year survival ratio 14.1 14.7 13.6 13.6 12.6 12.2 Environmental claims Beginning reserves $ 225 $ 185 $ 248 $ 201 $ 247 $ 198 Incurred claims and claims expense 32 22 (2 ) 19 18 Claims and claims expense paid (16 ) (14 ) (21 ) (16 ) (18 ) (15 ) Ending reserves $ 241 $ 193 $ 225 $ 185 $ 248 $ 201 Annual survival ratio 15.1 13.8 10.7 11.6 13.8 13.4 3-year survival ratio 13.4 12.9 11.8 11.6 8.0 8.7 Combined environmental and asbestos claims Annual survival ratio 13.1 13.3 17.1 19.7 14.0 13.0 3-year survival ratio 14.0 14.3 13.4 13.3 11.7 11.6 Percentage of IBNR in ending reserves 57.8 % 59.0 % 60.1 % The survival ratio is calculated by taking our ending reserves divided by payments made during the year. This is a commonly used but extremely simplistic and imprecise approach to measuring the adequacy of asbestos and environmental reserve levels. Many factors, such as mix of business, level of coverage provided and settlement procedures have significant impacts on the amount of environmental and asbestos claims and claims expense reserves, claim payments and the resultant ratio. As payments result in corresponding reserve reductions, survival ratios can be expected to vary over time. In both 2012 and 2011, the asbestos net 3-year survival ratio increased due to lower average annual payments. The environmental net 3-year survival ratio increased in both 2012 and 2011 due to lower average annual payments. Our net asbestos reserves by type of exposure and total reserve additions are shown in the following table. ($ in millions) December 31, 2012 December 31, 2011 December 31, 2010 Active policy- holders Net reserves % of reserves Active policy- holders Net reserves % of reserves Active policy- holders Net reserves % of reserves Direct policyholders: Primary 54 $ 12 1 % 52 $ 17 2 % 51 $ 17 1 % Excess 299 276 27 314 263 24 319 261 24 Total 353 288 28 366 280 26 370 278 25 Assumed reinsurance 150 15 171 16 165 15 IBNR 588 57 627 58 657 60 Total net reserves $ 1,026 100 % $ 1,078 100 % $ 1,100 100 % Total reserve additions $ 26 $ 26 $ 5 During the last three years, 52 direct primary and excess policyholders reported new claims, and claims of 68 policyholders were closed, decreasing the number of active policyholders by 16 during the period. The 16 decrease comprised (13) from 2012, (4) from 2011 and 1 from 2010. The decrease of 13 in 2012 included 15 new policyholders reporting new claims and the closing of 28 policyholders' claims. 65 Table of Contents IBNR net reserves decreased $39 million as of December 31, 2012 compared to December 31, 2011. As of December 31, 2012 IBNR represented 57% of total net asbestos reserves, compared to 58% as of December 31, 2011. IBNR provides for reserve development of known claims and future reporting of additional unknown claims from current and new policyholders and ceding companies. Pending, new, total closed and closed without payment claims for asbestos and environmental exposures for the years ended December 31 are summarized in the following table. Number of claims 2012 2011 2010 Asbestos Pending, beginning of year 8,072 8,421 8,252 New 492 507 788 Total closed (1,117 ) (856 ) (619 ) Pending, end of year 7,447 8,072 8,421 Closed without payment 728 664 336 Environmental Pending, beginning of year 4,176 4,297 4,114 New 402 351 498 Total closed (902 ) (472 ) (315 ) Pending, end of year 3,676 4,176 4,297 Closed without payment 511 334 181 Property-Liability reinsurance ceded For Allstate Protection, we utilize reinsurance to reduce exposure to catastrophe risk and manage capital, and to support the required statutory surplus and the insurance financial strength ratings of certain subsidiaries such as Castle Key Insurance Company and Allstate New Jersey Insurance Company. We purchase significant reinsurance to manage our aggregate countrywide exposure to an acceptable level. The price and terms of reinsurance and the credit quality of the reinsurer are considered in the purchase process, along with whether the price can be appropriately reflected in the costs that are considered in setting future rates charged to policyholders. We also participate in various reinsurance mechanisms, including industry pools and facilities, which are backed by the financial resources of the property-liability insurance company market participants, and have historically purchased reinsurance to mitigate long-tail liability lines, including environmental, asbestos and other discontinued lines exposures. We retain primary liability as a direct insurer for all risks ceded to reinsurers. 66 Table of Contents Our reinsurance recoverable balances are shown in the following table as of December 31, net of the allowance we have established for uncollectible amounts. Standard & Poor's financial strength rating (1) Reinsurance recoverable on paid and unpaid claims, net ($ in millions) 2012 2011 Industry pools and facilities Michigan Catastrophic Claim Association ("MCCA") N/A $ 2,590 $ 1,709 National Flood Insurance Program N/A 428 33 North Carolina Reinsurance Facility N/A 64 70 New Jersey Unsatisfied Claim and Judgment Fund N/A 38 50 Other 3 3 Subtotal 3,123 1,865 Lloyd's of London ("Lloyd's") A+ 190 193 Westport Insurance Corporation (formerly Employers Reinsurance Corporation) AA- 95 98 Swiss Reinsurance America Corporation AA- 41 16 New England Reinsurance Corporation N/A 35 36 R&Q Reinsurance Company N/A 30 31 Renaissance Reinsurance Limited AA- 28 2 Other, including allowance for future uncollectible reinsurance recoverables 537 433 Subtotal 956 809 Total Property-Liability $ 4,079 $ 2,674 (1) N/A reflects no rating available. Reinsurance recoverables include an estimate of the amount of property-liability insurance claims and claims expense reserves that may be ceded under the terms of the reinsurance agreements, including incurred but not reported unpaid losses. We calculate our ceded reinsurance estimate based on the terms of each applicable reinsurance agreement, including an estimate of how IBNR losses will ultimately be ceded under the agreement. We also consider other limitations and coverage exclusions under our reinsurance agreements. Accordingly, our estimate of reinsurance recoverables is subject to similar risks and uncertainties as our estimate of reserves for property-liability claims and claims expense. We believe the recoverables are appropriately established; however, as our underlying reserves continue to develop, the amount ultimately recoverable may vary from amounts currently recorded. We regularly evaluate the reinsurers and the respective amounts recoverable, and a provision for uncollectible reinsurance is recorded if needed. The establishment of reinsurance recoverables and the related allowance for uncollectible reinsurance is also an inherently uncertain process involving estimates. Changes in estimates could result in additional changes to the Consolidated Statements of Operations. The allowance for uncollectible reinsurance relates to Discontinued Lines and Coverages reinsurance recoverables and was $87 million and $103 million as of December 31, 2012 and 2011, respectively. This amount represents 12.4% and 13.4% of the related reinsurance recoverable balances as of December 31, 2012 and 2011, respectively. The allowance is based upon our ongoing review of amounts outstanding, length of collection periods, changes in reinsurer credit standing, and other relevant factors. In addition, in the ordinary course of business, we may become involved in coverage disputes with certain of our reinsurers which may ultimately result in lawsuits and arbitrations brought by or against such reinsurers to determine the parties' rights and obligations under the various reinsurance agreements. We employ dedicated specialists to manage reinsurance collections and disputes. We also consider recent developments in commutation activity between reinsurers and cedants, and recent trends in arbitration and litigation outcomes in disputes between cedants and reinsurers in seeking to maximize our reinsurance recoveries. Adverse developments in the insurance industry have led to a decline in the financial strength of some of our reinsurance carriers, causing amounts recoverable from them and future claims ceded to them to be considered a higher risk. There has also been consolidation activity in the industry, which causes reinsurance risk across the industry to be 67 Table of Contents concentrated among fewer companies. In addition, some companies have segregated asbestos, environmental, and other discontinued lines exposures into separate legal entities with dedicated capital. Regulatory bodies in certain cases have supported these actions. We are unable to determine the impact, if any, that these developments will have on the collectability of reinsurance recoverables in the future. The effects of reinsurance ceded on our property-liability premiums earned and claims and claims expense for the years ended December 31 are summarized in the following table. ($ in millions) 2012 2011 2010 Ceded property-liability premiums earned $ 1,090 $ 1,098 $ 1,092 Ceded property-liability claims and claims expense Industry pool and facilities MCCA $ 962 $ 509 $ 142 National Flood Insurance Program 758 196 50 FHCF 8 10 Other 70 84 64 Subtotal industry pools and facilities 1,790 797 266 Other 261 130 5 Ceded property-liability claims and claims expense $ 2,051 $ 927 $ 271 In 2012, ceded property-liability premiums earned decreased $8 million compared to 2011, primarily due to decreased premiums in our catastrophe reinsurance program. In 2011, ceded property-liability premiums earned increased $6 million compared to 2010 year, primarily due to higher premium rates and an increase in policies written for the National Flood Insurance Program. Ceded property-liability claims and claims expense increased in 2012 primarily due to amounts ceded to the National Flood Insurance Program related to Sandy, reserve increases in the MCCA program, and amounts ceded under our catastrophe reinsurance program related to Sandy. The reserve increases in the MCCA program are attributable to an increased recognition of longer term paid loss trends. The paid loss trends are rising due to increased costs in medical and attendant care and increased longevity of claimants. Ceded property-liability claims and claims expense increased in 2011 primarily due to reserve increases in the MCCA program and an increase in claim activity on the National Flood Insurance Program due to multiple flooding events throughout the year. For a detailed description of the MCCA, FHCF and Lloyd's, see Note 10 of the consolidated financial statements. As of December 31, 2012, other than the recoverable balances listed in the table above, no other amount due or estimated to be due from any single Property-Liability reinsurer was in excess of $26 million. We enter into certain intercompany insurance and reinsurance transactions for the Property-Liability operations in order to maintain underwriting control and manage insurance risk among various legal entities. These reinsurance agreements have been approved by the appropriate regulatory authorities. All significant intercompany transactions have been eliminated in consolidation. Catastrophe reinsurance Our catastrophe reinsurance program is designed, utilizing our risk management methodology, to address our exposure to catastrophes nationwide. Our program is designed to provide reinsurance protection for catastrophes including hurricanes, windstorms, hail, tornados, fires following earthquakes, earthquakes and wildfires. These reinsurance agreements are part of our catastrophe management strategy, which is intended to provide our shareholders an acceptable return on the risks assumed in our property business, and to reduce variability of earnings, while providing protection to our customers. We anticipate completing the placement of our 2013 catastrophe reinsurance program in March 2013. We expect the program will be similar to our 2012 catastrophe reinsurance program. For further details of the existing 2012 program, see Note 10 of the consolidated financial statements. 68 Table of Contents ALLSTATE FINANCIAL 2012 HIGHLIGHTS Net income was $541 million in 2012 compared to $590 million in 2011. Premiums and contract charges on underwritten products, including traditional life, interest-sensitive life and accident and health insurance, totaled $2.18 billion in 2012, an increase of 3.8% from $2.10 billion in 2011. Investments totaled $57.00 billion as of December 31, 2012, reflecting a decrease in carrying value of $374 million from $57.37 billion as of December 31, 2011. Net investment income decreased 2.5% to $2.65 billion in 2012 from $2.72 billion in 2011. Net realized capital losses totaled $13 million in 2012 compared to net realized capital gains of $388 million in 2011. Contractholder funds totaled $39.32 billion as of December 31, 2012, reflecting a decrease of $3.01 billion from $42.33 billion as of December 31, 2011. ALLSTATE FINANCIAL SEGMENT Overview and strategy The Allstate Financial segment sells life insurance, voluntary employee benefits products, and products designed to meet customer retirement and investment needs. We serve our customers through Allstate exclusive agencies and exclusive financial specialists, workplace distribution and non-proprietary distribution channels. Allstate Financial brings value to The Allstate Corporation in three principal ways: through profitable growth, by bringing new customers to Allstate, and by improving the economics of the Protection business through increased customer loyalty and stronger customer relationships based on cross selling Allstate Financial products to existing customers. Allstate Financial's strategy is focused on expanding Allstate customer relationships, growing our underwritten product sales through Allstate exclusive agencies and Allstate Benefits (our workplace distribution business), improving returns on and reducing our exposure to spread-based products, and emphasizing capital efficiency and shareholder returns. Our products include interest-sensitive, traditional and variable life insurance; voluntary accident and health insurance; fixed annuities such as deferred and immediate annuities; and funding agreements backing medium-term notes, which we most recently offered in 2008. Our products are sold through multiple distribution channels including Allstate exclusive agencies and exclusive financial specialists, workplace enrolling independent agents and, to a lesser extent, independent master brokerage agencies, specialized structured settlement brokers, and directly through call centers and the internet. Our institutional product line consists of funding agreements sold to unaffiliated trusts that use them to back medium-term notes issued to institutional and individual investors. Banking products and services were previously offered to customers through the Allstate Bank, which ceased operations in 2011. We continue to shift our mix of products in force by decreasing our lower returning spread-based products, principally fixed annuities and institutional products, and through growth of our higher returning underwritten products having mortality or morbidity risk, principally life insurance and accident and health products. In addition to focusing on higher return markets, products and distribution channels, Allstate Financial continues to implement capital efficiency and enterprise risk and return management strategies and actions. Based upon Allstate's strong financial position and brand, we have a unique opportunity to cross-sell to our customer base. We will enhance trusted customer relationships through our Allstate exclusive agencies to serve those who are looking for assistance in meeting their protection and retirement needs by providing them with the information, products and services that they need. To further strengthen Allstate Financial's value proposition to Allstate exclusive agencies and drive further engagement in selling our products, Allstate Financial products are integrated into the Allstate Protection sales processes and the new agent compensation structure incorporates sales of Allstate Financial products. Life insurance policies issued through Allstate agencies increased 9.3% and 31.5% in 2012 and 2011, respectively, compared to the prior years. During 2012, we introduced a new deferred annuity product that allows our Allstate exclusive agents to continue to offer a full range of products that meet customer retirement needs while providing Allstate with an attractive risk adjusted return profile. Our employer relationships through Allstate Benefits also afford opportunities to offer additional Allstate products and grow our business. Allstate Benefits is an industry leader in voluntary benefits, offering one of the broadest product portfolios in the voluntary benefits market. Our strategy for Allstate Benefits focuses on growth in the national accounts market by increasing the number of sales and account management personnel, expanding independent agent distribution in targeted geographic locations for increased new sales, increasing Allstate exclusive agency engagement to drive cross selling of voluntary benefits products, capitalizing on strategic alliance opportunities, and developing opportunities for revenue growth through new product and fee income offerings. In 2012, Allstate Benefits new business written premiums increased 6.5% compared to 2011. Our deferred and immediate annuity business has been adversely impacted by the credit cycle and historically low interest rate environment. Our immediate annuity business has been impacted by medical advancements that have 69 Table of Contents resulted in annuitants living longer than anticipated when many of these contracts were originated. We are aggressively reducing the level of legacy deferred annuities in force and proactively managing annuity crediting rates to improve the profitability of the business. We are managing the investment portfolio supporting our immediate annuities to ensure the assets match the characteristics of the liabilities and provide the long-term returns needed to support this business. We are increasing limited partnership and other alternative asset investments to appropriately match investment duration with these long-term illiquid liabilities. Allstate Financial outlook Our growth initiatives continue to focus on increasing the number of customers served through our proprietary and Allstate Benefits channels. We continue to focus on improving returns and reducing our concentration in spread-based products resulting in net reductions in contractholder fund obligations. We plan to further grow premiums and contract charges on underwritten insurance products and offer a broad range of products to meet our customers' needs for retirement income, including third-party solutions when we choose not to offer certain products. We expect lower investment spread due to reduced contractholder funds, the continuing low interest rate environment and changes in asset allocations. The amount by which the low interest rate environment will reduce our investment spread is contingent on our ability to maintain the portfolio yield and lower interest crediting rates on spread-based products, which could be limited by market conditions, regulatory minimum rates or contractual minimum rate guarantees, and may not match the timing or magnitude of changes in asset yields. We also anticipate changing our asset allocation for long-term immediate annuities by reducing fixed income securities and increasing investments in limited partnerships and other alternative investments. This shift could result in lower and more volatile investment income; however, we anticipate that this strategy will lead to higher total returns and attributed equity. We expect increases in Allstate Financial's attributed GAAP equity as there may be limitations on the amount of dividends Allstate Financial companies can pay without prior approval by their insurance departments. We continue to review our strategic options to reduce our exposure and improve returns of the spread-based businesses. As a result, we may take additional operational and financial actions that offer return improvement and risk reduction opportunities. Summary analysis Summarized financial data for the years ended December 31 is presented in the following table. ($ in millions) 2012 2011 2010 Revenues Life and annuity premiums and contract charges $ 2,241 $ 2,238 $ 2,168 Net investment income 2,647 2,716 2,853 Realized capital gains and losses (13 ) 388 (517 ) Total revenues 4,875 5,342 4,504 Costs and expenses Life and annuity contract benefits (1,818 ) (1,761 ) (1,815 ) Interest credited to contractholder funds (1,316 ) (1,645 ) (1,807 ) Amortization of DAC (401 ) (494 ) (290 ) Operating costs and expenses (576 ) (555 ) (568 ) Restructuring and related charges (1 ) 3 Total costs and expenses (4,111 ) (4,456 ) (4,477 ) Gain (loss) on disposition of operations 18 (7 ) 14 Income tax (expense) benefit (241 ) (289 ) 1 Net income $ 541 $ 590 $ 42 Investments as of December 31 $ 56,999 $ 57,373 $ 61,582 Net income Life insurance $ 226 $ 262 Accident and health insurance 81 95 Annuities and institutional products 234 233 Net income $ 541 $ 590 70 Table of Contents Net income in 2012 was $541 million compared to $590 million in 2011. The decrease was primarily due to net realized capital losses in 2012 compared to net realized capital gains in 2011, lower net investment income and higher life and annuity contract benefits, partially offset by decreased interest credited to contractholder funds and lower amortization of DAC. Net income in 2011 was $590 million compared to $42 million in 2010. The increase was primarily due to net realized capital gains in 2011 compared to net realized capital losses in 2010, decreased interest credited to contractholder funds, higher life and annuity premiums and contract charges and lower life and annuity contract benefits, partially offset by higher amortization of DAC and lower net investment income. Analysis of revenues Total revenues decreased 8.7% or $467 million in 2012 compared to 2011 due to net realized capital losses in 2012 compared to net realized capital gains in 2011 and lower net investment income. Total revenues increased 18.6% or $838 million in 2011 compared to 2010 due to net realized capital gains in 2011 compared to net realized capital losses in 2010 and higher premiums and contract charges, partially offset by lower net investment income. Life and annuity premiums and contract charges Premiums represent revenues generated from traditional life insurance, immediate annuities with life contingencies, and accident and health insurance products that have significant mortality or morbidity risk. Contract charges are revenues generated from interest-sensitive and variable life insurance and fixed annuities for which deposits are classified as contractholder funds or separate account liabilities. Contract charges are assessed against the contractholder account values for maintenance, administration, cost of insurance and surrender prior to contractually specified dates. The following table summarizes life and annuity premiums and contract charges by product for the years ended December 31. ($ in millions) 2012 2011 2010 Underwritten products Traditional life insurance premiums $ 470 $ 441 $ 420 Accident and health insurance premiums 653 643 621 Interest-sensitive life insurance contract charges 1,055 1,015 991 Subtotal 2,178 2,099 2,032 Annuities Immediate annuities with life contingencies premiums 45 106 97 Other fixed annuity contract charges 18 33 39 Subtotal 63 139 136 Life and annuity premiums and contract charges (1) $ 2,241 $ 2,238 $ 2,168 (1) Contract charges related to the cost of insurance totaled $696 million, $659 million and $637 million in 2012, 2011 and 2010, respectively. Total premiums and contract charges increased 0.1% in 2012 compared to 2011 primarily due to higher contract charges on interest-sensitive life insurance products primarily resulting from the aging of our policyholders and lower reinsurance ceded, and increased traditional life insurance premiums due to lower reinsurance ceded and higher sales through Allstate agencies, partially offset by lower sales of immediate annuities with life contingencies. Sales of immediate annuities with life contingencies fluctuate with changes in our pricing competitiveness relative to other insurers. Total premiums and contract charges increased 3.2% in 2011 compared to 2010 primarily due to higher contract charges on interest-sensitive life insurance products primarily resulting from the aging of our policyholders, growth in Allstate Benefits's accident and health insurance business in force and increased traditional life insurance premiums. Increased traditional life insurance premiums were primarily due to lower reinsurance premiums resulting from higher retention, partially offset by lower renewal premiums. Contractholder funds represent interest-bearing liabilities arising from the sale of products such as interest-sensitive life insurance, fixed annuities, funding agreements and, prior to December 31, 2011, bank deposits. The balance of contractholder funds is equal to the cumulative deposits received and interest credited to the contractholder less 71 Table of Contents cumulative contract benefits, surrenders, withdrawals, maturities and contract charges for mortality or administrative expenses. The following table shows the changes in contractholder funds for the years ended December 31. ($ in millions) 2012 2011 2010 Contractholder funds, beginning balance $ 42,332 $ 48,195 $ 52,582 Deposits Fixed annuities 928 667 932 Interest-sensitive life insurance 1,347 1,291 1,515 Bank deposits 360 991 Total deposits 2,275 2,318 3,438 Interest credited 1,323 1,629 1,794 Benefits, withdrawals, maturities and other adjustments Benefits (1,463 ) (1,461 ) (1,552 ) Surrenders and partial withdrawals (3,990 ) (4,935 ) (4,201 ) Bank withdrawals (1,463 ) (1,002 ) Maturities of and interest payments on institutional products (138 ) (867 ) (1,833 ) Contract charges (1,066 ) (1,028 ) (983 ) Net transfers from separate accounts 11 12 11 Fair value hedge adjustments for institutional products (34 ) (196 ) Other adjustments (1) 35 (34 ) 137 Total benefits, withdrawals, maturities and other adjustments (6,611 ) (9,810 ) (9,619 ) Contractholder funds, ending balance $ 39,319 $ 42,332 $ 48,195 (1) The table above illustrates the changes in contractholder funds, which are presented gross of reinsurance recoverables on the Consolidated Statements of Financial Position. The table above is intended to supplement our discussion and analysis of revenues, which are presented net of reinsurance on the Consolidated Statements of Operations. As a result, the net change in contractholder funds associated with products reinsured to third parties is reflected as a component of the other adjustments line. Contractholder funds decreased 7.1%, 12.2% and 8.3% in 2012, 2011 and 2010, respectively, reflecting our continuing strategy to reduce our concentration in spread-based products. Average contractholder funds decreased 9.8% in 2012 compared to 2011 and 10.2% in 2011 compared to 2010. Contractholder deposits decreased 1.9% in 2012 compared to 2011 primarily due to increased fixed annuity deposits driven by new equity-indexed annuity products launched in second quarter 2012 being more than offset by the absence of Allstate Bank deposits in 2012. Contractholder deposits decreased 32.6% in 2011 compared to 2010 primarily due to lower deposits on Allstate Bank products and fixed annuities. In September 2011, Allstate Bank stopped opening new customer accounts and all funds were returned to Allstate Bank account holders prior to December 31, 2011. Surrenders and partial withdrawals on deferred fixed annuities and interest-sensitive life insurance products decreased 19.1% to $3.99 billion in 2012 from $4.94 billion in 2011. 2011 had elevated surrenders on fixed annuities resulting from crediting rate actions and a large number of contracts reaching the 30-45 day period (typically at their 5 or 6 year anniversary) during which there is no surrender charge. In 2011, surrenders and partial withdrawals on deferred fixed annuities and interest-sensitive life insurance products increased 17.5% to $4.94 billion from $4.20 billion in 2010 primarily due to higher surrenders on fixed annuities, partially offset by lower surrenders and partial withdrawals on interest-sensitive life insurance products. The surrender and partial withdrawal rate on deferred fixed annuities and interest-sensitive life insurance products, based on the beginning of year contractholder funds, was 11.3% in 2012 compared to 12.6% in 2011 and 10.1% in 2010. Maturities of and interest payments on institutional products decreased to $138 million in 2012 from $867 million in 2011 and $1.83 billion in 2010, reflecting differences in the timing and magnitude of maturities for these declining obligations. Net investment income decreased 2.5% to $2.65 billion in 2012 from $2.72 billion in 2011 primarily due to lower average investment balances and lower yields on fixed income securities, partially offset by income from limited partnerships. Net investment income decreased 4.8% to $2.72 billion in 2011 from $2.85 billion in 2010 primarily due to 72 Table of Contents lower average investment balances which were partially offset by higher yields. The higher yields are primarily attributable to yield optimization actions including the termination of interest rate swaps during the first quarter of 2011. Net realized capital gains and losses for the years ended December 31 are presented in the following table. ($ in millions) 2012 2011 2010 Impairment write-downs $ (51 ) $ (246 ) $ (501 ) Change in intent write-downs (17 ) (51 ) (142 ) Net other-than-temporary impairment losses recognized in earnings (68 ) (297 ) (643 ) Sales 20 838 219 Valuation of derivative instruments (16 ) (237 ) (94 ) Settlements of derivative instruments 51 22 (31 ) EMA limited partnership income (1) 62 32 Realized capital gains and losses, pre-tax (13 ) 388 (517 ) Income tax benefit (expense) 5 (138 ) 180 Realized capital gains and losses, after-tax $ (8 ) $ 250 $ (337 ) (1) Income from EMA limited partnerships is reported in net investment income in 2012 and realized capital gains and losses in 2011 and 2010. For further discussion of realized capital gains and losses, see the Investments section of the MD&A. Analysis of costs and expenses Total costs and expenses decreased 7.7% or $345 million in 2012 compared to 2011 primarily due to lower interest credited to contractholder funds and amortization of DAC, partially offset by higher life and annuity contract benefits. Total costs and expenses decreased 0.5% or $21 million in 2011 compared to 2010 primarily due to lower interest credited to contractholder funds and life and annuity contract benefits, partially offset by higher amortization of DAC. Life and annuity contract benefits increased 3.2% or $57 million in 2012 compared to 2011 primarily due to worse mortality experience on life insurance and the reduction in accident and health insurance reserves at Allstate Benefits in 2011, partially offset by lower sales of immediate annuities with life contingencies and the reduction in reserves for secondary guarantees on interest-sensitive life insurance. Our 2012 annual review of assumptions resulted in a $13 million decrease in the reserves for secondary guarantees on interest-sensitive life insurance due to favorable projected mortality. Life and annuity contract benefits decreased 3.0% or $54 million in 2011 compared to 2010 primarily due to reserve reestimations recorded in second quarter 2010 that did not recur in 2011 and a $38 million reduction in accident and health insurance reserves at Allstate Benefits as of December 31, 2011 related to a contract modification, partially offset by unfavorable mortality experience on life insurance. The reserve reestimations in second quarter 2010 utilized more refined policy level information and assumptions. The increase in reserves for certain secondary guarantees on universal life insurance policies resulted in a charge to contract benefits of $68 million. The decrease in reserves for immediate annuities resulted in a credit to contract benefits of $26 million. We analyze our mortality and morbidity results using the difference between premiums and contract charges earned for the cost of insurance and life and annuity contract benefits excluding the portion related to the implied interest on immediate annuities with life contingencies ("benefit spread"). This implied interest totaled $538 million, $541 million and $549 million in 2012, 2011 and 2010, respectively. The benefit spread by product group for the years ended December 31 is disclosed in the following table. ($ in millions) 2012 2011 2010 Life insurance $ 347 $ 355 $ 282 Accident and health insurance 303 329 252 Annuities (66 ) (55 ) (25 ) Total benefit spread $ 584 $ 629 $ 509 73 Table of Contents Benefit spread decreased 7.2% or $45 million in 2012 compared to 2011 primarily due to worse mortality experience on life insurance and annuities and the reduction in accident and health insurance reserves at Allstate Benefits in 2011, partially offset by lower reinsurance premiums ceded on life insurance, higher cost of insurance contract charges on interest-sensitive life insurance and the reduction in reserves for secondary guarantees on interest-sensitive life insurance. Benefit spread increased 23.6% or $120 million in 2011 compared to 2010 primarily due to reestimations of reserves that increased contract benefits for interest-sensitive life insurance and decreased contract benefits for immediate annuities with life contingencies in 2010, a reduction in accident and health insurance reserves at Allstate Benefits as of December 31, 2011 related to a contract modification, and favorable morbidity experience on certain accident and health products and growth at Allstate Benefits. Interest credited to contractholder funds decreased 20.0% or $329 million in 2012 compared to 2011 primarily due to the valuation change on derivatives embedded in equity-indexed annuity contracts that reduced interest credited expense, lower average contractholder funds and lower interest crediting rates. Valuation changes on derivatives embedded in equity-indexed annuity contracts that are not hedged decreased interest credited to contractholder funds by $126 million in 2012 compared to an $18 million increase in 2011. During third quarter 2012, we reviewed the significant valuation inputs for these embedded derivatives and reduced the projected option cost to reflect management's current and anticipated crediting rate setting actions, which were informed by the existing and projected low interest rate environment and are consistent with our strategy to reduce exposure to spread-based business. The reduction in projected interest rates to the level currently being credited, approximately 2%, resulted in a reduction of contractholder funds and interest credited expense by $169 million. Amortization of deferred sales inducement costs was $14 million in 2012 compared to $23 million in 2011. Interest credited to contractholder funds decreased 9.0% or $162 million in 2011 compared to 2010 primarily due to lower average contractholder funds and lower interest crediting rates on deferred fixed annuities, interest-sensitive life insurance and immediate fixed annuities. Additionally, valuation changes on derivatives embedded in equity-indexed annuity contracts that are not hedged increased interest credited to contractholder funds by $18 million in 2011. Amortization of deferred sales inducement costs was $23 million in 2011 compared to $27 million in 2010. In order to analyze the impact of net investment income and interest credited to contractholders on net income, we monitor the difference between net investment income and the sum of interest credited to contractholder funds and the implied interest on immediate annuities with life contingencies, which is included as a component of life and annuity contract benefits on the Consolidated Statements of Operations ("investment spread"). The investment spread by product group for the years ended December 31 is shown in the following table. ($ in millions) 2012 2011 2010 Annuities and institutional products $ 292 $ 188 $ 179 Life insurance 82 54 35 Accident and health insurance 25 19 18 Allstate Bank products 22 31 Net investment income on investments supporting capital 268 265 234 Investment spread before valuation changes on embedded derivatives that are not hedged 667 548 497 Valuation changes on derivatives embedded in equity-indexed annuity contracts that are not hedged 126 (18 ) Total investment spread $ 793 $ 530 $ 497 Investment spread before valuation changes on embedded derivatives that are not hedged increased 21.7% or $119 million in 2012 compared to 2011 due to income from limited partnerships and lower crediting rates, partially offset by lower yields on fixed income securities and the continued managed reduction in our spread-based business in force. Investment spread before valuation changes on embedded derivatives that are not hedged increased 10.3% or $51 million in 2011 compared to 2010 as actions to improve investment portfolio yields and lower crediting rates more than offset the effect of the continuing decline in our spread-based business in force. For further analysis on the valuation changes on derivatives embedded in equity-indexed annuity contracts, see the interest credited to contractholder funds section. 74 Table of Contents To further analyze investment spreads, the following table summarizes the weighted average investment yield on assets supporting product liabilities and capital, interest crediting rates and investment spreads. Weighted average investment yield Weighted average interest crediting rate Weighted average investment spreads 2012 2011 2010 2012 2011 2010 2012 2011 2010 Interest-sensitive life insurance 5.2 % 5.4 % 5.5 % 4.0 % 4.2 % 4.4 % 1.2 % 1.2 % 1.1 % Deferred fixed annuities and institutional products 4.6 4.6 4.4 3.2 3.3 3.2 1.4 1.3 1.2 Immediate fixed annuities with and without life contingencies 6.9 6.3 6.4 6.1 6.2 6.4 0.8 0.1 Investments supporting capital, traditional life and other products 4.0 3.9 3.7 n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a The following table summarizes our product liabilities as of December 31 and indicates the account value of those contracts and policies in which an investment spread is generated. ($ in millions) 2012 2011 2010 Immediate fixed annuities with life contingencies $ 8,889 $ 8,831 $ 8,696 Other life contingent contracts and other 6,006 5,575 4,754 Reserve for life-contingent contract benefits $ 14,895 $ 14,406 $ 13,450 Interest-sensitive life insurance $ 11,011 $ 10,826 $ 10,675 Deferred fixed annuities 22,066 25,228 29,367 Immediate fixed annuities without life contingencies 3,815 3,821 3,799 Institutional products 1,851 1,891 2,650 Allstate Bank products 1,091 Other 576 566 613 Contractholder funds $ 39,319 $ 42,332 $ 48,195 The following table summarizes the weighted average guaranteed crediting rates and weighted average current crediting rates as of December 31, 2012 for certain fixed annuities and interest-sensitive life contracts where management has the ability to change the crediting rate, subject to a contractual minimum. Other products, including equity-indexed, variable and immediate annuities, equity-indexed and variable life, and institutional products totaling $10.72 billion of contractholder funds, have been excluded from the analysis because management does not have the ability to change the crediting rate or the minimum crediting rate is not considered meaningful in this context. ($ in millions) Weighted average guaranteed crediting rates Weighted average current crediting rates Contractholder funds Annuities with annual crediting rate resets 3.17 % 3.18 % $ 10,654 Annuities with multi-year rate guarantees (1) : Resettable in next 12 months 2.05 3.93 1,610 Resettable after 12 months 1.56 3.54 5,434 Interest-sensitive life insurance 3.92 4.17 10,904 (1) These contracts include interest rate guarantee periods which are typically 5 or 6 years. 75 Table of Contents Amortization of DAC decreased 18.8% or $93 million in 2012 compared to 2011 and increased 70.3% or $204 million in 2011 compared to 2010. The components of amortization of DAC for the years ended December 31 are summarized in the following table. ($ in millions) 2012 2011 2010 Amortization of DAC before amortization relating to realized capital gains and losses, valuation changes on embedded derivatives that are not hedged and changes in assumptions $ 310 $ 331 $ 270 Amortization relating to realized capital gains and losses (1) and valuation changes on embedded derivatives that are not hedged 57 156 36 Amortization acceleration (deceleration) for changes in assumptions ("DAC unlocking") 34 7 (16 ) Total amortization of DAC $ 401 $ 494 $ 290 (1) The impact of realized capital gains and losses on amortization of DAC is dependent upon the relationship between the assets that give rise to the gain or loss and the product liability supported by the assets. Fluctuations result from changes in the impact of realized capital gains and losses on actual and expected gross profits. The decrease in DAC amortization in 2012 compared to 2011 was primarily due to decreased amortization relating to realized capital gains and losses and decreased amortization on fixed annuity products due to the DAC balance for contracts issued prior to 2010 being fully amortized, partially offset by increased amortization acceleration for changes in assumptions and increased amortization relating to valuation changes on embedded derivatives that are not hedged. Amortization relating to valuation changes on derivatives embedded in equity-indexed annuity contracts was $25 million in 2012. The increase in DAC amortization in 2011 compared to 2010 was primarily due to increased amortization relating to realized capital gains, lower amortization in the second quarter of 2010 resulting from decreased benefit spread on interest-sensitive life insurance due to the reestimation of reserves, and an unfavorable change in amortization acceleration/deceleration for changes in assumptions. Our annual comprehensive review of the profitability of our products to determine DAC balances for our interest-sensitive life, fixed annuities and other investment contracts covers assumptions for persistency, mortality, expenses, investment returns, including capital gains and losses, interest crediting rates to policyholders, and the effect of any hedges in all product lines. In 2012, the review resulted in an acceleration of DAC amortization (charge to income) of $34 million. Amortization acceleration of $38 million related to variable life insurance and was primarily due to an increase in projected mortality. Amortization acceleration of $4 million related to fixed annuities and was primarily due to lower projected investment returns. Amortization deceleration of $8 million related to interest-sensitive life insurance and was primarily due to an increase in projected persistency. In 2011, the review resulted in an acceleration of DAC amortization of $7 million. Amortization acceleration of $12 million related to interest-sensitive life insurance and was primarily due to an increase in projected expenses. Amortization deceleration of $5 million related to equity-indexed annuities and was primarily due to an increase in projected investment margins. In 2010, the review resulted in a deceleration of DAC amortization (credit to income) of $16 million. Amortization deceleration of $37 million related to variable life insurance and was primarily due to appreciation in the underlying separate account valuations. Amortization acceleration of $20 million related to interest-sensitive life insurance and was primarily due to an increase in projected realized capital losses and lower projected renewal premium (which is also expected to reduce persistency), partially offset by lower expenses. 76 Table of Contents The changes in DAC for the years ended December 31 are detailed in the following table. ($ in millions) Traditional life and accident and health Interest-sensitive life insurance Fixed annuities Total 2012 2011 2012 2011 2012 2011 2012 2011 Beginning balance $ 616 $ 573 $ 1,698 $ 1,917 $ 209 $ 369 $ 2,523 $ 2,859 Acquisition costs deferred 154 133 192 178 25 22 371 333 Amortization of DAC before amortization relating to realized capital gains and losses, valuation changes on embedded derivatives that are not hedged and changes in assumptions (1) (99 ) (90 ) (186 ) (186 ) (25 ) (55 ) (310 ) (331 ) Amortization relating to realized capital gains and losses and valuation changes on embedded derivatives that are not hedged (1) (18 ) (21 ) (39 ) (135 ) (57 ) (156 ) Amortization (acceleration) deceleration for changes in assumptions ("DAC unlocking") (1) (30 ) (12 ) (4 ) 5 (34 ) (7 ) Effect of unrealized capital gains and losses (2) (127 ) (178 ) (141 ) 3 (268 ) (175 ) Ending balance $ 671 $ 616 $ 1,529 $ 1,698 $ 25 $ 209 $ 2,225 $ 2,523 (1) Included as a component of amortization of DAC on the Consolidated Statements of Operations. (2) Represents the change in the DAC adjustment for unrealized capital gains and losses. The DAC adjustment balance was $(380) million and $(112) million as of December 31, 2012 and 2011, respectively, and represents the amount by which the amortization of DAC would increase or decrease if the unrealized gains and losses in the respective product portfolios were realized. Operating costs and expenses increased 3.8% or $21 million in 2012 compared to 2011 and decreased 2.3% or $13 million in 2011 compared to 2010. The following table summarizes operating costs and expenses for the years ended December 31. ($ in millions) 2012 2011 2010 Non-deferrable commissions $ 103 $ 111 $ 109 General and administrative expenses 421 385 396 Taxes and licenses 52 59 63 Total operating costs and expenses $ 576 $ 555 $ 568 Restructuring and related charges $ $ 1 $ (3 ) General and administrative expenses increased 9.4% or $36 million in 2012 compared to 2011 primarily due to higher employee related expenses, lower reinsurance expense allowances and increased marketing costs, partially offset by a charge in 2011 related to the liquidation plan for Executive Life Insurance Company of New York, the elimination of expenses following our exit from the banking business in 2011 and lower pension costs. General and administrative expenses decreased 2.8% or $11 million in 2011 compared to 2010 primarily due to lower employee and professional service costs, reduced insurance department assessments for 2011 and lower net Allstate agencies distribution channel expenses reflecting increased fees from sales of third party financial products, partially offset by a charge related to the liquidation plan for Executive Life Insurance Company of New York. Gain on disposition of $18 million in 2012 relates to the amortization of the deferred gain from the disposition through reinsurance of substantially all of our variable annuity business in 2006, and the sale of Surety Life Insurance Company, which was not used for new business, in third quarter 2012. Loss on disposition of $7 million in 2011 included $22 million related to the dissolution of Allstate Bank. In 2011, after receiving regulatory approval to dissolve, Allstate Bank ceased operations. We canceled the bank's charter in March 2012 and effective July 1, 2012 The Allstate Corporation is no longer a savings and loan holding company. Reinsurance ceded We enter into reinsurance agreements with unaffiliated reinsurers to limit our risk of mortality and morbidity losses. In addition, Allstate Financial has used reinsurance to effect the acquisition or disposition of certain blocks of business. We retain primary liability as a direct insurer for all risks ceded to reinsurers. As of December 31, 2012 and 2011, 39% and 42%, respectively, of our face amount of life insurance in force was reinsured. Additionally, we ceded substantially all of the risk associated with our variable annuity business and we cede 100% of the morbidity risk on substantially all of our long-term care contracts. 77 Table of Contents Our reinsurance recoverables, summarized by reinsurer as of December 31, are shown in the following table. ($ in millions) Reinsurance recoverable on paid and unpaid benefits Standard & Poor's financial strength rating (4) 2012 2011 Prudential Insurance Company of America AA- $ 1,691 $ 1,681 Employers Reassurance Corporation A+ 1,059 960 Transamerica Life Group AA- 447 454 RGA Reinsurance Company AA- 361 359 Swiss Re Life and Health America, Inc. (1) AA- 217 212 Scottish Re Group (2) N/A 131 134 Munich American Reassurance AA- 131 127 Paul Revere Life Insurance Company A 127 132 Mutual of Omaha Insurance A+ 96 96 Security Life of Denver A- 83 71 Manulife Insurance Company AA- 62 64 Lincoln National Life Insurance AA- 60 63 Triton Insurance Company N/A 55 56 American Health & Life Insurance Co. N/A 45 48 Other (3) 123 120 Total $ 4,688 $ 4,577 (1) The Company has extensive reinsurance contracts directly with Swiss Re and its affiliates and indirectly through Swiss Re's acquisition of other companies with whom we had reinsurance or retrocession contracts. (2) The reinsurance recoverable on paid and unpaid benefits related to the Scottish Re Group as of December 31, 2012 comprised $71 million related to Scottish Re Life Corporation and $60 million related to Scottish Re (U.S.), Inc. The reinsurance recoverable on paid and unpaid benefits related to the Scottish Re Group as of December 31, 2011 comprised $73 million related to Scottish Re Life Corporation and $61 million related to Scottish Re (U.S.), Inc. (3) As of December 31, 2012 and 2011, the other category includes $106 million and $103 million, respectively, of recoverables due from reinsurers with an investment grade credit rating from Standard & Poor's ("S&P"). (4) N/A reflects no rating available. We continuously monitor the creditworthiness of reinsurers in order to determine our risk of recoverability on an individual and aggregate basis, and a provision for uncollectible reinsurance is recorded if needed. No amounts have been deemed unrecoverable in the three-years ended December 31, 2012. We enter into certain intercompany reinsurance transactions for the Allstate Financial operations in order to maintain underwriting control and manage insurance risk among various legal entities. These reinsurance agreements have been approved by the appropriate regulatory authorities. All significant intercompany transactions have been eliminated in consolidation. INVESTMENTS 2012 HIGHLIGHTS Investments totaled $97.28 billion as of December 31, 2012, an increase of 1.7% from $95.62 billion as of December 31, 2011. Unrealized net capital gains totaled $5.55 billion as of December 31, 2012, increasing from $2.88 billion as of December 31, 2011. Net investment income was $4.01 billion in 2012, an increase of 1.0% from $3.97 billion in 2011. Net realized capital gains were $327 million in 2012 compared to $503 million in 2011. INVESTMENTS Overview and strategy The return on our investment portfolios is an important component of our financial results. Investment portfolios are segmented between the Property-Liability, Allstate Financial and Corporate and Other operations. While taking into consideration the investment portfolio in aggregate, we manage the underlying portfolios based upon the nature of each respective business and its corresponding liability structure. We employ a strategic asset allocation approach which considers the nature of the liabilities and risk tolerances, as well as the risk and return parameters of the various asset classes in which we invest. This asset allocation is informed by our global economic and market outlook, as well as other inputs and constraints, including diversification effects, 78 Table of Contents duration, liquidity and capital considerations. Within the ranges set by the strategic asset allocation, tactical investment decisions are made in consideration of prevailing market conditions. We manage risks associated with interest rates, credit spreads, equity markets, real estate and currency exchange rates. Our continuing focus is to manage risks and returns and to position our portfolio to take advantage of market opportunities while attempting to mitigate adverse effects. The Property-Liability portfolio's investment strategy emphasizes protection of principal and consistent income generation, within a total return framework. This approach, which has produced competitive returns over the long term, is designed to ensure financial strength and stability for paying claims, while maximizing economic value and surplus growth. The Allstate Financial portfolio's investment strategy focuses on the total return of assets needed to support the underlying liabilities, asset-liability management and achieving an appropriate return on capital. The Corporate and Other portfolio's investment strategy balances the unique liquidity needs of the portfolio in relation to the overall corporate capital structure with the pursuit of returns. Investments outlook We anticipate that interest rates may remain below historic averages for an extended period of time and that financial markets will continue to have periods of high volatility. Invested assets and income are expected to decline in line with reductions in contractholder funds for the Allstate Financial segment and as we continue to invest and reinvest proceeds at market yields that are below the current portfolio yield. We plan to focus on the following priorities: Optimizing return and risk in an uncertain economic climate and volatile investment markets. Reducing our exposure to interest rate risk by targeting a shorter maturity profile in the Property-Liability portfolio. Shifting the portfolio mix in the next few years to have less reliance on lending to borrowers and a greater proportion of ownership of assets including real estate and other cash-generating assets. Managing the alignment of assets with respect to Allstate Financial's changing liability profile. Portfolio composition The composition of the investment portfolios as of December 31, 2012 is presented in the table below. Property-Liability (5) Allstate Financial (5) Corporate and Other (5) Total ($ in millions) Percent to total Percent to total Percent to total Percent to total Fixed income securities (1) $ 29,681 77.7 % $ 45,796 80.3 % $ 1,540 74.6 % $ 77,017 79.2 % Equity securities (2) 3,671 9.6 366 0.6 4,037 4.1 Mortgage loans 493 1.3 6,077 10.7 6,570 6.8 Limited partnership interests (3) 2,991 7.8 1,924 3.4 7 0.3 4,922 5.1 Short-term (4) 912 2.4 907 1.6 517 25.1 2,336 2.4 Other 467 1.2 1,929 3.4 2,396 2.4 Total $ 38,215 100.0 % $ 56,999 100.0 % $ 2,064 100.0 % $ 97,278 100.0 % (1) Fixed income securities are carried at fair value. Amortized cost basis for these securities was $28.37 billion, $42.05 billion and $1.50 billion for Property-Liability, Allstate Financial and Corporate and Other, respectively. (2) Equity securities are carried at fair value. Cost basis for these securities was $3.25 billion and $327 million for Property-Liability and Allstate Financial, respectively. (3) We have commitments to invest in additional limited partnership interests totaling $1.13 billion and $947 million for Property-Liability and Allstate Financial, respectively. (4) Short-term investments are carried at fair value. Amortized cost basis for these investments was $912 million, $907 million and $517 million for Property-Liability, Allstate Financial and Corporate and Other, respectively. (5) Balances reflect the elimination of related party investments between segments. Total investments increased to $97.28 billion as of December 31, 2012, from $95.62 billion as of December 31, 2011, primarily due to higher valuations of fixed income securities and positive Property-Liability operating cash flows, partially offset by net reductions in Allstate Financial's contractholder funds. Valuations of fixed income securities are typically driven by a combination of changes in relevant risk-free interest rates and credit spreads over the period. Risk-free interest rates are typically referenced as the yield on U.S. Treasury securities, whereas credit spread is the additional yield on fixed income securities above the risk-free rate that market participants require to compensate them 79 Table of Contents for assuming credit, liquidity and/or prepayment risks. The increase in valuation of fixed income securities during 2012 was due to tightening credit spreads and decreasing risk-free interest rates. The Property-Liability investment portfolio increased to $38.22 billion as of December 31, 2012, from $36.00 billion as of December 31, 2011, primarily due to higher valuations of fixed income securities and positive operating cash flows, partially offset by dividends paid by Allstate Insurance Company ("AIC") to its parent, The Allstate Corporation (the "Corporation"). The Allstate Financial investment portfolio decreased to $57.00 billion as of December 31, 2012, from $57.37 billion as of December 31, 2011, primarily due to net reductions in contractholder funds of $3.01 billion, partially offset by higher valuations of fixed income securities. The Corporate and Other investment portfolio decreased to $2.06 billion as of December 31, 2012, from $2.25 billion as of December 31, 2011, primarily due to offsetting capital transactions. During 2012, strategic actions focused on optimizing portfolio yield, return and risk considerations in the low interest rate environment. We increased our investment in intermediate corporate fixed income securities and reduced our investment in long-duration municipal and corporate bonds, shorter duration U.S. government and agencies and asset-backed securities ("ABS"), as well as equity securities. This positioning, coupled with an increase in bank loans, has reduced our exposure to interest rate risk in the Property-Liability investment portfolio. While the dispositions generated net realized capital gains, we expect a decline in investment income prospectively due to the lower yield on the reinvestment of proceeds. We opportunistically reduced our investment in structured securities, including residential mortgage-backed securities ("RMBS") and commercial mortgage-backed securities ("CMBS") and ARS, taking advantage of increased valuations and demand. We also increased our limited partnership interests, consistent with our strategy to have a greater proportion of ownership of assets. Fixed income securities by type are listed in the table below. ($ in millions) Fair value as of December 31, 2012 Percent to total investments Fair value as of December 31, 2011 Percent to total investments U.S. government and agencies $ 4,713 4.9 % $ 6,315 6.6 % Municipal 13,069 13.5 14,241 14.9 Corporate 48,537 49.9 43,581 45.6 Foreign government 2,517 2.6 2,081 2.2 ABS 3,624 3.7 3,966 4.1 RMBS 3,032 3.1 4,121 4.3 CMBS 1,498 1.5 1,784 1.9 Redeemable preferred stock 27 24 Total fixed income securities $ 77,017 79.2 % $ 76,113 79.6 % As of December 31, 2012, 91.4% of the consolidated fixed income securities portfolio was rated investment grade, which is defined as a security having a rating of Aaa, Aa, A or Baa from Moody's, a rating of AAA, AA, A or BBB from S&P, Fitch, Dominion, Kroll or Realpoint, a rating of aaa, aa, a or bbb from A.M. Best, or a comparable internal rating if an externally provided rating is not available. All of our fixed income securities are rated by third party credit rating agencies, the National Association of Insurance Commissioners ("NAIC"), and/or are internally rated. Our initial investment decisions and ongoing monitoring procedures for fixed income securities are based on a thorough due diligence process which includes, but is not limited to, an assessment of the credit quality, sector, structure, and liquidity risks of each issue. 80 Table of Contents The following table summarizes the fair value and unrealized net capital gains and losses for fixed income securities by credit rating as of December 31, 2012. ($ in millions) Aaa Aa A Fair value Unrealized gain/(loss) Fair value Unrealized gain/(loss) Fair value Unrealized gain/(loss) U.S. government and agencies $ 4,713 $ 326 $ $ $ $ Municipal Tax exempt 1,343 43 3,852 201 1,929 132 Taxable 278 33 2,789 428 1,091 142 ARS 186 (15 ) 146 (19 ) 23 (4 ) Corporate Public 935 70 2,731 187 12,670 1,046 Privately placed 1,185 68 1,343 112 4,035 367 Foreign government 1,047 116 654 34 413 31 ABS Collateralized debt obligations ("CDO") 153 5 608 3 251 (25 ) Consumer and other asset-backed securities ("Consumer and other ABS") 1,182 49 437 9 385 10 RMBS U.S. government sponsored entities ("U.S. Agency") 1,387 59 Prime residential mortgage-backed securities ("Prime") 72 2 41 2 65 1 Alt-A residential mortgage-backed securities ("Alt-A") 4 1 25 1 Subprime residential mortgage-backed securities ("Subprime") 24 (1 ) 18 CMBS 802 40 100 3 155 5 Redeemable preferred stock Total fixed income securities $ 13,287 $ 796 $ 12,726 $ 959 $ 21,060 $ 1,706 Baa Ba or lower Total Fair value Unrealized gain/(loss) Fair value Unrealized gain/(loss) Fair value Unrealized gain/(loss) U.S. government and agencies $ $ $ $ $ 4,713 $ 326 Municipal Tax exempt 626 30 288 (12 ) 8,038 394 Taxable 357 (7 ) 92 (12 ) 4,607 584 ARS 40 (8 ) 29 (2 ) 424 (48 ) Corporate Public 14,506 1,149 3,212 165 34,054 2,617 Privately placed 6,549 395 1,371 35 14,483 977 Foreign government 403 46 2,517 227 ABS CDO 195 (28 ) 121 (26 ) 1,328 (71 ) Consumer and other ABS 264 8 28 (4 ) 2,296 72 RMBS U.S. Agency 1,387 59 Prime 132 2 432 35 742 42 Alt-A 46 1 441 (3 ) 517 (1 ) Subprime 9 335 (67 ) 386 (68 ) CMBS 169 (4 ) 272 (56 ) 1,498 (12 ) Redeemable preferred stock 26 4 1 27 4 Total fixed income securities $ 23,322 $ 1,588 $ 6,622 $ 53 $ 77,017 $ 5,102 Municipal bonds , including tax exempt, taxable and ARS securities, totaled $13.07 billion as of December 31, 2012 with an unrealized net capital gain of $930 million. The municipal bond portfolio includes general obligations of state and local issuers and revenue bonds (including pre-refunded bonds, which are bonds for which an irrevocable trust has been established to fund the remaining payments of principal and interest). 81 Table of Contents The following table summarizes by state the fair value, amortized cost and credit rating of our municipal bonds, excluding $938 million of pre-refunded bonds, as of December 31, 2012. State general obligation Local general obligation Fair value Amortized cost Average credit rating ($ in millions) Revenue (1) State Texas $ 32 $ 385 $ 571 $ 988 $ 890 Aa California 88 452 446 986 905 A Florida 135 134 522 791 744 Aa New York 27 102 590 719 674 Aa Pennsylvania 110 89 275 474 458 Aa Missouri 65 127 260 452 423 A Michigan 64 96 283 443 410 Aa Ohio 99 159 170 428 388 Aa Illinois 115 286 401 353 A Washington 26 50 271 347 322 Aa All others 1,164 1,461 3,477 6,102 5,707 Aa Total $ 1,810 $ 3,170 $ 7,151 $ 12,131 $ 11,274 Aa (1) The nature of the activities supporting revenue bonds is highly diversified and includes transportation, health care, industrial development, housing, higher education, utilities, recreation/convention centers and other activities. Our practice for acquiring and monitoring municipal bonds is predominantly based on the underlying credit quality of the primary obligor. We currently rely on the primary obligor to pay all contractual cash flows and are not relying on bond insurers for payments. As a result of downgrades in the insurers' credit ratings, the ratings of the insured municipal bonds generally reflect the underlying ratings of the primary obligor. As of December 31, 2012, 99.6% of our insured municipal bond portfolio is rated investment grade. ARS totaled $424 million as of December 31, 2012 with an unrealized net capital loss of $48 million. Our holdings primarily have a credit rating of Aaa and Aa. As of December 31, 2012, our ARS backed by student loans portfolio of $394 million was 76% to 100% insured by the U.S. Department of Education. All of our ARS holdings are experiencing failed auctions and we receive the failed auction rate or, for those which contain maximum reset rate formulas, we receive the contractual maximum rate. We anticipate that failed auctions may persist and most of our holdings will continue to pay the failed auction rate or, for those that contain maximum rate reset formulas, the maximum rate. Auctions continue to be conducted as scheduled for each of the securities. Corporate bonds , including publicly traded and privately placed, totaled $48.54 billion as of December 31, 2012, with an unrealized net capital gain of $3.59 billion. Privately placed securities primarily consist of corporate issued senior debt securities that are directly negotiated with the borrower or are in unregistered form. Our $14.48 billion portfolio of privately placed securities is broadly diversified by issuer, industry sector and country. The portfolio is made up of 518 issuers. Privately placed corporate obligations contain structural security features such as financial covenants and call protections that provide investors greater protection against credit deterioration, reinvestment risk or fluctuations in interest rates than those typically found in publicly registered debt securities. Additionally, investments in these securities are made after extensive due diligence of the issuer, typically including direct discussions with senior management and on-site visits to company facilities. Ongoing monitoring includes direct periodic dialog with senior management of the issuer and continuous monitoring of operating performance and financial position. Every issue not rated by an independent rating agency is internally rated with a formal rating affirmation at least once a year. Foreign government securities totaled $2.52 billion as of December 31, 2012, with 100% rated investment grade and an unrealized net capital gain of $227 million. Of these securities, 55.0% are in Canadian governmental and provincial securities, 35.4% of which are held by our Canadian companies, 16.2% are backed by the U.S. government and the remaining 28.8% are highly diversified in other foreign governments. ABS, RMBS and CMBS are structured securities that are primarily collateralized by residential and commercial real estate loans and other consumer or corporate borrowings. The cash flows from the underlying collateral paid to the securitization trust are generally applied in a pre-determined order and are designed so that each security issued by the trust, typically referred to as a "class", qualifies for a specific original rating. For example, the "senior" portion or "top" of the capital structure, or rating class, which would originally qualify for a rating of Aaa typically has priority in receiving 82 Table of Contents principal repayments on the underlying collateral and retains this priority until the class is paid in full. In a sequential structure, underlying collateral principal repayments are directed to the most senior rated Aaa class in the structure until paid in full, after which principal repayments are directed to the next most senior Aaa class in the structure until it is paid in full. Senior Aaa classes generally share any losses from the underlying collateral on a pro-rata basis after losses are absorbed by classes with lower original ratings. The payment priority and class subordination included in these securities serves as credit enhancement for holders of the senior or top portions of the structures. These securities continue to retain the payment priority features that existed at the origination of the securitization trust. Other forms of credit enhancement may include structural features embedded in the securitization trust, such as overcollateralization, excess spread and bond insurance. The underlying collateral can have fixed interest rates, variable interest rates (such as adjustable rate mortgages) or may contain features of both fixed and variable rate mortgages. ABS , including CDO and Consumer and other ABS, totaled $3.62 billion as of December 31, 2012, with 95.9% rated investment grade and an unrealized net capital gain of $1 million. Credit risk is managed by monitoring the performance of the underlying collateral. Many of the securities in the ABS portfolio have credit enhancement with features such as overcollateralization, subordinated structures, reserve funds, guarantees and/or insurance. CDO totaled $1.33 billion as of December 31, 2012, with 90.9% rated investment grade. CDO consist primarily of obligations collateralized by high yield and investment grade corporate credits including $1.14 billion of cash flow collateralized loan obligations ("CLO") with unrealized net capital losses of $22 million. Cash flow CLO are structures collateralized primarily by below investment grade senior secured corporate loans. The underlying collateral is generally actively managed by external managers that monitor the collateral's performance and is well diversified across industries and among issuers. The remaining $188 million of securities consisted of project finance CDO, market value CDO and trust preferred CDO with unrealized net capital losses of $49 million. Consumer and other ABS totaled $2.30 billion as of December 31, 2012, with 98.8% rated investment grade. Consumer and other ABS consists of $486 million of consumer auto and $1.81 billion of other ABS with unrealized net capital gains of $9 million and $63 million, respectively. RMBS , including U.S. Agency, Prime, Alt-A and Subprime, totaled $3.03 billion as of December 31, 2012, with 60.2% rated investment grade and an unrealized net capital gain of $32 million. The RMBS portfolio is subject to interest rate risk, but unlike other fixed income securities, is additionally subject to significant prepayment risk from the underlying residential mortgage loans. The credit risk associated with the U.S. Agency portfolio is mitigated because they were issued by or have underlying collateral guaranteed by U.S. government agencies. Prime are collateralized by residential mortgage loans issued to prime borrowers. Alt-A includes securities collateralized by residential mortgage loans issued to borrowers who do not qualify for prime financing terms due to high loan-to-value ratios or limited supporting documentation, but have stronger credit profiles than subprime borrowers. Subprime includes securities collateralized by residential mortgage loans issued to borrowers that cannot qualify for Prime or Alt-A financing terms due in part to weak or limited credit history. It also includes securities that are collateralized by certain second lien mortgages regardless of the borrower's credit history. The Subprime portfolio consisted of $264 million and $122 million of first lien and second lien securities, respectively. The Subprime portfolio unrealized net capital loss of $68 million as of December 31, 2012 was the result of wider credit spreads than at initial purchase. Wider spreads are largely due to the risk associated with the underlying collateral supporting certain Subprime securities. CMBS totaled $1.50 billion as of December 31, 2012, with 81.8% rated investment grade and an unrealized net capital loss of $12 million. The CMBS portfolio is subject to credit risk and has a sequential paydown structure, but unlike certain other structured securities, is generally not subject to prepayment risk due to protections within the underlying commercial mortgage loans. Of the CMBS investments, 91.7% are traditional conduit transactions collateralized by commercial mortgage loans, broadly diversified across property types and geographical area. The remainder consists of non-traditional CMBS such as small balance transactions, large loan pools and single borrower transactions. Equity securities Equity securities primarily include common stocks, exchange traded and mutual funds, non-redeemable preferred stocks and real estate investment trust equity investments. The equity securities portfolio was $4.04 billion as of December 31, 2012 compared to $4.36 billion as of December 31, 2011. The unrealized net capital gain totaled $460 million as of December 31, 2012 compared to $160 million as of December 31, 2011. Mortgage loans Our mortgage loan portfolio, which is primarily held in the Allstate Financial portfolio, totaled $6.57 billion as of December 31, 2012, compared to $7.14 billion as of December 31, 2011, and primarily comprises loans secured by first mortgages on developed commercial real estate. Key considerations used to manage our exposure include property type and geographic diversification. For further detail on our mortgage loan portfolio, see Note 5 of the consolidated financial statements. 83 Table of Contents Limited partnership interests consist of investments in private equity/debt funds, real estate funds, hedge funds and tax credit funds. The limited partnership interests portfolio is well diversified across a number of characteristics including fund managers, vintage years, strategies, geography (including international), and company/property types. The following table presents information about our limited partnership interests as of December 31, 2012. ($ in millions) Private equity/debt funds Real estate funds Hedge funds Tax credit funds Total Cost method of accounting ("Cost") $ 912 $ 448 $ 46 $ $ 1,406 Equity method of accounting ("EMA") 1,439 1,115 293 669 3,516 Total $ 2,351 (1) $ 1,563 $ 339 $ 669 $ 4,922 Number of managers 98 45 14 11 Number of individual funds 165 96 38 21 Largest exposure to single fund $ 123 $ 224 $ 83 $ 56 (1) Includes $479 million of infrastructure and real asset funds. The following table shows the earnings from our limited partnership interests by fund type and accounting classification for the years ended December 31. ($ in millions) 2012 2011 Cost EMA (1) Total income Impairment write-downs Cost EMA (1) Total income Impairment write-downs Private equity/debt funds $ 94 $ 152 $ 246 $ (2 ) $ 77 $ 72 $ 149 $ (3 ) Real estate funds 17 106 123 (4 ) 12 86 98 (3 ) Hedge funds 7 7 (2 ) 12 12 Tax credit funds (28 ) (28 ) (1 ) (11 ) (12 ) Total $ 111 $ 237 $ 348 $ (8 ) $ 88 $ 159 $ 247 $ (6 ) (1) Income from EMA limited partnerships is reported in net investment income in 2012 and realized capital gains and losses in 2011. Limited partnership interests produced income, excluding impairment write-downs, of $348 million in 2012 compared to $247 million in 2011. Income on EMA limited partnerships is recognized on a delay due to the availability of the related financial statements. The recognition of income on hedge funds is primarily on a one-month delay and the income recognition on private equity/debt funds, real estate funds and tax credit funds are generally on a three-month delay. Income on cost method limited partnerships is recognized only upon receipt of amounts distributed by the partnerships. Short-term investments Our short-term investment portfolio was $2.34 billion and $1.29 billion as of December 31, 2012 and 2011, respectively. Other investments Our other investments as of December 31, 2012 primarily comprise $1.14 billion of policy loans, $682 million of bank loans, $319 million of agent loans and $133 million of certain derivatives. For further detail on our use of derivatives, see Note 7 of the consolidated financial statements. Unrealized net capital gains totaled $5.55 billion as of December 31, 2012 compared to $2.88 billion as of December 31, 2011. The increase for fixed income securities was due to tightening credit spreads and decreasing 84 Table of Contents risk-free interest rates. The increase for equity securities was primarily due to positive returns in the equity markets. The following table presents unrealized net capital gains and losses as of December 31. ($ in millions) 2012 2011 U.S. government and agencies $ 326 $ 349 Municipal 930 607 Corporate 3,594 2,364 Foreign government 227 215 ABS 1 (214 ) RMBS 32 (411 ) CMBS (12 ) (178 ) Redeemable preferred stock 4 2 Fixed income securities 5,102 2,734 Equity securities 460 160 EMA limited partnerships 7 2 Derivatives (22 ) (17 ) Unrealized net capital gains and losses, pre-tax $ 5,547 $ 2,879 The unrealized net capital gains for the fixed income portfolio totaled $5.10 billion and comprised $5.63 billion of gross unrealized gains and $530 million of gross unrealized losses as of December 31, 2012. This is compared to unrealized net capital gains for the fixed income portfolio totaling $2.73 billion, comprised of $4.40 billion of gross unrealized gains and $1.67 billion of gross unrealized losses as of December 31, 2011. Unrealized capital gains and losses may decrease or increase as risk-free interest rates increase or decrease in the future. Gross unrealized gains and losses on fixed income securities by type and sector as of December 31, 2012 are provided in the table below. Gross unrealized Amortized cost ($ in millions) Gains Losses Fair value Corporate: Banking $ 3,707 $ 195 $ (55 ) $ 3,847 Utilities 7,792 879 (17 ) 8,654 Capital goods 5,281 424 (15 ) 5,690 Financial services 3,436 257 (10 ) 3,683 Consumer goods (cyclical and non-cyclical) 9,960 758 (11 ) 10,707 Transportation 1,960 203 (8 ) 2,155 Technology 2,355 147 (4 ) 2,498 Basic industry 2,626 191 (3 ) 2,814 Energy 3,993 338 (1 ) 4,330 Communications 2,931 253 (1 ) 3,183 Other 902 76 (2 ) 976 Total corporate fixed income portfolio 44,943 3,721 (127 ) 48,537 U.S. government and agencies 4,387 326 4,713 Municipal 12,139 1,038 (108 ) 13,069 Foreign government 2,290 228 (1 ) 2,517 ABS 3,623 108 (107 ) 3,624 RMBS 3,000 142 (110 ) 3,032 CMBS 1,510 65 (77 ) 1,498 Redeemable preferred stock 23 4 27 Total fixed income securities $ 71,915 $ 5,632 $ (530 ) $ 77,017 The banking, utilities and capital goods sectors had the highest concentration of gross unrealized losses in our corporate fixed income securities portfolio as of December 31, 2012. In general, credit spreads remain wider than at initial purchase for most of the securities with gross unrealized losses in these categories. 85 Table of Contents The unrealized net capital gain for the equity portfolio totaled $460 million and comprised $494 million of gross unrealized gains and $34 million of gross unrealized losses as of December 31, 2012. This is compared to an unrealized net capital gain for the equity portfolio totaling $160 million, comprised of $369 million of gross unrealized gains and $209 million of gross unrealized losses as of December 31, 2011. Gross unrealized gains and losses on equity securities by sector as of December 31, 2012 are provided in the table below. Gross unrealized ($ in millions) Cost Gains Losses Fair value Energy $ 194 $ 27 $ (7 ) $ 214 Consumer goods (cyclical and non-cyclical) 643 117 (5 ) 755 Technology 213 44 (5 ) 252 Basic industry 138 30 (5 ) 163 Financial services 183 35 (3 ) 215 Capital goods 160 31 (2 ) 189 Utilities 76 7 (2 ) 81 Index-based funds 403 46 (1 ) 448 Banking 143 27 (1 ) 169 Communications 110 25 (1 ) 134 Real estate 102 19 (1 ) 120 Transportation 42 12 (1 ) 53 Emerging market fixed income funds 753 55 808 Emerging market equity funds 417 19 436 Total equity securities $ 3,577 $ 494 $ (34 ) $ 4,037 Within the equity portfolio, the losses were primarily concentrated in the energy, consumer goods, technology and basic industry sectors. The unrealized losses were company and sector specific. As of December 31, 2012, we have the intent and ability to hold our equity securities with unrealized losses until recovery. As of December 31, 2012, the total fair value of our direct investments in fixed income and equity securities in the Eurozone (European Union member states using the Euro currency) is $1.48 billion, with net unrealized capital gains of $62 million, comprised of $83 million of gross unrealized gains and $21 million of gross unrealized losses. The following table summarizes our total direct exposure related to the Eurozone and the "GIIPS" group of countries, including Greece, Ireland, Italy, Portugal and Spain. As of December 31, 2012, we do not have any direct exposure to Greece. We have no sovereign debt investments in the Eurozone. Financials (1) Non-financials (2) Total ($ in millions) Fair value Gross unrealized losses Fair value Gross unrealized losses Fair value Gross unrealized losses GIIPS Fixed income securities $ 25 $ (7 ) $ 365 $ (9 ) $ 390 $ (16 ) Equity securities 1 1 Total 26 (7 ) 365 (9 ) 391 (16 ) Eurozone non-GIIPS Fixed income securities 165 (4 ) 921 (1 ) 1,086 (5 ) Equity securities 2 3 5 Total 167 (4 ) 924 (1 ) 1,091 (5 ) Total Eurozone $ 193 $ (11 ) $ 1,289 $ (10 ) $ 1,482 $ (21 ) (1) Financials primarily includes banking and financial services. (2) Non-financials primarily includes energy, capital goods, consumer goods, communication, technology and basic industries. Other direct exposure to investments in fixed income and equity securities in European Union ("EU") member states that do not use the Euro currency is $2.29 billion, with net unrealized capital gains of $183 million. Remaining 86 Table of Contents direct exposure to non-EU countries total $885 million, with net unrealized capital gains of $78 million. The large majority of these investments are in multinational public companies with global revenue sources that are well diversified across region and sector, including a higher allocation to energy, capital goods, non-cyclical consumer goods and communications sectors. We also have additional indirect and diversified exposures through investments in multinational equity funds and limited partnership interests that invest in Europe. We estimate these indirect exposures do not exceed 1% of total investments. Net investment income The following table presents net investment income for the years ended December 31. ($ in millions) 2012 2011 2010 Fixed income securities $ 3,234 $ 3,484 $ 3,737 Equity securities 127 122 90 Mortgage loans 374 359 385 Limited partnership interests (1) 348 88 40 Short-term investments 6 6 8 Other 132 95 19 Investment income, before expense 4,221 4,154 4,279 Investment expense (211 ) (183 ) (177 ) Net investment income $ 4,010 $ 3,971 $ 4,102 (1) Income from EMA limited partnerships is reported in net investment income in 2012 and realized capital gains and losses in 2011 and 2010. Net investment income increased 1.0% or $39 million in 2012 compared to 2011, after decreasing 3.2% or $131 million in 2011 compared to 2010. The 2012 increase was primarily due to income from limited partnerships, partially offset by lower average investment balances and lower fixed income yields. The 2011 decline was primarily due to lower average investment balances, partially offset by higher yields. Realized capital gains and losses The following table presents the components of realized capital gains and losses and the related tax effect for the years ended December 31. ($ in millions) 2012 2011 2010 Impairment write-downs $ (185 ) $ (496 ) $ (797 ) Change in intent write-downs (48 ) (100 ) (204 ) Net other-than-temporary impairment losses recognized in earnings (233 ) (596 ) (1,001 ) Sales 536 1,336 686 Valuation of derivative instruments (11 ) (291 ) (427 ) Settlements of derivative instruments 35 (105 ) (174 ) EMA limited partnership income (1) 159 89 Realized capital gains and losses, pre-tax 327 503 (827 ) Income tax (expense) benefit (111 ) (179 ) 290 Realized capital gains and losses, after-tax $ 216 $ 324 $ (537 ) (1) Income from EMA limited partnerships is reported in net investment income in 2012 and realized capital gains and losses in 2011 and 2010. Impairment write-downs for the years ended December 31 are presented in the following table. ($ in millions) 2012 2011 2010 Fixed income securities $ (108 ) $ (302 ) $ (626 ) Equity securities (63 ) (131 ) (57 ) Mortgage loans 5 (37 ) (65 ) Limited partnership interests (8 ) (6 ) (46 ) Other investments (11 ) (20 ) (3 ) Impairment write-downs $ (185 ) $ (496 ) $ (797 ) 87 Table of Contents Impairment write-downs on fixed income securities in 2012 were primarily driven by RMBS and CMBS that experienced deterioration in expected cash flows and municipal and corporate fixed income securities impacted by issuer specific circumstances. Equity securities were written down primarily due to the length of time and extent to which fair value was below cost, considering our assessment of the financial condition and near-term and long-term prospects of the issuer, including relevant industry conditions and trends. Impairment write-downs in 2011 were primarily driven by RMBS, which experienced deterioration in expected cash flows; investments with commercial real estate exposure, including CMBS, mortgage loans and municipal bonds, which were impacted by lower real estate valuations or experienced deterioration in expected cash flows; and corporate fixed income securities impacted by issuer specific circumstances. Change in intent write-downs were $48 million, $100 million and $204 million in 2012, 2011 and 2010, respectively. The change in intent write-downs in 2012 were primarily a result of ongoing comprehensive reviews of our portfolios resulting in write-downs of individually identified investments, primarily RMBS and equity securities. The change in intent write-downs in 2011 were primarily a result of ongoing comprehensive reviews of our portfolios resulting in write-downs of individually identified investments, primarily lower yielding, floating rate RMBS and municipal bonds, and equity securities. Sales generated $536 million, $1.34 billion and $686 million of net realized gains in 2012, 2011 and 2010, respectively. The sales in 2012 primarily related to corporate, municipal and U.S. government and agencies fixed income securities and equity securities in connection with portfolio repositioning. The sales in 2011 were primarily due to $1.11 billion of net gains on sales of corporate, foreign government, U.S. government, ABS, U.S. Agency and municipal fixed income securities and $202 million of net gains on sales of equity securities. Valuation and settlements of derivative instruments net realized capital gains totaling $24 million in 2012 included $11 million of losses on the valuation of derivative instruments and $35 million of gains on the settlements of derivative instruments. The net realized capital gains on derivative instruments in 2012 primarily included gains on credit default swaps due to the tightening of credit spreads on the underlying credit names. In 2011, net realized capital losses on the valuation and settlements of derivative instruments totaled $396 million, including $291 million of losses on the valuation of derivative instruments and $105 million of losses on the settlements of derivative instruments. The net realized capital losses on derivative instruments in 2011 primarily included losses on interest rate risk management due to decreases in interest rates. As a component of our approach to managing interest rate risk, realized gains and losses on certain derivative instruments are most appropriately considered in conjunction with the unrealized gains and losses on the fixed income portfolio. This approach mitigates the impacts of general interest rate changes to our overall financial condition. MARKET RISK Market risk is the risk that we will incur losses due to adverse changes in interest rates, credit spreads, equity prices or currency exchange rates. Adverse changes to these rates and prices may occur due to changes in fiscal policy, the economic climate, the liquidity of a market or market segment, insolvency or financial distress of key market makers or participants or changes in market perceptions of credit worthiness and/or risk tolerance. Our primary market risk exposures are to changes in interest rates, credit spreads and equity prices. The active management of market risk is integral to our results of operations. We may use the following approaches to manage exposure to market risk within defined tolerance ranges: 1) rebalancing existing asset or liability portfolios, 2) changing the type of investments purchased in the future and 3) using derivative instruments to modify the market risk characteristics of existing assets and liabilities or assets expected to be purchased. For a more detailed discussion of our use of derivative financial instruments, see Note 7 of the consolidated financial statements. Overview In formulating and implementing guidelines for investing funds, we seek to earn returns that enhance our ability to offer competitive rates and prices to customers while contributing to attractive and stable profits and long-term capital growth. Accordingly, our investment decisions and objectives are a function of the underlying risks and product profiles of each business. Investment policies define the overall framework for managing market and other investment risks, including accountability and controls over risk management activities. Subsidiaries that conduct investment activities follow policies that have been approved by their respective boards of directors. These investment policies specify the investment limits and strategies that are appropriate given the liquidity, surplus, product profile and regulatory requirements of the subsidiary. Executive oversight of investment activities is conducted primarily through subsidiaries' boards of directors and investment committees. For Allstate Financial, its asset-liability management ("ALM") policies 88 Table of Contents further define the overall framework for managing market and investment risks. ALM focuses on strategies to enhance yields, mitigate market risks and optimize capital to improve profitability and returns for Allstate Financial. Allstate Financial ALM activities follow asset-liability policies that have been approved by their respective boards of directors. These ALM policies specify limits, ranges and/or targets for investments that best meet Allstate Financial's business objectives in light of its product liabilities. We use quantitative and qualitative market-based approaches to measure, monitor and manage market risk. We evaluate our exposure to market risk through the use of multiple measures including but not limited to duration, value-at-risk, scenario analysis and sensitivity analysis. Duration measures the price sensitivity of assets and liabilities to changes in interest rates. For example, if interest rates increase 100 basis points, the fair value of an asset with a duration of 5 is expected to decrease in value by 5%. Value-at-risk is a statistical estimate of the probability that the change in fair value of a portfolio will exceed a certain amount over a given time horizon. Scenario analysis estimates the potential changes in the fair value of a portfolio that could occur under different hypothetical market conditions defined by changes to multiple market risk factors: interest rates, credit spreads, equity prices or currency exchange rates. Sensitivity analysis estimates the potential changes in the fair value of a portfolio that could occur under different hypothetical shocks to a market risk factor. In general, we establish investment portfolio asset allocation and market risk limits for the Property-Liability and Allstate Financial businesses based upon a combination of duration, value-at-risk, scenario analysis and sensitivity analysis. The asset allocation limits place restrictions on the total funds that may be invested within an asset class. Comprehensive day-to-day management of market risk within defined tolerance ranges occurs as portfolio managers buy and sell within their respective markets based upon the acceptable boundaries established by investment policies. For Allstate Financial, this day-to-day management is integrated with and informed by the activities of the ALM organization. This integration is intended to result in a prudent, methodical and effective adjudication of market risk and return, conditioned by the unique demands and dynamics of Allstate Financial's product liabilities and supported by the continuous application of advanced risk technology and analytics. Although we apply a similar overall philosophy to market risk, the underlying business frameworks and the accounting and regulatory environments differ considerably between the Property-Liability and Allstate Financial businesses affecting investment decisions and risk parameters. Interest rate risk is the risk that we will incur a loss due to adverse changes in interest rates relative to the characteristics of our interest bearing assets and liabilities. This risk arises from many of our primary activities, as we invest substantial funds in interest-sensitive assets and issue interest-sensitive liabilities. Interest rate risk includes risks related to changes in U.S. Treasury yields and other key risk-free reference yields. We manage the interest rate risk in our assets relative to the interest rate risk in our liabilities. One of the measures used to quantify this exposure is duration. The difference in the duration of our assets relative to our liabilities is our duration gap. To calculate the duration gap between assets and liabilities, we project asset and liability cash flows and calculate their net present value using a risk-free market interest rate adjusted for credit quality, sector attributes, liquidity and other specific risks. Duration is calculated by revaluing these cash flows at alternative interest rates and determining the percentage change in aggregate fair value. The cash flows used in this calculation include the expected maturity and repricing characteristics of our derivative financial instruments, all other financial instruments, and certain other items including unearned premiums, property-liability insurance claims and claims expense reserves, annuity liabilities and other interest-sensitive liabilities. The projections include assumptions (based upon historical market experience and our experience) that reflect the effect of changing interest rates on the prepayment, lapse, leverage and/or option features of instruments, where applicable. The preceding assumptions relate primarily to mortgage-backed securities, municipal housing bonds, callable municipal and corporate obligations, and fixed rate single and flexible premium deferred annuities. Additionally, the calculations include assumptions regarding the renewal of property-liability policies. As of December 31, 2012, the difference between our asset and liability duration was a (0.23) gap, compared to a 0.14 gap as of December 31, 2011. A negative duration gap indicates that the fair value of our liabilities is more sensitive to interest rate movements than the fair value of our assets, while a positive duration gap indicates that the fair value of our assets is more sensitive to interest rate movements than the fair value of our liabilities. The Property-Liability segment generally maintains a positive duration gap between its assets and liabilities due to the relatively short duration of auto and homeowners claims, which are its primary liabilities. The Allstate Financial segment may have a positive or negative duration gap, as the duration of its assets and liabilities vary with its product mix and investing activity. As of December 31, 2012, Property-Liability had a positive duration gap while Allstate Financial had a negative duration gap. 89 Table of Contents In the management of investments supporting the Property-Liability business, we adhere to an objective of emphasizing safety of principal and consistency of income within a total return framework. This approach is designed to ensure our financial strength and stability for paying claims, while maximizing economic value and surplus growth. For the Allstate Financial business, we seek to invest premiums, contract charges and deposits to generate future cash flows that will fund future claims, benefits and expenses, and that will earn stable returns across a wide variety of interest rate and economic scenarios. To achieve this objective and limit interest rate risk for Allstate Financial, we adhere to a philosophy of managing the duration of assets and related liabilities within predetermined tolerance levels. This philosophy is executed using duration targets for fixed income investments in addition to interest rate swaps, futures, forwards, caps, floors and swaptions to reduce the interest rate risk resulting from mismatches between existing assets and liabilities, and financial futures and other derivative instruments to hedge the interest rate risk of anticipated purchases and sales of investments and product sales to customers. Based upon the information and assumptions used in the duration calculation, and interest rates in effect as of December 31, 2012, we estimate that a 100 basis point immediate, parallel increase in interest rates ("rate shock") would increase the net fair value of the assets and liabilities by $211 million, compared to a decrease of $127 million as of December 31, 2011, reflecting year to year changes in duration. Reflected in the duration calculation are the effects of a program that uses swaps, eurodollar futures, options on Treasury futures and interest rate swaptions to manage interest rate risk. In calculating the impact of a 100 basis point increase on the value of the derivatives, we have assumed interest rate volatility remains constant. Based on the swaps, eurodollar futures, options on Treasury futures and interest rate swaptions in place as of December 31, 2012, we would recognize realized capital losses totaling $2 million in the event of a 100 basis point immediate, parallel interest rate increase and $2 million in realized capital gains in the event of a 100 basis point immediate, parallel interest rate decrease on these derivatives. The selection of a 100 basis point immediate, parallel change in interest rates should not be construed as our prediction of future market events, but only as an illustration of the potential effect of such an event. The above estimate excludes the traditional and interest-sensitive life insurance products that are not considered financial instruments and the $12.04 billion of assets supporting them and the associated liabilities. The $12.04 billion of assets excluded from the calculation has increased from $10.49 billion as of December 31, 2011, due to an increase in interest-sensitive life contractholder funds and improved fixed income valuations as a result of declining risk-free interest rates and tightening of credit spreads in certain sectors. Based on assumptions described above, in the event of a 100 basis point immediate increase in interest rates, the assets supporting life insurance products would decrease in value by $737 million, compared to a decrease of $660 million as of December 31, 2011. To the extent that conditions differ from the assumptions we used in these calculations, duration and rate shock measures could be significantly impacted. Additionally, our calculations assume that the current relationship between short-term and long-term interest rates (the term structure of interest rates) will remain constant over time. As a result, these calculations may not fully capture the effect of non-parallel changes in the term structure of interest rates and/or large changes in interest rates. Credit spread risk is the risk that we will incur a loss due to adverse changes in credit spreads ("spreads"). This risk arises from many of our primary activities, as we invest substantial funds in spread-sensitive fixed income assets. We manage the spread risk in our assets. One of the measures used to quantify this exposure is spread duration. Spread duration measures the price sensitivity of the assets to changes in spreads. For example, if spreads increase 100 basis points, the fair value of an asset exhibiting a spread duration of 5 is expected to decrease in value by 5%. Spread duration is calculated similarly to interest rate duration. As of December 31, 2012, the spread duration of Property-Liability assets was 4.04, compared to 4.77 as of December 31, 2011, and the spread duration of Allstate Financial assets was 5.85, compared to 5.58 as of December 31, 2011. Based upon the information and assumptions we use in this spread duration calculation, and spreads in effect as of December 31, 2012, we estimate that a 100 basis point immediate, parallel increase in spreads across all asset classes, industry sectors and credit ratings ("spread shock") would decrease the net fair value of the assets by $4.04 billion, compared to $4.10 billion as of December 31, 2011. Reflected in the duration calculation are the effects of our tactical actions that use credit default swaps to manage spread risk. The selection of a 100 basis point immediate parallel change in spreads should not be construed as our prediction of future market events, but only as an illustration of the potential effect of such an event. Equity price risk is the risk that we will incur losses due to adverse changes in the general levels of the equity markets. As of December 31, 2012, we held $3.99 billion in common stocks and exchange traded and mutual funds and $4.97 billion in other securities with equity risk (including primarily limited partnership interests, non-redeemable preferred securities and equity-linked notes), compared to $4.26 billion and $4.82 billion, respectively, as of 90 Table of Contents December 31, 2011. 90.8% and 60.2% of these totals, respectively, represented assets of the Property-Liability operations as of December 31, 2012, compared to 95.7% and 63.3%, respectively, as of December 31, 2011. As of December 31, 2012, our portfolio of common stocks and other securities with equity risk had a cash market portfolio beta of 0.86, compared to a beta of 0.72 as of December 31, 2011. Beta represents a widely used methodology to describe, quantitatively, an investment's market risk characteristics relative to an index such as the Standard & Poor's 500 Composite Price Index ("S&P 500"). Based on the beta analysis, we estimate that if the S&P 500 increases or decreases by 10%, the fair value of our equity investments will increase or decrease by 8.6%, respectively. Based upon the information and assumptions we used to calculate beta as of December 31, 2012, we estimate that an immediate decrease in the S&P 500 of 10% would decrease the net fair value of our equity investments identified above by $766 million, compared to $652 million as of December 31, 2011, and an immediate increase in the S&P 500 of 10% would increase the net fair value by $766 million compared to $654 million as of December 31, 2011. The selection of a 10% immediate decrease or increase in the S&P 500 should not be construed as our prediction of future market events, but only as an illustration of the potential effect of such an event. The beta of our common stocks and other securities with equity risk was determined by calculating the change in the fair value of the portfolio resulting from stressing the equity market up and down 10%. The illustrations noted above may not reflect our actual experience if the future composition of the portfolio (hence its beta) and correlation relationships differ from the historical relationships. As of December 31, 2012 and 2011, we had separate accounts assets related to variable annuity and variable life contracts with account values totaling $6.61 billion and $6.98 billion, respectively. Equity risk exists for contract charges based on separate account balances and guarantees for death and/or income benefits provided by our variable products. In 2006, we disposed of substantially all of the variable annuity business through reinsurance agreements with The Prudential Insurance Company of America, a subsidiary of Prudential Financial Inc. and therefore mitigated this aspect of our risk. Equity risk for our variable life business relates to contract charges and policyholder benefits. Total variable life contract charges for 2012 and 2011 were $71 million and $76 million, respectively. Separate account liabilities related to variable life contracts were $767 million and $716 million in December 31, 2012 and 2011, respectively. As of December 31, 2012 and 2011 we had $3.63 billion and $3.87 billion, respectively, in equity-indexed annuity liabilities that provide customers with interest crediting rates based on the performance of the S&P 500. We hedge the majority of the risk associated with these liabilities using equity-indexed options and futures and eurodollar futures, maintaining risk within specified value-at-risk limits. Foreign currency exchange rate risk is the risk that we will incur economic losses due to adverse changes in foreign currency exchange rates. This risk primarily arises from our foreign equity investments, including real estate funds and private equity funds, and our Canadian and Northern Ireland operations. We also have investments in certain fixed income securities and emerging market fixed income funds that are denominated in foreign currencies; however, derivatives are used to hedge approximately 28% of this foreign currency risk. As of December 31, 2012, we had $1.11 billion in foreign currency denominated equity investments, $858 million net investment in our foreign subsidiaries, and $548 million in unhedged non-dollar pay fixed income securities. These amounts were $1.24 billion, $786 million, and $363 million, respectively, as of December 31, 2011. 78.9% of the foreign currency exposure is in the Property-Liability business. Based upon the information and assumptions used as of December 31, 2012, we estimate that a 10% immediate unfavorable change in each of the foreign currency exchange rates to which we are exposed would decrease the value of our foreign currency denominated instruments by $264 million, compared with an estimated $225 million decrease as of December 31, 2011. The selection of a 10% immediate decrease in all currency exchange rates should not be construed as our prediction of future market events, but only as an illustration of the potential effect of such an event. The modeling technique we use to report our currency exposure does not take into account correlation among foreign currency exchange rates. Even though we believe it is very unlikely that all of the foreign currency exchange rates that we are exposed to would simultaneously decrease by 10%, we nonetheless stress test our portfolio under this and other hypothetical extreme adverse market scenarios. Our actual experience may differ from these results because of assumptions we have used or because significant liquidity and market events could occur that we did not foresee. PENSION PLANS We have defined benefit pension plans, which cover most full-time, certain part-time employees and employee-agents. See Note 17 of the consolidated financial statements for a complete discussion of these plans and their effect on 91 Table of Contents the consolidated financial statements. The pension and other postretirement plans may be amended or terminated at any time. Any revisions could result in significant changes to our obligations and our obligation to fund the plans. We report unrecognized pension and other postretirement benefit cost in the Consolidated Statements of Financial Position as a component of accumulated other comprehensive income in shareholders' equity. It represents the after-tax differences between the fair value of plan assets and the projected benefit obligation ("PBO") for pension plans and the accumulated postretirement benefit obligation for other postretirement plans that have not yet been recognized as a component of net periodic cost. The measurement of the unrecognized pension and other postretirement benefit cost can vary based upon the fluctuations in the fair value of plan assets and the actuarial assumptions used for the plans as discussed below. The unrecognized pension and other postretirement benefit cost as of December 31, 2012 was $1.73 billion, an increase of $302 million from $1.43 billion as of December 31, 2011. The increase was the result of updated actuarial assumptions primarily the discount rates. As of December 31, 2012, $1.88 billion related to pension benefits and $(150) million related to other postretirement benefits. The components of net periodic pension cost for all pension plans for the years ended December 31 are as follows: ($ in millions) 2012 2011 2010 Service cost $ 152 $ 151 $ 150 Interest cost 298 322 320 Expected return on plan assets (393 ) (367 ) (331 ) Amortization of: Prior service credit (2 ) (2 ) (2 ) Net actuarial loss 178 154 160 Settlement loss 33 46 48 Net periodic cost $ 266 $ 304 $ 345 The service cost component is the actuarial present value of the benefits attributed by the plans benefit formula to services rendered by the employees during the period. Interest cost is the increase in the PBO in the period due to the passage of time at the discount rate. Interest cost fluctuates as the discount rate changes and is also impacted by the related change in the size of the PBO. The change in the PBO due to the change in the discount rate is deferred as a component of net actuarial loss. It is recorded in accumulated other comprehensive income as unrecognized pension benefit cost and may be amortized. The expected return on plan assets is determined as the product of the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets and the adjusted fair value of plan assets, referred to as the market-related value of plan assets. To determine the market-related value, the fair value of plan assets is adjusted annually so that differences between changes in the fair value of equity securities and hedge fund limited partnerships and the expected long-term rate of return on these securities are recognized into the market-related value of plan assets over a five year period. We believe this is consistent with the long-term nature of pension obligations. The difference between the actual return on plan assets and the expected return on plan assets is deferred as a component of net actuarial loss. It is recorded in accumulated other comprehensive income as unrecognized pension benefit cost and may be amortized. The market-related value adjustment represents the current difference between actual returns and expected returns on equity securities and hedge fund limited partnerships recognized over a five year period. The market-related value adjustment is a deferred net gain of $460 million as of December 31, 2012. The expected return on plan assets fluctuates when the market-related value of plan assets changes and when the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets assumption changes. Amortization of net actuarial loss in pension cost is recorded when the net actuarial loss including the unamortized market-related value adjustment exceeds 10% of the greater of the PBO or the market-related value of plan assets. The amount of amortization is equal to the excess divided by the average remaining service period for active employees for each plan, which approximates 9 years for Allstate's largest plan. As a result, the effect of changes in the PBO due to changes in the discount rate and changes in the fair value of plan assets may be experienced in our net periodic pension cost in periods subsequent to those in which the fluctuations actually occur. Net actuarial loss fluctuates as the discount rate fluctuates, as the actual return on plan assets differ from the expected long-term rate of return on plans assets, and as actual plan experience differs from other actuarial assumptions. Net actuarial loss related to changes in the discount rate will change when interest rates change and from amortization of net actuarial loss when there is an excess sufficient to qualify for amortization. Net actuarial loss related to changes in the fair value of plan assets will change when plan assets change in fair value and when there is an excess sufficient to qualify for amortization. Other net actuarial loss will change over time due to changes in other valuation assumptions and the plan participants or when there is an excess sufficient to qualify for amortization. 92 Table of Contents The change in the discount rate increased the net actuarial loss by $806 million, $407 million, and $166 million in 2012, 2011 and 2010, respectively. The difference between actual and expected returns on plan assets (decreased) increased the net actuarial loss by $(201) million, $100 million, and $(164) million in 2012, 2011 and 2010, respectively. Net periodic pension cost in 2013 is estimated to be $333 million based on current assumptions, including settlement charges. This represents an increase compared to $266 million in 2012 due to an increase in the amortization expense for prior years net actuarial losses (gain) which increased due to a lower discount rate used to value the pension plans. Net periodic pension cost decreased in 2012 compared to $304 million in 2011 primarily due to an increase in the expected return on plan assets, a lower discount rate used to value the pension plans and a decrease in settlement charges partially offset by increased amortization of net actuarial loss (gain). Net periodic pension cost decreased in 2011 compared to $345 million in 2010 primarily due to an increase in the expected return on plan assets. In 2012, 2011 and 2010, net pension cost included non-cash settlement charges primarily resulting from lump sum distributions made to agents. Settlement charges also occurred during 2012, 2011 and 2010 related to the Supplemental Retirement Income Plan as a result of lump sum payments made from the plan. Settlement charges are likely to continue for some period in the future as we settle our remaining agent pension obligations by making lump sum distributions to agents. Since December 31, 2007, unrecognized pension benefit cost, pre-tax, has increased approximately $2 billion, approximately one third of which arose from asset returns differing from expected returns and approximately two thirds of which is related to changes in the discount rates which have been declining over this period. As of December 31, 2012, the discount rate had declined over the last five years from 6.5% to 4.0%, due to the decline in the weighted average yields of the investments that qualify for consideration to establish the assumption for the discount rate. Also, plan assets sustained net losses in 2008 primarily due to declines in equity and credit markets. These changes in discount rates and prior year asset losses, combined with all other unrecognized actuarial gains and losses, resulted in a net actuarial loss of $2.89 billion and amortization of net actuarial loss (and additional net periodic pension cost) of $178 million in 2012 and $153 million in 2011. We anticipate that the net actuarial loss for our pension plans will exceed 10% of the greater of the PBO or the market-related value of assets in 2013 and into the foreseeable future, resulting in additional amortization and net periodic pension cost. The net actuarial loss will be amortized over the remaining service life of active employees (approximately 9 years) or will reverse with increases in the discount rate or better than expected returns on plan assets. Amounts recorded for net periodic pension cost and accumulated other comprehensive income are significantly affected by changes in the assumptions used to determine the discount rate and the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets. The discount rate is based on rates at which expected pension benefits attributable to past employee service could effectively be settled on a present value basis at the measurement date. We develop the assumed discount rate by utilizing the weighted average yield of a theoretical dedicated portfolio derived from non-callable bonds and bonds with a make-whole provision available in the Bloomberg corporate bond universe having ratings of at least "AA" by S&P or at least "Aa" by Moody's on the measurement date with cash flows that match expected plan benefit requirements. Significant changes in discount rates, such as those caused by changes in the credit spreads, yield curve, the mix of bonds available in the market, the duration of selected bonds and expected benefit payments, may result in volatility in pension cost and accumulated other comprehensive income. Holding other assumptions constant, a hypothetical decrease of 100 basis points in the discount rate would result in an increase of $51 million in net periodic pension cost and a $503 million increase in the unrecognized pension cost liability recorded as accumulated other comprehensive income as of December 31, 2012, compared to an increase of $52 million in net periodic pension cost and a $427 million increase in the unrecognized pension cost liability as of December 31, 2011. A hypothetical increase of 100 basis points in the discount rate would decrease net periodic pension cost by $45 million and would decrease the unrecognized pension cost liability recorded as accumulated other comprehensive income by $421 million as of December 31, 2012, compared to a decrease in net periodic pension cost of $46 million and a $360 million decrease in the unrecognized pension cost liability recorded as accumulated other comprehensive income as of December 31, 2011. This non-symmetrical range results from the non-linear relationship between discount rates and pension obligations, and changes in the amortization of unrealized net actuarial gains and losses. The expected long-term rate of return on plan assets reflects the average rate of earnings expected on plan assets. While this rate reflects long-term assumptions and is consistent with long-term historical returns, sustained changes in the market or changes in the mix of plan assets may lead to revisions in the assumed long-term rate of return on plan assets that may result in variability of pension cost. Differences between the actual return on plan assets and the 93 Table of Contents expected long-term rate of return on plan assets are a component of net actuarial loss and are recorded in accumulated other comprehensive income. Holding other assumptions constant, a hypothetical decrease of 100 basis points in the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets would result in an increase of $51 million in pension cost as of December 31, 2012, compared to $47 million as of December 31, 2011. A hypothetical increase of 100 basis points in the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets would result in a decrease in net periodic pension cost of $51 million as of December 31, 2012, compared to $47 million as of December 31, 2011. We target funding levels that do not restrict the payment of plan benefits in our domestic plans and were within our targeted range as of December 31, 2012. In 2012, we contributed $439 million to our pension plans. We expect to contribute $578 million for the 2013 fiscal year to maintain the plans' funded status. This estimate could change significantly following either an improvement or decline in investment markets. GOODWILL Goodwill represents the excess of amounts paid for acquiring businesses over the fair value of the net assets acquired. The goodwill balances were $822 million and $418 million as of December 31, 2012 for the Allstate Protection segment and the Allstate Financial segment, respectively. Our reporting units are equivalent to our reporting segments, Allstate Protection and Allstate Financial. Goodwill is allocated to reporting units based on which unit is expected to benefit from the synergies of the business combination. Goodwill is not amortized but is tested for impairment at least annually. We perform our annual goodwill impairment testing during the fourth quarter of each year based upon data as of the close of the third quarter. We also review goodwill for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances, such as deteriorating or adverse market conditions, indicate that it is more likely than not that the carrying amount of goodwill may exceed its implied fair value. Impairment testing requires the use of estimates and judgments. For purposes of goodwill impairment testing, if the carrying value of a reporting unit exceeds its estimated fair value, the second step of the goodwill test is required. In such instances, the implied fair value of the goodwill is determined in the same manner as the amount of goodwill that would be determined in a business acquisition. The excess of the carrying value of goodwill over the implied fair value of goodwill would be recognized as an impairment and recorded as a charge against net income. To estimate the fair value of our reporting units for our annual impairment test, we initially utilize a stock price and market capitalization analysis and apportion the value between our reporting units using peer company price to book multiples. If the stock price and market capitalization analysis does not result in the fair value of the reporting unit exceeding its carrying value, we may also utilize a peer company price to earnings multiples analysis and/or a discounted cash flow analysis to supplement the stock price and market capitalization analysis. If a combination of valuation techniques are utilized, the analyses would be weighted based on management's judgment of their relevance given current facts and circumstances. The stock price and market capitalization analysis takes into consideration the quoted market price of our outstanding common stock and includes a control premium, derived from historical insurance industry acquisition activity, in determining the estimated fair value of the consolidated entity before allocating that fair value to individual reporting units. The total market capitalization of the consolidated entity is allocated to the individual reporting units using book value multiples derived from peer company data for the respective reporting units. The peer company price to earnings multiples analysis takes into consideration the price earnings multiples of peer companies for each reporting unit and estimated income from our strategic plan. The discounted cash flow analysis utilizes long term assumptions for revenue growth, capital growth, earnings projections including those used in our strategic plan, and an appropriate discount rate. We apply significant judgment when determining the fair value of our reporting units and when assessing the relationship of market capitalization to the estimated fair value of our reporting units. The valuation analyses described above are subject to critical judgments and assumptions and may be potentially sensitive to variability. Estimates of fair value are inherently uncertain and represent management's reasonable expectation regarding future developments. These estimates and the judgments and assumptions utilized may differ from future actual results. Declines in the estimated fair value of our reporting units could result in goodwill impairments in future periods which may be material to our results of operations but not our financial position. During fourth quarter 2012, we completed our annual goodwill impairment test using information as of September 30, 2012. The stock price and market capitalization analysis resulted in the fair value of our reporting units exceeding their respective carrying values. While the fair value of the reporting units exceeded their respective carrying values, the results indicated that the amount of excess fair value was disproportionately greater for the Allstate 94 Table of Contents Protection reporting unit and relatively less for the Allstate Financial reporting unit. The results of this analysis are consistent with both the relative operating performance of the individual reporting units as well as their respective industry sector's performance. Specifically, spread-based products, which are a material component of the Allstate Financial reporting unit, are experiencing the continued impacts of the historically low interest rate environment which has depressed operating margins. In contrast, underwriting results from the Allstate Protection business have benefitted by the general presence of stable to higher premium rates and stable loss costs. Goodwill impairment evaluations indicated no impairment as of December 31, 2012 and no reporting unit was at risk of having its carrying value including goodwill exceed its fair value. CAPITAL RESOURCES AND LIQUIDITY 2012 HIGHLIGHTS Shareholders' equity as of December 31, 2012 was $20.58 billion, an increase of 12.5% from $18.30 billion as of December 31, 2011. On January 3, 2012, April 2, 2012, July 2, 2012, October 1, 2012 and December 31, 2012, we paid shareholder dividends of $0.21, $0.22, $0.22, $0.22 and $0.22, respectively. On February 6, 2013, we declared a quarterly shareholder dividend of $0.25 payable on April 1, 2013. In November 2012, we completed a $1.00 billion share repurchase program that commenced in November 2011. In December 2012, we commenced a new $1.00 billion share repurchase program that is expected to be completed by December 31, 2013, and as of December 31, 2012, had $984 million remaining. In February 2013, an additional $1 billion share repurchase program was authorized and is expected to be completed by March 31, 2014. Our repurchase programs may utilize an accelerated repurchase program. During 2012, we repurchased 26.7 million common shares for $910 million. CAPITAL RESOURCES AND LIQUIDITY Capital resources consist of shareholders' equity and debt, representing funds deployed or available to be deployed to support business operations or for general corporate purposes. The following table summarizes our capital resources as of December 31. ($ in millions) 2012 2011 2010 Common stock, retained income and other shareholders' equity items $ 19,405 $ 18,269 $ 18,789 Accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) 1,175 29 (172 ) Total shareholders' equity 20,580 18,298 18,617 Debt 6,057 5,908 5,908 Total capital resources $ 26,637 $ 24,206 $ 24,525 Ratio of debt to shareholders' equity 29.4% 32.3% 31.7% Ratio of debt to capital resources 22.7% 24.4% 24.1% Shareholders' equity increased in 2012, primarily due to net income and increased unrealized net capital gains on investments, partially offset by share repurchases and dividends paid to shareholders. Shareholders' equity decreased in 2011, primarily due to share repurchases and dividends paid to shareholders, partially offset by net income and increased unrealized net capital gains on investments. Debt The debt balance increased in 2012 due to increases in long-term debt. On January 11, 2012, we issued $500 million of 5.20% Senior Notes due 2042, utilizing the registration statement filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on May 8, 2009. The proceeds of this issuance were used for general corporate purposes, including the repayment of $350 million of 6.125% Senior Notes on February 15, 2012. On January 10, 2013, we issued $500 million of 5.10% Fixed-to-Floating Rate Subordinated Debentures due 2053, utilizing the registration statement filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on April 30, 2012. The proceeds of this issuance will be used for general corporate purposes, including the repurchase of our common stock through open market purchases from time to time or through an accelerated repurchase program. The next debt maturity is on June 15, 2013 when $250 million of 7.50% Debentures are due, which is expected to be refinanced or repaid from available capital. For further information on outstanding debt, see Note 12 of the consolidated financial statements. As of December 31, 2012 and 2011, there were no outstanding commercial paper borrowings. Share repurchases In November 2012, we completed our $1.00 billion share repurchase program that commenced in November 2011. In December 2012, we commenced a new $1.00 billion share repurchase program that is expected to 95 Table of Contents be completed by December 31, 2013, and as of December 31, 2012, had $984 million remaining. This program is expected to be funded by issuing a like amount of subordinated debentures (half of which were issued in January 2013). In February 2013, an additional $1 billion share repurchase program was authorized and is expected to be completed by March 31, 2014. Our repurchase programs may utilize an accelerated repurchase program. During 2012, we repurchased 26.7 million common shares for $910 million. Since 1995, we have acquired 523 million shares of our common stock at a cost of $21.13 billion, primarily as part of various stock repurchase programs. We have reissued 104 million shares since 1995, primarily associated with our equity incentive plans, the 1999 acquisition of American Heritage Life Investment Corporation and the 2001 redemption of certain mandatorily redeemable preferred securities. Since 1995, total shares outstanding has decreased by 417 million shares or 46.5%, primarily due to our repurchase programs. Financial ratings and strength The following table summarizes our senior long-term debt, commercial paper and insurance financial strength ratings as of December 31, 2012. Moody's Standard & Poor's A.M. Best The Allstate Corporation (senior long-term debt) A3 A- a- The Allstate Corporation (commercial paper) P-2 A-2 AMB-1 Allstate Insurance Company (insurance financial strength) Aa3 AA- A+ Allstate Life Insurance Company (insurance financial strength) A1 A+ A+ Our ratings are influenced by many factors including our operating and financial performance, asset quality, liquidity, asset/liability management, overall portfolio mix, financial leverage (i.e., debt), exposure to risks such as catastrophes and the current level of operating leverage. On January 31, 2013, A.M. Best affirmed The Allstate Corporation's debt and commercial paper ratings of a- and AMB-1, respectively, and our insurance entities financial strength ratings of A+ for AIC and Allstate Life Insurance Company ("ALIC"). The outlook for AIC and ALIC remained stable. In April 2012, S&P affirmed The Allstate Corporation's debt and commercial paper ratings of A- and A-2, respectively, AIC's financial strength ratings of AA- and ALIC's financial strength rating of A+. The outlook for all S&P ratings remained negative. There were no changes to our debt, commercial paper and insurance financial strength ratings from Moody's during 2012. The outlook for all of our Moody's ratings is negative. In the future, if our financial position is less than rating agency expectations including those related to capitalization at the parent company, AIC or ALIC, we could be exposed to a downgrade in our ratings of one notch or more which we do not view as being material to our business model or strategies. We have distinct and separately capitalized groups of subsidiaries licensed to sell property and casualty insurance in New Jersey and Florida that maintain separate group ratings. The ratings of these groups are influenced by the risks that relate specifically to each group. Many mortgage companies require property owners to have insurance from an insurance carrier with a secure financial strength rating from an accredited rating agency. In February 2013, A.M. Best affirmed the Allstate New Jersey Insurance Company, which writes auto and homeowners insurance, rating of A-. The outlook for this rating is stable. Allstate New Jersey Insurance Company also has a Financial Stability Rating of A" from Demotech, which was affirmed on November 28, 2012. On September 19, 2012, A.M. Best affirmed the Castle Key Insurance Company, which underwrites personal lines property insurance in Florida, rating of B-. The outlook for the rating is negative. Castle Key Insurance Company also has a Financial Stability Rating of A' from Demotech, which was affirmed on November 28, 2012. ALIC, AIC and The Allstate Corporation are party to the Amended and Restated Intercompany Liquidity Agreement ("Liquidity Agreement") which allows for short-term advances of funds to be made between parties for liquidity and other general corporate purposes. The Liquidity Agreement does not establish a commitment to advance funds on the part of any party. ALIC and AIC each serve as a lender and borrower and the Corporation serves only as a lender. AIC also has a capital support agreement with ALIC. Under the capital support agreement, AIC is committed to provide capital to ALIC to maintain an adequate capital level. The maximum amount of potential funding under each of these agreements is $1.00 billion. In addition to the Liquidity Agreement, the Corporation also has an intercompany loan agreement with certain of its subsidiaries, which include, but are not limited to, AIC and ALIC. The amount of intercompany loans available to the Corporation's subsidiaries is at the discretion of the Corporation. The maximum amount of loans the Corporation will have outstanding to all its eligible subsidiaries at any given point in time is limited to $1.00 billion. The Corporation may use commercial paper borrowings, bank lines of credit and securities lending to fund intercompany borrowings. 96 Table of Contents Allstate's domestic property-liability and life insurance subsidiaries prepare their statutory-basis financial statements in conformity with accounting practices prescribed or permitted by the insurance department of the applicable state of domicile. Statutory surplus is a measure that is often used as a basis for determining dividend paying capacity, operating leverage and premium growth capacity, and it is also reviewed by rating agencies in determining their ratings. As of December 31, 2012, total statutory surplus is $17.28 billion compared to $15.59 billion as of December 31, 2011. Property-Liability surplus was $13.74 billion as of December 31, 2012, compared to $11.99 billion as of December 31, 2011. Allstate Financial surplus was $3.54 billion as of December 31, 2012, compared to $3.60 billion as of December 31, 2011. The ratio of net premiums written to statutory surplus is a common measure of operating leverage used in the property-casualty insurance industry and serves as an indicator of a company's premium growth capacity. Ratios in excess of 3 to 1 are typically considered outside the usual range by insurance regulators and rating agencies, and for homeowners and related coverages that have significant net exposure to natural catastrophes a ratio of 1 to 1 is considered appropriate. AIC's premium to surplus ratio was 1.6x as of both December 31, 2012 and 2011. State laws specify regulatory actions if an insurer's risk-based capital ("RBC"), a measure of an insurer's solvency, falls below certain levels. The NAIC has a standard formula for annually assessing RBC. The formula for calculating RBC for property-liability companies takes into account asset and credit risks but places more emphasis on underwriting factors for reserving and pricing. The formula for calculating RBC for life insurance companies takes into account factors relating to insurance, business, asset and interest rate risks. As of December 31, 2012, the statutory capital and surplus for each of our domestic insurance companies exceeds its company action level RBC. The NAIC has also developed a set of financial relationships or tests known as the Insurance Regulatory Information System to assist state regulators in monitoring the financial condition of insurance companies and identifying companies that require special attention or actions by insurance regulatory authorities. The NAIC analyzes financial data provided by insurance companies using prescribed ratios, each with defined "usual ranges". Generally, regulators will begin to monitor an insurance company if its ratios fall outside the usual ranges for four or more of the ratios. If an insurance company has insufficient capital, regulators may act to reduce the amount of insurance it can issue. The ratios of our domestic insurance companies are within these ranges. Liquidity sources and uses Our potential sources of funds principally include activities shown in the following table. Property- Liability Allstate Financial Corporate and Other Receipt of insurance premiums X X Contractholder fund deposits X Reinsurance recoveries X X Receipts of principal, interest and dividends on investments X X X Sales of investments X X X Funds from securities lending, commercial paper and line of credit agreements X X X Intercompany loans X X X Capital contributions from parent X X Dividends from subsidiaries X X Tax refunds/settlements X X X Funds from periodic issuance of additional securities X Receipt of intercompany settlements related to employee benefit plans X 97 Table of Contents Our potential uses of funds principally include activities shown in the following table. Property- Liability Allstate Financial Corporate and Other Payment of claims and related expenses X Payment of contract benefits, maturities, surrenders and withdrawals X Reinsurance cessions and payments X X Operating costs and expenses X X X Purchase of investments X X X Repayment of securities lending, commercial paper and line of credit agreements X X X Payment or repayment of intercompany loans X X X Capital contributions to subsidiaries X X Dividends to shareholders/parent company X X X Tax payments/settlements X X Share repurchases X Debt service expenses and repayment X X X Payments related to employee and agent benefit plans X X X We actively manage our financial position and liquidity levels in light of changing market, economic, and business conditions. Liquidity is managed at both the entity and enterprise level across the Company, and is assessed on both base and stressed level liquidity needs. We believe we have sufficient liquidity to meet these needs. Additionally, we have existing intercompany agreements in place that facilitate liquidity management across the Company to enhance flexibility. Parent company capital capacity At the parent holding company level, we have deployable invested assets totaling $2.06 billion as of December 31, 2012. These assets include investments that are generally saleable within one quarter totaling $1.48 billion. The substantial earnings capacity of the operating subsidiaries is the primary source of capital generation for the Corporation. In 2013, AIC will have the capacity to pay dividends currently estimated at $1.95 billion without prior regulatory approval. In addition, we have access to $1.00 billion of funds from either commercial paper issuance or an unsecured revolving credit facility. These provide funds for the parent company's relatively low fixed charges and other corporate purposes. In 2012, AIC paid dividends totaling $1.51 billion. These dividends comprised $1.06 billion in cash paid to its parent, Allstate Insurance Holdings, LLC ("AIH"), of which $1.04 billion were paid by AIH to its parent, the Corporation, and the transfer of ownership (valued at $450 million) to AIH of three insurance companies that were formerly subsidiaries of AIC (Allstate Indemnity Company, Allstate Fire and Casualty Insurance Company and Allstate Property and Casualty Insurance Company). In 2011, dividends totaling $838 million were paid by AIC to the Corporation. In 2010, dividends totaling $1.30 billion were paid by AIC to the Corporation. There were no capital contributions paid by the Corporation to AIC in 2012, 2011 or 2010. There were no capital contributions by AIC to ALIC in 2012, 2011 or 2010. In 2012, Allstate Financial paid $357 million of dividends and repayments of surplus notes to the Corporation and other affiliates. The Corporation has access to additional borrowing to support liquidity as follows: A commercial paper facility with a borrowing limit of $1.00 billion to cover short-term cash needs. As of December 31, 2012, there were no balances outstanding and therefore the remaining borrowing capacity was $1.00 billion; however, the outstanding balance can fluctuate daily. Our credit facility is available for short-term liquidity requirements and backs our commercial paper facility. The $1.00 billion unsecured revolving credit facility has an initial term of five years expiring in April 2017. The facility is fully subscribed among 12 lenders with the largest commitment being $115 million. We have the option to extend the expiration by one year at the first and second anniversary of the facility, upon approval of existing or replacement lenders. The commitments of the lenders are several and no lender is responsible for any other lender's commitment if such lender fails to make a loan under the facility. This facility contains an increase provision that would allow up to an additional $500 million of borrowing. This facility has a financial covenant requiring that we not exceed a 37.5% debt to capitalization ratio as defined in the agreement. This ratio was 19.8% as of December 31, 2012. Although the right to borrow under the facility is not subject to a minimum rating requirement, the costs of maintaining the facility and borrowing under it are based on the ratings of our senior unsecured, unguaranteed long-term debt. There were no borrowings under the credit facility during 2012. The total amount 98 Table of Contents outstanding at any point in time under the combination of the commercial paper program and the credit facility cannot exceed the amount that can be borrowed under the credit facility. A universal shelf registration statement was filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on April 30, 2012. We can use this shelf registration to issue an unspecified amount of debt securities, common stock (including 421 million shares of treasury stock as of December 31, 2012), preferred stock, depositary shares, warrants, stock purchase contracts, stock purchase units and securities of trust subsidiaries. The specific terms of any securities we issue under this registration statement will be provided in the applicable prospectus supplements. Liquidity exposure Contractholder funds were $39.32 billion as of December 31, 2012. The following table summarizes contractholder funds by their contractual withdrawal provisions as of December 31, 2012. ($ in millions) Percent to total Not subject to discretionary withdrawal $ 6,012 15.3 % Subject to discretionary withdrawal with adjustments: Specified surrender charges (1) 13,170 33.5 Market value adjustments (2) 5,382 13.7 Subject to discretionary withdrawal without adjustments (3) 14,755 37.5 Total contractholder funds (4) $ 39,319 100.0 % (1) Includes $6.81 billion of liabilities with a contractual surrender charge of less than 5% of the account balance. (2) $4.45 billion of the contracts with market value adjusted surrenders have a 30-45 day period at the end of their initial and subsequent interest rate guarantee periods (which are typically 5 or 6 years) during which there is no surrender charge or market value adjustment. (3) 76% of these contracts have a minimum interest crediting rate guarantee of 3% or higher. (4) Includes $1.12 billion of contractholder funds on variable annuities reinsured to The Prudential Insurance Company of America, a subsidiary of Prudential Financial Inc., in 2006. While we are able to quantify remaining scheduled maturities for our institutional products, anticipating retail product surrenders is less precise. Retail life and annuity products may be surrendered by customers for a variety of reasons. Reasons unique to individual customers include a current or unexpected need for cash or a change in life insurance coverage needs. Other key factors that may impact the likelihood of customer surrender include the level of the contract surrender charge, the length of time the contract has been in force, distribution channel, market interest rates, equity market conditions and potential tax implications. In addition, the propensity for retail life insurance policies to lapse is lower than it is for fixed annuities because of the need for the insured to be re-underwritten upon policy replacement. Surrenders and partial withdrawals for our retail annuities decreased 20.1% in 2012 compared to 2011. The annualized surrender and partial withdrawal rate on deferred fixed annuities and interest-sensitive life insurance products, based on the beginning of year contractholder funds, was 11.3% and 12.6% in 2012 and 2011, respectively. Allstate Financial strives to promptly pay customers who request cash surrenders; however, statutory regulations generally provide up to six months in most states to fulfill surrender requests. Our institutional products are primarily funding agreements sold to unaffiliated trusts used to back medium-term notes. As of December 31, 2012, total institutional products outstanding were $1.84 billion, with scheduled maturities of $1.75 billion in April of 2013 and $85 million in 2016. Our asset-liability management practices limit the differences between the cash flows generated by our investment portfolio and the expected cash flow requirements of our life insurance, annuity and institutional product obligations. Certain remote events and circumstances could constrain our liquidity. Those events and circumstances include, for example, a catastrophe resulting in extraordinary losses, a downgrade in our senior long-term debt rating of A3, A- and a- (from Moody's, S&P and A.M. Best, respectively) to non-investment grade status of below Baa3/BBB-/bb, a downgrade in AIC's financial strength rating from Aa3, AA- and A+ (from Moody's, S&P and A.M. Best, respectively) to below Baa2/BBB/A-, or a downgrade in ALIC's financial strength ratings from A1, A+ and A+ (from Moody's, S&P and A.M. Best, respectively) to below A3/A-/A-. The rating agencies also consider the interdependence of our individually rated entities; therefore, a rating change in one entity could potentially affect the ratings of other related entities. 99 Table of Contents The following table summarizes consolidated cash flow activities by segment. ($ in millions) Property-Liability (1) Allstate Financial (1) Corporate and Other (1) Consolidated 2012 2011 2010 2012 2011 2010 2012 2011 2010 2012 2011 2010 Net cash provided by (used in): Operating activities $ 2,023 $ 789 $ 1,373 $ 1,165 $ 1,295 $ 2,407 $ (134 ) $ (155 ) $ (91 ) $ 3,054 $ 1,929 $ 3,689 Investing activities (1,081 ) 244 (44 ) 2,497 5,284 3,096 165 633 (720 ) 1,581 6,161 2,332 Financing activities (18 ) (4 ) (8 ) (3,363 ) (6,504 ) (5,510 ) (1,224 ) (1,368 ) (553 ) (4,605 ) (7,876 ) (6,071 ) Net increase (decrease) in consolidated cash $ 30 $ 214 $ (50 ) (1) Business unit cash flows reflect the elimination of intersegment dividends, contributions and borrowings. Property-Liability Higher cash provided by operating activities in 2012 compared to 2011 was primarily due to lower claim payments. Lower cash provided by operating activities in 2011 compared to 2010 was primarily due to higher claim payments, partially offset by lower income tax payments. Cash used in investing activities in 2012 compared to cash provided by investing activities in 2011 was primarily due to 2012 operating cash flows being invested. There were lower sales of fixed income and equity securities and lower purchases of fixed income and equity securities. Cash provided by investing activities in 2011 compared to cash used in investing activities in 2010 was primarily due to higher net sales of fixed income and equity securities, partially offset by higher net purchases of fixed income and equity securities. Allstate Financial Lower cash provided by operating cash flows in 2012 compared to 2011 was primarily due to higher contract benefits paid. Lower cash provided by operating cash flows in 2011 was primarily due to income tax payments in 2011 compared to income tax refunds in 2010. Lower cash provided by investing activities in 2012 compared to 2011 was primarily due to lower financing needs as reflected in lower sales of fixed income securities, partially offset by decreased purchases of fixed income securities. Higher cash provided by investing activities in 2011 compared to 2010 was impacted by lower net purchases of fixed income securities and higher net sales of fixed income securities used to fund reductions in contractholder fund liabilities. Lower cash used in financing activities in 2012 compared to 2011 was primarily due to lower surrenders and partial withdrawals on fixed annuities, decreased maturities of institutional products and the absence of Allstate Bank activity in 2012. Higher cash used in financing activities in 2011 compared to 2010 was primarily due to higher surrenders and partial withdrawals on fixed annuities and Allstate Bank products and lower deposits on Allstate Bank products and fixed annuities, partially offset by decreased maturities of institutional products. In 2011, Allstate Bank ceased operations and all funds were returned to customers by December 31, 2011. For quantification of the changes in contractholder funds, see the Allstate Financial Segment section of the MD&A. Corporate and Other Fluctuations in the Corporate and Other operating cash flows were primarily due to the timing of intercompany settlements. Investing activities primarily relate to investments in the parent company portfolio, including the acquisition of Esurance and Answer Financial in 2011. Financing cash flows of the Corporate and Other segment reflect actions such as fluctuations in short-term debt, repayment of debt, proceeds from the issuance of debt, dividends to shareholders of The Allstate Corporation and share repurchases; therefore, financing cash flows are affected when we increase or decrease the level of these activities. 100 Table of Contents Contractual obligations and commitments Our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2012 and the payments due by period are shown in the following table. ($ in millions) Total Less than 1 year 1-3 years 4-5 years Over 5 years Liabilities for collateral (1) $ 808 $ 808 $ $ $ Contractholder funds (2) 54,517 7,924 9,929 6,990 29,674 Reserve for life-contingent contract benefits (2) 35,195 1,216 2,241 2,108 29,630 Long-term debt (3) 12,652 607 1,628 591 9,826 Capital lease obligations (3) 63 19 24 9 11 Operating leases (3) 580 166 229 115 70 Unconditional purchase obligations (3) 392 158 183 51 Defined benefit pension plans and other postretirement benefit plans (3)(4) 3,276 622 280 286 2,088 Reserve for property-liability insurance claims and claims expense (5) 21,288 9,258 6,513 2,392 3,125 Other liabilities and accrued expenses (6)(7) 3,722 3,529 98 69 26 Net unrecognized tax benefits (8) 25 25 Total contractual cash obligations $ 132,518 $ 24,332 $ 21,125 $ 12,611 $ 74,450 (1) Liabilities for collateral are typically fully secured with cash or short-term investments. We manage our short-term liquidity position to ensure the availability of a sufficient amount of liquid assets to extinguish short-term liabilities as they come due in the normal course of business, including utilizing potential sources of liquidity as disclosed previously. (2) Contractholder funds represent interest-bearing liabilities arising from the sale of products such as interest-sensitive life, fixed annuities, including immediate annuities without life contingencies and institutional products. The reserve for life-contingent contract benefits relates primarily to traditional life insurance, immediate annuities with life contingencies and voluntary accident and health insurance. These amounts reflect the present value of estimated cash payments to be made to contractholders and policyholders. Certain of these contracts, such as immediate annuities without life contingencies and institutional products, involve payment obligations where the amount and timing of the payment is essentially fixed and determinable. These amounts relate to (i) policies or contracts where we are currently making payments and will continue to do so and (ii) contracts where the timing of a portion or all of the payments has been determined by the contract. Other contracts, such as interest-sensitive life, fixed deferred annuities, traditional life insurance, immediate annuities with life contingencies and voluntary accident and health insurance, involve payment obligations where a portion or all of the amount and timing of future payments is uncertain. For these contracts, we are not currently making payments and will not make payments until (i) the occurrence of an insurable event such as death or illness or (ii) the occurrence of a payment triggering event such as the surrender or partial withdrawal on a policy or deposit contract, which is outside of our control. We have estimated the timing of payments related to these contracts based on historical experience and our expectation of future payment patterns. Uncertainties relating to these liabilities include mortality, morbidity, expenses, customer lapse and withdrawal activity, estimated additional deposits for interest-sensitive life contracts, and renewal premium for life policies, which may significantly impact both the timing and amount of future payments. Such cash outflows reflect adjustments for the estimated timing of mortality, retirement, and other appropriate factors, but are undiscounted with respect to interest. As a result, the sum of the cash outflows shown for all years in the table exceeds the corresponding liabilities of $39.32 billion for contractholder funds and $14.90 billion for reserve for life-contingent contract benefits as included in the Consolidated Statements of Financial Position as of December 31, 2012. The liability amount in the Consolidated Statements of Financial Position reflects the discounting for interest as well as adjustments for the timing of other factors as described above. (3) Our payment obligations relating to long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating leases, unconditional purchase obligations and pension and other post employment benefits ("OPEB") contributions are managed within the structure of our intermediate to long-term liquidity management program. Amount differs from the balance presented on the Consolidated Statements of Financial Position as of December 31, 2012 because the long-term debt amount above includes interest. (4) The pension plans' obligations in the next 12 months represent our planned contributions, and the remaining years' contributions are projected based on the average remaining service period using the current underfunded status of the plans. The OPEB plans' obligations are estimated based on the expected benefits to be paid. These liabilities are discounted with respect to interest, and as a result the sum of the cash outflows shown for all years in the table exceeds the corresponding liability amount of $2.14 billion included in other liabilities and accrued expenses on the Consolidated Statements of Financial Position. (5) Reserve for property-liability insurance claims and claims expense is an estimate of amounts necessary to settle all outstanding claims, including claims that have been IBNR as of the balance sheet date. We have estimated the timing of these payments based on our historical experience and our expectation of future payment patterns. However, the timing of these payments may vary significantly from the amounts shown above, especially for IBNR claims. The ultimate cost of losses may vary materially from recorded amounts which are our best estimates. The reserve for property-liability insurance claims and claims expense includes loss reserves related to asbestos and environmental claims as of December 31, 2012, of $1.52 billion and $241 million, respectively. (6) Other liabilities primarily include accrued expenses and certain benefit obligations and claim payments and other checks outstanding. Certain of these long-term liabilities are discounted with respect to interest, as a result the sum of the cash outflows shown for all years in the table exceeds the corresponding liability amount of $3.65 billion. (7) Balance sheet liabilities not included in the table above include unearned and advance premiums of $11.08 billion and gross deferred tax liabilities of $2.89 billion. These items were excluded as they do not meet the definition of a contractual liability as we are not contractually obligated to pay 101 Table of Contents these amounts to third parties. Rather, they represent an accounting mechanism that allows us to present our financial statements on an accrual basis. In addition, other liabilities of $244 million were not included in the table above because they did not represent a contractual obligation or the amount and timing of their eventual payment was sufficiently uncertain. (8) Net unrecognized tax benefits represent our potential future obligation to the taxing authority for a tax position that was not recognized in the consolidated financial statements. We believe it is reasonably possible that the liability balance will be reduced by $25 million within the next twelve months upon the resolution of an outstanding issue resulting from the 2005-2006 and 2007-2008 Internal Revenue Service examinations. The resolution of this obligation may be for an amount different than what we have accrued. Our contractual commitments as of December 31, 2012 and the periods in which the commitments expire are shown in the following table. ($ in millions) Total Less than 1 year 1-3 years 4-5 years Over 5 years Other commitments conditional $ 128 $ 74 $ $ 12 $ 42 Other commitments unconditional 2,080 253 457 1,171 199 Total commitments $ 2,208 $ 327 $ 457 $ 1,183 $ 241 Contractual commitments represent investment commitments such as private placements, limited partnership interests and other loans. We have agreements in place for services we conduct, generally at cost, between subsidiaries relating to insurance, reinsurance, loans and capitalization. All material intercompany transactions have appropriately been eliminated in consolidation. Intercompany transactions among insurance subsidiaries and affiliates have been approved by the appropriate departments of insurance as required. For a more detailed discussion of our off-balance sheet arrangements, see Note 7 of the consolidated financial statements. ENTERPRISE RISK AND RETURN MANAGEMENT Allstate manages enterprise risk under an integrated Enterprise Risk and Return Management ("ERRM") framework with risk-return principles, governance and analytics. This framework provides an enterprise view of risks and opportunities and is used by senior leaders and business managers to drive strategic and business decisions. Allstate's risk management strategies adapt to changes in business and market environments and seek to optimize returns. Allstate continually validates and improves its ERRM practices by benchmarking and securing external perspectives for our processes. Our qualitative risk-return principles define how we operate and guide decision-making around risk and return. These principles are built around three key operating components: maintaining our strong foundation of stakeholder trust and financial strength, building strategic value and optimizing return per unit of risk. ERRM governance includes an executive management committee structure, Board oversight and chief risk officers ("CROs"). The Enterprise Risk & Return Council ("ERRC") is Allstate's senior risk management committee. It directs ERRM by establishing risk-return targets, determining economic capital levels and directing integrated strategies and actions from an enterprise perspective. It consists of Allstate's chief executive officer, business unit presidents, enterprise and business unit chief risk officers and chief financial officers, general counsel and treasurer. Allstate's Board of Directors and Audit Committee provide ERRM oversight by reviewing enterprise principles, guidelines and limits for Allstate's significant risks and by monitoring strategies and actions management has taken to control these risks. CROs are appointed for the enterprise and for Allstate Protection, Allstate Financial and Allstate Investments. Collectively, the CROs create an integrated approach to risk and return management to ensure risk management practices and strategies are aligned with Allstate's overall enterprise objectives. Our ERRM governance is supported with an analytic framework to manage risk exposure and optimize returns on risk-adjusted capital. Allstate views economic capital primarily on a statutory accounting basis. Management and the ERRC use enterprise stochastic modeling, risk expertise and judgment to determine an appropriate level of enterprise economic capital to hold considering a broad range of risk objectives and external constraints. These include limiting risks of financial stress, insolvency, likelihood of capital stress and volatility, maintaining stakeholder value and financial strength ratings and satisfying regulatory and rating agency risk-based capital requirements. Enterprise economic capital approximates a combination of statutory surplus and deployable invested assets at the parent holding company level. 102 Table of Contents Using our governance and analytic framework, Allstate designs business and enterprise strategies that seek to optimize returns on risk-adjusted capital. Examples include shifting Allstate Financial away from spread-based products toward underwritten products, implementing a comprehensive program of margin improvement actions in homeowners insurance, and balancing yield and return considerations in the low interest rate environment. REGULATION AND LEGAL PROCEEDINGS We are subject to extensive regulation and we are involved in various legal and regulatory actions, all of which have an effect on specific aspects of our business. For a detailed discussion of the legal and regulatory actions in which we are involved, see Note 14 of the consolidated financial statements. PENDING ACCOUNTING STANDARDS There are several pending accounting standards that we have not implemented because the implementation date has not yet occurred. For a discussion of these pending standards, see Note 2 of the consolidated financial statements. The effect of implementing certain accounting standards on our financial results and financial condition is often based in part on market conditions at the time of implementation of the standard and other factors we are unable to determine prior to implementation. For this reason, we are sometimes unable to estimate the effect of certain pending accounting standards until the relevant authoritative body finalizes these standards or until we implement them. 
