CIK: 899051
Company Name: ALLSTATE CORP
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2009-02-26


Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Page Overview 27 2008 Highlights 27 Consolidated Net (Loss) Income 28 Application of Critical Accounting Estimates 28 Property-Liability 2008 Highlights 42 Property-Liability Operations 43 Allstate Protection Segment 45 Discontinued Lines and Coverages Segment 58 Property-Liability Investment Results 59 Property-Liability Claims and Claims Expense Reserves 60 Allstate Financial 2008 Highlights 71 Allstate Financial Segment 72 Investments 82 Fair Value of Financial Assets and Financial Liabilities 119 Market Risk 122 Pension Plans 125 Deferred Taxes 127 Capital Resources and Liquidity 128 Enterprise Risk and Return Management 137 Regulation and Legal Proceedings 138 Pending Accounting Standards 138 26 OVERVIEW The following discussion highlights significant factors influencing the consolidated financial position and results of operations of The Allstate Corporation (referred to in this document as "we", "our", "us", the "Company" or "Allstate"). It should be read in conjunction with the 5-year summary of selected financial data, consolidated financial statements and related notes found under Part II, Item 6 and Item 8 contained herein. Further analysis of our insurance segments is provided in the Property-Liability Operations (which includes the Allstate Protection and the Discontinued Lines and Coverages segments) and in the Allstate Financial Segment sections of Management's Discussion and Analysis ("MD&A"). The segments are consistent with the way in which we use financial information to evaluate business performance and to determine the allocation of resources. Allstate is focused on three priorities in 2009: protecting Allstate's financial strength, building customer loyalty, and continue reinventing protection and retirement for the consumer. In addition, we will continue to monitor market conditions and will consider business start-ups, acquisitions and alliances that would forward our business objectives and represent prudent uses of corporate capital. The most important factors we monitor to evaluate the financial condition and performance of our company include: For Allstate Protection: premium written, the number of policies in force ("PIF"), retention, price changes, claim frequency (rate of claim occurrence per policy in force) and severity (average cost per claim), catastrophes, loss ratio, expenses, underwriting results and sales of all products and services; For Allstate Financial: premiums and deposits, benefit and investment spread, amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs, expenses, operating income, net income, invested assets, and new business returns; For Investments: credit quality/experience, realized capital gains and losses, investment income, unrealized capital gains and losses, stability of long-term returns, total returns, cash flows, and asset and liability duration; and For financial condition: liquidity, parent company deployable invested assets, financial strength ratings, operating leverage, debt leverage, book value per share, and return on equity. 2008 HIGHLIGHTS Consolidated net loss was $1.68 billion in 2008 compared to net income of $4.64 billion in 2007. Net loss per diluted share was $3.07 in 2008 compared to net income per diluted share of $7.77 in 2007. Property-Liability net income was $228 million in 2008 compared to $4.26 billion in 2007. The Property-Liability combined ratio was 99.4 in 2008 compared to 89.8 in 2007. Catastrophe losses in 2008 totaled $3.34 billion compared to $1.41 billion in 2007. The effect of catastrophe losses on the combined ratio was 12.4 points and 5.2 points in 2008 and 2007, respectively. Allstate Financial had a net loss of $1.72 billion in 2008 compared to net income of $465 million in 2007. Total revenues were $29.39 billion in 2008 compared to $36.77 billion in 2007. Property-Liability premiums earned in 2008 totaled $26.97 billion, a decrease of 1.0% from $27.23 billion in 2007. Net realized capital losses were $5.09 billion in 2008 compared to net realized capital gains of $1.24 billion in 2007. Investments as of December 31, 2008 totaled $96.00 billion, a decrease of 19.3% from $118.98 billion as of December 31, 2007. Net investment income in 2008 was $5.62 billion, a decrease of 12.6% from $6.44 billion in 2007. Book value per diluted share was $23.51 as of December 31, 2008, a decrease of 39.1% from $38.58 as of December 31, 2007. For the twelve months ended December 31, 2008, return on the average of beginning and ending period shareholders' equity was (9.7)%, a decrease of 30.9 points from 21.2% for the twelve months ended December 31, 2007. To further enhance our liquidity and capital levels, we suspended our $2.00 billion share repurchase program and do not plan to complete it by our original target date of March 2009. The number of shares repurchased under the program was 22.7 million shares for $1.07 billion during the twelve months ended December 31, 2008. At December 31, 2008, we held $12.64 billion in capital. This total included $3.64 billion in deployable invested assets at the parent holding company level. On February 25, 2009, we announced that our shareholder dividend was being revised to $.20. 27 CONSOLIDATED NET (LOSS) INCOME For the years ended December 31, ($ in millions) 2008 2007 2006 Revenues Property-liability insurance premiums earned $ 26,967 $ 27,233 $ 27,369 Life and annuity premiums and contract charges 1,895 1,866 1,964 Net investment income 5,622 6,435 6,177 Realized capital gains and losses (5,090 ) 1,235 286 Total revenues 29,394 36,769 35,796 Costs and expenses Property-liability insurance claims and claims expense (20,064 ) (17,667 ) (16,017 ) Life and annuity contract benefits (1,612 ) (1,589 ) (1,570 ) Interest credited to contractholder funds (2,411 ) (2,681 ) (2,609 ) Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs (4,679 ) (4,704 ) (4,757 ) Operating costs and expenses (3,273 ) (3,103 ) (3,033 ) Restructuring and related charges (23 ) (29 ) (182 ) Interest expense (351 ) (333 ) (357 ) Total costs and expenses (32,413 ) (30,106 ) (28,525 ) Loss on disposition of operations (6 ) (10 ) (93 ) Income tax benefit (expense) 1,346 (2,017 ) (2,185 ) Net (loss) income $ (1,679 ) $ 4,636 $ 4,993 Property-Liability $ 228 $ 4,258 $ 4,614 Allstate Financial (1,721 ) 465 464 Corporate and Other (186 ) (87 ) (85 ) Net (loss) income $ (1,679 ) $ 4,636 $ 4,993 APPLICATION OF CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America ("GAAP") requires management to adopt accounting policies and make estimates and assumptions that affect amounts reported in the consolidated financial statements. The most critical estimates include those used in determining: Fair Value of Financial Assets and Financial Liabilities Impairment of Fixed Income and Equity Securities Deferred Policy Acquisition Costs ("DAC") Amortization Reserve for Property-Liability Insurance Claims and Claims Expense Estimation Reserve for Life-Contingent Contract Benefits Estimation In applying these policies, management makes subjective and complex judgments that frequently require estimates about matters that are inherently uncertain. Many of these policies, estimates and related judgments are common in the insurance and financial services industries; others are specific to our businesses and operations. It is reasonably likely that changes in these estimates could occur from period to period and result in a material impact on our consolidated financial statements. A brief summary of each of these critical accounting estimates follows. For a more detailed discussion of the effect of these estimates on our consolidated financial statements, and the judgments and assumptions related to these estimates, see the referenced sections of this document. For a complete summary of our significant accounting policies, see Note 2 of the consolidated financial statements. 28 Fair Value of Financial Assets and Financial Liabilities Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 157, Fair Value Measurements ("SFAS No. 157"), is effective for fiscal years beginning after November 15, 2007. We adopted the provisions of SFAS No. 157 as of January 1, 2008 for financial assets and financial liabilities that are measured at fair value. SFAS No. 157: Defines fair value as the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date, and establishes a framework for measuring fair value; Establishes a three-level hierarchy for fair value measurements based upon the transparency of inputs to the valuation as of the measurement date; Expands disclosures about financial instruments measured at fair value. We categorize our financial assets and financial liabilities measured at fair value based on the observability of inputs to the valuation techniques, into a three-level fair value hierarchy as follows: Level 1: Financial assets and financial liabilities whose values are based on unadjusted quoted prices for identical assets or liabilities in an active market that we can access. Level 2: Financial assets and financial liabilities whose values are based on the following: (a) Quoted prices for similar assets or liabilities in active markets; (b) Quoted prices for identical or similar assets or liabilities in non-active markets; or (c) Valuation models whose inputs are observable, directly or indirectly, for substantially the full term of the asset or liability. Level 3: Financial assets and financial liabilities whose values are based on prices or valuation techniques that require inputs that are both unobservable and significant to the overall fair value measurement. These inputs may reflect our estimates of the assumptions that market participants would use in valuing the financial assets and financial liabilities. Observable inputs are those used by market participants in valuing financial instruments that are developed based on market data obtained from independent sources. In the absence of sufficient observable inputs, unobservable inputs reflect our estimates of the assumptions market participants would use in valuing financial assets and financial liabilities and are developed based on the best information available in the circumstances. The degree of management judgment involved in determining fair values is inversely related to the availability of market observable information. To distinguish among the categories, we consider the frequency of completed transactions such as daily trading for equity securities. If inputs used to measure a financial instrument fall within different levels of the fair value hierarchy, the categorization is based on the lowest level input that is significant to the fair value measurement of the entire instrument. Certain financial assets are not carried at fair value on a recurring basis, including investments such as mortgage loans, limited partnership interests, bank loans and policy loans. Accordingly, such investments are only included in the fair value hierarchy disclosure when the investment is subject to remeasurement at fair value after initial recognition and the resulting measurement is reflected in the consolidated financial statements. In addition, equity options embedded in fixed income securities are not disclosed in the hierarchy with free-standing derivatives, as the embedded derivatives are presented as combined instruments in fixed income securities. We are responsible for the determination of the value of the financial assets and financial liabilities carried at fair value and the supporting assumptions and methodologies. We gain assurance on the overall reasonableness and consistent application of valuation input assumptions, valuation methodologies and compliance with accounting standards for fair value determination through the execution of various processes and controls designed to ensure that our financial assets and financial liabilities are appropriately valued. We monitor fair values received from third parties and those derived internally on an ongoing basis. In certain situations, we employ independent third-party valuation service providers to gather, analyze, and interpret market information and derive fair values based upon relevant assumptions and methodologies for individual instruments. In situations where our valuation service providers are unable to obtain sufficient market observable information upon which to estimate the fair value for a particular security, fair value is determined either by requesting brokers who are knowledgeable about these securities to provide a single quote or by employing internal valuation models that are widely accepted in the financial services industry. Changing market conditions are incorporated into valuation assumptions and reflected in the fair values, which are validated by calibration and other analytical techniques to available market observable data. Valuation service providers typically obtain data about market transactions and other key valuation model inputs from multiple sources and, through the use of proprietary algorithms, produce valuation information in the 29 form of a single fair value for individual securities for which a fair value has been requested under the terms of our agreements. For certain equity securities, valuation service providers provide market quotations for completed transactions on the measurement date. For other security types, fair values are derived from the valuation service providers' proprietary valuation models. The inputs used by the valuation service providers include, but are not limited to, market prices from recently completed transactions and transactions of comparable securities, interest rate yield curves, credit spreads, liquidity spread, currency rates, and other market-observable information, as applicable. Credit and liquidity spreads are typically implied from completed transactions and transactions of comparable securities. Valuation service providers also use proprietary discounted cash flow models that are widely accepted in the financial services industry and similar to those used by other market participants to value the same financial instruments. The valuation models take into account, among other things, market observable information as of the measurement date, as described above, as well as the specific attributes of the security being valued including its term, interest rate, credit rating, industry sector, and where applicable, collateral quality and other issue or issuer specific information. Executing valuation models effectively requires seasoned professional judgment and experience. In cases where market transactions or other market observable data is limited, the extent to which judgment is applied varies inversely with the availability of market observable information. For certain of our financial assets carried at fair value, where our valuation service providers cannot provide fair value determinations, we obtain non-binding price quotes from brokers familiar with the security who, similar to our valuation service providers, may consider transactions or activity in similar securities, as applicable, among other information. The brokers providing price quotes are generally from the brokerage divisions of leading financial institutions with market making, underwriting and distribution expertise. The fair value of financial assets and financial liabilities, including privately-placed securities, certain free-standing derivatives and certain derivatives embedded in certain contractholder liabilities, where our valuation service providers or brokers do not provide fair value determinations, is determined using valuation methods and models widely accepted in the financial services industry. Internally developed valuation models, which include inputs that may not be market observable and as such involve some degree of judgment, are considered appropriate for each class of security to which they are applied. Our internal pricing methods are primarily based on models using discounted cash flow methodologies that determine a single best estimate of fair value for individual financial instruments. In addition, our models use internally assigned credit ratings as inputs (which are generally consistent with any external ratings and those we use to report our holdings by credit rating) and stochastically determined cash flows for certain derivatives embedded in certain contractholder liabilities, both of which are difficult to independently observe and verify. Instrument specific inputs used in our internal fair value determinations include: coupon rate, coupon type, weighted average life, sector of the issuer, call provisions, and the contractual elements of derivatives embedded in certain contractholder liabilities. Market related inputs used in these fair values, which we believe are representative of inputs other market participants would use to determine fair value of the same instruments include: interest rate yield curves, quoted market prices of comparable securities, credit spreads, estimated liquidity premiums, and other applicable market data including lapse and anticipated market return estimates for derivatives embedded in certain contractholder liabilities. Credit spreads are determined using those published by a commonly used industry specialist for comparable public securities. A liquidity premium is also added to certain securities to reflect spreads commonly required for the types of securities being valued and are calibrated based on actual trades or other market data. As a result of the significance of non-market observable inputs, including internally assigned credit ratings and stochastic cash flow estimates as described above, judgment is required in developing these fair values. The fair value of these financial assets and financial liabilities may differ from the amount actually received to sell an asset or the amount paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. Moreover, the use of different valuation assumptions may have a material effect on the financial assets' and financial liabilities' fair values. Fair value of our investments comprise an aggregation of numerous, single best estimates for each security in the Consolidated Statements of Financial Position. Because of this detailed approach, there is no single set of assumptions that determine our fair value estimates at a consolidated level. Moreover, management does not compile a range of estimates for items reported at fair value at the consolidated level because we do not believe that a range would provide meaningful information. In the last 10 years, our quarterly net unrealized capital gains and losses have ranged from a $7.55 billion net unrealized capital gain at June 30, 2003 to an $8.81 billion net unrealized capital loss at December 31, 2008. The change in net unrealized capital gains and losses by quarter over the 10 year period has averaged $1.10 billion and has ranged from a $4.71 billion decrease to a $2.29 billion increase. Level 1 and Level 2 measurements represent valuations where all significant inputs are market observable. Level 3 measurements have one or more significant inputs that are not market observable and as a result these 30 fair value determinations have greater potential variability as it relates to their significant inputs. The Level 3 principal components are privately placed securities valued using internal models and broker quoted securities. Additionally, due to the reduced availability of actual market prices or relevant observable inputs as a result of the decrease in liquidity that has been experienced in the market, all asset-backed residential mortgage-backed securities ("ABS RMBS"), auction rate securities ("ARS") backed by student loans, Alt-A residential mortgage-backed securities ("Alt-A"), other collateralized debt obligations ("CDO"), certain asset-backed securities ("ABS") and certain commercial mortgage-backed securities ("CMBS") are categorized as Level 3. In general, the greater the reliance on significant inputs that are not market observable, the greater potential variability of the fair value determinations. For broker quoted securities' fair value determinations, which were all categorized as Level 3, we believe the brokers providing the quotes may consider market observable transactions or activity in similar securities, as applicable, and other information as calibration points. Privately placed securities' fair value determinations, which are based on internal ratings that are not market observable and categorized as Level 3, are calibrated to market observable information in the form of external National Association of Insurance Commissioners ("NAIC") ratings and credit spreads. We believe our most significant exposure to changes in fair value is due to market risk. Our exposure to changes in market conditions is discussed fully in the Market Risk section of the MD&A. We employ specific control processes to determine the reasonableness of the fair values of our financial assets and financial liabilities. Our processes are designed to ensure that the values received or internally estimated are accurately recorded and that the data inputs and the valuation techniques utilized are appropriate, consistently applied, and that the assumptions are reasonable and consistent with the objective of determining fair value. For example, on a continuing basis, we assess the reasonableness of individual security values received from valuation service providers that exceed certain thresholds as compared to previous values received from those valuation service providers. In addition, we may validate the reasonableness of fair values by comparing information obtained from our valuation service providers to other third party valuation sources for selected financial assets. When fair value determinations are expected to be more variable, we validate them through reviews by members of management who have relevant expertise and who are independent of those charged with executing investment transactions. We do not alter fair values provided by our valuation providers or brokers. The following table identifies investments as of December 31, 2008 by source of value determination: Investments ($ in millions) Fair value Percent to total Fair value based on internal sources $ 9,256 9.7 % Fair value based on external sources (1) 71,063 74.0 Total fixed income, equity and short-term securities 80,319 83.7 Fair value of derivatives 301 0.3 Mortgage loans, policy loans, bank loans and certain limited partnership and other investments, valued at cost, amortized cost and the equity method 15,378 16.0 Total $ 95,998 100.0 % (1) Includes $2.73 billion that are valued using broker quotes. For more detailed information on our accounting policy for the fair value of financial assets and financial liabilities and information on the financial assets and financial liabilities included in the levels promulgated by SFAS No. 157, see Note 2 of the consolidated financial statements. Impairment of Fixed Income and Equity Securities For investments classified as available for sale, the difference between fair value and amortized cost for fixed income securities and cost for equity securities, net of certain other items and deferred income taxes (as disclosed in Note 5), is reported as a component of accumulated other comprehensive income on the Consolidated Statements of Financial Position and is not reflected in the operating results of any period until reclassified to net income upon the consummation of a transaction with an unrelated third party or when the decline in fair value is deemed other than temporary. The assessment of whether the impairment of a security's fair value is other than temporary is performed using a portfolio review as well as a case-by-case review considering a wide range of factors. There are a number of assumptions and estimates inherent in evaluating impairments and determining if they are other than temporary, including: 1) our ability and intent to hold the investment for a period of time sufficient to allow for an anticipated recovery in value; 2) the expected recoverability of principal and interest; 3) the length of time and extent to which the fair value has been less than amortized cost for fixed income securities or cost for equity securities; 4) the financial condition, near-term and long-term prospects of the issue or issuer, including 31 relevant industry conditions and trends, and implications of rating agency actions and offering prices; and 5) the specific reasons that a security is in a significant unrealized loss position, including market conditions which could affect liquidity. Additionally, once assumptions and estimates are made, any number of changes in facts and circumstances could cause us to subsequently determine that an impairment is other than temporary, including: 1) general economic conditions that are worse than previously forecasted or that have a greater adverse effect on a particular issuer or industry sector than originally estimated; 2) changes in the facts and circumstances related to a particular issue or issuer's ability to meet all of its contractual obligations; and 3) changes in facts and circumstances obtained that causes a change in our ability or intent to hold a security to maturity or until it recovers in value. Examples of situations which may change our ability or intent to hold a security to maturity or recovery include where significant unanticipated new facts and circumstances emerge or existing facts and circumstances increase in significance and are anticipated to adversely impact a security's future valuations more than previously expected, including negative developments that would change the view of long term investors and their intent to continue to hold the investment, subsequent credit deterioration of an issuer or holding, subsequent further deterioration in capital markets (i.e. debt and equity) and of economic conditions, subsequent further deterioration in the financial services and real estate industries, liquidity needs, federal income tax situations involving capital gains and capital loss carrybacks and carryforwards with specific expiration dates, investment risk mitigation actions, and other new facts and circumstances that would cause a change in our previous intent to hold a security to recovery or maturity. Changes in assumptions, facts and circumstances could result in additional charges to earnings in future periods to the extent that losses are realized. The charge to earnings, while potentially significant to net income, would not have a significant effect on shareholders' equity, since the majority of our portfolio is designated as available-for-sale and carried at fair value and as a result, any related net unrealized loss would already be reflected as a component of accumulated other comprehensive income in shareholders' equity. The determination of the amount of impairment is an inherently subjective process based on periodic evaluation of the factors described above. Such evaluations and assessments are revised as conditions change and new information becomes available. We update our evaluations regularly and reflect changes in impairments in results of operations as such evaluations are revised. The use of different methodologies and assumptions as to the determination of the fair value of investments and the timing and amount of impairments may have a material effect on the amounts presented within the consolidated financial statements. Fixed income securities subject to other-than-temporary impairment write-downs continue to earn investment income when future expected payments are both reasonably estimable and probable, and any discount or premium is recognized using the effective yield method over the expected life of the security; otherwise income recognition is discontinued. For a more detailed discussion of the risks relating to changes in investment values and levels of investment impairment as well as the potential causes of such changes, see Note 5 of the consolidated financial statements and the Investments, Market Risk, Enterprise Risk and Return Management and Forward-looking Statements and Risk Factors sections of this document. Deferred Policy Acquisition Costs Amortization We incur significant costs in connection with acquiring insurance policies and investment contracts. In accordance with GAAP, costs that vary with and are primarily related to acquiring insurance policies and investment contracts are deferred and recorded as an asset on the Consolidated Statements of Financial Position. DAC related to property-liability contracts is amortized into income as premiums are earned, typically over periods of six to twelve months. The amortization methodology for DAC for Allstate Financial policies and contracts includes significant assumptions and estimates. DAC related to traditional life insurance is amortized over the premium paying period of the related policies in proportion to the estimated revenues on such business. Significant assumptions relating to estimated premiums, investment returns, which include investment income and realized capital gains and losses, as well as mortality, persistency and expenses to administer the business are established at the time the policy is issued and are generally not revised during the life of the policy. The assumptions for determining DAC amortization are consistent with the assumptions used to calculate the reserve for life-contingent contract benefits. Any deviations from projected business in force resulting from actual policy terminations differing from expected levels and any estimated premium deficiencies may result in a change to the rate of amortization in the period such events occur. Generally, the amortization periods for these policies approximates the estimated lives of the policies. The recovery of DAC is dependent upon the future profitability of this business. We periodically review the adequacy of reserves and recoverability of DAC for these policies on an aggregate basis using actual experience. We aggregate all products accounted for pursuant to Statement of Financial Accounting Standard No. 60, "Accounting and Reporting by Insurance Enterprises" ("SFAS No. 60"), in the analysis. In the event actual experience is significantly adverse compared to the original assumptions, any remaining unamortized DAC balance must be expensed to the extent not recoverable and a premium deficiency reserve may be required if the remaining DAC 32 balance is insufficient to absorb the deficiency. In 2008, for traditional life insurance and immediate annuities with life contingencies, an aggregate premium deficiency of $336 million pre-tax ($219 million after-tax) resulted primarily from a study indicating that the annuitants on certain life-contingent contracts are projected to live longer than we anticipated when the contracts were issued and, to a lesser degree, a reduction in the related investment portfolio yield. The deficiency was recorded through a reduction in DAC. In 2007 and 2006, our reviews concluded that no premium deficiency adjustments were necessary, primarily due to projected income from traditional life insurance more than offsetting the projected deficiency in immediate annuities with life contingencies. DAC related to interest-sensitive life, annuities and other investment contracts is amortized in proportion to the incidence of the total present value of gross profits, which includes both actual historical gross profits ("AGP") and estimated future gross profits ("EGP") expected to be earned over the estimated lives of the contracts. The amortization is net of interest on the prior period DAC balance using rates established at the inception of the contracts. Actual amortization periods generally range from 15-30 years; however, incorporating estimates of customer surrender rates, partial withdrawals and deaths generally results in the majority of the DAC being amortized during the surrender charge period. The cumulative DAC amortization is reestimated and adjusted by a cumulative charge or credit to results of operations when there is a difference between the incidence of actual versus expected gross profits in a reporting period or when there is a change in total EGP. AGP and EGP consist primarily of the following components: contract charges for the cost of insurance less mortality costs and other benefits (benefit margin); investment income and realized capital gains and losses less interest credited (investment margin); and surrender and other contract charges less maintenance expenses (expense margin). The amount of EGP is principally dependent on assumptions for investment returns, including capital gains and losses on assets supporting contract liabilities, interest crediting rates to contractholders, and the effects of persistency, mortality, expenses, and hedges if applicable, and these assumptions are reasonably likely to have the greatest impact on the amount of DAC amortization. Changes in these assumptions can be offsetting and the Company is unable to reasonably predict their future movements or offsetting impacts over time. Each reporting period, DAC amortization is recognized in proportion to AGP for that period adjusted for interest on the prior period DAC balance. This amortization process includes an assessment of AGP compared to EGP, the actual amount of business remaining in-force and realized capital gains and losses on investments supporting the product liability. The impact of realized capital gains and losses on amortization of DAC depends upon which product liability is supported by the assets that give rise to the gain or loss. If the AGP is less than EGP in the period, but the total EGP is unchanged, the amount of DAC amortization will generally decrease, resulting in a current period increase to earnings. The opposite result generally occurs when the AGP exceeds the EGP in the period, but the total EGP is unchanged. Annually, we review all assumptions underlying the projections of EGP, including investment returns, comprising investment income and realized capital gains and losses, interest crediting rates, persistency, mortality, and expenses. Management annually updates assumptions used in the calculation of EGP. At each reporting period, we assess whether any revisions to assumptions used to determine DAC amortization are required. These reviews and updates may result in amortization acceleration or deceleration, which are commonly referred to as "DAC unlocking". If the update of assumptions causes total EGP to increase, the rate of DAC amortization will generally decrease, resulting in a current period increase to earnings. A decrease to earnings generally occurs when the assumption update causes the total EGP to decrease. Over the past three years, our most significant DAC assumption updates that resulted in a change to EGP and the amortization of DAC have been revisions to expected future investment returns, primarily realized capital losses, expenses, mortality and the number of contracts in force or persistency resulting in net DAC amortization acceleration of $327 million in 2008, deceleration of $14 million in 2007 and acceleration of $2 million in 2006. The following table provides the effect on DAC amortization of changes in assumptions relating to the gross profit components of investment margin, benefit margin and expense margin during the years ended December 31. ($ in millions) 2008 2007 2006 Investment margin $ (303 ) $ 11 $ 15 Benefit margin 35 34 (13 ) Expense margin (59 ) (31 ) (4 ) Net (acceleration) deceleration $ (327 ) $ 14 $ (2 ) 33 DAC amortization acceleration related to changes in the EGP component of investment margin in 2008 was primarily due to the level of realized capital losses impacting actual gross profits in 2008 and the impact of realized capital losses on expected gross profits in 2009. The deceleration related to benefit margin was due to more favorable projected life insurance mortality. The acceleration related to expense margin resulted from current and expected expense levels higher than previously projected. DAC amortization deceleration related to changes in the EGP component of investment margin in 2007 was due to higher yields from repositioning of the investment portfolio and reduced interest crediting rates on annuities. The deceleration related to benefit margin was due to more favorable projected life insurance mortality. The acceleration related to expense margin was a result of expenses being higher than expected. The following table displays the sensitivity of reasonably likely changes in assumptions included in the gross profit components of investment margin or benefit margin to amortization of the DAC balance as of December 31, 2008. ($ in millions) December 31, 2008 Increase/(reduction) in DAC Increase in future investment margins of 25 basis points $ 169 Decrease in future investment margins of 25 basis points $ (195 ) Decrease in future life mortality by 1% $ 28 Increase in future life mortality by 1% $ (31 ) Any potential changes in assumptions discussed above are measured without consideration of correlation among assumptions. Therefore, it would be inappropriate to add them together in an attempt to estimate overall variability in amortization. For additional discussion see the Allstate Financial Segment and Forward-looking Statements and Risk Factors sections of this document and Note 2 and 10 of the consolidated financial statements. Reserve for Property-Liability Insurance Claims and Claims Expense Estimation Reserves are established to provide for the estimated costs of paying claims and claims expenses under insurance policies we have issued. Property-Liability underwriting results are significantly influenced by estimates of property-liability insurance claims and claims expense reserves. These reserves are an estimate of amounts necessary to settle all outstanding claims, including claims that have been incurred but not reported ("IBNR"), as of the financial statement date. Characteristics of Reserves Reserves are established independently of business segment management for each business segment and line of business based on estimates of the ultimate cost to settle claims, less losses that have been paid. The significant lines of business are auto, homeowners, and other lines for Allstate Protection, and asbestos, environmental, and other discontinued lines for Discontinued Lines and Coverages. Allstate Protection's claims are typically reported promptly with relatively little reporting lag between the date of occurrence and the date the loss is reported. Auto and homeowners liability losses generally take an average of about two years to settle, while auto physical damage, homeowners property and other personal lines have an average settlement time of less than one year. Discontinued Lines and Coverages involve long-tail losses, such as those related to asbestos and environmental claims, which often involve substantial reporting lags and extended times to settle. Reserves are the difference between the estimated ultimate cost of losses incurred and the amount of paid losses as of the reporting date. Reserves are estimated for both reported and unreported claims, and include estimates of all expenses associated with processing and settling all incurred claims. We update the majority of our reserve estimates quarterly and as new information becomes available or as events emerge that may affect the resolution of unsettled claims. Changes in prior year reserve estimates (reserve reestimates), which may be material, are determined by comparing updated estimates of ultimate losses to prior estimates, and the differences are recorded as property-liability insurance claims and claims expenses in the Consolidated Statements of Operations in the period such changes are determined. Estimating the ultimate cost of claims and claims expenses is an inherently uncertain and complex process involving a high degree of judgment and is subject to the evaluation of numerous variables. The Actuarial Methods used to Develop Reserve Estimates Reserve estimates are derived by using several different actuarial estimation methods that are variations on one primary actuarial technique. The actuarial technique is known as a "chain ladder" estimation process in which historical loss patterns are applied to actual paid losses and reported losses (paid losses plus individual case reserves established by claim adjusters) for an accident year or a report year to create an estimate of how losses are likely to develop over time. An accident year refers to classifying claims based on the year in which the claims occurred. A report year refers to classifying claims based on the year in which the claims are reported. Both classifications are used to prepare estimates of 34 required reserves for payments to be made in the future. The key assumptions affecting our reserve estimates comprise data elements including claim counts, paid losses, case reserves, and development factors calculated with this data. In the chain ladder estimation technique, a ratio (development factor) is calculated which compares current period results to results in the prior period for each accident year. A three-year or two-year average development factor, based on historical results, is usually multiplied by the current period experience to estimate the development of losses of each accident year into the next time period. The development factors for the future time periods for each accident year are compounded over the remaining future periods to calculate an estimate of ultimate losses for each accident year. The implicit assumption of this technique is that an average of historical development factors is predictive of future loss development, as the significant size of our experience data base achieves a high degree of statistical credibility in actuarial projections of this type. The effects of inflation are implicitly considered in the reserving process, the implicit assumption being that a multi-year average development factor includes an adequate provision. Occasionally, unusual aberrations in loss patterns are caused by external and internal factors such as changes in claim reporting, settlement patterns, unusually large losses, process changes, legal or regulatory changes, and other influences. In these instances, analyses of alternate development factor selections are performed to evaluate the effect of these factors, and actuarial judgment is applied to make appropriate development factor assumptions needed to develop a best estimate of ultimate losses. How Reserve Estimates are Established and Updated Reserve estimates are developed at a very detailed level, and the results of these numerous micro-level best estimates are aggregated to form a consolidated reserve estimate. For example, over one thousand actuarial estimates of the types described above are prepared each quarter to estimate losses for each line of insurance, major components of losses (such as coverages and perils), major states or groups of states and for reported losses and IBNR. The actuarial methods described above are used to analyze the settlement patterns of claims by determining the development factors for specific data elements that are necessary components of a reserve estimation process. Development factors are calculated quarterly for data elements such as, claim counts reported and settled, paid losses, and paid losses combined with case reserves. The calculation of development factors from changes in these data elements also impacts claim severity trends, which is a common industry reference used to explain changes in reserve estimates. The historical development patterns for these data elements are used as the assumptions to calculate reserve estimates. Often, several different estimates are prepared for each detailed component, incorporating alternative analyses of changing claim settlement patterns and other influences on losses, from which we select our best estimate for each component, occasionally incorporating additional analyses and actuarial judgment, as described above. These micro-level estimates are not based on a single set of assumptions. Actuarial judgments that may be applied to these components of certain micro-level estimates generally do not have a material impact on the consolidated level of reserves. Moreover, this detailed micro-level process does not permit or result in a compilation of a company-wide roll up to generate a range of needed loss reserves that would be meaningful. Based on our review of these estimates, our best estimate of required reserves for each state/line/coverage component is recorded for each accident year, and the required reserves for each component are summed to create the reserve balance carried on our Consolidated Statements of Financial Position. Reserves are reestimated quarterly, by combining historical results with current actual results to calculate new development factors. This process incorporates the historic and latest actual trends, and other underlying changes in the data elements used to calculate reserve estimates. New development factors are likely to differ from previous development factors used in prior reserve estimates because actual results (claims reported or settled, losses paid, or changes to case reserves) occur differently than the implied assumptions contained in the previous development factor calculations. If claims reported, paid losses, or case reserve changes are greater or lower than the levels estimated by previous development factors, reserve reestimates increase or decrease. When actual development of these data elements is different than the historical development pattern used in a prior period reserve estimate, a new reserve is determined. The difference between indicated reserves based on new reserve estimates and recorded reserves (the previous estimate) is the amount of reserve reestimate and an increase or decrease in property-liability insurance claims and claims expense will be recorded in the Consolidated Statements of Operations. Total Property-liability reserve reestimates, after-tax, as a percent of net income, in 2008, 2007 and 2006 were (6.6)%, 2.4% and 12.6%, respectively. For Property-Liability, the 3-year average of reserve reestimates as a percentage of total reserves was a favorable 1.9%, for Allstate Protection, the 3-year average of reserve estimates was a favorable 2.6% and for Discontinued Lines and Coverages the 3-year average of reserve reestimates was an unfavorable 3.1%, each of these results being consistent within a reasonable actuarial tolerance for our respective businesses. Allstate Protection reserve reestimates were primarily the result of claim severity development that was better than expected and late reported loss development that was better than expected due to lower frequency trends, and for Discontinued Lines and Coverages, reestimates were primarily a result of increased reported claim activity (claims frequency). A more detailed discussion of reserve reestimates is presented in the Property-Liability Claims and Claims Expense Reserves section of this document. 35 The following table shows claims and claims expense reserves by operating segment and line of business as of December 31: ($ in millions) 2008 2007 2006 Allstate Protection Auto $ 10,220 $ 10,175 $ 9,995 Homeowners 2,824 2,279 2,226 Other lines 2,207 2,131 2,235 Total Allstate Protection 15,251 14,585 14,456 Discontinued Lines and Coverages Asbestos 1,228 1,302 1,375 Environmental 195 232 194 Other discontinued lines 508 541 585 Total Discontinued Lines and Coverages 1,931 2,075 2,154 Total Property-Liability $ 17,182 $ 16,660 $ 16,610 Allstate Protection Reserve Estimates Factors Affecting Reserve Estimates Reserve estimates are developed based on the processes and historical development trends as previously described. These estimates are considered in conjunction with known facts and interpretations of circumstances and factors including our experience with similar cases, actual claims paid, differing payment patterns and pending levels of unpaid claims, loss management programs, product mix and contractual terms, changes in law and regulation, judicial decisions, and economic conditions. When we experience changes of the type previously mentioned, we may need to apply actuarial judgment in the determination and selection of development factors considered more reflective of the new trends, such as combining shorter or longer periods of historical results with current actual results to produce development factors based on two-year, three-year, or longer development periods to reestimate our reserves. For example, if a legal change is expected to have a significant impact on the development of claim severity for a coverage which is part of a particular line of insurance in a specific state, actuarial judgment is applied to determine appropriate development factors that will most accurately reflect the expected impact on that specific estimate. Another example would be when a change in economic conditions is expected to affect the cost of repairs to damaged autos or property for a particular line, coverage, or state, actuarial judgment is applied to determine appropriate development factors to use in the reserve estimate that will most accurately reflect the expected impacts on severity development. As claims are reported, for certain liability claims of sufficient size and complexity, the field adjusting staff establishes case reserve estimates of ultimate cost, based on their assessment of facts and circumstances related to each individual claim. For other claims which occur in large volumes and settle in a relatively short time frame, it is not practical or efficient to set case reserves for each claim, and a statistical case reserve is set for these claims based on estimation techniques previously described. In the normal course of business, we may also supplement our claims processes by utilizing third party adjusters, appraisers, engineers, inspectors, other professionals and information sources to assess and settle catastrophe and non-catastrophe related claims. Historically, the case reserves set by the field adjusting staff have not proven to be an entirely accurate estimate of the ultimate cost of claims. To provide for this, a development reserve is estimated using previously described processes, and allocated to pending claims as a supplement to case reserves. Typically, the case and supplemental development reserves comprise about 90% of total reserves. Another major component of reserves is IBNR. Typically, IBNR comprises about 10% of total reserves. Generally, the initial reserves for a new accident year are established based on severity assumptions for different business segments, lines, and coverages based on historical relationships to relevant inflation indicators, and reserves for prior accident years are statistically determined using processes previously described. Changes in auto current year claim severity are generally influenced by inflation in the medical and auto repair sectors of the economy. We mitigate these effects through various loss management programs. Injury claims are affected largely by medical cost inflation while physical damage claims are affected largely by auto repair cost inflation and used car prices. For auto physical damage coverages, we monitor our rate of increase in average cost per claim against a weighted average of the Maintenance and Repair price index and the Parts & Equipment price index. We believe our claim settlement initiatives, such as improvements to the claim review and settlement process, the use 36 of special investigative units to detect fraud and handle suspect claims, litigation management and defense strategies, as well as various other loss management initiatives underway, contribute to the mitigation of injury and physical damage severity trends. Changes in homeowners current year claim severity are generally influenced by inflation in the cost of building materials, the cost of construction and property repair services, the cost of replacing home furnishings and other contents, the types of claims that qualify for coverage, deductibles and other economic and environmental factors. We employ various loss management programs to mitigate the effect of these factors. As loss experience for the current year develops for each type of loss, it is monitored relative to initial assumptions until it is judged to have sufficient statistical credibility. From that point in time and forward, reserves are reestimated using statistical actuarial processes to reflect the impact actual loss trends have on development factors incorporated into the actuarial estimation processes. Statistical credibility is usually achieved by the end of the first calendar year; however, when trends for the current accident year exceed initial assumptions sooner, they are usually given credibility, and reserves are increased accordingly. The very detailed processes for developing reserve estimates and the lack of a need and existence of a common set of assumptions or development factors, limits aggregate reserve level testing for variability of data elements. However, by applying standard actuarial methods to consolidated historic accident year loss data for major loss types, comprising auto injury losses, auto physical damage losses and homeowner losses, we develop variability analyses consistent with the way we develop reserves by measuring the potential variability of development factors, as described in the section titled, "Potential Reserve Estimate Variability" below. Causes of Reserve Estimate Uncertainty Since reserves are estimates of the unpaid portions of claims and claims expenses that have occurred, including IBNR losses, the establishment of appropriate reserves, including reserves for catastrophes, requires regular reevaluation and refinement of estimates to determine our ultimate loss estimate. At each reporting date, the highest degree of uncertainty in estimates of losses arises from claims remaining to be settled for the current accident year and the most recent preceding accident year. The greatest degree of uncertainty exists in the current accident year because the current accident year contains the greatest proportion of losses that have not been reported or settled but must be estimated as of the current reporting date. Most of these losses relate to damaged property such as automobiles and homes, and medical care for injuries from accidents. During the first year after the end of an accident year, a large portion of the total losses for that accident year are settled. When accident year losses paid through the end of the first year following the initial accident year are incorporated into updated actuarial estimates, the trends inherent in the settlement of claims emerge more clearly. Consequently, this is the point in time at which we tend to make our largest reestimates of losses for an accident year. After the second year, the losses that we pay for an accident year typically relate to claims that are more difficult to settle, such as those involving serious injuries or litigation. Private passenger auto insurance provides a good illustration of the uncertainty of future loss estimates: our typical annual percentage payout of reserves for an accident year is approximately 50% in the first year after the end of the accident year, 20% in the second year, 15% in the third year, 5% in the fourth year, and the remaining 10% thereafter. Reserves for Catastrophe Losses Property-Liability claims and claims expense reserves also include reserves for catastrophe losses. Catastrophe losses are an inherent risk of the property-liability insurance industry that have contributed, and will continue to contribute, to potentially material year-to-year fluctuations in our results of operations and financial position. We define a "catastrophe" as an event that produces pre-tax losses before reinsurance in excess of $1 million and involves multiple first party policyholders, or an event that produces a number of claims in excess of a preset, per-event threshold of average claims in a specific area, occurring within a certain amount of time following the event. Catastrophes are caused by various natural events including high winds, winter storms, tornadoes, hailstorms, wildfires, tropical storms, hurricanes, earthquakes, and volcanoes. We are also exposed to man-made catastrophic events, such as certain acts of terrorism or industrial accidents. The nature and level of catastrophes in any period cannot be predicted. The estimation of claims and claims expense reserves for catastrophes also comprises estimates of losses from reported claims and IBNR, primarily for damage to property. In general, our estimates for catastrophe reserves are based on claim adjuster inspections and the application of historical loss development factors as described previously. However, depending on the nature of the catastrophe, as noted above, the estimation process can be further complicated. For example, for hurricanes, complications could include the inability of insureds to be able to promptly report losses, limitations placed on claims adjusting staff affecting their ability to inspect losses, determining whether losses are covered by our homeowners policy (generally for damage caused by wind or wind driven rain), or specifically excluded coverage caused by flood, estimating additional living 37 expenses, and assessing the impact of demand surge, exposure to mold damage, and the effects of numerous other considerations, including the timing of a catastrophe in relation to other events, such as at or near the end of a financial reporting period, which can affect the availability of information needed to estimate reserves for that reporting period. In these situations, we may need to adapt our practices to accommodate these circumstances in order to determine a best estimate of our losses from a catastrophe. As an example, in 2005 to complete an estimate for certain areas affected by Hurricane Katrina and not yet inspected by our claims adjusting staff, or where we believed our historical loss development factors were not predictive, we relied on analysis of actual claim notices received compared to total policies in force, as well as visual, governmental and third party information, including aerial photos, area observations, and data on wind speed and flood depth to the extent available. Potential Reserve Estimate Variability The aggregation of numerous micro-level estimates for each business segment, line of insurance, major components of losses (such as coverages and perils), and major states or groups of states for reported losses and IBNR forms the reserve liability recorded in the Consolidated Statements of Financial Position. Because of this detailed approach to developing our reserve estimates, there is not a single set of assumptions that determine our reserve estimates at the consolidated level. Given the numerous micro-level estimates for reported losses and IBNR, management does not believe the processes that we follow will produce a statistically credible or reliable actuarial reserve range that would be meaningful. Reserve estimates, by their very nature, are very complex to determine and subject to significant judgment, and do not represent an exact determination for each outstanding claim. Accordingly, as actual claims, and/or paid losses, and/or case reserve results emerge, our estimate of the ultimate cost to settle will be different than previously estimated. To develop a statistical indication of potential reserve variability within reasonably likely possible outcomes, an actuarial technique (stochastic modeling) is applied to the countrywide consolidated data elements for paid losses and paid losses combined with case reserves separately for injury losses, auto physical damage losses, and homeowners losses excluding catastrophe losses. Based on the combined historical variability of the development factors calculated for these data elements, an estimate of the standard error or standard deviation around these reserve estimates is calculated within each accident year for the last eleven years for each type of loss. The variability of these reserve estimates within one standard deviation of the mean (a measure of frequency of dispersion often viewed to be an acceptable level of accuracy) is believed by management to represent a reasonable and statistically probable measure of potential variability. Based on our products and coverages, historical experience, the statistical credibility of our extensive data, and stochastic modeling of actuarial chain ladder methodologies used to develop reserve estimates, we estimate that the potential variability of our Allstate Protection reserves, within a reasonable probability of other possible outcomes, may be approximately plus or minus 4%, or plus or minus $400 million in net income. A lower level of variability exists for auto injury losses, which comprise approximately 70% of reserves, due to their relatively stable development patterns over a longer duration of time required to settle claims. Other types of losses, such as auto physical damage, homeowners losses and other losses, which comprise about 30% of reserves, tend to have greater variability, but are settled in a much shorter period of time. Although this evaluation reflects most reasonably likely outcomes, it is possible the final outcome may fall below or above these amounts. Historical variability of reserve estimates is reported in the Property-Liability Claims and Claims Expense Reserves section of this document. Adequacy of Reserve Estimates We believe our net claims and claims expense reserves are appropriately established based on available methodology, facts, technology, laws and regulations. We calculate and record a single best reserve estimate, in conformance with generally accepted actuarial standards, for each line of insurance, its components (coverages and perils), and state, for reported losses and for IBNR losses and as a result we believe that no other estimate is better than our recorded amount. Due to the uncertainties involved, the ultimate cost of losses may vary materially from recorded amounts, which are based on our best estimates. Discontinued Lines and Coverages Reserve Estimates Characteristics of Discontinued Lines Exposure We continue to receive asbestos and environmental claims. Asbestos claims relate primarily to bodily injuries asserted by people who were exposed to asbestos or products containing asbestos. Environmental claims relate primarily to pollution and related clean-up costs. Our exposure to asbestos, environmental and other discontinued lines claims arises principally from assumed reinsurance coverage written during the 1960s through the mid-1980s, including reinsurance on primary insurance written on large U.S. companies, and from direct excess insurance written from 1972 through 1985, including substantial excess general liability coverages on large U.S. companies. Additional exposure stems from direct primary commercial insurance written during the 1960s through the mid-1980s. Other discontinued lines 38 exposures primarily relate to general liability and product liability mass tort claims, such as those for medical devices and other products. In 1986, the general liability policy form used by us and others in the property-liability industry was amended to introduce an "absolute pollution exclusion," which excluded coverage for environmental damage claims, and to add an asbestos exclusion. Most general liability policies issued prior to 1987 contain annual aggregate limits for product liability coverage. General liability policies issued in 1987 and thereafter contain annual aggregate limits for product liability coverage and annual aggregate limits for all coverages. Our experience to date is that these policy form changes have limited the extent of our exposure to environmental and asbestos claim risks. Our exposure to liability for asbestos, environmental, and other discontinued lines losses manifests differently depending on whether it arises from assumed reinsurance coverage, direct excess insurance, or direct primary commercial insurance. The direct insurance coverage we provided that covered asbestos, environmental and other discontinued lines was substantially "excess" in nature. Direct excess insurance and reinsurance involve coverage written by us for specific layers of protection above retentions and other insurance plans. The nature of excess coverage and reinsurance provided to other insurers limits our exposure to loss to specific layers of protection in excess of policyholder retention on primary insurance plans. Our exposure is further limited by the significant reinsurance that we had purchased on our direct excess business. Our assumed reinsurance business involved writing generally small participations in other insurers' reinsurance programs. The reinsured losses in which we participate may be a proportion of all eligible losses or eligible losses in excess of defined retentions. The majority of our assumed reinsurance exposure, approximately 85%, is for excess of loss coverage, while the remaining 15% is for pro-rata coverage. Our direct primary commercial insurance business did not include coverage to large asbestos manufacturers. This business comprises a cross section of policyholders engaged in many diverse business sectors located throughout the country. How Reserve Estimates are Established and Updated We conduct an annual review in the third quarter to evaluate and establish asbestos, environmental and other discontinued lines reserves. Changes to reserves are recorded in the reporting period in which they are determined. Using established industry and actuarial best practices and assuming no change in the regulatory or economic environment, this detailed and comprehensive "grounds up" methodology determines asbestos reserves based on assessments of the characteristics of exposure (e.g. claim activity, potential liability, jurisdiction, products versus non-products exposure) presented by individual policyholders, and determines environmental reserves based on assessments of the characteristics of exposure (e.g. environmental damages, respective shares of liability of potentially responsible parties, appropriateness and cost of remediation) to pollution and related clean-up costs. The number and cost of these claims is affected by intense advertising by trial lawyers seeking asbestos plaintiffs, and entities with asbestos exposure seeking bankruptcy protection as a result of asbestos liabilities, initially causing a delay in the reporting of claims, often followed by an acceleration and an increase in claims and claims expenses as settlements occur. After evaluating our insureds' probable liabilities for asbestos and/or environmental claims, we evaluate our insureds' coverage programs for such claims. We consider our insureds' total available insurance coverage, including the coverage we issued. We also consider relevant judicial interpretations of policy language and applicable coverage defenses or determinations, if any. Evaluation of both the insureds' estimated liabilities and our exposure to the insureds depends heavily on an analysis of the relevant legal issues and litigation environment. This analysis is conducted by our specialized claims adjusting staff and legal counsel. Based on these evaluations, case reserves are established by claims adjusting staff and actuarial analysis is employed to develop an IBNR reserve, which includes estimated potential reserve development and claims that have occurred but have not been reported. As of December 31, 2008 and 2007, IBNR was 63.8% and 63.2%, respectively, of combined asbestos and environmental reserves. For both asbestos and environmental reserves, we also evaluate our historical direct net loss and expense paid and incurred experience to assess any emerging trends, fluctuations or characteristics suggested by the aggregate paid and incurred activity. 39 Other Discontinued Lines and Coverages The following table shows reserves for Other Discontinued Lines which provide for remaining loss and loss expense liabilities related to business no longer written by us, other than asbestos and environmental as of December 31. ($ in millions) 2008 2007 2006 Other mass torts $ 177 $ 189 $ 185 Workers' compensation 130 133 140 Commercial and other 201 219 260 Other discontinued lines $ 508 $ 541 $ 585 Other mass torts describes direct excess and reinsurance general liability coverage provided for cumulative injury losses other than asbestos and environmental. Workers' compensation and commercial and other include run-off from discontinued direct primary, direct excess and reinsurance commercial insurance operations of various coverage exposures other than asbestos and environmental. Reserves are based on considerations similar to those previously described, as they relate to the characteristics of specific individual coverage exposures. Potential Reserve Estimate Variability Establishing Discontinued Lines and Coverages net loss reserves for asbestos, environmental and other discontinued lines claims is subject to uncertainties that are much greater than those presented by other types of claims. Among the complications are lack of historical data, long reporting delays, uncertainty as to the number and identity of insureds with potential exposure and unresolved legal issues regarding policy coverage; unresolved legal issues regarding the determination, availability and timing of exhaustion of policy limits; plaintiffs' evolving and expanding theories of liability; availability and collectability of recoveries from reinsurance; retrospectively determined premiums and other contractual agreements; estimates of the extent and timing of any contractual liability; the impact of bankruptcy protection sought by various asbestos producers and other asbestos defendants; and other uncertainties. There are also complex legal issues concerning the interpretation of various insurance policy provisions and whether those losses are covered, or were ever intended to be covered, and could be recoverable through retrospectively determined premium, reinsurance or other contractual agreements. Courts have reached different and sometimes inconsistent conclusions as to when losses are deemed to have occurred and which policies provide coverage; what types of losses are covered; whether there is an insurer obligation to defend; how policy limits are determined; how policy exclusions and conditions are applied and interpreted; and whether clean-up costs represent insured property damage. Our reserves for asbestos and environmental exposures could be affected by tort reform, class action litigation, and other potential legislation and judicial decisions. Environmental exposures could also be affected by a change in the existing federal Superfund law and similar state statutes. There can be no assurance that any reform legislation will be enacted or that any such legislation will provide for a fair, effective and cost-efficient system for settlement of asbestos or environmental claims. We believe these issues are not likely to be resolved in the near future, and the ultimate costs may vary materially from the amounts currently recorded resulting in material changes in loss reserves. Historical variability of reserve estimates is demonstrated in the Property-Liability Claims and Claims Expense Reserves section of this document. Adequacy of Reserve Estimates Management believes its net loss reserves for environmental, asbestos and other discontinued lines exposures are appropriately established based on available facts, technology, laws, regulations, and assessments of other pertinent factors and characteristics of exposure (e.g. claim activity, potential liability, jurisdiction, products versus non-products exposure) presented by individual policyholders, assuming no change in the legal, legislative or economic environment. Due to the uncertainties and factors described above, management believes it is not practicable to develop a meaningful range for any such additional net loss reserves that may be required. Further Discussion of Reserve Estimates For further discussion of these estimates and quantification of the impact of reserve estimates, reserve reestimates and assumptions, see Notes 7 and 13 to the consolidated financial statements and the Catastrophe Losses, Property-Liability Claims and Claims Expense Reserves and Forward-looking Statements and Risk Factors sections of this document. Reserve for Life-Contingent Contract Benefits Estimation Benefits for these policies are payable over many years; accordingly, the reserves are calculated as the present value of future expected benefits to be paid, reduced by the present value of future expected net premiums. Long-term actuarial assumptions of future investment yields, mortality, morbidity, policy terminations and expenses are used when establishing the reserve for life-contingent contract benefits payable under insurance policies including traditional life insurance, life-contingent immediate annuities and voluntary health products. These assumptions, which for traditional life insurance are applied using the net level premium method, include provisions for adverse deviation and generally 40 vary by characteristics such as type of coverage, year of issue and policy duration. Future investment yield assumptions are determined based upon prevailing investment yields as well as estimated reinvestment yields. Mortality, morbidity and policy termination assumptions are based on our experience and industry experience. Expense assumptions include the estimated effects of inflation and expenses to be incurred beyond the premium-paying period. These assumptions are established at the time the policy is issued, are consistent with assumptions for determining DAC amortization for these policies, and are generally not changed during the policy coverage period. However, if actual experience emerges in a manner that is significantly adverse relative to the original assumptions, adjustments to DAC or reserves may be required resulting in a charge to earnings which could have a material adverse effect on our operating results and financial condition. We periodically review the adequacy of these reserves and recoverability of DAC for these policies on an aggregate basis using actual experience. In the event that actual experience is significantly adverse compared to the original assumptions, any remaining unamortized DAC balance must be expensed to the extent not recoverable and the establishment of a premium deficiency reserve may be required. The effects of changes in reserve estimates are reported in the results of operations in the period in which the changes are determined. In 2008, for traditional life insurance and immediate annuities with life contingencies, an aggregate premium deficiency of $336 million pre-tax ($219 million after-tax) resulted primarily from a study indicating that the annuitants on certain life-contingent contracts are projected to live longer than we anticipated when the contracts were issued and, to a lesser degree, a reduction in the related investment portfolio yield. The deficiency was recorded through a reduction in DAC. In 2007 and 2006, our reviews concluded that no premium deficiency adjustments were necessary, primarily due to projected income from traditional life insurance more than offsetting the projected deficiency in immediate annuities with life contingencies. We will continue to monitor the experience of our traditional life insurance and immediate annuities. Further significant changes in mortality experience or the portfolio yield could result in additional charges in future periods. The Company has not recognized a charge of this nature in previous years. We anticipate that mortality, investment and reinvestment yields, and policy terminations are the factors that would be most likely to require adjustment to these reserves or related DAC. For further discussion of these policies, see Note 8 of the consolidated financial statements and the Forward-looking Statements and Risk Factors section of this document. 41 PROPERTY-LIABILITY 2008 HIGHLIGHTS Premiums written, an operating measure that is defined and reconciled to premiums earned on page 46, decreased 2.2% to $26.58 billion in 2008 from $27.18 billion in 2007. Allstate brand standard auto premiums written in 2008 decreased 0.7% to $15.92 billion in 2008 from $16.04 billion in 2007. Allstate brand homeowners premiums written decreased 1.3% to $5.64 billion in 2008 from $5.71 billion in 2007. A continuation of declining new car sales, weakness in the housing market and a highly competitive environment contributed to lower policies in force. Premium operating measures and statistics contributing to the overall Allstate brand standard auto premiums written decline were the following: 1.8% decrease in PIF as of December 31, 2008 compared to December 31, 2007 0.6 point decline in the six month renewal ratio to 88.9% in 2008 compared to 89.5% in 2007 1.2% increase in the six month policy term average gross premium before reinsurance to $427 in 2008 from $422 in 2007 7.5% decrease in new issued applications in 2008 compared to 2007 Premium operating measures and statistics contributing to the overall Allstate brand homeowners premiums written decline were the following: 4.2% decrease in PIF as of December 31, 2008 compared to December 31, 2007 0.5 point increase in the twelve month renewal ratio to 87.0% in 2008 compared to 86.5% in 2007 1.3% increase in the twelve month policy term average gross premium before reinsurance to $861 in 2008 from $850 in 2007 26.0% decrease in new issued applications in 2008 compared to 2007 $100 million decrease in catastrophe reinsurance costs to $657 million in 2008 from $757 million in 2007 Factors contributing to the Allstate brand standard auto loss ratio increase of 2.3 points to 68.1 in 2008 from 65.8 in 2007 were the following: 6.5% decrease in standard auto property damage gross claim frequency in 2008 compared to 2007 8.5% decrease in bodily injury gross claim frequency in 2008 compared to 2007 1.8% increase in claim severities for auto property damage in 2008 compared to 2007 6.5% increase in claim severities for bodily injury in 2008 compared to 2007 unfavorable prior year reserve reestimates in 2008 compared to favorable reestimates in 2007 Factors contributing to the Allstate brand homeowners loss ratio, which includes catastrophes, increase of 29.8 points to 96.3 in 2008 from 66.5 in 2007 were the following: 46.5 point effect of catastrophe losses in 2008 compared to 19.5 point in 2007 7.2% increase in homeowner gross claim frequency, excluding catastrophes, in 2008 compared to 2007, fueled by weather-related claim trends 0.6% increase in claim severity, excluding catastrophes, in 2008 compared to 2007 Factors contributing to catastrophe losses increase of $1.93 billion to $3.34 billion in 2008 compared to $1.41 billion in 2007 were the following: $966 million and $342 million estimated losses for Hurricanes Ike and Gustav, respectively 121 other events with losses of $2.03 billion in 2008 compared to 91 events with losses of $1.41 billion in 2007 Factors contributing to prior year reserve reestimates of $170 million unfavorable in 2008 compared to $172 million favorable in 2007 included: prior year reserve reestimates related to auto, homeowners and other lines in 2008 contributed $27 million favorable, $124 million unfavorable and $55 million unfavorable, respectively, compared to prior year reserve reetimates in 2007 of $311 million favorable, $115 million unfavorable and $23 million favorable, respectively Property-Liability underwriting income of $164 million in 2008 compared to $2.78 billion in 2007 included the following primary contributing factors. Underwriting income (loss), a measure not based on GAAP, is defined below. catastrophe losses increase of $1.93 billion to $3.34 billion in 2008 compared to $1.41 billion in 2007 $170 million unfavorable prior year reserve reestimates in 2008 compared to $172 million favorable in 2007 Property-Liability investments as of December 31, 2008 were $30.84 billion, a decrease of 24.6% from $40.91 billion as of December 31, 2007. Net investment income was $1.67 billion in 2008, a decrease of 15.1% from $1.97 billion in 2007. Net realized capital losses were $1.86 billion in 2008 compared to net realized capital gains of $1.42 billion in 2007. 42 PROPERTY-LIABILITY OPERATIONS Overview Our Property-Liability operations consist of two business segments: Allstate Protection and Discontinued Lines and Coverages. Allstate Protection comprises two brands, the Allstate brand and Encompass brand. Allstate Protection is principally engaged in the sale of personal property and casualty insurance, primarily private passenger auto and homeowners insurance, to individuals in the United States and Canada. Discontinued Lines and Coverages includes results from insurance coverage that we no longer write and results for certain commercial and other businesses in run-off. These segments are consistent with the groupings of financial information that management uses to evaluate performance and to determine the allocation of resources. Underwriting income (loss), a measure that is not based on GAAP and is reconciled to net income on page 44, is calculated as premiums earned, less claims and claims expense ("losses"), amortization of DAC, operating costs and expenses and restructuring and related charges, as determined using GAAP. We use this measure in our evaluation of results of operations to analyze the profitability of the Property-Liability insurance operations separately from investment results. It is also an integral component of incentive compensation. It is useful for investors to evaluate the components of income separately and in the aggregate when reviewing performance. Net income is the GAAP measure most directly comparable to underwriting income (loss). Underwriting income (loss) should not be considered as a substitute for net income and does not reflect the overall profitability of the business. The table below includes GAAP operating ratios we use to measure our profitability. We believe that they enhance an investor's understanding of our profitability. They are calculated as follows: Claims and claims expense ("loss") ratio the ratio of claims and claims expense to premiums earned. Loss ratios include the impact of catastrophe losses. Expense ratio the ratio of amortization of DAC, operating costs and expenses, and restructuring and related charges to premiums earned. Combined ratio the ratio of claims and claims expense, amortization of DAC, operating costs and expenses, and restructuring and related charges to premiums earned. The combined ratio is the sum of the loss ratio and the expense ratio. The difference between 100% and the combined ratio represents underwriting income (loss) as a percentage of premiums earned. We have also calculated the following impacts of specific items on the GAAP operating ratios because of the volatility of these items between fiscal periods. Effect of catastrophe losses on combined ratio the percentage of catastrophe losses included in claims and claims expense to premiums earned. This ratio includes prior year reserve reestimates of catastrophe losses. Effect of prior year reserve reestimates on combined ratio the percentage of prior year reserve reestimates included in claims and claims expense to premiums earned. This ratio includes prior year reserve reestimates of catastrophe losses. Effect of restructuring and related charges on combined ratio the percentage of restructuring and related charges to premiums earned. Effect of Discontinued Lines and Coverages on combined ratio the ratio of claims and claims expense and other costs and expenses in the Discontinued Lines and Coverages segment to Property-Liability premiums earned. The sum of the effect of Discontinued Lines and Coverages on the combined ratio and the Allstate Protection combined ratio is equal to the Property-Liability combined ratio. 43 Summarized financial data, a reconciliation of underwriting income to net income and GAAP operating ratios for our Property-Liability operations are presented in the following table. ($ in millions, except ratios) 2008 2007 2006 Premiums written $ 26,584 $ 27,183 $ 27,526 Revenues Premiums earned $ 26,967 $ 27,233 $ 27,369 Net investment income 1,674 1,972 1,854 Realized capital gains and losses (1,858 ) 1,416 348 Total revenues 26,783 30,621 29,571 Costs and expenses Claims and claims expense (20,064 ) (17,667 ) (16,017 ) Amortization of DAC (3,975 ) (4,121 ) (4,131 ) Operating costs and expenses (2,742 ) (2,634 ) (2,567 ) Restructuring and related charges (22 ) (27 ) (157 ) Total costs and expenses (26,803 ) (24,449 ) (22,872 ) Loss on disposition of operations (1 ) Income tax benefit (expense) 248 (1,914 ) (2,084 ) Net income $ 228 $ 4,258 $ 4,614 Underwriting income $ 164 $ 2,784 $ 4,497 Net investment income 1,674 1,972 1,854 Income tax benefit (expense) on operations (401 ) (1,413 ) (1,963 ) Realized capital gains and losses, after-tax (1,209 ) 915 227 Loss on disposition of operations, after-tax (1 ) Net income $ 228 $ 4,258 $ 4,614 Catastrophe losses (1) $ 3,342 $ 1,409 $ 810 GAAP operating ratios Claims and claims expense ratio 74.4 64.9 58.5 Expense ratio 25.0 24.9 25.1 Combined ratio 99.4 89.8 83.6 Effect of catastrophe losses on combined ratio (1) 12.4 5.2 3.0 Effect of prior year reserve reestimates on combined ratio (1) 0.7 (0.6 ) (3.5 ) Effect of restructuring and related charges on combined ratio 0.1 0.1 0.6 Effect of Discontinued Lines and Coverages on combined ratio 0.1 0.2 0.5 (1) Reserve reestimates included in catastrophe losses totaled $125 million unfavorable in 2008, $127 million unfavorable in 2007 and $223 million favorable in 2006. 44 ALLSTATE PROTECTION SEGMENT Overview and Strategy The Allstate Protection segment sells primarily private passenger auto and homeowners insurance to individuals through Allstate Exclusive Agencies and directly through Customer Information Centers and the internet under the Allstate brand and through independent agencies under both the Allstate brand and the Encompass brand. The key elements of the Allstate Protection strategy of consumer focus, innovation and loyalty are: Build customer loyalty Increase distribution effectiveness Maintain leadership in pricing sophistication Provide innovative products and services Extend our claims competitive advantage Maintain a strong support foundation by continuing to effectively manage people, investments, technology and capital In our strategy for the Allstate brand, we are seeking, through the utilization of our distribution channels, our pricing sophistication and targeted consumer marketing, to attract and retain high lifetime value customers who will potentially provide profitability over the course of their relationship with us. We maintain a comprehensive marketing approach throughout the U.S. We have aligned agency and management compensation and the overall strategies of the Allstate brand to best serve our customers by basing certain incentives on Allstate brand profitability, PIF growth, retention, and sales of financial products. We differentiate the Allstate brand from competitors by offering a choice of products, including Allstate Your Choice Auto Insurance ("YCA") with options such as safe driving deductibles and a safe driving bonus, Allstate Your Choice Home ("YCH") with options such as a claim-free bonus and greater ability to tailor insurance coverage and Allstate Blue SM , our non-standard auto product with features such as a loyalty bonus and roadside assistance coverage. Our strategy for the Encompass brand includes enhancing our pricing and product offering by applying pricing sophistication to the Encompass Edge product, increasing distribution effectiveness and improving agency technology interfaces to support profitable growth. Our pricing and underwriting are designed to enhance both our competitive position and profit potential, and produce a broader range of premiums that is more refined than the range generated by the standard/non-standard model. Pricing sophistication which underlies our Strategic Risk Management program uses a number of risk evaluation factors including, to the extent legally permissible, insurance scoring based on information that is obtained from credit reports. We continue to expand the number of price points with successive rating program releases. Substantially all of new and approximately 88% of renewal business written for Allstate brand auto are rated using our pricing sophistication methods. For Allstate brand homeowners, approximately 94% of new and 60% of renewal business written are rated using pricing sophistication methods. For Allstate brand auto and homeowners business, our results indicate that over time, use of these methods has improved our mix of customers towards those who we consider high lifetime value that generally have better retention and more favorable loss experience. The Allstate Protection segment also includes a separate organization called Emerging Businesses which is comprised of Small Business ("Commercial"), Consumer Household ("Specialty Product Lines"), Allstate Dealer Services ("Allstate Credit Division") and Allstate Roadside Services ("Allstate Motor Club and Partnership Marketing Group"). Consumer Household and Allstate Roadside Services accounted for $1.55 billion or 62.7% and $187 million or 7.6% of Emerging Businesses premiums written in 2008, respectively. We expect to accelerate growth in high-value areas of Emerging Businesses, including Consumer Household and Allstate Roadside Services, during 2009. We are pursuing improvements in the overall customer experience through actions targeted to increase customer satisfaction and retention. These programs are designed around establishing customer service expectations and customer relationship building. Our claims strategy focuses on delivering fast, fair and consistent claim service while achieving loss cost management and customer satisfaction. 45 We continue to enhance technology to integrate our distribution channels, improve customer service, facilitate the introduction of new products and services and reduce infrastructure costs related to supporting agencies and handling claims. These actions and others are designed to optimize the effectiveness of our distribution and service channels by increasing the productivity of the Allstate brand's exclusive agencies and our direct channel. We continue to manage our property catastrophe exposure in order to provide our shareholders an acceptable return on the risks assumed in our property business and to reduce the variability of our earnings, while providing protection to our customers. Our property business includes personal homeowners, commercial property and other property lines. At December 31, 2008, we continue to be within our goal to have no more than a 1% likelihood of exceeding our expected annual aggregate catastrophe losses by $2 billion, net of reinsurance, based on modeled assumptions and applications currently available. The use of different assumptions and updates to industry models could materially change the projected loss. Property catastrophe exposure management includes purchasing reinsurance in areas that have known exposure to hurricanes, earthquakes, wildfires, fires following earthquakes and other catastrophes. We are working for changes in the regulatory environment, including fewer restrictions on underwriting, recognizing the need for and improving appropriate risk based pricing and promoting the creation of government sponsored, privately funded solutions for large catastrophes. While the actions that we take will be primarily focused on reducing the catastrophe exposure in our property business, we also consider their impact on our ability to market our auto lines. Pricing of property products is typically intended to establish returns that we deem acceptable over a long-term period. Losses, including losses from catastrophic events and weather-related losses (such as wind, hail, lightning and freeze losses not meeting our criteria to be declared a catastrophe) are accrued on an occurrence basis within the policy period. Therefore, in any reporting period, loss experience from catastrophic events and weather-related losses may contribute to negative or positive underwriting performance relative to the expectations we incorporated into the products' pricing. Additionally, property products are more capital intensive than other personal lines products. Premiums written , an operating measure, is the amount of premiums charged for policies issued during a fiscal period. Premiums earned is a GAAP measure. Premiums are considered earned and are included in the financial results on a pro-rata basis over the policy period. The portion of premiums written applicable to the unexpired terms of the policies is recorded as unearned premiums on our Consolidated Statements of Financial Position. Since the Allstate brand policy periods are typically 6 months for auto and 12 months for homeowners, and the Encompass standard auto and homeowners policy periods are typically 12 months and non-standard auto policy periods are typically 6 months, rate changes will generally be recognized in premiums earned over a period of 6 to 24 months. During this period, premiums written at a higher rate will cause an increase in the balance of unearned premiums on our Consolidated Statements of Financial Position. The following table shows the unearned premium balance at December 31 and the timeframe in which we expect to recognize these premiums as earned. % earned after ($ in millions) 2008 2007 90 days 180 days 270 days 360 days Allstate brand: Standard auto $ 4,002 $ 4,092 73.7 % 98.4 % 99.6 % 100.0 % Non-standard auto 259 302 71.9 % 97.4 % 99.4 % 100.0 % Homeowners 3,182 3,322 43.9 % 76.1 % 94.4 % 100.0 % Other personal lines (1) 1,385 1,413 39.0 % 68.0 % 85.9 % 92.9 % Total Allstate brand 8,828 9,129 57.6 % 85.7 % 95.6 % 98.9 % Encompass brand: Standard auto 506 572 44.6 % 76.2 % 94.4 % 100.0 % Non-standard auto 9 15 76.3 % 100.0 % 100.0 % 100.0 % Homeowners 269 303 44.3 % 76.1 % 94.4 % 100.0 % Other personal lines (1) 60 66 44.2 % 76.0 % 94.3 % 100.0 % Total Encompass brand 844 956 44.8 % 76.4 % 94.5 % 100.0 % Allstate Protection unearned premiums $ 9,672 $ 10,085 56.5 % 84.9 % 95.5 % 99.0 % (1) Other personal lines include commercial lines, condominium, renters, involuntary auto and other personal lines. 46 A reconciliation of premiums written to premiums earned for the years ended December 31 is presented in the following table. ($ in millions) 2008 2007 2006 Premiums written: Allstate Protection $ 26,584 $ 27,183 $ 27,525 Discontinued Lines and Coverages 1 Property-Liability premiums written 26,584 27,183 27,526 Decrease (increase) in unearned premiums (1) 383 17 (354 ) Other (1) 33 197 Property-Liability premiums earned $ 26,967 $ 27,233 $ 27,369 Premiums earned: Allstate Protection $ 26,967 $ 27,232 $ 27,366 Discontinued Lines and Coverages 1 3 Property-Liability $ 26,967 $ 27,233 $ 27,369 (1) Year ended December 31, 2008 includes $44 million in unearned premiums related to June 27, 2008 acquisition of Partnership Marketing Group. Year ended December 31, 2006 includes the transfer at January 1, 2006 of $152 million in unearned premiums to Property-Liability related to the loan protection business previously managed by Allstate Financial. Premiums written by brand are shown in the following table. Allstate brand Encompass brand Allstate Protection ($ in millions) 2008 2007 2006 2008 2007 2006 2008 2007 2006 Standard auto (1) $ 15,918 $ 16,035 $ 15,704 $ 1,025 $ 1,125 $ 1,138 $ 16,943 $ 17,160 $ 16,842 Non-standard auto (1) 1,018 1,179 1,386 40 68 94 1,058 1,247 1,480 Homeowners 5,639 5,711 5,926 471 538 589 6,110 6,249 6,515 Other personal lines 2,358 2,397 2,548 115 130 140 2,473 2,527 2,688 Total $ 24,933 $ 25,322 $ 25,564 $ 1,651 $ 1,861 $ 1,961 $ 26,584 $ 27,183 $ 27,525 (1) 2007 includes the impact from the fourth quarter 2007 discontinuation and reinstatement of mandatory personal injury protection in the state of Florida. Premiums earned by brand are shown in the following table. Allstate brand Encompass brand Allstate Protection ($ in millions) 2008 2007 2006 2008 2007 2006 2008 2007 2006 Standard auto $ 15,957 $ 15,952 $ 15,591 $ 1,091 $ 1,127 $ 1,160 $ 17,048 $ 17,079 $ 16,751 Non-standard auto 1,055 1,232 1,436 45 76 98 1,100 1,308 1,534 Homeowners 5,758 5,732 5,793 503 551 590 6,261 6,283 6,383 Other personal lines 2,434 2,426 2,546 124 136 152 2,558 2,562 2,698 Total $ 25,204 $ 25,342 $ 25,366 $ 1,763 $ 1,890 $ 2,000 $ 26,967 $ 27,232 $ 27,366 Premium operating measures and statistics that are used to analyze the business are calculated and described below. Measures and statistics presented for Allstate brand exclude Allstate Canada, loan protection and specialty auto. PIF: Policy counts are based on items rather than customers. A multi-car customer would generate multiple item (policy) counts, even if all cars were insured under one policy. Average premium-gross written: Gross premiums written divided by issued item count. Gross premiums written do not include the impacts from mid-term premium adjustments, ceded reinsurance premiums, or premium refund accruals. Allstate brand average gross premiums represent the appropriate policy term for each line, which is 6 months for standard and non-standard auto and 12 months for homeowners. Encompass brand average gross premiums represent the appropriate policy term for each line, which is 12 months for standard auto and homeowners and 6 months for non-standard auto. 47 Renewal ratio: Renewal policies issued during the period, based on contract effective dates, divided by the total policies issued 6 months prior for standard and non-standard auto (12 months prior for Encompass brand standard auto) or 12 months prior for homeowners. New issued applications: Item counts of automobiles or homeowners insurance applications for insurance policies that were issued during the period. Does not include automobiles that are added by existing customers. Standard auto premiums written totaled $16.94 billion in 2008, a decrease of 1.3% from $17.16 billion in 2007, following a 1.9% increase in 2007 from $16.84 billion in 2006. Allstate brand Encompass brand (2) Standard Auto 2008 2007 2006 2008 2007 2006 PIF (thousands) 17,924 18,256 18,084 1,090 1,103 1,124 Average premium-gross written (1) $ 427 $ 422 $ 420 $ 961 $ 969 $ 983 Renewal ratio (%) (1) 88.9 89.5 90.0 73.9 75.0 76.4 (1) Policy term is six months for Allstate brand and twelve months for Encompass brand. (2) Premium operating measures and statistics exclude the discontinuation of a large national broker arrangement. Allstate brand standard auto premiums written totaled $15.92 billion in 2008, a decrease of 0.7% from $16.04 billion in 2007, following a 2.1% increase in 2007 from $15.70 billion in 2006. Contributing to the Allstate brand standard auto premiums written decrease in 2008 compared to 2007 were the following: decrease in PIF as of December 31, 2008 compared to December 31, 2007 due to a lower renewal ratio and lower new business production 7.5% decrease in new issued applications on a countrywide basis to 1,807 thousand in 2008 from 1,954 thousand in 2007 increase in average gross premium in 2008 compared to 2007, primarily due to rate changes, partially offset by deductible changes decline in the renewal ratio in 2008 compared to 2007 Our Allstate brand standard auto growth strategy includes actions such as the continued rollout of YCA policy options, enhanced marketing, the continued refinement of our pricing sophistication, and distribution effectiveness, while recognizing that the impact of catastrophe management actions on cross-sell opportunities and competitive pressures in certain markets may lessen their success. Allstate brand standard auto premiums written increased in 2007 compared to 2006. Contributing to the Allstate brand standard auto premiums written increase in 2007 compared to 2006 were the following: increase in PIF as of December 31, 2007 compared to December 31, 2006 primarily due to the result of growth in policies available for renewal 1.5% decrease in new issued applications on a countrywide basis to 1,954 thousand in 2007 from 1,983 thousand in 2006 increase in average gross premium in 2007 compared to 2006; Standard auto average gross premium was impacted by rate changes, geographic and product shifts in the mix of business and changes in customer preferences decline in the renewal ratio in 2007 compared to 2006 due to competitive conditions and the impact of our property catastrophe management actions on cross-sell opportunities Encompass brand standard auto premiums written totaled $1.03 billion in 2008, a decrease of 8.9% from $1.13 billion in 2007, following a 1.1% decrease in 2007 from $1.14 billion in 2006. Contributing to the Encompass brand standard auto premiums written decrease in 2008 compared to 2007 were the following: the discontinuation of a large national broker arrangement; Encompass brand standard auto premiums written excluding the terminated national broker's business decreased 3.3% to $1.01 billion in 2008 from $1.04 billion in 2007 decrease in PIF as of December 31, 2008 compared to December 31, 2007 driven by less policies available to renew and lower retention 48 decrease in average gross premium in 2008 compared to 2007 due to a shift in the mix of business toward policies with basic coverages and fewer features, partially offset by rate changes Decreases are expected in Encompass brand standard auto PIF as profit improvement actions are implemented. Some of these actions are improving business quality by changing risk management policy, terminating relationships with certain agents and rate changes. Encompass brand strategy includes targeting high quality business including the package market and the continued rollout of Encompass Edge, which provides more segmented pricing of auto and homeowners coverage. Encompass brand standard auto premiums written decreased in 2007 compared to 2006. Contributing to the Encompass brand standard auto premiums written decrease in 2007 compared to 2006 were the following: decrease in PIF as of December 31, 2007 compared to December 31, 2006 due to a decline in the policies available to renew more than offsetting new business production decrease in average gross premium in 2007 compared to 2006 due to a change in the mix of business to policies with basic coverages and fewer features Rate increases that are indicated based on loss trend analysis to achieve a targeted return will continue to be pursued. The following table shows the net rate changes that were approved for standard auto during 2008 and 2007. These rate changes do not reflect initial rates filed for insurance subsidiaries initially writing business in a state. # of States Countrywide(%) (1) State Specific(%) (2)(3) 2008 2007 (4) 2008 (5) 2007 (4) 2008 (5) 2007 (4) Allstate brand 32 25 1.3 1.3 2.1 4.4 Encompass brand 33 12 2.5 0.4 4.8 1.2 (1) Represents the impact in the states where rate changes were approved during 2008 and 2007, respectively, as a percentage of total countrywide prior year-end premiums written. (2) Represents the impact in the states where rate changes were approved during 2008 and 2007, respectively, as a percentage of total prior year-end premiums written in those states. (3) Based on historical premiums written in those states, rate changes approved for standard auto totaled $223 million in 2008 compared to $208 million in 2007. (4) Excludes the impact of rate changes in the state of Florida relating to the discontinuation and eventual reinstatement of mandatory personal injury protection. (5) Excluding the impact of a 15.9% rate reduction in California related to an order effective in April 2008, the Allstate brand standard auto rate change is 6.0% on a state specific basis and 3.0% on a countrywide basis in 2008. Non-standard auto premiums written totaled $1.06 billion in 2008, a decrease of 15.2% from $1.25 billion in 2007, following a 15.7% decrease in 2007 from $1.48 billion in 2006. Allstate brand Encompass brand Non-Standard Auto 2008 2007 2006 2008 2007 2006 PIF (thousands) 745 829 943 39 56 85 Average premium-gross written $ 624 $ 616 $ 617 $ 479 $ 526 $ 535 Renewal ratio (%) 73.7 76.1 75.9 68.3 65.0 67.3 Allstate brand non-standard auto premiums written totaled $1.02 billion in 2008, a decrease of 13.7% from $1.18 billion in 2007, following a 14.9% decrease in 2007 from $1.39 billion in 2006. Contributing to the Allstate brand non-standard auto premiums written decrease in 2008 compared to 2007 were the following: decrease in PIF as of December 31, 2008 compared to December 31, 2007 due to new business production that was insufficient to offset declines in the renewal ratio and polices available to renew 10.1% increase in new issued applications to 328 thousand in 2008 from 298 thousand in 2007 due to the continued rollout and momentum of our Allstate Blue SM product increase in average gross premium in 2008 compared to 2007 due to changes in the mix of customer segments resulting from the implementation of Allstate Blue decrease in the renewal ratio in 2008 compared to 2007 49 Allstate brand non-standard auto premiums written decreased in 2007 compared to 2006. Contributing to the Allstate brand non-standard auto premiums written decrease in 2007 compared to 2006 were the following: decrease in PIF as of December 31, 2007 compared to December 31, 2006 due to new business production insufficient to offset the decline in polices available to renew 9.6% increase in new issued applications in 2007 compared to 2006 primarily due to the introduction of our Allstate Blue product comparable auto average gross premium in 2007 to 2006 Encompass brand non-standard auto premiums written totaled $40 million in 2008, a decrease of 41.2% from $68 million in 2007, following a 27.7% decrease in 2007 from $94 million in 2006. Contributing to the Encompass brand non-standard auto premiums written decrease in 2008 compared to 2007 were the following: decline in policies available to renew discontinued writing of new business in all states except for Pennsylvania decrease in average gross premium in 2008 compared to 2007 due to geographic shifts in the mix of business. Encompass brand non-standard auto premiums written decreased in 2007 compared to 2006. Contributing to the Encompass brand non-standard auto premiums written decrease in 2007 compared to 2006 were the following: declines in PIF due to new business that was insufficient to offset the decline in polices available to renew decrease in average gross premium due to geographic shifts in the mix of business, partially offset by rate changes in specific markets Rate increases that are indicated based on loss trend analysis to achieve a targeted return will continue to be pursued. The following table shows the net rate changes that were approved for non-standard auto during 2008 and 2007. These rate changes do not reflect initial rates filed for insurance subsidiaries initially writing business in a state. # of States Countrywide(%) (1) State Specific(%) (2)(3) 2008 (4) 2007 (5) 2008 2007 (5) 2008 2007 (5) Allstate brand 11 9 1.0 4.7 Encompass brand 4 7 4.8 8.1 23.2 14.6 (1) Represents the impact in the states where rate changes were approved during 2008 and 2007, respectively, as a percentage of total countrywide prior year-end premiums written. (2) Represents the impact in the states where rate changes were approved during 2008 and 2007, respectively, as a percentage of total prior year-end premiums written in those states. (3) Based on historical premiums written in those states, rate changes approved for non-standard auto totaled $3 million in 2008 compared to $20 million in 2007. (4) Includes Washington D.C. (5) Excludes the impact of rate changes in the state of Florida relating to the discontinuation and eventual reinstatement of mandatory personal injury protection. Homeowners premiums written totaled $6.11 billion in 2008, a decrease of 2.2% from $6.25 billion in 2007, following a 4.1% decrease in 2007 from $6.52 billion in 2006. Excluding the cost of catastrophe reinsurance, premiums written declined 3.4% in 2008 compared to 2007. For a more detailed discussion on reinsurance, see the Property-Liability Claims and Claims Expense Reserves section of the MD&A and Note 9 of the consolidated financial statements. Allstate brand Encompass brand (1) Homeowners 2008 2007 2006 2008 2007 2006 PIF (thousands) 7,255 7,570 7,836 446 484 527 Average premium-gross written (12 months) $ 861 $ 850 $ 832 $ 1,206 $ 1,181 $ 1,136 Renewal ratio (%) 87.0 86.5 87.3 80.6 80.0 84.0 (1) Premium operating measures and statistics exclude the discontinuation of a large national broker arrangement. 50 Allstate brand homeowners premiums written totaled $5.64 billion in 2008, a decrease of 1.3% from $5.71 billion in 2007, following a 3.6% decrease in 2007 from $5.93 billion in 2006. Contributing to the Allstate brand homeowners premiums written decrease in 2008 compared to 2007 were the following: decrease in PIF due to lower new issued applications and policies available to renew 26.0% decrease in new issued applications to 594 thousand in 2008 from 803 thousand in 2007 increase in average gross premium in 2008 compared to 2007, primarily due to higher average renewal premiums related to increases in insured value and approved rate changes, including those taken for our net cost of reinsurance, partially offset by a shift in geographic mix as our catastrophe management actions reduce premiums written in areas with generally higher average gross premiums and state insurance department initiated rate decreases in California and Texas increase in the renewal ratio in 2008 compared to 2007 decrease in the net cost of our catastrophe reinsurance program Actions taken to manage our catastrophe exposure in areas with known exposure to hurricanes, earthquakes, wildfires, fires following earthquakes and other catastrophes have had an impact on our new business writings for homeowners insurance, as demonstrated by the decline in Allstate brand homeowners new issued applications. Allstate brand homeowners premiums written decreased in 2007 compared to 2006. Contributing to the Allstate brand homeowners premiums written decrease in 2007 compared to 2006 were the following: increases in ceded reinsurance premiums decrease in PIF due to lower new issued applications and renewal ratio 18.6% decrease in new issued applications to 803 thousand in 2007 from 987 thousand in 2006 increase in average gross premium in 2007 compared to 2006, primarily due to higher average renewal premiums related to increases in insured value and approved rate changes, including our net cost of reinsurance, partially offset by a shift in geographic mix as our catastrophe management actions reduce premiums written in areas with generally higher average premiums Our strategy to reduce risk in catastrophe prone areas will continue to impact new issued applications and the renewal ratio in 2009, although to a lesser degree than in 2008 and 2007. Examples of the impact of this strategy include our decision to cease writing new homeowners applications in California, to cease offering renewals on certain homeowners insurance policies in certain down-state locations in New York and to reduce PIF in coastal management areas (southern and eastern states) thereby lowering hurricane exposures. This includes Texas and Louisiana where the combination of reduced PIF and ceded wind coverage in the coastal regions reduced our loss exposures to wind by 43.5% and 34.9%, respectively, below 2006 levels. Encompass brand homeowners premiums written totaled $471 million in 2008, a decrease of 12.5% from $538 million in 2007, following a 8.7% decrease in 2007 from $589 million in 2006. Contributing to the Encompass brand homeowners premiums written decrease in 2008 compared to 2007 were the following: decrease in PIF as of December 31, 2008 compared to December 31, 2007, primarily due to our catastrophe management actions in certain markets the discontinuation of a large national broker arrangement; Encompass brand homeowners premiums written excluding the terminated national broker's business decreased 8.3% to $464 million in 2008 from $506 million in 2007 increase in average gross premium in 2008 compared to 2007 due to rate actions including those taken for our net cost of reinsurance Encompass brand homeowners premiums written decreased in 2007 compared to 2006. Contributing to the Encompass brand homeowners premiums written decrease in 2007 compared to 2006 were the following: increases in ceded reinsurance premiums decrease in PIF as of December 31, 2007 compared to December 31, 2006 partially due to a decline in the renewal ratio in 2007 compared to 2006, primarily due to our catastrophe management actions in certain markets increase in average gross premium in 2007 compared to 2006 due to rate actions taken in the current year, including those taken for our net cost of reinsurance, and increases in insured value 51 Rate increases that are indicated based on loss trend analysis to achieve a targeted return will continue to be pursued. The following table shows the net rate changes that were approved for homeowners during 2008 and 2007, including rate changes approved based on our net cost of reinsurance. For a discussion relating to reinsurance costs, see the Property-Liability Claims and Claims Expense Reserves section of the MD&A and Note 7 of the consolidated financial statements. # of States Countrywide(%) (1) State Specific(%) (2)(3) 2008 2007 2008 2007 2008 2007 Allstate brand (4)(5) 35 33 (0.9 ) 3.6 (1.3 ) 5.8 Encompass brand (4) 26 26 4.2 2.3 7.0 4.3 (1) Represents the impact in the states where rate changes were approved during 2008 and 2007, respectively, as a percentage of total countrywide prior year-end premiums written. (2) Represents the impact in the states where rate changes were approved during 2008 and 2007, respectively, as a percentage of total prior year-end premiums written in those states. (3) Based on historical premiums written in those states, rate changes approved for homeowners totaled $(32) million in 2008 compared to $244 million in 2007. (4) Includes Washington D.C. (5) Excluding the impact of a 3.0% rate reduction in Texas and a 28.5% rate reduction in California related to resolutions reached in 2008, the Allstate brand homeowners rate change is 5.8% on a state specific basis and 3.2% on a countrywide basis in 2008. Underwriting results are shown in the following table. ($ in millions) 2008 2007 2006 Premiums written $ 26,584 $ 27,183 $ 27,525 Premiums earned $ 26,967 $ 27,232 $ 27,366 Claims and claims expense (20,046 ) (17,620 ) (15,885 ) Amortization of DAC (3,975 ) (4,121 ) (4,131 ) Other costs and expenses (2,735 ) (2,626 ) (2,557 ) Restructuring and related charges (22 ) (27 ) (157 ) Underwriting income $ 189 $ 2,838 $ 4,636 Catastrophe losses $ 3,342 $ 1,409 $ 810 Underwriting income by line of business Standard auto (1) $ 1,247 $ 1,665 $ 2,320 Non-standard auto 136 264 309 Homeowners (1,175 ) 571 1,472 Other personal lines (1) (19 ) 338 535 Underwriting income $ 189 $ 2,838 $ 4,636 Underwriting income by brand Allstate brand $ 220 $ 2,634 $ 4,451 Encompass brand (31 ) 204 185 Underwriting income $ 189 $ 2,838 $ 4,636 (1) During 2008, $45 million of IBNR losses were reclassified from standard auto to other personal lines to be consistent with the recording of excess liability policies' premiums and losses. Allstate Protection experienced underwriting income of $189 million during 2008 compared to $2.84 billion 2007. The decrease was primarily due to increased catastrophe losses, increases in auto severities, increases in homeowners loss frequencies and unfavorable prior year reserve reestimates in the current year compared to favorable prior year reserve reestimates in 2007, partially offset by favorable auto loss frequencies and higher standard auto average premium. Current year claim severity expectations continue to be consistent with relevant indices. For further discussion and quantification of the impact of reserve estimates and assumptions, see the Application of Critical Accounting Estimates and Property-Liability Claims and Claims Expense Reserves sections of the MD&A. 52 Allstate Protection generated underwriting income of $2.84 billion during 2007 compared to $4.64 billion in 2006. The decrease was primarily due to lower favorable prior year reserve reestimates, higher catastrophe losses, increases in auto and homeowners claim frequency excluding catastrophes, higher current year claim severity and increases in the cost of catastrophe reinsurance. Catastrophe losses in 2008 were $3.34 billion and include estimates of losses for Hurricanes Ike and Gustav among other events. This compares to catastrophe losses in 2007 of $1.41 billion. Hurricane Ike is expected to be among the top three costliest U.S. hurricanes along with Hurricane Katrina of 2005 and Hurricane Andrew of 1992. Losses from Hurricane Ike were incurred in multiple states. Hurricane Ike losses in Texas were estimated to be $666 million, net of reinsurance, and losses in all other states, which primarily included losses in Ohio and Kentucky, were estimated to be $300 million. Hurricane Gustav is also expected to be among the top 10 costliest U.S. hurricanes. Catastrophe loss estimates include losses for approximately 173 thousand and 81 thousand claims for Hurricanes Ike and Gustav, respectively, on our auto, homeowners, commercial and other insurance products. These estimated claim counts include 129 thousand and 66 thousand for Hurricanes Ike and Gustav, respectively, that have been reported as of January 16, 2009. Catastrophe losses in 2008 also include assessments totaling $75 million from the Texas Windstorm Insurance Association ("TWIA") for our estimated share of losses for Hurricanes Dolly and Ike. We expect to recover $35 million of the assessment relating to Hurricane Ike through premium tax credits over the next five years, with the remaining $31 million from Ike eligible for cession under our reinsurance program. We define a "catastrophe" as an event that produces pre-tax losses before reinsurance in excess of $1 million and involves multiple first party policyholders, or an event that produces a number of claims in excess of a preset, per-event threshold of average claims in a specific area, occurring within a certain amount of time following the event. Catastrophes are caused by various natural events including high winds, winter storms, tornadoes, hailstorms, wildfires, tropical storms, hurricanes, earthquakes, and volcanoes. We are also exposed to man-made catastrophic events, such as certain acts of terrorism or industrial accidents. The nature and level of catastrophes in any period cannot be predicted. The following table presents our 2008 catastrophe losses related to events that occurred by the size of the event. 2008 ($ in millions) Number of events Claims and claims expense Combined ratio impact Average catastrophe loss per event Size of catastrophe Greater than $250 million: Hurricane Ike (net of recoveries) 1 0.8 % $ 966 28.9 % 3.6 $ 966 Hurricane Gustav 1 0.8 342 10.2 1.3 342 $100 million to $250 million 2 1.6 278 8.4 1.0 139 $50 million to $100 million 7 5.7 444 13.3 1.6 63 Less than $50 million 112 91.1 1,187 35.5 4.4 11 Total 123 100.0 % 3,217 96.3 11.9 26 Prior year reserve reestimates 125 3.7 0.5 Total catastrophe losses $ 3,342 100.0 % 12.4 In the years 1995 through 2008, we incurred catastrophe losses of $21.63 billion related to 912 events. Of these total losses, 41.9% related to 11 events with losses greater than $250 million per event, 8.4% related to 12 events with losses between $100 million and $250 million per event, 11.1% related to 35 events with losses between $50 million and $100 million per event, and 38.6% related to 854 events with losses less than $50 million per event. Catastrophe losses in the period 2003 through 2008 amounted to $15.19 billion or 70.2% of the total losses. Catastrophe losses greater than $50 million in the period 2003 through 2008 amounted to 37 events and $11.25 billion or 52.0% of the total losses. There were no catastrophe losses greater than $100 million incurred in 2006. 53 The following table presents our catastrophe losses incurred by the type of event. ($ in millions) 2008 Number of events 2007 Number of events 2006 Number of events Hurricanes/Tropical storms $ 1,381 5 $ 9 3 $ 36 3 Tornadoes 628 19 258 16 271 9 Wind/Hail 960 81 542 60 702 57 Other events 248 18 473 12 24 5 Prior year reserve reestimates 125 127 (223 ) Total catastrophe losses $ 3,342 123 $ 1,409 91 $ 810 74 Combined ratio Loss ratios are a measure of profitability. Loss ratios by product, and expense and combined ratios by brand, are shown in the following table. These ratios are defined on page 43. Effect of catastrophe losses on the loss ratio Effect of pre-tax reserves reestimates on the combined ratio 2008 2007 2006 2008 2007 2006 2008 2007 2006 Allstate brand loss ratio: Standard auto 68.1 65.8 61.5 1.5 0.6 0.6 0.1 (1.1 ) (3.7 ) Non-standard auto 62.3 54.9 56.1 0.9 0.2 (0.1 ) (7.1 ) (5.5 ) Homeowners 96.3 66.5 50.4 46.5 19.5 10.9 2.1 2.2 (4.8 ) Other personal lines 69.3 60.4 52.1 10.6 5.0 (0.9 ) 0.6 (0.9 ) (5.7 ) Total Allstate brand loss ratio 74.4 64.9 57.8 12.6 5.3 2.8 0.6 (0.7 ) (4.3 ) Allstate brand expense ratio 24.7 24.7 24.7 Allstate brand combined ratio 99.1 89.6 82.5 Encompass brand loss ratio: Standard auto (1) 66.3 64.2 60.0 0.9 0.4 (0.3 ) (4.2 ) (3.4 ) (6.0 ) Non-standard auto 88.9 75.0 76.5 1.0 (6.6 ) (6.1 ) Homeowners 76.4 54.6 58.6 27.8 12.0 17.3 0.4 (1.6 ) 5.8 Other personal lines (1) 112.9 61.8 81.6 8.9 2.2 7.9 33.1 15.8 Total Encompass brand loss ratio 73.0 61.6 62.1 9.1 3.9 5.6 (0.2 ) (2.8 ) (0.9 ) Encompass brand expense ratio 28.8 27.6 28.7 Encompass brand combined ratio 101.8 89.2 90.8 Allstate Protection loss ratio 74.3 64.7 58.1 12.4 5.2 3.0 0.6 (0.8 ) (4.0 ) Allstate Protection expense ratio 25.0 24.9 25.0 Allstate Protection combined ratio 99.3 89.6 83.1 (1) During 2008, $45 million of IBNR losses were reclassified from standard auto to other personal lines to be consistent with the recording of excess liability policies' premiums and losses. Standard auto loss ratio for the Allstate brand increased 2.3 points in 2008 compared to 2007 due to increased catastrophe losses, unfavorable reserve reestimates in the current year compared to favorable reserve reestimates in the prior year and higher claim severities, partially offset by lower claim frequencies. Excluding catastrophes, the underlying inflationary increase in severity was in part offset by declines in frequency, reflecting a continuation of a long-term decline in frequency and a decrease in miles driven. Standard auto loss ratio for the Encompass brand increased 2.1 points in 2008 compared to 2007 primarily driven by higher claim severities and increased catastrophe losses. Standard auto loss ratio for the Allstate brand increased 4.3 points in 2007 compared to 2006 due to lower favorable reserve reestimates related to prior years, and higher claim frequency and claim severity excluding catastrophes, partially offset by higher premiums earned. Standard auto loss ratio for the Encompass brand increased 4.2 points in 2007 compared to 2006 due to lower favorable reserve reestimates related to prior years. 54 Non-standard auto loss ratio for the Allstate brand increased 7.4 points in 2008 compared to 2007 due to lower favorable reserve reestimates related to prior years, increased catastrophe losses and higher claim severities, partially offset by lower claim frequencies. Non-standard auto loss ratio for the Encompass brand increased 13.9 points in 2008 compared to 2007. Non-standard auto loss ratio for the Allstate brand decreased 1.2 points in 2007 compared to 2006 due to favorable reserve reestimates related to prior years. Non-standard auto loss ratio for the Encompass brand decreased 1.5 points in 2007 compared to 2006 primarily driven by lower claim frequency. Homeowners loss ratio for the Allstate brand increased 29.8 points to 96.3 in 2008 from 66.5 in 2007 due to higher catastrophe losses. Homeowners loss ratio for the Encompass brand increased 21.8 points to 76.4 in 2008 from 54.6 in 2007 due to higher catastrophe losses. Homeowners loss ratio for the Allstate brand increased 16.1 points in 2007 compared to 2006 due to higher catastrophe losses, the absence of favorable non-catastrophe reserve reestimates related to prior years, higher claim severity, higher ceded earned premium for catastrophe reinsurance, and higher claim frequency excluding catastrophes. Homeowners loss ratio for the Encompass brand decreased 4.0 points in 2007 compared to 2006 primarily due to lower catastrophe losses. Expense ratio for Allstate Protection increased 0.1 points in 2008 compared to 2007 primarily due to lower earned premiums, increases in the net cost of benefits due to unfavorable investment results, and charges for the write-off of capitalized computer software. Expense ratio for Allstate Protection decreased 0.1 points in 2007 compared to 2006 primarily due to lower restructuring charges offset by increased spending on advertising and investments in marketing and technology for product and service innovations. The expense ratio for Encompass brand increased 1.2 points in 2008 compared to 2007 primarily due to lower earned premiums as well as increased state fund assessments and cost associated with the discontinuation of a large national broker arrangement. The impact of specific costs and expenses on the expense ratio are included in the following table. Allstate brand Encompass brand Allstate Protection 2008 2007 2006 2008 2007 2006 2008 2007 2006 Amortization of DAC 14.4 14.8 14.7 19.9 20.1 19.7 14.7 15.1 15.1 Other costs and expenses 10.2 9.8 9.4 8.9 7.5 8.7 10.2 9.7 9.3 Restructuring and related charges 0.1 0.1 0.6 0.3 0.1 0.1 0.6 Total expense ratio 24.7 24.7 24.7 28.8 27.6 28.7 25.0 24.9 25.0 The expense ratio for the standard auto and homeowners businesses generally approximates the total Allstate Protection expense ratio. The expense ratio for the non-standard auto business generally is lower than the total Allstate Protection expense ratio due to lower agent commission rates and higher average premiums for non-standard auto as compared to standard auto. The Encompass brand DAC amortization is higher on average than Allstate brand DAC amortization due to higher commission rates. DAC We establish a DAC asset for costs that vary with and are primarily related to acquiring business, principally agents' remuneration, premium taxes, certain underwriting costs and direct mail solicitation expenses. For the Allstate Protection business, DAC is amortized to income over the period in which premiums are earned. The balance of DAC for each product type at December 31, is included in the following table. Allstate brand Encompass brand Allstate Protection ($ in millions) 2008 2007 2008 2007 2008 2007 Standard auto $ 544 $ 579 $ 87 $ 110 $ 631 $ 689 Non-standard auto 36 42 1 2 37 44 Homeowners 420 454 49 60 469 514 Other personal lines 307 218 9 12 316 230 Total DAC $ 1,307 $ 1,293 $ 146 $ 184 $ 1,453 $ 1,477 Catastrophe Management Historical Catastrophe Experience Since the beginning of 1992, the average annual impact of catastrophes on our Property-Liability loss ratio was 7.5 points. However, this average does not reflect the impact of some of the more significant actions we have taken to limit our catastrophe exposure. Consequently, we think it is useful 55 to consider the impact of catastrophes after excluding losses that are now partially or substantially covered by the California Earthquake Authority ("CEA"), Florida Hurricane Catastrophe Fund ("FHCF") or placed with a third party, such as hurricane coverage in Hawaii. The average annual impact of all catastrophes, excluding losses from Hurricanes Andrew and Iniki and losses from California earthquakes, on our Property-Liability loss ratio was 6.2 points since the beginning of 1992. Comparatively, the average annual impact of catastrophes on the homeowners loss ratio for the years 1992 through 2008 is shown in the following table. Average annual impact of catastrophes on the homeowners loss ratio Average annual impact of catastrophes on the homeowners loss ratio excluding losses from hurricanes Andrew and Iniki, and losses from California earthquakes Florida 100.8 48.1 Other hurricane exposure states 27.9 27.7 Total hurricane exposure states 34.5 29.6 All other 23.1 17.5 Total 29.2 24.0 Over time, we have limited our aggregate insurance exposure to catastrophe losses in certain regions of the country that are subject to high levels of natural catastrophes. Limitations include our participation in various state facilities, such as the CEA, which provides insurance for California earthquake losses; the FHCF, which provides reimbursements on certain qualifying Florida hurricane losses; and other state facilities, such as wind pools. However, the impact of these actions may be diminished by the growth in insured values, the effect of state insurance laws and regulations. In addition, in various states we are required to participate in assigned risk plans, reinsurance facilities and joint underwriting associations that provide insurance coverage to individuals or entities that otherwise are unable to purchase such coverage from private insurers. Because of our participation in these and other state facilities such as wind pools, we may be exposed to losses that surpass the capitalization of these facilities and/or to assessments from these facilities. In 2006 and 2007, both PIF and the renewal ratio were suppressed by our catastrophe management actions such as our decision to discontinue offering coverage by Allstate Floridian Insurance Company and its subsidiaries ("Allstate Floridian") on approximately 226,000 property policies as part of renewal rights and reinsurance arrangements with Royal Palm Insurance Company ("Royal Palm") entered into in 2006 and 2007 ("Royal Palm 1 and 2"). Approximately 81% of the policies involved in Royal Palm 1 and 2 expired in 2007 and therefore negatively influenced the PIF and renewal ratio. We continue to take actions to maintain an appropriate level of exposure to catastrophic events, including the following: We have reduced property PIF in coastal management areas thereby lowering hurricane exposures. This includes Texas and Louisiana where the combination of reduced property PIF and ceded wind coverage in the coastal regions reduced our loss exposures to wind by 43.5% and 34.9%, respectively, below 2006 levels. We have increased our utilization of wind storm pools, including in Texas where we are ceding all wind exposure related to insured property located in all wind pool eligible areas along the coast including the Galveston Islands. We have ceased writing new homeowners business in California. We will continue to renew current policyholders and have a renewal ratio of approximately 90% in California. Encompass Floridian Insurance and Encompass Floridian Indemnity Company filed a formal notification with the Florida Office of Insurance Regulation to discontinue providing property insurance in the State of Florida. We ceased offering renewals on certain homeowners insurance policies in New York in certain down-state geographical locations. The level of non-renewals in New York is governed by state statute. 56 Hurricanes We consider the greatest areas of potential catastrophe losses due to hurricanes to generally be major metropolitan centers in counties along the eastern and gulf coasts of the United States. Generally, the average premium on a property policy near these coasts is greater than other areas. However, average premiums are not considered commensurate with the inherent risk of loss. We have addressed our risk of hurricane loss by, among other actions, purchasing reinsurance for specific states and on a countrywide basis for our personal lines property insurance in areas most exposed to hurricanes (for further information on our reinsurance program see the Property-Liability Claims and Claims Expense Reserves section of the MD&A); limiting personal homeowners new business writings in coastal areas in southern and eastern states; not offering continuing coverage on certain policies in coastal counties in certain states; and entering into Royal Palm 1 and 2. Our actions are expected to continue during 2009 in northeastern and certain other hurricane prone states. Earthquakes During 2006, we began taking actions countrywide to significantly reduce our exposure to the risk of earthquake losses. These actions included purchasing reinsurance on a countrywide basis and in the state of Kentucky; no longer offering new optional earthquake coverage in most states; removing optional earthquake coverage upon renewal in most states; and entering into arrangements in many states to make earthquake coverage available through other insurers for new and renewal business. Actions taken to reduce our exposure from optional earthquake coverage are substantially complete. We expect to retain approximately 40,000 PIF due to regulatory and other reasons. We also will continue to have exposure to earthquake risk on certain policies and coverages that do not specifically exclude coverage for earthquake losses, including our auto policies, and to fires following earthquakes. Allstate policyholders in the state of California are offered coverage through the CEA, a privately-financed, publicly-managed state agency created to provide insurance coverage for earthquake damage. Allstate is subject to assessments from the CEA under certain circumstances as explained in Note 13 of the consolidated financial statements. Fires Following Earthquakes Actions taken related to our risk of loss from fires following earthquakes include changing homeowners underwriting requirements in California and purchasing additional reinsurance on a countrywide basis excluding Florida and on a statewide basis in California and Kentucky. Wildfires Actions we are taking to reduce our risk of loss from wildfires include changing homeowners underwriting requirements in certain states and including California wildfire losses in our 2008 aggregate excess reinsurance agreement. Catastrophe losses related to the Southern California wildfires that occurred during 2008 and 2007 totaled $166 million and $350 million, respectively. Reinsurance We expect to renew expiring coverages including the coverage expiring on programs placed for 2 years (Aggregate excess), 3 years (various state specific) and 1 year (South-East and Florida). We anticipate purchasing coverage that has similar retentions and limits as our expiring program with either retentions and limits or premiums being subject to re-measurement for exposure differences from estimates initially provided to reinsurers. Our program will be in place by June 1, 2009. We expect to bind coverage in March 2009, except for certain coverage in Florida which we expect to bind by June 1, 2009. We anticipate reporting the details at that time. We estimate that the total annualized cost of our catastrophe reinsurance program for the year beginning June 1, 2009, including the new Pennsylvania (up to $100 million limit, $100 million retention) and Texas/Louisiana (up to $150 million limit, $500 million retention) agreements, to be within 10% of our expiring annualized reinsurance contract premiums of $613 million. We continue to attempt to capture our reinsurance cost in premium rates as allowed by state regulatory authorities. 57 Allstate Protection Outlook Allstate Protection premiums written in 2009 are anticipated to be lower than 2008 levels due to continued emphasis on preserving auto insurance margins by providing customer-focused products and services. Short-term growth will be limited reflecting a transition to a value-based strategy in the competitive environment as consumers buy fewer autos and choose lower product coverages, and reductions of catastrophe exposure. We expect that volatility in the level of catastrophes we experience will contribute to variation in our underwriting results; however, this volatility will be somewhat mitigated due to our catastrophe management actions, including purchases of reinsurance. We plan to continue to study the efficiencies of our operations and cost structure for additional areas where costs may be reduced. DISCONTINUED LINES AND COVERAGES SEGMENT Overview The Discontinued Lines and Coverages segment includes results from insurance coverage that we no longer write and results for certain commercial and other businesses in run-off. Our exposure to asbestos, environmental and other discontinued lines claims is reported in this segment. We have assigned management of this segment to a designated group of professionals with expertise in claims handling, policy coverage interpretation, exposure identification and reinsurance collection. As part of its responsibilities, this group is also regularly engaged in policy buybacks, settlements and reinsurance assumed and ceded commutations. Summarized underwriting results for the years ended December 31, are presented in the following table. ($ in millions) 2008 2007 2006 Premiums written $ $ $ 1 Premiums earned $ $ 1 $ 3 Claims and claims expense (18 ) (47 ) (132 ) Operating costs and expenses (7 ) (8 ) (10 ) Underwriting loss $ (25 ) $ (54 ) $ (139 ) Underwriting losses of $25 million in 2008 primarily related to an $8 million unfavorable reestimate of asbestos reserves and a $13 million unfavorable reestimate of other reserves as a result of the annual third quarter 2008 grounds up reserve review, partially offset by a $16 million reduction of our bad debt allowance for future uncollectible reinsurance recoverables. The cost of administering claims settlements totaled $13 million, $14 million and $19 million for the years ended December 31, 2008, 2007 and 2006, respectively. Underwriting loss of $54 million in 2007 primarily related to a $63 million reestimate of environmental reserves and a $6 million reestimate of asbestos reserves as a result of the annual third quarter 2007 grounds up reserve review, partially offset by a $46 million reduction in the reinsurance recoverable valuation allowance related to Equitas Limited's improved financial position as a result of its reinsurance coverage with National Indemnity Company. Underwriting loss of $139 million in 2006 primarily related to an $86 million reestimate of asbestos reserves, a $10 million reestimate of environmental reserves and a $26 million increase in the allowance for future uncollectible reinsurance recoverables. See the Property-Liability Claims and Claims Expense Reserves section of the MD&A for a more detailed discussion. Discontinued Lines and Coverages Outlook We may continue to experience asbestos and/or environmental losses in the future. These losses could be due to the potential adverse impact of new information relating to new and additional claims or the impact of resolving unsettled claims based on unanticipated events such as litigation or legislative, judicial and regulatory actions. Environmental losses may also increase as the result of additional funding for environmental site cleanup from the new administration. Because of our annual "grounds up" review, we believe that our reserves are appropriately established based on available information, technology, laws and regulations. 58 We continue to be encouraged that the pace of industry asbestos claim activity has slowed, perhaps reflecting various state legislative and judicial actions with respect to medical criteria and increased legal scrutiny of the legitimacy of claims. PROPERTY-LIABILITY INVESTMENT RESULTS Net investment income decreased 15.1% in 2008 when compared to 2007, after increasing 6.4% in 2007 when compared to 2006. The 2008 decrease was due to decreased partnership income and lower average asset balances reflecting dividends paid by Allstate Insurance Company ("AIC") to its parent, The Allstate Corporation (the "Corporation") and capital contributions to Allstate Life Insurance Company ("ALIC") and reduced portfolio yields. The 2007 increase was principally due to increased partnership income and increased portfolio yields. Property-Liability net investment income in 2009 is anticipated to be lower than 2008 levels due to lower average asset balances and reduced portfolio yields. The following table presents the average pre-tax investment yields for the year ended December 31. 2008 (1)(2) 2007 (1)(2) 2006 (1)(2) Fixed income securities: tax-exempt 5.1 % 5.1 % 5.1 % Fixed income securities: tax-exempt equivalent 7.4 7.4 7.4 Fixed income securities: taxable 5.6 5.5 5.3 Equity securities 3.0 2.7 2.7 Mortgage loans 6.1 5.6 5.2 Limited partnership interests (3) 2.3 16.0 17.2 Total portfolio 4.8 5.4 5.2 (1) Pre-tax yield is calculated as investment income (including dividend income in the case of equity securities) divided by the average of the investment balances at the beginning and end of period and interim quarters. (2) Amortized cost basis is used to calculate the average investment balance for fixed income securities and mortgage loans. Cost is used for equity securities. Cost or the equity method of accounting basis is used for limited partnership interests. (3) Beginning in the fourth quarter of 2008, income from limited partnerships accounted for on the equity method of accounting ("EMA LP") is reported in realized capital gains and losses and is therefore excluded from the determination of pre-tax investment yields on limited partnership interests. EMA LP income for periods prior to the fourth quarter of 2008 is reported in net investment income and included in the determination of pre-tax investment yields on limited partnership interests. Net realized capital gains and losses, after-tax were $(1.21) billion of net realized capital losses in 2008 compared to net realized capital gains of $915 million in 2007 and $227 million in 2006. The following table presents the factors driving the net realized capital gains and losses results. ($ in millions) 2008 2007 2006 Sales (1) $ (635 ) $ 1,396 $ 483 Impairment write-downs (2) (638 ) (44 ) (26 ) Change in intent write-downs (1)(3) (501 ) (54 ) (32 ) Valuation of derivative instruments (296 ) (15 ) 43 EMA LP income (4) (77 ) Settlements of derivative instruments 289 133 (120 ) Realized capital gains and losses, pre-tax (1,858 ) 1,416 348 Income tax benefit (expense) 649 (501 ) (121 ) Realized capital gains and losses, after-tax $ (1,209 ) $ 915 $ 227 (1) To conform to the current period presentation, certain amounts in the prior periods have been reclassified. (2) Impairment write-downs reflect issue specific other than temporary declines in fair value, including instances where we could not reasonably assert that the recovery period would be temporary. (3) Change in intent write-downs reflects instances where we cannot assert a positive intent to hold until recovery. (4) Beginning in the fourth quarter of 2008, income from EMA LP is reported in realized capital gains and losses. EMA LP income for periods prior to the fourth quarter of 2008 is reported in net investment income. For a further discussion of net realized capital gains and losses, see the Investments section of the MD&A. 59 PROPERTY-LIABILITY CLAIMS AND CLAIMS EXPENSE RESERVES Property-Liability underwriting results are significantly influenced by estimates of property-liability claims and claims expense reserves. For a description of our reserve process, see Note 7 of the consolidated financial statements and for a further description of our reserving policies and the potential variability in our reserve estimates, see the Application of Critical Accounting Estimates section of the MD&A. These reserves are an estimate of amounts necessary to settle all outstanding claims, including IBNR claims, as of the reporting date. The facts and circumstances leading to our quarterly reestimates of reserves relate to revisions to the development factors used to predict how losses are likely to develop from the end of a reporting period until all claims have been paid. Reestimates occur because actual losses are likely different than that predicted by the estimated development factors used in prior reserve estimates. At December 31, 2008, the impact of a reserve reestimation corresponding to a one percent increase or decrease in net reserves would be a decrease or increase of approximately $112 million in net income. The table below shows total net reserves as of December 31, 2008, 2007 and 2006 for Allstate brand, Encompass brand and Discontinued Lines and Coverages lines of business. ($ in millions) 2008 2007 2006 Allstate brand $ 14,118 $ 13,456 $ 13,220 Encompass brand 1,133 1,129 1,236 Total Allstate Protection 15,251 14,585 14,456 Discontinued Lines and Coverages 1,931 2,075 2,154 Total Property-Liability $ 17,182 $ 16,660 $ 16,610 The table below shows reserves, net of reinsurance, representing the estimated cost of outstanding claims as they were recorded at the beginning of years 2008, 2007 and 2006, and the effect of reestimates in each year. 2008 2007 2006 ($ in millions) Jan 1 reserves Reserve reestimate (1) Jan 1 reserves Reserve reestimate (1) Jan 1 reserves Reserve reestimate (1) Allstate brand $ 13,456 $ 155 $ 13,220 $ (167 ) $ 15,423 $ (1,085 ) Encompass brand 1,129 (3 ) 1,236 (52 ) 1,331 (18 ) Total Allstate Protection 14,585 152 14,456 (219 ) 16,754 (1,103 ) Discontinued Lines and Coverages 2,075 18 2,154 47 2,177 132 Total Property-Liability $ 16,660 $ 170 $ 16,610 $ (172 ) $ 18,931 $ (971 ) Reserve reestimates, after-tax $ 111 $ (112 ) $ (631 ) Net (loss) income (1,679 ) 4,636 4,993 Reserve reestimates as a % of net (loss) income (6.6 )% 2.4 % 12.6 % (1) Favorable reserve reestimates are shown in parentheses. 60 Allstate Protection The table below shows Allstate Protection net reserves representing the estimated cost of outstanding claims as they were recorded at the beginning of years 2008, 2007 and 2006, and the effect of reestimates in each year. 2008 2007 2006 ($ in millions) Jan 1 reserves Reserve reestimate Jan 1 reserves Reserve reestimate Jan 1 reserves Reserve reestimate Auto $ 10,175 $ (27 ) $ 9,995 $ (311 ) $ 10,460 $ (737 ) Homeowners 2,279 124 2,226 115 3,675 (244 ) Other personal lines 2,131 55 2,235 (23 ) 2,619 (122 ) Total Allstate Protection $ 14,585 $ 152 $ 14,456 $ (219 ) $ 16,754 $ (1,103 ) Underwriting income 189 2,838 4,636 Reserve reestimates as a % of underwriting income (80.4 )% 7.7 % 23.8 % Auto reserve reestimates in 2008 were primarily the result of a $45 million reclassification of IBNR losses from standard auto to other personal lines to be consistent with the recording of excess liability policies' premiums and losses. Auto reserve reestimates in 2007 were primarily the result of auto severity development that was better than expected. Auto reserve reestimates in 2006 were primarily the result of auto injury severity development that was better than expected and late reported loss development that was better than expected, primarily due to lower frequency trends in recent years. Unfavorable homeowners reserve reestimates in 2008 were primarily due to litigation filed in conjunction with a Louisiana deadline for filing suits related to Hurricane Katrina. Unfavorable homeowners reserve reestimates in 2007 were primarily due to catastrophe reserve reestimates attributable to increased claim expense reserves primarily for 2005 events and increased loss reserves including reopened claims arising from litigation filed in conjunction with a Louisiana deadline for filing suits related to Hurricane Katrina. Homeowners reserve reestimates in 2006 were primarily due to favorable catastrophe reestimates attributable to lower loss estimates for additional living expenses and mold for Hurricane Katrina, late reported loss development that was better than expected and injury severity development that was better than expected. Other personal lines reserve reestimates in 2008 were primarily the result of a $45 million reclassification of IBNR losses from standard auto to other personal lines to be consistent with the recording of excess liability policies' premiums and losses. Other personal lines reserve reestimates in 2007 were primarily the result of claim severity development different than anticipated in previous estimates. Other personal lines reserve reestimates in 2006 were primarily due to favorable catastrophe reestimates and the result of claim severity development different than anticipated in previous estimates. 61 Pending, new and closed claims for Allstate Protection, for the years ended December 31, are summarized in the following table. Number of claims 2008 2007 2006 Auto Pending, beginning of year 551,598 522,544 569,334 New 5,323,072 5,450,438 5,256,600 Total closed (5,308,276 ) (5,421,384 ) (5,303,390 ) Pending, end of year 566,394 551,598 522,544 Homeowners Pending, beginning of year 80,229 72,988 197,326 New 1,242,007 805,461 835,900 Total closed (1,247,464 ) (798,220 ) (960,238 ) Pending, end of year 74,772 80,229 72,988 Other personal lines Pending, beginning of year 39,951 42,254 79,560 New 301,363 270,962 312,546 Total closed (300,313 ) (273,265 ) (349,852 ) Pending, end of year 41,001 39,951 42,254 Total Allstate Protection Pending, beginning of year 671,778 637,786 846,220 New 6,866,442 6,526,861 6,405,046 Total closed (6,856,053 ) (6,492,869 ) (6,613,480 ) Pending, end of year 682,167 671,778 637,786 We believe the net loss reserves for Allstate Protection exposures are appropriately established based on available facts, technology, laws and regulations. 62 The following tables reflect the accident years to which the reestimates shown above are applicable for Allstate brand, Encompass brand and Discontinued Lines and Coverages lines of business. Favorable reserve reestimates are shown in these tables in parentheses. 2008 Prior year reserve reestimates ($ in millions) 1998 & Prior 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 Total Allstate brand $ 56 $ (7 ) $ 9 $ 34 $ 1 $ (5 ) $ 13 $ 152 $ (71 ) $ (27 ) $ 155 Encompass brand 2 2 (1 ) 2 1 (1 ) 10 (20 ) 2 (3 ) Total Allstate Protection 58 (7 ) 11 33 3 (4 ) 12 162 (91 ) (25 ) 152 Discontinued Lines and Coverages 18 18 Total Property-Liability $ 76 $ (7 ) $ 11 $ 33 $ 3 $ (4 ) $ 12 $ 162 $ (91 ) $ (25 ) $ 170 2007 Prior year reserve reestimates ($ in millions) 1997 & Prior 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 Total Allstate brand $ 103 $ $ 10 $ 16 $ (5 ) $ 15 $ 5 $ (10 ) $ (225 ) $ (76 ) $ (167 ) Encompass brand (1 ) (4 ) 3 6 (4 ) (39 ) (13 ) (52 ) Total Allstate Protection 103 9 12 (5 ) 18 11 (14 ) (264 ) (89 ) (219 ) Discontinued Lines and Coverages 47 47 Total Property-Liability $ 150 $ $ 9 $ 12 $ (5 ) $ 18 $ 11 $ (14 ) $ (264 ) $ (89 ) $ (172 ) 2006 Prior year reserve reestimates ($ in millions) 1996 & Prior 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 Total Allstate brand $ 18 $ (8 ) $ (3 ) $ (5 ) $ (2 ) $ (22 ) $ (2 ) $ (48 ) $ (282 ) $ (731 ) $ (1,085 ) Encompass brand (6 ) (10 ) (22 ) 20 (18 ) Total Allstate Protection 18 (8 ) (3 ) (5 ) (2 ) (28 ) (2 ) (58 ) (304 ) (711 ) (1,103 ) Discontinued Lines and Coverages 132 132 Total Property-Liability $ 150 $ (8 ) $ (3 ) $ (5 ) $ (2 ) $ (28 ) $ (2 ) $ (58 ) $ (304 ) $ (711 ) $ (971 ) Allstate brand prior year reserve reestimates were $155 million unfavorable in 2008 and $167 million and $1.09 billion favorable in 2007 and 2006, respectively. In 2008, this was primarily due to litigation filed in conjunction with a Louisiana deadline for filing suits related to Hurricane Katrina. In 2007, this was primarily due to auto severity development that was better than expected, partially offset by unfavorable reserve reestimates of catastrophe losses. In 2006, this was primarily due to auto injury severity development and late reported loss development that was better than expected and changes in reserve reestimates of catastrophe losses which were favorable in 2006. These trends are primarily responsible for revisions to loss development factors, as previously described, used to predict how losses are likely to develop from the end of a reporting period until all claims have been paid. Because these trends cause actual losses to differ from those predicted by the estimated development factors used in prior reserve estimates, reserves are revised as actuarial studies validate new trends based on the indications of updated development factor calculations. 63 The impact of these reestimates on the Allstate brand underwriting income is shown in the table below. ($ in millions) 2008 2007 2006 Reserve reestimates $ 155 $ (167 ) $ (1,085 ) Allstate brand underwriting income 220 2,634 4,451 Reserve reestimates as a % of underwriting income (70.5 )% 6.3 % 24.4 % Encompass brand Reserve reestimates in 2008, 2007 and 2006 were related to lower than anticipated claim settlement costs. The impact of these reestimates on the Encompass brand underwriting (loss) income is shown in the table below. ($ in millions) 2008 2007 2006 Reserve reestimates $ (3 ) $ (52 ) $ (18 ) Encompass brand underwriting (loss) income (31 ) 204 185 Reserve reestimates as a % of underwriting (loss) income 9.7 % 25.5 % 9.7 % Discontinued Lines and Coverages We conduct an annual review in the third quarter of each year to evaluate and establish asbestos, environmental and other discontinued lines reserves. Reserves are recorded in the reporting period in which they are determined. Using established industry and actuarial best practices and assuming no change in the regulatory or economic environment, this detailed and comprehensive "grounds up" methodology determines reserves based on assessments of the characteristics of exposure (e.g. claim activity, potential liability, jurisdiction, products versus non-products exposure) presented by policyholders. Reserve reestimates for the Discontinued Lines and Coverages, as shown in the table below, were increased primarily for other discontinued lines in 2008, environmental in 2007 and for asbestos in 2006. 2008 2007 2006 ($ in millions) Jan 1 reserves Reserve reestimate Jan 1 reserves Reserve reestimate Jan 1 reserves Reserve reestimate Asbestos Claims $ 1,302 $ 8 $ 1,375 $ 17 $ 1,373 $ 86 Environmental Claims 232 194 63 205 10 Other Discontinued Lines 541 10 585 (33 ) 599 36 Total Discontinued Lines and coverages $ 2,075 $ 18 $ 2,154 $ 47 $ 2,177 $ 132 Underwriting loss (25 ) (54 ) (139 ) Reserve reestimates as a % of underwriting loss (72.0 )% (87.0 )% (95.0 )% Reserve additions for asbestos in 2008, 2007 and 2006, totaling $8 million, $17 million and $86 million, respectively, were primarily for products-related coverage. They were essentially a result of a continuing level of increased claim activity being reported by excess and primary insurance policyholders with existing active claims, excess policyholders with new claims, and reestimates of liabilities for increased assumed reinsurance cessions, as ceding companies (other insurance carriers) also experienced increased claim activity. Higher claim activity over prior estimates has also resulted in an increased estimate for future claims reported. These trends are consistent with the trends of other carriers in the industry, which we believe are related to increased publicity and awareness of coverage, ongoing litigation and bankruptcy actions. The 2007 asbestos reserve addition also includes the write-off of uncollectible reinsurance for a single foreign reinsurer. Normal environmental claim activity resulted in essentially no change in estimated reserves for 2008. The reserve additions for environmental in 2007 were for increased claim activity related to site-specific remediations where the clean-up cost estimates and responsibility for the clean-up have been more fully determined. This increased claim activity over prior estimates has also resulted in an increased estimate for future claims reported. IBNR now represents 63% of total net environmental reserves, 8 points higher than at December 31, 2007. 64 The table below summarizes reserves and claim activity for asbestos and environmental claims before (Gross) and after (Net) the effects of reinsurance for the past three years. 2008 2007 2006 ($ in millions, except ratios) Gross Net Gross Net Gross Net Asbestos claims Beginning reserves $ 2,053 $ 1,302 $ 2,198 $ 1,375 $ 2,205 $ 1,373 Incurred claims and claims expense 4 8 12 17 143 86 Claims and claims expense paid (124 ) (82 ) (157 ) (90 ) (150 ) (84 ) Ending reserves $ 1,933 $ 1,228 $ 2,053 $ 1,302 $ 2,198 $ 1,375 Annual survival ratio 15.4 15.1 13.1 14.5 14.7 16.4 3-year survival ratio 13.4 14.4 8.5 9.7 9.4 10.5 Environmental claims Beginning reserves $ 340 $ 232 $ 249 $ 194 $ 252 $ 205 Incurred claims and claims expense (34 ) 120 63 22 10 Claims and claims expense paid (56 ) (37 ) (29 ) (25 ) (25 ) (21 ) Ending reserves $ 250 $ 195 $ 340 $ 232 $ 249 $ 194 Annual survival ratio 4.5 5.2 11.7 9.4 9.8 8.9 3-year survival ratio 6.8 7.0 11.8 9.3 8.1 7.7 Combined environmental and asbestos claims Annual survival ratio 12.1 12.0 12.9 13.4 14.0 14.8 3-year survival ratio 12.1 12.6 8.8 9.6 9.3 10.1 Percentage of IBNR in ending reserves 63.8 % 63.2 % 66.5 % The survival ratio is calculated by taking our ending reserves divided by payments made during the year. This is a commonly used but extremely simplistic and imprecise approach to measuring the adequacy of asbestos and environmental reserve levels. Many factors, such as mix of business, level of coverage provided and settlement procedures have significant impacts on the amount of environmental and asbestos claims and claims expense reserves, claim payments and the resultant ratio. As payments result in corresponding reserve reductions, survival ratios can be expected to vary over time. In 2008, the asbestos net 3-year survival ratio increased due to lower average annual payments. In 2007, the asbestos net 3-year survival ratio declined due to continuing claim payments. In 2008, the environmental net 3-year survival ratio declined due to continuing claim payments. In 2007, the environmental net 3-year survival ratio increased due to reserve additions. Our net asbestos reserves by type of exposure and total reserve additions are shown in the following table. December 31, 2008 December 31, 2007 December 31, 2006 ($ in millions) Active policy- holders Net reserves % of reserves Active policy- holders Net reserves % of reserves Active policy- holders Net reserves % of reserves Direct policyholders: Primary 54 $ 21 2 % 52 $ 23 2 % 47 $ 15 1 % Excess 330 216 17 346 222 17 340 214 16 Total 384 237 19 % 398 245 19 % 387 229 17 % Assumed reinsurance 205 17 216 16 203 15 IBNR 786 64 841 65 943 68 Total net reserves $ 1,228 100 % $ 1,302 100 % $ 1,375 100 % Total reserve additions $ 8 $ 17 $ 86 During the last three years, 72 direct primary and excess policyholders reported new claims, and claims of 67 policyholders were closed, increasing the number of active policyholders by 5 during the period. The 5 increase 65 comprised (9) from 2008, 6 from 2007 and 8 from 2006. The decrease of 9 from 2008 included 15 new policyholders reporting new claims and the closing of 24 policyholders' claims. IBNR net reserves decreased by $55 million. At December 31, 2008 IBNR represented 64% of total net asbestos reserves, 1 point lower than at December 31, 2007. IBNR provides for reserve development of known claims and future reporting of additional unknown claims from current and new policyholders and ceding companies. Pending, new, total closed and closed without payment claims for asbestos and environmental exposures for the years ended December 31, are summarized in the following table. Number of claims 2008 2007 2006 Asbestos Pending, beginning of year 9,256 9,175 8,806 New 601 876 1,220 Total closed (1,077 ) (795 ) (851 ) Pending, end of year 8,780 9,256 9,175 Closed without payment 800 364 596 Environmental Pending, beginning of year 4,747 4,771 4,896 New 291 603 612 Total closed (435 ) (627 ) (737 ) Pending, end of year 4,603 4,747 4,771 Closed without payment 307 370 513 Property-Liability Reinsurance Ceded For Allstate Protection, we utilize reinsurance to reduce exposure to catastrophe risk and manage capital, and to support the required statutory surplus and the insurance financial strength ratings of certain subsidiaries such as Allstate Floridian Insurance Company and Allstate New Jersey Insurance Company. We purchase significant reinsurance where we believe the greatest benefit may be achieved relative to our aggregate countrywide exposure. The price and terms of reinsurance and the credit quality of the reinsurer are considered in the purchase process, along with whether the price can be appropriately reflected in the costs that are considered in setting future rates charged to policyholders. We also participate in various reinsurance mechanisms, including industry pools and facilities, which are backed by the financial resources of the property-liability insurance company market participants, and have historically purchased reinsurance to mitigate long-tail liability lines, including environmental, asbestos and other discontinued lines exposures. We retain primary liability as a direct insurer for all risks ceded to reinsurers. The impacts of reinsurance on our reserve for claims and claims expense at December 31 are summarized in the following table, net of allowances we have established for uncollectible amounts. Reserve for Property-Liability insurance claims and claims expense Reinsurance recoverables, net ($ in millions) 2008 2007 2008 2007 Industry pools and facilities $ 2,012 $ 1,862 $ 1,442 $ 1,275 Asbestos and environmental 2,183 2,393 795 912 Other including allowance for future uncollectible reinsurance recoverables 15,261 14,610 116 117 Total Property-Liability $ 19,456 $ 18,865 $ 2,353 $ 2,304 Reinsurance recoverables include an estimate of the amount of property-liability insurance claims and claims expense reserves that may be ceded under the terms of the reinsurance agreements, including incurred but not reported unpaid losses. We calculate our ceded reinsurance estimate based on the terms of each applicable reinsurance agreement, including an estimate of how IBNR losses will ultimately be ceded under the agreement. We also consider other limitations and coverage exclusions under our reinsurance agreements. Accordingly, our estimate of reinsurance recoverables is subject to similar risks and uncertainties as our estimate of reserve for property-liability claims and claims expense. We believe the recoverables are appropriately established; however, 66 as our underlying reserves continue to develop, the amount ultimately recoverable may vary from amounts currently recorded. We regularly evaluate the reinsurers and the respective amounts recoverable, and a provision for uncollectible reinsurance is recorded if needed. The establishment of reinsurance recoverables and the related allowance for uncollectible reinsurance recoverables is also an inherently uncertain process involving estimates. Changes in estimates could result in additional changes to the Consolidated Statements of Operations. The allowance for uncollectible reinsurance relates to Discontinued Lines and Coverages reinsurance recoverables and was $168 million and $185 million at December 31, 2008 and 2007, respectively. These amounts represent 16.9% and 16.4%, respectively of the related reinsurance recoverable balances. The allowance is based upon our ongoing review of amounts outstanding, length of collection periods, changes in reinsurer credit standing, and other relevant factors. In addition, in the ordinary course of business, we may become involved in coverage disputes with certain of our reinsurers which may ultimately result in lawsuits and arbitrations brought by or against such reinsurers to determine the parties' rights and obligations under the various reinsurance agreements. We employ dedicated specialists to manage reinsurance collections and disputes. We also consider recent developments in commutation activity between reinsurers and cedants, and recent trends in arbitration and litigation outcomes in disputes between cedants and reinsurers in seeking to maximize our reinsurance recoveries. For further discussion on the decrease in the allowance for uncollectible reinsurance, see Note 9 of the consolidated financial statements. Adverse developments in the insurance industry have led to a decline in the financial strength of some of our reinsurance carriers, causing amounts recoverable from them and future claims ceded to them to be considered a higher risk. There has also been consolidation activity in the industry, which causes reinsurance risk across the industry to be concentrated among fewer companies. In addition, over the last several years the industry has increasingly segregated asbestos, environmental, and other discontinued lines exposures into separate legal entities with dedicated capital. Regulatory bodies in certain cases have supported these actions. We are unable to determine the impact, if any, that these developments will have on the collectability of reinsurance recoverables in the future. The largest reinsurance recoverable balances are shown in the following table at December 31, net of allowances we have established for uncollectible amounts. Reinsurance recoverable on paid and unpaid claims, net A.M. Best financial strength rating ($ in millions) 2008 2007 Industry pools and facilities Michigan Catastrophic Claim Association ("MCCA") N/A $ 1,108 $ 1,023 National Flood Insurance Program ("NFIP") N/A 138 22 New Jersey Unsatisfied Claim and Judgment Fund N/A 84 105 North Carolina Reinsurance Facility N/A 63 64 FHCF N/A 36 47 Other 13 14 Total 1,442 1,275 Asbestos, Environmental and Other Lloyd's of London ("Lloyd's") A 227 240 Westport Insurance Corporation (formerly Employers Reinsurance Corporation) A+ 81 90 Harper Insurance Limited N/A 56 60 Clearwater Insurance Company A- 39 44 SCOR U.S. Corporation ("SCOR") A- 28 28 Other, including allowance for future uncollectible reinsurance recoverables 480 567 Total 911 1,029 Total Property-Liability $ 2,353 $ 2,304 67 The effects of reinsurance ceded on our property-liability premiums earned and claims and claims expense for the years ended December 31, are summarized in the following table. ($ in millions) 2008 2007 2006 Ceded property-liability premiums earned $ 1,139 $ 1,356 $ 1,113 Ceded property-liability claims and claims expense Industry pool and facilities FHCF $ 28 $ 22 $ 146 NFIP 344 65 32 MCCA 148 60 36 Other 60 72 71 Subtotal industry pools and facilities 580 219 285 Asbestos, Environmental and Other 40 151 129 Ceded property-liability claims and claims expense $ 620 $ 370 $ 414 For the years ended December 31, 2008 and 2007, ceded property-liability premiums earned decreased $217 million and increased $243 million, respectively, when compared to prior years, primarily as a result of changes in the rates charged on our catastrophe reinsurance program. Ceded property-liability claims and claims expense increased in 2008 primarily due to amounts ceded to NFIP and MCCA. Ceded property-liability claims and claims expense decreased in 2007 as a result of lower qualifying losses eligible to be ceded to the FHCF, but higher losses eligible to be ceded to NFIP and MCCA. For further discussion, see the Discontinued Lines and Coverages Segment and Property-Liability Claims and Claims Expense Reserves sections of the MD&A. For a detailed description of the MCCA, FHCF and Lloyd's, see Note 9 of the consolidated financial statements. At December 31, 2008, other than the recoverable balances listed above, no other amount due or estimated to be due from any single Property-Liability reinsurer was in excess of $23 million. We enter into certain inter-company insurance and reinsurance transactions for the Property-Liability operations in order to maintain underwriting control and manage insurance risk among various legal entities. These reinsurance agreements have been approved by the appropriate regulatory authorities. All significant inter-company transactions have been eliminated in consolidation. An affiliate of the company, Allstate Texas Lloyd's ("ATL"), a syndicate insurance company, cedes 100% of its business net of reinsurance with external parties to AIC. At December 31, 2008, ATL had $66 million of reinsurance recoverable primarily related to losses incurred from Hurricane Ike which occurred in 2008. At December 31, 2007, ATL had $5 million reinsurance recoverable primarily related to losses incurred from Hurricane Rita which occurred in 2005. Catastrophe Reinsurance Our personal lines catastrophe reinsurance program was designed, utilizing our risk management methodology, to address our exposure to catastrophes nationwide. Our program provides reinsurance protection to us for catastrophes including storms named or numbered by the National Weather Service, wildfires, earthquakes and fires following earthquakes. Our catastrophe reinsurance program which will be effective June 1, 2009 is currently being negotiated. We expect to bind coverage in March 2009, except for certain coverage in Florida which we expect to bind by June 1, 2009. We anticipate reporting the details of our catastrophe reinsurance program renewal upon finalizing coverage. See The Allstate Corporation Annual Report on Form 10-K for 2007 and The Allstate Corporation Form 10-Qs for 2008 for additional details on our current program. We expect to renew expiring coverages including the coverage expiring on programs placed for 2 years (Aggregate excess), 3 years (various state specific), and 1 year (South-East and Florida). We anticipate purchasing coverage that has similar retentions and limits as our expiring program, with either retentions and limits or premiums being subject to re-measurement for exposure differences from estimates initially provided to reinsurers. In addition, effective June 1, 2009, we are contemplating two new agreements: a Pennsylvania only agreement (up to $100 million limit, $100 million retention) to enhance protection in Pennsylvania, and a Texas/Louisiana agreement (up to $150 million limit, $500 million retention) whereby losses resulting from the same 68 named or numbered storm but taking place in both Texas and Louisiana may be combined to meet the agreement's per occurrence retention and limit. We also intend to purchase a portion of our annual Florida reinsurance program in the first quarter of 2009, deferring our remaining Florida reinsurance purchase until the FHCF reimbursement program is finalized. Our reinsurance program, effective June 1, 2008 to May 31, 2009 is comprised of agreements that provide coverage for the occurrence of certain qualifying catastrophes in specific states including New York, New Jersey, Connecticut, Rhode Island and Texas ("multi-peril"); additional coverage for hurricane catastrophe losses in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut ("North-East") in other states along the southern and eastern coasts ("South-East") and in Texas ("Texas"); in California for fires following earthquakes ("California fires following earthquakes"); in Kentucky for earthquakes and fires following earthquakes ("Kentucky"); and four agreements for our exposure in Florida. The Florida component of the reinsurance program, which expires on May 31, 2009, is designed separately from the other components of the program to address the distinct needs of our separately capitalized legal entities in that state. Another reinsurance agreement provides coverage nationwide, excluding Florida, for the aggregate or sum of catastrophe losses in excess of an annual retention associated with storms named or numbered by the National Weather Service, California wildfires, earthquakes and fires following earthquakes ("aggregate excess"). For further discussion on catastrophe reinsurance, see Note 9 to the consolidated financial statements. The multi-peril agreements have various retentions and limits commensurate with the amount of catastrophe risk, measured on an annual basis, in each covered state. The multi-peril agreement for Connecticut and Rhode Island provides that losses resulting from the same occurrence but taking place in both states may be combined to meet the agreement's per occurrence retention and limit. One-third of the coverage expires each year with each of the three contracts in this agreement. The North-East agreement was placed with Willow Re Ltd., a Cayman Island insurance company, and covers Allstate Protection personal property and auto excess catastrophe losses. Amounts payable under the reinsurance agreement are based on an index created by applying predetermined percentages representing our market share to insured personal property industry losses in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut as reported by Property Claim Services ("PCS"), a division of Insurance Services Offices, Inc., limited to our actual losses. This agreement covers 38% of $658 million, our estimated share of estimated modified personal property industry catastrophe losses between $9.2 billion and $13.5 billion, or 38% of our catastrophe losses between $1.6 billion (initial trigger) and $2.2 billion (exhaustion point) in the states of New York, New Jersey and Connecticut. The initial trigger and exhaustion points are reset by AIR Worldwide Corporation ("AIR") annually based on changes in the underlying industry exposures and our share of industry exposures. Willow Re Ltd. issued to unrelated investors principal-at-risk variable market rate notes of $250 million to collateralize hurricane catastrophe losses covered by this reinsurance agreement. Willow Re Ltd. entered into a total return swap with Lehman Brothers Special Financing, Inc. ("Lehman") which guaranteed the value of the collateral and a predetermined fixed rate of return to be paid to note holders. Upon the failure of Lehman in the third quarter of 2008, the total return swap was settled and terminated without replacement. Allstate continues to make the required premium payments to Willow Re and the reinsurance remains in place, but the underlying assets have not generated enough interest to meet the quarterly bond interest payment requirement due in February 2009, resulting in a default to note holders. The default does not create any obligations for Allstate and the reinsurance contract remains in place, although the value of the reinsurance provided by Willow Re depends upon the market value of the underlying assets held in collateral for reinsurance trust, with Allstate as the beneficiary. The underlying assets held in collateral are comprised largely of illiquid mortgaged-backed securities and cash with a current market value less than $250 million. The Texas agreement provides coverage for Allstate Protection personal property excess catastrophe losses in Texas for hurricane catastrophe losses. The agreement was placed with Willow Re Ltd., which completed an offering to unrelated investors for principal at risk, variable market rate notes of $250 million to collateralize hurricane catastrophe losses covered by this agreement. Amounts payable under the reinsurance agreement will be based on an index created by applying predetermined percentages representing our market share to insured personal property industry losses in Texas as reported by PCS limited to our actual losses. The limits on our Texas agreement are designed to replicate as close as possible 100% of $250 million, our estimated market share of estimated modified personal property industry catastrophe losses between $12.5 billion and $15.8 billion, or 100% of our catastrophe losses between $950 million (retention) and $1.2 billion (exhaustion point). The Texas agreement placed with Willow Re is independent of the North-East agreement and is not impacted by the termination of the North-East agreement's total return swap. 69 The Florida reinsurance program, which will be effective June 1, 2009, should be similar in design to the current program, however containing limits based on reduced underlying exposure, assuming there is no further change in Florida insurance markets. Our current program comprises, four separate agreements entered into by Allstate Floridian for personal property excess catastrophe losses in Florida, effective June 1, 2008 for one year. These agreements coordinate coverage with the Florida Hurricane Catastrophe Fund, including our elected participation in the optional temporary increase in coverage limit ("TICL"), (collectively "FHCF"). We chose not to participate in the optional temporary emergency additional coverage option ("TEACO") that is below the mandatory FHCF coverage. The FHCF provides 90% reimbursement on qualifying Allstate Floridian property losses up to an estimated maximum of $398 million in excess of a $80 million retention, including reimbursement of eligible loss adjustment expenses at 5%, for each of the two largest hurricanes and $27 million for all other hurricanes for the season beginning June 1, 2008. The four agreements are listed and described below. FHCF Retention provides coverage on $59 million of losses in excess of $40 million and is 100% placed, with one prepaid reinstatement of limit. FHCF Sliver provides coverage on 10% co-participation of the FHCF payout, or $40 million and is 100% placed, with one prepaid reinstatement of limit. FHCF Back-up provides coverage after the exhaustion of an amount equivalent to the anticipated FHCF reimbursement protection on $398 million of losses in excess of $80 million and is 90% placed. FHCF Excess provides coverage on $99 million of losses in excess of the FHCF Retention, FHCF and the FHCF Back-up agreements and is 100% placed, with one prepaid reinstatement of limit. We are currently evaluating the FHCF's capacity to timely reimburse us in the event of a major catastrophe, and await any changes that might be made by the FL legislature. We have approximately $175 million or 9% of the Aggregate excess agreement limits for the June 1, 2008 to May 31, 2009 period, $25 million or 5% of the South-East agreement limit, $250 million or 100% of the North-East agreement limit; $250 million or 100% of the Texas agreement, and $2 million or less than 1% of the Florida limit placed with alternative market sources. Alternative market sources refers to a reinsurer that hedge funds, private equity firms, or investment banks substantially or wholly support; retrocedes 100% of its assumed liability to a specific retrocessionaire; provides collateral to us equal to its assumed per occurrence limit; or funding is provided by an unrelated third party issuance of bonds financing the reinsurance limit ("catastrophe bond"). Our total annualized cost for catastrophe reinsurance for the year beginning June 1, 2008 is $613 million (originally $660 million before annual exposure re-measurements). The total cost of our reinsurance program during 2008 was $227 million in the first quarter, $223 million in the second quarter, $164 million in the third quarter and $136 million in the fourth quarter. We estimate that the total annualized cost of our catastrophe reinsurance program for the year beginning June 1, 2009, including the new Pennsylvania and Texas/Louisiana agreements, to be within 10% of our expiring annualized reinsurance contract premiums of $613 million. We continue to attempt to capture our reinsurance cost in premium rates as allowed by state regulatory authorities. The reinsurance agreements have been placed in the global reinsurance market, with all limits on our current Florida program and the majority of limits on our other programs placed with reinsurers who currently have an A.M. Best insurance financial strength rating of A or better. The remaining limits are placed with reinsurers who currently have an A.M. Best insurance financial strength rating no lower than A-, with three exceptions. Of the three exceptions, one has a Standard & Poor's ("S&P") rating of AA, one has an S&P rating of AA- and we have collateral for the entire contract limit exposure for the reinsurer which is not rated by either rating agency. 70 ALLSTATE FINANCIAL 2008 HIGHLIGHTS Net loss was $1.72 billion in 2008 compared to net income of $465 million in 2007. Net realized capital losses totaled $3.13 billion in 2008 compared to $193 million in 2007. During 2008, we recorded $397 million in accelerated DAC and deferred sales inducement costs ("DSI") amortization related to deferred annuities and interest-sensitive life insurance due to changes in assumptions (which resulted in changes to total EGP). Additional amortization of DAC totaling $336 million was recorded in connection with a premium deficiency assessment for traditional life insurance and immediate annuities with life contingencies primarily due to revised annuity mortality assumptions. Contractholder fund deposits totaled $10.40 billion for 2008 compared to $8.99 billion for 2007. Investments as of December 31, 2008 decreased 17.2% to $61.50 billion from $74.26 billion as of December 31, 2007 and net investment income decreased 11.3% to $3.81 billion in 2008 from $4.30 billion in 2007. Continued focus on improving returns and reducing our concentration in spread based products, primarily fixed annuities and institutional markets products. Launched an initiative that will result in lower operating expenses in 2009 and 2010, and targeting annual savings of $90 million beginning in 2011. 71 ALLSTATE FINANCIAL SEGMENT Overview and Strategy The Allstate Financial segment is a major provider of life insurance, retirement and investment products, and voluntary accident and health insurance to individual and institutional customers. We serve these customers through Allstate exclusive agencies, the Workplace Division and non-proprietary distribution channels. Allstate Financial's strategic vision is to reinvent protection and retirement for the consumer. To achieve its vision and reach its financial goals, Allstate Financial's primary objectives are to deepen financial services relationships with Allstate customers, dramatically expand the workplace business and restore profitability through operational excellence and portfolio optimization. Sales in non-proprietary channels will be increasingly tactical as we assess market opportunities. In addition to focusing on higher return markets, products, and distribution channels, Allstate Financial will continue to emphasize capital efficiency and enterprise risk and return management strategies and actions. Allstate Financial's strategy provides a platform to profitably grow its business. Based upon Allstate's strong financial position and brand, our customers seek assistance in meeting their protection and retirement needs through trusted relationships. We have unique access to potential customers through cross-sell opportunities within the Allstate exclusive agencies and employer relationships through our Workplace Division. Our investment expertise, strong operating platform and solid relationships with distribution partners provide a foundation to deliver value to our customers and shareholders. We plan to offer a more focused suite of products designed for middle market consumers to help everyday Americans meet their financial protection needs and help them better prepare for retirement. Our products include fixed annuities including deferred, immediate and indexed; interest-sensitive, traditional and variable life insurance; voluntary accident and health insurance; and funding agreements backing medium-term notes. Banking products and services are also offered to customers through the Allstate Bank. Our products are sold through a wide range of distribution channels including Allstate exclusive agencies, which include exclusive financial specialists, independent agents (including master brokerage agencies and workplace enrolling agents), financial service firms such as banks and broker-dealers, and specialized structured settlement brokers. Allstate Bank products can also be obtained directly through a toll-free number. Our institutional product line consists primarily of funding agreements sold to unaffiliated trusts that use them to back medium-term notes issued to institutional and individual investors. 72 Summarized financial data for the years ended December 31 is presented in the following table. ($ in millions) 2008 2007 2006 Revenues Life and annuity premiums and contract charges $ 1,895 $ 1,866 $ 1,964 Net investment income 3,811 4,297 4,173 Realized capital gains and losses (3,127 ) (193 ) (77 ) Total revenues 2,579 5,970 6,060 Costs and expenses Life and annuity contract benefits (1,612 ) (1,589 ) (1,570 ) Interest credited to contractholder funds (2,411 ) (2,681 ) (2,609 ) Amortization of DAC (704 ) (583 ) (626 ) Operating costs and expenses (520 ) (441 ) (468 ) Restructuring and related charges (1 ) (2 ) (24 ) Total costs and expenses (5,248 ) (5,296 ) (5,297 ) Loss on disposition of operations (6 ) (10 ) (92 ) Income tax benefit (expense) 954 (199 ) (207 ) Net (loss) income $ (1,721 ) $ 465 $ 464 Investments at December 31 $ 61,499 $ 74,256 $ 75,951 Effective June 1, 2006, Allstate Financial disposed of substantially all of its variable annuity business through reinsurance with Prudential Financial Inc. ("Prudential"). The following table presents the results of operations attributable to our reinsured variable annuity business for the period of 2006 prior to the disposition. ($ in millions) 2006 Life and annuity premiums and contract charges $ 136 Net investment income 17 Realized capital gains and losses (8 ) Total revenues 145 Life and annuity contract benefits (13 ) Interest credited to contractholder funds (24 ) Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs (44 ) Operating costs and expenses (43 ) Total costs and expenses (124 ) Loss on disposition of operations (89 ) Income from operations before income tax expense (1) $ (68 ) (1) For 2006, income from operations before income tax expense attributable to the variable annuity business reinsured to Prudential included an investment spread and benefit spread of $(7) million and $13 million, respectively. Net loss in 2008 of $1.72 billion compared to net income of $465 million and $464 million in 2007 and 2006, respectively. The change in 2008 was primarily the result of the recognition of higher net realized capital losses in the current year compared to the prior year and, to a lesser extent, DAC and DSI amortization acceleration for changes in assumptions and additional amortization of DAC that was recorded in connection with a premium deficiency assessment for traditional life insurance and immediate annuities with life contingencies due to revised annuity mortality assumptions. Net income in 2007 was comparable to 2006 as lower losses associated with dispositions of operations were almost entirely offset by a decline in total revenues. Analysis of Revenues Total revenues decreased 56.8% or $3.39 billion in 2008 compared to 2007, due to a $2.93 billion increase in net realized capital losses and a $486 million decrease in net investment income. Total revenues decreased 1.5% or $90 million in 2007 compared to 2006, due to higher net realized capital losses and lower premiums and contract charges, partially offset by higher net investment income. Life and annuity premiums and contract charges Premiums represent revenues generated from traditional life insurance, immediate annuities with life contingencies, and accident, health and other insurance products that 73 have significant mortality or morbidity risk. Contract charges are revenues generated from interest-sensitive and variable life insurance, fixed annuities and variable annuities for which deposits are classified as contractholder funds or separate accounts liabilities. Contract charges are assessed against the contractholder account values for maintenance, administration, cost of insurance and surrender prior to contractually specified dates. As a result, changes in contractholder funds are considered in the evaluation of growth and as indicators of future levels of revenues. Subsequent to the close of our reinsurance transaction with Prudential effective June 1, 2006, variable annuity contract charges on the business subject to the transaction are fully reinsured to Prudential and presented net of reinsurance on the Consolidated Statements of Operations (see Note 3 to the consolidated financial statements). The following table summarizes life and annuity premiums and contract charges by product. ($ in millions) 2008 2007 2006 Premiums Traditional life insurance (1) $ 399 $ 286 $ 281 Immediate annuities with life contingencies 132 204 278 Accident, health and other 412 380 340 Total premiums 943 870 899 Contract charges Interest-sensitive life insurance (1) 896 915 853 Fixed annuities 55 79 73 Variable annuities 1 1 139 Bank and other 1 Total contract charges (2) 952 996 1,065 Life and annuity premiums and contract charges $ 1,895 $ 1,866 $ 1,964 (1) Beginning in 2008, certain ceded reinsurance premiums previously included as a component of traditional life insurance premiums were reclassified prospectively to be reported as a component of interest-sensitive life insurance contract charges. In 2007 and 2006, these reinsurance premiums were $95 million and $58 million, respectively. (2) Total contract charges for 2008, 2007 and 2006 include contract charges related to the cost of insurance of $595 million, $652 million and $638 million, respectively. Total premiums increased 8.4% in 2008 compared to 2007, due to the prospective reporting reclassification for certain ceded reinsurance premiums. Excluding the impact of this reporting reclassification, total premiums decreased 2.3% in 2008 compared to 2007 as higher sales of accident and health insurance and traditional life insurance products were more than offset by lower sales of immediate annuities with life contingencies due to highly competitive market conditions and our continued focus on returns. Total premiums decreased 3.2% in 2007 compared to 2006 as higher sales of accident and health insurance products sold through the Allstate Workplace Division and traditional life insurance products were more than offset by a decline in sales of life contingent immediate annuities due to market competitiveness. Total contract charges decreased 4.4% in 2008 compared to 2007 due to the prospective reporting reclassification of certain ceded reinsurance premiums. Excluding the impact of this reclassification, total contract charges increased 5.7% in 2008 due to higher contract charges on interest-sensitive life insurance policies resulting from increased contract charge rates and growth in business in force, partially offset by decreased contract charges on fixed annuities resulting primarily from lower contract surrenders. Contract charges decreased 6.5% in 2007 compared to 2006 due to the disposal of substantially all of our variable annuity business through reinsurance effective June 1, 2006. Excluding contract charges on variable annuities, substantially all of which are reinsured to Prudential effective June 1, 2006, contract charges increased 7.5% in 2007 compared to 2006. This increase reflects growth in interest-sensitive life insurance policies in force and, to a lesser extent, higher contract charges on fixed annuities. The increase in contract charges on fixed annuities was mostly attributable to higher contract surrenders. 74 Total Contractholder funds represent interest-bearing liabilities arising from the sale of individual and institutional products, such as interest-sensitive life insurance, fixed annuities, funding agreements and bank deposits. The balance of contractholder funds is equal to the cumulative deposits received and interest credited to the contractholder less cumulative contract maturities, benefits, surrenders, withdrawals and contract charges for mortality or administrative expenses. The following table shows the changes in contractholder funds. ($ in millions) 2008 2007 2006 Contractholder funds, beginning balance $ 61,975 $ 62,031 $ 60,040 Deposits Fixed annuities 3,802 3,636 6,007 Institutional products (funding agreements) 4,158 3,000 2,100 Interest-sensitive life insurance 1,404 1,402 1,416 Variable annuity and life deposits allocated to fixed accounts 2 1 99 Bank and other deposits 1,036 952 856 Total deposits 10,402 8,991 10,478 Interest credited 2,405 2,689 2,666 Maturities, benefits, withdrawals and other adjustments Maturities and retirements of institutional products (8,599 ) (3,165 ) (2,726 ) Benefits (1,710 ) (1,668 ) (1,517 ) Surrenders and partial withdrawals (5,313 ) (5,872 ) (5,945 ) Contract charges (870 ) (801 ) (749 ) Net transfers from (to) separate accounts 19 13 (145 ) Fair value hedge adjustments for institutional products (56 ) 34 38 Other adjustments (1) 160 (277 ) (109 ) Total maturities, benefits, withdrawals and other adjustments (16,369 ) (11,736 ) (11,153 ) Contractholder funds, ending balance $ 58,413 $ 61,975 $ 62,031 (1) The table above illustrates the changes in contractholder funds, which are presented gross of reinsurance recoverables on the Consolidated Statements of Financial Position. The table above is intended to supplement our discussion and analysis of revenues, which are presented net of reinsurance on the Consolidated Statements of Operations. As a result, the net change in contractholder funds associated with products reinsured to third parties is reflected as a component of the other adjustments line. This includes, but is not limited to, the net change in contractholder funds associated with the reinsured variable annuity business subsequent to the effective date of our reinsurance agreements with Prudential (see Note 3 to the consolidated financial statements). Contractholder funds decreased 5.8% and 0.1% in 2008 and 2007, respectively, and increased 3.3% in 2006. Average contractholder funds decreased 2.9% in 2008 compared to 2007, and increased 1.6% in 2007 compared to 2006. Contractholder deposits increased 15.7% in 2008 compared to 2007 due primarily to higher deposits on institutional products, and to a lesser extent, higher deposits on fixed annuities and Allstate Bank products. Sales of our institutional products vary from period to period based on management's assessment of market conditions, investor demand and operational priorities. Deposits on fixed annuities increased 4.6% in 2008 compared to 2007 due primarily to increased consumer demand as the attractiveness of fixed annuities relative to competing products improved, partially offset by pricing decisions aimed to increase new business returns. Contractholder deposits decreased 14.2% in 2007 compared to 2006. This decline was primarily due to lower deposits on fixed annuities partially offset by higher deposits on institutional products. The decline of 39.5% in fixed annuity deposits in 2007 compared to 2006 was due to our strategy to raise new business returns for these products combined with lower industry-wide fixed annuity sales. Deposits on institutional products increased 42.9% in 2007 compared to 2006. Maturities and retirements of institutional products increased $5.43 billion in 2008 compared to 2007. During 2008, we retired $5.36 billion of extendible institutional market obligations for which investors had elected to non-extend their maturity date through a combination of maturities, calls, and acquisitions in the secondary market. All of our outstanding extendible institutional market contracts, which totaled $1.45 billion as of December 31, 2008, have non-extended and become due by October 31, 2009. We have accumulated, and expect to maintain, short-term and other maturing investments to fund the retirement of these obligations. 75 Surrenders and partial withdrawals decreased 9.5% to $5.31 billion in 2008 from $5.87 billion in 2007 due to lower surrenders and partial withdrawals on market value adjusted annuities and traditional fixed annuities, partially offset by higher surrenders and partial withdrawals on interest-sensitive life insurance products and, to a lesser extent, increased withdrawals on Allstate Bank products. The surrender and partial withdrawal rate on deferred fixed annuities, interest-sensitive life insurance products and Allstate Bank products, based on the beginning of period contractholder funds, was 12.2% in 2008 compared to 13.3% in 2007. Surrenders and partial withdrawals decreased 1.2% in 2007 compared to 2006. This decline was due to lower surrenders and partial withdrawals on interest-sensitive life insurance policies and the classification of the net change in variable annuity contractholder funds as "other adjustments" subsequent to the effective date of our reinsurance agreements with Prudential. These declines were partially offset by an 11.2% increase in surrenders and partial withdrawals on fixed annuities. The surrenders and partial withdrawals line in the table above, for 2006 includes $120 million related to the reinsured variable annuity business. The surrender and partial withdrawal rate on deferred fixed annuities, interest-sensitive life insurance products and Allstate Bank products, based on the beginning of period contractholder funds, was 13.3% in 2007 compared to 13.9% in 2006. The improvement in the surrender and partial withdrawal rate in 2007 compared to 2006 was primarily due to a block of corporate owned life insurance policies that terminated in 2006 due to the bankruptcy of the policyholder. Net investment income decreased 11.3% in 2008 compared to 2007 and increased 3.0% in 2007 compared to 2006. The decline in 2008 was primarily due to lower investment yields on floating rate securities, increased short-term investment balances reflecting liquidity management activities, lower average investment balances and lower income from limited partnership interests. The increase in 2007 was primarily due to higher average portfolio balances, increased portfolio yields and higher income from limited partnership interests. Net realized capital gains and losses are reflected in the following table for the years ended December 31. ($ in millions) 2008 2007 2006 Sales (1) $ 178 $ 75 $ (27 ) Impairment write-downs (2) (1,256 ) (118 ) (21 ) Change in intent write-downs (1)(3) (1,247 ) (93 ) (60 ) Valuation of derivative instruments (985 ) (63 ) (17 ) EMA LP income (4) (14 ) Settlements of derivative instruments 197 6 48 Realized capital gains and losses, pre-tax (3,127 ) (193 ) (77 ) Income tax benefit 1,093 68 27 Realized capital gains and losses, after-tax $ (2,034 ) $ (125 ) $ (50 ) (1) To conform to the current period presentation, certain amounts in the prior periods have been reclassified. (2) Impairment write-downs reflect issue specific other than temporary declines in fair value, including instances where we could not reasonably assert that the recovery period would be temporary. (3) Change in intent write-downs reflect instances where we cannot assert a positive intent to hold until recovery. (4) Beginning in the fourth quarter of 2008, income from EMA LP is reported in realized capital gains and losses. EMA LP income for periods prior to the fourth quarter of 2008 is reported in net investment income. For further discussion of realized capital gains and losses, see the Investments section of the MD&A. Analysis of Costs and Expenses Total costs and expenses decreased 0.9% or $48 million in 2008 compared to 2007 due to lower interest credited to contractholder funds, partially offset by higher amortization of DAC, contract benefits and operating costs and expenses. Total costs and expenses in 2007 were consistent with 2006 as increased interest credited to contractholder funds and life and annuity contract benefits were offset by lower amortization of DAC, operating costs and expenses, and restructuring and related charges. Life and annuity contract benefits increased 1.5% or $23 million in 2008 compared to 2007 due primarily to higher contract benefits on life insurance products, partially offset by lower contract benefits on annuities. The increase in contract benefits on life insurance products was primarily due to unfavorable mortality experience, partially offset by the recognition in the prior year period of litigation related costs in the form of additional policy benefits. The decline in contract benefits on annuities was due to the impact of lower sales of immediate annuities with life contingencies, partially offset by unfavorable mortality experience. 76 Life and annuity contract benefits increased 1.2% or $19 million in 2007 compared to 2006 due to increased contract benefits on life insurance products, partially offset by lower contract benefits on annuities. Increased contract benefits on life insurance products in 2007 were primarily due to unfavorable mortality experience, litigation related costs recognized in 2007 in the form of additional policy benefits on certain universal life policies written prior to 1992, and higher contract benefits associated with the Workplace Division. The decline in contract benefits on annuities was mostly attributable to favorable mortality experience on immediate annuities with life contingencies and the absence in 2007 of contract benefits on the reinsured variable annuity business, partially offset by an increase in the implied interest on immediate annuities with life contingencies. We analyze our mortality and morbidity results using the difference between premiums and contract charges earned for the cost of insurance and life and annuity contract benefits excluding the portion related to the implied interest on immediate annuities with life contingencies ("benefit spread"). This implied interest totaled $552 million, $547 million and $539 million in 2008, 2007 and 2006, respectively. The benefit spread by product group is disclosed in the following table. ($ in millions) 2008 2007 2006 Life insurance $ 540 $ 515 $ 549 Annuities (62 ) (35 ) (43 ) Total benefit spread $ 478 $ 480 $ 506 Interest credited to contractholder funds decreased 10.1% or $270 million in 2008 compared to 2007 and increased 2.8% or $72 million in 2007 compared to 2006. The decrease in 2008 compared to 2007 was due primarily to a decline in average contractholder funds, decreased weighted average interest crediting rates on institutional products resulting from a decline in market interest rates on floating rate obligations, and a favorable change in amortization of DSI relating to realized capital gains and losses, partially offset by the acceleration of amortization of DSI due to changes in assumptions. The acceleration of amortization of DSI due to changes in assumptions increased interest credited to contractholder funds by $70 million in 2008 compared to amortization deceleration which decreased interest credited to contractholder funds by $5 million in 2007. The increase in interest credited to contractholder funds in 2007 compared to 2006 was due primarily to growth in average contractholder funds and, to a lesser extent, higher weighted average interest crediting rates on institutional products, which are detailed in the table of investment yields, crediting rates and investment spreads by product below. The increase was partially offset by the impact of the reinsured variable annuity business. Excluding the impact of the reinsured variable annuity business, interest credited to contractholder funds increased 3.7% in 2007 compared to 2006. In order to analyze the impact of net investment income and interest credited to contractholders on net income, we monitor the difference between net investment income and the sum of interest credited to contractholder funds and the implied interest on immediate annuities with life contingencies, which is included as a component of life and annuity contract benefits on the Consolidated Statements of Operations ("investment spread"). The investment spread by product group is shown in the following table. ($ in millions) 2008 2007 2006 Annuities $ 389 $ 505 $ 481 Life insurance 60 63 60 Institutional products 71 87 88 Bank 22 18 16 Net investment income on investments supporting capital 306 396 380 Total investment spread $ 848 $ 1,069 $ 1,025 77 To further analyze investment spreads, the following table summarizes the weighted average investment yield on assets supporting product liabilities and capital, interest crediting rates and investment spreads for 2008, 2007 and 2006. Weighted average investment yield Weighted average interest crediting rate Weighted average investment spreads 2008 2007 2006 2008 2007 2006 2008 2007 2006 Interest-sensitive life insurance 6.0 % 6.2 % 6.2 % 4.6 % 4.6 % 4.7 % 1.4 % 1.6 % 1.5 % Deferred fixed annuities 5.5 5.8 5.7 3.7 3.7 3.7 1.8 2.1 2.0 Immediate fixed annuities with and without life contingencies 6.8 7.1 7.2 6.5 6.5 6.6 0.3 0.6 0.6 Institutional products 4.2 6.1 6.0 3.5 5.2 5.0 0.7 0.9 1.0 Investments supporting capital, traditional life and other products 5.3 6.1 5.7 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A The following table summarizes our product liabilities as of December 31 and indicates the account value of those contracts and policies in which an investment spread is generated. ($ in millions) 2008 2007 2006 Immediate fixed annuities with life contingencies $ 8,355 $ 8,294 $ 8,144 Other life contingent contracts and other 4,526 4,918 4,642 Reserve for life-contingent contract benefits $ 12,881 $ 13,212 $ 12,786 Interest-sensitive life insurance $ 9,957 $ 9,539 $ 9,050 Deferred fixed annuities 33,766 34,214 35,533 Immediate fixed annuities without life contingencies 3,894 3,921 3,783 Institutional products 8,974 12,983 12,467 Allstate Bank 949 832 773 Market value adjustments related to fair value hedges and other 873 486 425 Contractholder funds $ 58,413 $ 61,975 $ 62,031 Amortization of DAC increased 20.8% in 2008 compared to 2007 and decreased 6.9% in 2007 compared to 2006. The components of amortization of DAC are summarized in the following table. ($ in millions) 2008 2007 2006 Amortization of DAC before amortization relating to realized capital gains and losses, changes in assumptions and premium deficiency (1) $ (556 ) $ (614 ) $ (674 ) Accretion relating to realized capital gains and losses (2) 515 17 50 Amortization (acceleration) deceleration for changes in assumptions ("DAC unlocking") (327 ) 14 (2 ) Amortization charge relating to premium deficiency (336 ) Total amortization of DAC (3) $ (704 ) $ (583 ) $ (626 ) (1) Amortization of DAC before accretion relating to realized capital gains and losses and changes in assumptions for 2006 includes $(72) million relating to the reinsured variable annuity business. (2) Amortization relating to realized capital gains and losses for 2006 includes $28 million relating to the reinsured variable annuity business. (3) Total amortization of DAC for 2006 includes $44 million relating to the reinsured variable annuity business. The increase of $121 million in 2008 was due primarily to amortization acceleration relating to changes in assumptions and additional amortization recorded in connection with a premium deficiency assessment for traditional life insurance and immediate annuities with life contingencies, partially offset by higher accretion of DAC relating to net realized capital losses. The impact of realized capital gains and losses on amortization of DAC is dependent upon the relationship between the assets that give rise to the gain or loss and the product liability supported by the assets. Fluctuations result from changes in the impact of realized capital gains and losses on actual and expected gross profits. In 2008, DAC amortization acceleration for changes in assumptions, recorded in connection with comprehensive reviews of the DAC balances and assumptions for interest-sensitive life insurance, annuities and other investment contracts, resulted in an increase to amortization of DAC of $327 million. The evaluations 78 covered assumptions for investment returns, including capital gains and losses, interest crediting rates to policyholders, the effect of any hedges, persistency, mortality and expenses in all product lines. The principle assumption impacting the amortization acceleration in 2008 was the level of realized capital losses impacting actual gross profits in 2008 and the impact of realized capital losses on EGP in 2009. During the fourth quarter of 2008, our assumptions for EGP were impacted by a view of further anticipated impairments in our investment portfolio. In 2007, DAC amortization deceleration for changes in assumptions (credit to income) was $14 million. During 2008, indicators emerged that suggested a study of mortality experience for our immediate annuities with life contingences was warranted. At the same time, the underlying profitability of the traditional life business deteriorated due to lower investment returns and growth. For traditional life insurance and immediate annuities with life contingencies, an aggregate premium deficiency of $336 million, pre-tax, resulted primarily from the experience study indicating that the annuitants on certain life contingent contracts are projected to live longer than we anticipated when the contracts were issued and, to a lesser degree, a reduction in the related investment portfolio yield. The deficiency was recorded through a reduction in DAC. There was no similar charge to income recorded in 2007 or 2006. The decrease in amortization of DAC in 2007 compared to 2006 was due to the absence in 2007 of amortization on the reinsured variable annuity business. Excluding amortization relating to the reinsured variable annuity business, amortization of DAC in 2007 was consistent with 2006 as increased amortization related to higher gross profits on fixed annuities and a decline in the credit to income for amortization relating to realized capital gains and losses were partially offset by lower amortization related to interest-sensitive life insurance contracts and a favorable impact relating to DAC unlocking. The decline in amortization related to interest-sensitive life insurance contracts was the result of a write-down in 2006 totaling $27 million for the present value of future profits related to a block of corporate owned life insurance policies that terminated due to the bankruptcy of the policyholder. The changes in the DAC asset are detailed in the following tables. ($ in millions) Beginning balance December 31, 2007 Acquisition costs deferred Amortization before adjustments (1)(2) Accretion relating to realized capital gains and losses (2) Amortization (acceleration) deceleration (charged) credited to income (2)(3) Effect of unrealized capital gains and losses (4) Ending balance December 31, 2008 Traditional life and other $ 882 $ 160 $ (111 ) $ $ (336 ) $ $ 595 Interest-sensitive life 1,911 304 (178 ) 141 (75 ) 346 2,449 Fixed annuities 1,489 212 (258 ) 374 (252 ) 2,472 4,037 Variable annuities 2 (2 ) Other 7 8 (7 ) 8 Total $ 4,291 $ 684 $ (556 ) $ 515 $ (663 ) $ 2,818 $ 7,089 ($ in millions) Beginning balance December 31, 2006 Impact of adoption of SOP 05-1 (5) Acquisition costs deferred Amortization before adjustments (1)(2) Accretion relating to realized capital gains and losses (2) Amortization (acceleration) deceleration (charged) credited to income (2) Effect of unrealized capital gains and losses (4) Ending balance December 31, 2007 Traditional life and other $ 841 $ $ 149 $ (108 ) $ $ $ $ 882 Interest-sensitive life 1,774 264 (187 ) 12 18 30 1,911 Fixed annuities 1,219 (11 ) 220 (312 ) 5 (4 ) 372 1,489 Variable annuities 4 (2 ) 2 Other 10 2 (5 ) 7 Total $ 3,848 $ (11 ) $ 635 $ (614 ) $ 17 $ 14 $ 402 $ 4,291 (1) Amortization before adjustments reflects total DAC amortization before accretion relating to realized capital gains and losses and amortization (acceleration) deceleration (charged) credited to income. (2) Included as a component of amortization of DAC on the Consolidated Statements of Operations. (3) The $(336) million in the traditional life and other line was recorded in connection with a premium deficiency assessment for traditional life insurance and immediate annuities with life contingencies and was primarily due to revised annuity mortality assumptions. (4) The effect of unrealized capital gains and losses represents the amount by which the amortization of DAC would increase or decrease if the unrealized capital gains and losses in the respective product portfolios were realized. Recapitalization of DAC is limited to the originally deferred policy acquisition costs plus interest. (5) The adoption of Statement of Position 05-1, "Accounting by Insurance Enterprises for Deferred Acquisition Costs in Connection with Modifications or Exchanges of Insurance Contracts" ("SOP 05-1"), resulted in an adjustment to unamortized DAC related to the impact on future estimated gross profits from the changes in accounting for certain costs associated with contract continuations that no longer 79 qualify for deferral under SOP 05-1. The adjustment was recorded as a $7 million reduction of retained income at January 1, 2007 and a reduction of the DAC balance of $11 million, pre-tax. Operating costs and expenses increased 17.9% in 2008 compared to 2007 and decreased 5.8% in 2007 compared to 2006. The following table summarizes operating costs and expenses. (in millions) 2008 2007 2006 Non-deferrable acquisition costs $ 153 $ 167 $ 175 Other operating costs and expenses 367 274 293 Total operating costs and expenses $ 520 $ 441 $ 468 Restructuring and related charges $ 1 $ 2 $ 24 Non-deferrable acquisition costs decreased 8.4% or $14 million in 2008 compared to 2007 primarily due to lower non-deferrable commissions. Other operating costs and expenses increased 33.9% or $93 million in 2008 compared to 2007 due primarily to increased spending on consumer research, product development, marketing and technology related to the effort to reinvent protection and retirement for consumers as well as increases in the net cost of benefits due to unfavorable investment results. In addition, the prior years benefitted to a greater degree from a servicing fee paid by Prudential for our servicing of the variable annuity business that we ceded to them during a transition period beginning in 2006 which ended in May 2008. Non-deferrable acquisition costs and other operating costs and expenses declined in 2007 compared to 2006 due to expenses in 2006 related to the reinsured variable annuity business. Non-deferrable acquisition costs and other operating costs and expenses for 2006 included $19 million and $24 million, respectively, related to the reinsured variable annuity business for the period of 2006 prior to the effective date of the reinsurance agreement. Excluding expenses associated with the impact of the reinsured variable annuity business in the period of 2006 prior to the effective date of the reinsurance agreement, non-deferrable acquisition expenses increased 7.1% in 2007 compared to 2006 due to higher non-deferrable commissions on certain Workplace Division products and other operating costs and expenses increased 1.9% due to higher investment in technology. Loss on disposition of operations for 2008, 2007 and 2006 totaled $6 million, $10 million and $92 million, respectively. In both 2008 and 2007, the net loss was primarily comprised of losses associated with the previously anticipated disposition of our direct response long-term care business, partially offset by amortization of the deferred reinsurance gain associated with our reinsured variable annuity business. The net loss in 2006 was almost entirely attributable to the reinsured variable annuity business. Income tax benefit of $954 million was recognized for 2008 compared to income tax expense of $199 million in 2007. The change reflects the shift from net pre-tax income in 2007 to a net pre-tax loss in 2008. Income tax expense decreased by 3.9% or $8 million in 2007 compared to 2006 due to lower income from operations before income tax expense and an energy tax credit that reduced income tax expense. Reinsurance Ceded We enter into reinsurance agreements with unaffiliated reinsurers to limit our risk of mortality and morbidity losses. In addition, Allstate Financial has used reinsurance to effect the acquisition or disposition of certain blocks of business. We retain primary liability as a direct insurer for all risks ceded to reinsurers. As of December 31, 2008 and 2007, 47% and 48%, respectively, of our face amount of life insurance in force was reinsured. As of December 31, 2008 and 2007, for certain term life insurance policies, we ceded up to 90% of the mortality risk depending on the year of policy issuance. Additionally, we ceded substantially all of the risk associated with our variable annuity business and we cede 100% of the morbidity risk on substantially all of our long-term care contracts. Beginning in July 2007, for new life insurance contracts, we ceded the mortality risk associated with coverage in excess of $3 million per life for contracts issued to individuals age 70 and over, and we ceded the mortality risk associated with coverage in excess of $5 million per life for most other contracts. Also beginning in July 2007, for certain large contracts that meet specific criteria, our retention limit was increased to $10 million per life. In the period prior to July 2007, but subsequent to August 1998, we ceded the mortality risk associated with coverage in excess of $2 million per life, except in 2006 for certain instances when specific criteria were met, we ceded the mortality risk associated with coverage in excess of $5 million per life. For business sold prior to October 1998, we ceded mortality risk in excess of specific amounts up to $1 million per individual life. 80 Amounts recoverable from reinsurers by type of policy or contract at December 31, are summarized in the following table. Reinsurance recoverable on paid and unpaid benefits ($ in millions) 2008 2007 Annuities (1) $ 1,734 $ 1,423 Life insurance 1,475 1,373 Long-term care 746 619 Other 96 97 Total Allstate Financial $ 4,051 $ 3,512 (1) Reinsurance recoverables as of December 31, 2008 and 2007 include $1.57 billion and $1.26 billion, respectively, for general account reserves related to reinsured variable annuities. The estimation of reinsurance recoverables is impacted by the uncertainties involved in the establishment of reserves. Our reinsurance recoverables, summarized by reinsurer as of December 31, are shown in the following table. S&P Financial Strength Rating Reinsurance recoverable on paid and unpaid benefits ($ in millions) 2008 2007 Prudential Insurance Company of America AA $ 1,569 $ 1,261 Employers Reassurance Corporation A+ 644 541 RGA Reinsurance Company AA- 342 327 Transamerica Life Group AA 341 288 Swiss Re Life and Health America, Inc. AA- 192 173 Paul Revere Life Insurance Company A- 151 147 Scottish Re Group (1) CCC+ 135 111 Munich American Reassurance AA- 113 103 Mutual of Omaha Insurance AA- 100 80 Security Life of Denver AA 86 86 Manulife Insurance Company AAA 74 78 Triton Insurance Company NR 66 73 Lincoln National Life Insurance AA 63 63 American Health & Life Insurance Co. NR 53 57 Other (2) 122 124 Total $ 4,051 $ 3,512 (1) The reinsurance recoverable on paid and unpaid benefits related to the Scottish Re Group of $135 million as of December 31, 2008 is comprised of $73 million related to Scottish Re Life Corporation and $62 million related to Scottish Re (U.S.), Inc. (2) As of December 31, 2008 and 2007, the other category includes $100 million and $84 million, respectively, of recoverables due from reinsurers with an investment grade credit rating from S&P. During 2008, the financial strength rating of the Scottish Re Group was downgraded by S&P to CCC+ from BB+ as of December 31, 2007 due to the deterioration of the Scottish Re Group's financial position and liquidity. The Scottish Re Group's financial strength rating was further downgraded by S&P in January 2009 to CCC. The financial strength ratings of the other of Allstate Financial's reinsurers remain stable. Although a significant impact has not been observed, the unprecedented deterioration in the global financial markets in 2008 could impact the financial condition of reinsurers in a variety of ways, including the decline in value of assets held as capital resources or to meet technical provisions, increases in risk-based economic or regulatory capital requirements and shortage of available capital in the event that recapitalization is required following a major claim. We continuously monitor the creditworthiness of reinsurers in order to determine our risk of recoverability on an individual and aggregate basis, and a provision for uncollectible reinsurance is recorded if needed. No amounts have been deemed unrecoverable in the three-years ended December 31, 2008. 81 We enter into certain inter-company reinsurance transactions for the Allstate Financial operations in order to maintain underwriting control and manage insurance risk among various legal entities. These reinsurance agreements have been approved by the appropriate regulatory authorities. All significant inter-company transactions have been eliminated in consolidation. Allstate Financial Outlook We will continue to focus on improving returns and reducing our concentration in spread based products, primarily fixed annuities and institutional markets products, resulting in lower premiums and deposits and reductions in net contractholder obligations. We plan to improve efficiency and narrow the focus of product offerings to better serve the needs of everyday Americans. We are targeting savings at 20% of certain operating expenses, excluding acquisition costs, and expect to yield estimated annual savings of $90 million beginning in 2011. We anticipate a reduction of approximately 1,000 workforce positions, through a combination of attrition and position elimination over the next two years. Maintaining high liquidity in our investment portfolio will result in lower net investment income but will ensure our ability to meet contractholder obligations. We will target sales of our spread based products at levels that allow us to avoid sales of investments with significant unrealized losses into distressed or illiquid markets. We expect continued investment spread compression due to credit losses, reduced contractholder funds and maintenance of liquidity. INVESTMENTS Overview and Strategy An important component of our financial results is the return on our investment portfolios. Investment portfolios are segmented between the Property-Liability, Allstate Financial and Corporate and Other operations. While taking into consideration the investment portfolio in aggregate, we manage the underlying portfolios based upon the nature of each respective business and its corresponding liability structure. The global economy is under significant stress and financial markets continue to experience extreme levels of volatility. Our strategy in 2009 will focus primarily upon mitigating the risks from a potential increase in risk-free interest rates, reducing exposure to certain investment sectors, and maintaining sufficient liquidity and capital. In order to achieve this, we expect to use a combination of reinvestment of the portfolio's significant cash flows, derivatives and other portfolio actions. The Property-Liability portfolio's investment strategy emphasizes safety of principal and consistent income generation, within a total return framework. This approach, which has produced competitive returns over the long term, is designed to ensure financial strength and stability for paying claims, while maximizing economic value and surplus growth. We employ a strategic asset allocation approach, which uses models that consider the nature of the liabilities and risk tolerances, as well as the risk and return parameters of the various asset classes in which we invest. The recommended asset allocation is informed by our economic and market outlook, as well as other inputs and constraints, including duration, liquidity and capital considerations. The Allstate Financial portfolio's investment strategy focuses on the total return of assets needed to support the underlying liabilities to achieve return on capital and profitable growth. The portfolio management process begins with a strategic asset allocation model which considers the nature and risk tolerances of the liabilities and risk tolerances, as well as the risk and return parameters, of the various asset classes in which we invest. This approach is informed by our economic and market outlook, as well as other inputs and constraints including duration, liquidity and capital preservation. Within the ranges set by the strategic asset allocation model, tactical investment decisions are made in consideration of prevailing market conditions. The Corporate and Other portfolio's investment strategy balances the pursuit of competitive returns with the unique liquidity needs of the portfolio relative to the overall corporate capital structure. The portfolio is primarily invested in high quality, liquid fixed income and short-term securities with additional investments in less liquid holdings in order to enhance overall returns. As a result of decisions in managing each of the portfolios, we may sell securities during a period in which fair value has declined below amortized cost for fixed income securities or cost for equity securities. For more information, see the Net Realized Capital Gains and Losses section of the MD&A. 82 During 2008, we developed risk mitigation and return optimization programs as our outlook on the economy changed significantly as conditions deteriorated throughout the year. The risk mitigation and return optimization programs augment earlier actions to reduce investments in real estate and other market sectors as well as to mitigate exposures to risk-free interest rate spikes. At the end of the second quarter of 2008, we had an outlook for continued weakness in the global financial markets and economy including continued volatility in the financial markets, reduced liquidity in certain asset classes and unfavorable economic trends. During the third quarter of 2008, we significantly modified our outlook to a more severe and prolonged downturn. We continue to expect extreme levels of volatility in the financial markets, suppressed liquidity in certain asset classes and further unfavorable global economic conditions. In addition, the potential for market supply and demand imbalances has remained above normal due to the deteriorating credit strength of financial institutions and eroding investor confidence. Among our risk mitigation and return optimization activities, we have taken the following actions: Developed and maintained a tactical positioning in liquid assets and assets that we can sell without generating significant additional realized capital losses. Continued to reduce exposure in assets other than those for which we have asserted an intent to hold until recovery where we have credit concerns or where there has been a significant change in facts and circumstances. Decreased exposure to financial-related market sectors to $7.69 billion as of December 31, 2008 from $14.45 billion as of December 31, 2007, primarily as a result of targeted sales and declines in fair value. Also reduced our short-term investing in financial institutions. Decreased exposure to residential and commercial real estate market sectors to $22.00 billion as of December 31, 2008 from $31.54 billion as of December 31, 2007 as a result of targeted sales, principal payments and declines in fair value. Reduced overall counterparty exposure replacing over-the-counter ("OTC") derivatives transactions used as stock market hedges with exchange-traded instruments where available. In the second half of 2008, we sold $1.67 billion of government securities and recognized realized capital gains of $241 million. Generated losses as part of tax planning strategy primarily within our equity portfolios that are effectively carried on a lower of cost or fair value basis to realize capital loss carryback benefits. Investments for which we had changed our intent to hold to recovery as of June 30, 2008 totaled $6.39 billion and included $3.31 billion as part of the risk mitigation and return optimization programs, $2.39 billion of securities as part of our enterprise-wide asset allocation program and $688 million related to individual securities. A risk mitigation and return optimization program, approved as of the end of the second quarter of 2008, was designed to reduce our exposure to residential and commercial real estate and the financial-related market sector by approximately $4 billion of amortized cost, prior to change in intent write-downs. A comprehensive review identified specific investments that could be significantly impacted by continued deterioration in the economy that may be sold. This included a portion of our residential and commercial real estate securities including securities collateralized by residential and commercial mortgage loans, mortgage loans and securities issued by financial institutions. During the third and fourth quarters of 2008, we sold $2.94 billion of these securities. On October 1, 2008, it was determined that, due to the financial markets experiencing additional severe deterioration and disruptions, we would be unable to sell certain of the investments identified as part of the programs at a value equal to or greater than our view of their intrinsic values. Approximately $2.59 billion of these investments were re-designated as intent to hold to recovery. Investments for which we had changed our intent to hold to recovery totaled $996 million as of December 31, 2008. For a more detailed discussion on securities written down due to a change in intent, see the Net Realized Capital Gains and Losses section of the MD&A. As part of the risk mitigation and return optimization programs, hedges were implemented to mitigate portfolio interest rate risk, credit spread risk, and equity market valuation declines. The equity hedge was designed to protect the equity portfolio from significant equity market valuation declines below targeted levels. The strategy employed equity indexed options which generated realized gains in the third and fourth quarters of 2008. At December 31, 2008, we had $2.32 billion of notional protection with an average strike price that was 11% below equity market levels. The interest rate component was put in place to protect a certain portion of fixed income securities if interest rates increase above a targeted maximum level. Interest rate spike protection for our 83 fixed income portfolio in the amount of $18.50 billion of notional principal protection was in place at December 31, 2008. Of this total, $14.50 billion was executed in early 2008 and $4.00 billion executed in December 2008. The $14.50 billion of protection was initially struck at 150 basis points out of the money, but, due to declining interest rates, at December 31, 2008 is struck over 300 basis points out of the money. The $4.00 billion of protection executed in December was initially struck at approximately 100 basis points out of the money. Other aspects of the hedging program have been designed to mitigate municipal bond interest rate risk and credit spread risk. The effectiveness of these hedges may be reduced due to the basis risk associated with these strategies. We continue to monitor the progress of these actions as market and economic conditions develop and will adapt our strategies as appropriate. Our continuing focus is to manage our risks and to position our portfolio to take advantage of market opportunities while attempting to mitigate further adverse effects. Investments outlook Continuing risk mitigation efforts will focus on shortening duration of the fixed income portfolio, reducing exposures to real estate and certain other market sectors, and managing excess market volatility through our macro hedging programs. Net investment income will decline due to lower asset balances and yields, and the costs of maintaining high liquidity and the risk mitigation programs. Our portfolio continues to generate significant cash flow from maturities, principal and interest receipts which will be available to manage liabilities and take advantage of market opportunities. Portfolio Composition The composition of the investment portfolios at December 31, 2008 is presented in the table below. Also see Notes 2 and 5 of the consolidated financial statements for investment accounting policies and additional information. Property-Liability Allstate Financial (5) Corporate and Other (5) Total ($ in millions) Percent to total Percent to total Percent to total Percent to total Fixed income securities (1) $ 24,094 78.1 % $ 43,725 71.1 % $ 789 21.6 % $ 68,608 71.5 % Equity securities (2) 2,723 8.8 82 0.1 2,805 2.9 Mortgage loans 104 0.4 10,125 16.5 10,229 10.7 Limited partnership interests (3) 1,552 5.0 1,191 1.9 48 1.3 2,791 2.9 Short-term (4) 2,152 7.0 3,930 6.4 2,824 77.1 8,906 9.3 Other 212 0.7 2,446 4.0 1 2,659 2.7 Total $ 30,837 100.0 % $ 61,499 100.0 % $ 3,662 100.0 % $ 95,998 100.0 % (1) Fixed income securities are carried at fair value. Amortized cost basis for these securities was $25.83 billion, $50.52 billion and $751 million for Property-Liability, Allstate Financial and Corporate and Other, respectively. (2) Equity securities are carried at fair value. Cost basis for these securities was $3.03 billion and $107 million for Property-Liability and Allstate Financial, respectively. (3) We have commitments to invest in additional limited partnership interests totaling $805 million, $1.08 billion and $8 million for Property-Liability, Allstate Financial and Corporate and Other, respectively, at December 31, 2008. (4) Short-term investments are carried at fair value. Amortized cost basis for these investments was $2.15 billion, $3.93 billion and $2.82 billion for Property-Liability, Allstate Financial and Corporate and Other, respectively, at December 31, 2008. (5) Balances reflect the elimination of related party investments between Property-Liability and Allstate Financial and Allstate Financial and Corporate and Other. Total investments decreased to $96.00 billion at December 31, 2008, from $118.98 billion at December 31, 2007, due primarily to a $10.73 billion increase in unrealized net capital losses and net reductions in both contractholder obligations of $5.50 billion and securities lending balances of $2.98 billion. The Property-Liability investment portfolio decreased to $30.84 billion at December 31, 2008, from $40.91 billion at December 31, 2007, due to unrealized net capital losses, dividends paid by AIC to the Corporation and capital contributions from AIC to ALIC, lower funds associated with collateral received in conjunction with securities lending and net realized capital losses. 84 The Allstate Financial investment portfolio decreased to $61.50 billion at December 31, 2008, from $74.25 billion at December 31, 2007, due to unrealized net capital losses, net reductions in contractholder funds, net realized capital losses, and lower funds associated with collateral received in conjunction with securities lending, partially offset by capital contributions from AIC. The Corporate and Other investment portfolio decreased to $3.66 billion at December 31, 2008, from $3.82 billion at December 31, 2007, primarily due to cash flows used in financing activities and a $1.00 billion capital contribution to AIC. Total investments at amortized cost related to collateral received in connection with securities lending business activities and collateral posted by counterparties related to derivative transactions decreased to $340 million at December 31, 2008, from $3.46 billion at December 31, 2007. As of December 31, 2008, these investments are included as a component of short-term investments. At December 31, 2007, these investments were carried at fair value and $2.85 billion were classified in fixed income securities and $549 million were classified in short-term investments. Securities lending activities are primarily used as an investment yield enhancement, and are conducted with third parties such as brokerage firms. We obtain collateral, typically in the form of cash, in an amount generally equal to 102% to 105% of the fair value of domestic and foreign securities, respectively, and monitor the market value of the securities loaned on a daily basis with additional collateral obtained as necessary. The cash we receive is invested in short-term and fixed income investments, and an offsetting liability to return the collateral is recorded in other liabilities and accrued expenses. We obtain fair values of our fixed income and equity securities and exchange traded and non-exchange traded derivative contracts from several sources and methods. For a discussion of these sources and methods, see the Application of Critical Accounting Estimates section of the MD&A. We may utilize derivative financial instruments to help manage the exposure to interest rate risk, and to a lesser extent currency and credit risks, from the fixed income securities portfolio as well as exposure to equity price risk from the equity securities portfolio. For a more detailed discussion of interest rate, currency, credit and equity price risks and our use of derivative financial instruments, see the Net realized capital gains and losses and Market Risk sections of the MD&A and Note 6 of the consolidated financial statements. Fixed income securities See Note 5 of the consolidated financial statements for a table showing the amortized cost, unrealized gains, unrealized losses and fair value for each type of fixed income security for the years ended December 31, 2008 and 2007. The following table shows fixed income securities by type. ($ in millions) Fair value at December 31, 2008 % to Total Investments Fair value at December 31, 2007 % to Total Investments U.S. government and agencies $ 4,234 4.4 % $ 4,421 3.7 % Municipal 21,848 22.8 25,307 21.3 Corporate 27,627 28.8 38,467 32.3 Foreign government 2,675 2.8 2,936 2.5 Mortgage-backed securities ("MBS") 4,492 4.7 6,959 5.8 CMBS 3,846 4.0 7,617 6.4 ABS 3,860 4.0 8,679 7.3 Redeemable preferred stock 26 65 0.1 Total fixed income securities $ 68,608 71.5 % $ 94,451 79.4 % At December 31, 2008, 95.2% of the consolidated fixed income securities portfolio was rated investment grade, which is defined as a security having a rating from the NAIC of 1 or 2; a rating of Aaa, Aa, A or Baa from Moody's, a rating of AAA, AA, A or BBB from S&P's, Fitch or Dominion or a rating of aaa, aa, a, or bbb from 85 A.M. Best; or a comparable internal rating if an externally provided rating is not available. The following table summarizes the credit quality of the fixed income securities portfolio at December 31, 2008. (in millions) Property-Liability Allstate Financial Corporate and Other Total NAIC Rating Moody's Equivalent Fair Value Percent to total Fair Value Percent to total Fair Value Percent to total Fair Value Percent to total 1 Aaa/Aa/A $ 18,818 78.1 % $ 29,286 67.0 % $ 762 96.6 % $ 48,866 71.2 % 2 Baa 3,747 15.6 12,690 29.0 21 2.6 16,458 24.0 Investment grade 22,565 93.7 41,976 96.0 783 99.2 65,324 95.2 3 Ba 687 2.8 1,275 2.9 1,962 2.9 4 B 496 2.1 317 0.7 3 0.4 816 1.2 5 Caa or lower 301 1.2 131 0.3 3 0.4 435 0.6 6 In or near default 45 0.2 26 0.1 71 0.1 Below investment grade 1,529 6.3 1,749 4.0 6 0.8 3,284 4.8 Total $ 24,094 100.0 % $ 43,725 100.0 % $ 789 100.0 % $ 68,608 100.0 % The table above includes 67 securities with a fair value totaling $317 million that have not yet received an NAIC rating, for which we have assigned a comparable internal rating. Due to lags between the funding of an investment, execution of final legal documents, filing with the Securities Valuation Office ("SVO") of the NAIC, and rating by the SVO, we generally have a small number of securities that have a pending NAIC rating. Municipal Bonds , including tax-exempt and taxable securities, totaled $21.85 billion at December 31, 2008. The following table summarizes the municipal bond portfolio by Moody's equivalent rating as of December 31, 2008. Tax exempt (in millions) Par value Amortized cost Fair value Unrealized gain/loss Fair value as a percent of amortized cost Non-zero-coupon: Rating (2) Aaa $ 1,456 $ 1,451 $ 1,493 $ 42 102.9 % Aa 5,894 5,902 5,779 (123 ) 97.9 A 4,918 4,928 4,727 (201 ) 95.9 Baa 3,827 3,766 3,417 (349 ) 90.7 Ba or lower 977 930 698 (232 ) 75.1 Total 17,072 16,977 16,114 (863 ) 94.9 Zero-coupon: Rating (2) Aaa 1,050 358 369 11 103.1 Aa 642 328 337 9 102.7 A 538 227 223 (4 ) 98.2 Baa 1,883 375 311 (64 ) 82.9 Total 4,113 1,288 1,240 (48 ) 96.3 Total tax exempt $ 21,185 $ 18,265 $ 17,354 $ (911 ) 95.0 Taxable (in millions) Par value Amortized cost Fair value Unrealized gain/loss Fair value as a percent of amortized cost Non-zero-coupon: Rating (2) Aaa $ 42 $ 45 $ 52 $ 7 115.6 % Aa 746 744 684 (60 ) 91.9 A 553 553 529 (24 ) 95.7 Baa 486 488 438 (50 ) 89.8 Ba or lower 178 177 146 (31 ) 82.5 Total 2,005 2,007 1,849 (158 ) 92.1 86 Taxable (in millions) Par value Amortized cost Fair value Unrealized gain/loss Fair value as a percent of amortized cost Zero-coupon: Rating (2) Aaa 147 42 39 (3 ) 92.9 Aa 1,014 440 308 (132 ) 70.0 A 771 331 228 (103 ) 68.9 Baa 3,610 573 337 (236 ) 58.8 Total 5,542 1,386 912 (474 ) 65.8 Total taxable $ 7,547 $ 3,393 $ 2,761 $ (632 ) 81.4 Total (in millions) Par value Amortized cost Fair value Unrealized gain/loss Fair value as a percent of amortized cost Rating (2) Aaa $ 4,455 $ 3,655 $ 3,552 $ (103 ) 97.2 % Aa 8,373 7,491 7,181 (310 ) 95.9 A 6,850 6,109 5,769 (340 ) 94.4 Baa 9,807 5,202 4,501 (701 ) 86.5 Ba or lower 1,155 1,108 845 (263 ) 76.3 Total (1) $ 30,640 $ 23,565 $ 21,848 $ (1,717 ) 92.7 (1) Includes ARS securities with par value of $1.91 billion, amortized cost of $1.91 billion, fair value of $1.73 billion and unrealized gains/losses of $(176) million. (2) Moody's equivalent rating will not necessarily tie to ratings distributions from the NAIC due to potential timing differences between the various rating suppliers and the number of external rating agencies used in the determination. The unrealized net capital loss of $1.72 billion at December 31, 2008 in our municipal bond portfolio was mainly caused by widening credit spreads that affected three main areas in this portfolio: tax exempt A and Baa rated holdings contributing $550 million of the unrealized losses and taxable zero-coupon holdings contributing $474 million of the unrealized losses, but particularly our less liquid zero-coupon and longer dated securities; high yield municipal bond portfolio contributing $263 million of the unrealized losses; and student loan ARS contributing $176 million of the unrealized losses. Included in our municipal bond portfolio at December 31, 2008 are $1.73 billion of ARS that have long-term stated maturities, with the interest rate reset based on auctions that generally occur every 7, 28 or 35 days depending on the specific security. This is compared to a balance of ARS at December 31, 2007 of $2.56 billion, with the decline primarily representing redemptions from calls or refunding proceeds since December 31, 2007. Our holdings primarily have a Moody's equivalent rating of Aaa. Approximately $1.69 billion of our holdings are pools of student loans for which at least 85% of the collateral was insured by the U.S. Department of Education at the time we purchased the security. As of December 31, 2008, $1.11 billion of our ARS backed by student loans was 100% insured by the U.S. Department of Education, $335 million was 90% to 99% insured and $165 million was 80% to 89% insured. All of our student loan ARS holdings are experiencing failed auctions and we receive the failed auction rate or, for those which contain maximum reset rate formulas, we received the contractual maximum rate. We anticipate that failed auctions may persist and most of our holdings will continue to pay the failed auction rate or, for those that contain maximum rate reset formulas, the maximum rate, as described below. Auctions continue to be conducted as scheduled for each of the securities. We estimate that approximately one third of our student loan backed ARS include maximum rate reset formulas with a look back feature whereby if the failed auction rate exceeds an annual contractual maximum rate over a preceding stipulated period, the coupon interest rate is temporarily reset to the maximum rate, which can vary between zero and the failed auction rate. This maximum rate formula causes the reset interest rate on these securities to be lower than the failed auction rate in order to reduce the annual interest rate so that it does not exceed the annual contractual maximum rate. Generally, the annual contractual maximum rate is higher than the historical rates paid on these securities. At December 31, 2008, interest on $118 million of our ARS has reset using the maximum rate reset formula. 87 Also included in our municipal bond holdings at December 31, 2008 are $949 million of municipal securities which are not rated by third party credit rating agencies, but are rated by the NAIC and also internally rated by us. These holdings mainly comprise the high yield portion of our overall municipal bond portfolio and provide the opportunity to achieve incremental returns and enhanced diversification of our overall investments portfolio. Our initial investment decisions and ongoing monitoring procedures for these securities are based on a thorough due diligence process that includes, among other things, an assessment of the credit, structure, and liquidity risks of the issue and issuer. Corporate bonds totaled $27.63 billion at December 31, 2008. As of December 31, 2008, $13.01 billion, or 47.1% of the portfolio consisted of privately placed securities compared to $17.34 billion or 45.1% at December 31, 2007. Privately placed securities primarily consist of corporate issued senior debt securities that are in unregistered form and are directly negotiated with the borrower. All privately placed corporate securities are rated by the NAIC based on information provided to them and are also internally rated. Additionally, approximately 40.7% of the privately placed corporate securities in our portfolio are rated by an independent rating agency. The following table summarizes the corporate fixed income portfolio by Moody's equivalent rating as of December 31, 2008. ($ in millions) Corporate-Public Non-hybrid Hybrid Total Rating (1) Fair value Unrealized gain/loss Fair value Unrealized gain/loss Fair value Unrealized gain/loss Aaa $ 255 $ (30 ) $ $ $ 255 $ (30 ) Aa 1,264 13 94 6 1,358 19 A 4,900 (159 ) 364 (186 ) 5,264 (345 ) Baa 6,379 (671 ) 168 (167 ) 6,547 (838 ) Ba or lower 1,178 (323 ) 16 (19 ) 1,194 (342 ) Total $ 13,976 $ (1,170 ) $ 642 $ (366 ) $ 14,618 $ (1,536 ) ($ in millions) Corporate-Private Non-hybrid Hybrid Total Rating (1) Fair value Unrealized gain/loss Fair value Unrealized gain/loss Fair value Unrealized gain/loss Aaa $ 542 $ 26 $ $ $ 542 $ 26 Aa 1,118 (38 ) 74 (28 ) 1,192 (66 ) A 3,296 (190 ) 577 (449 ) 3,873 (639 ) Baa 6,274 (774 ) 87 (99 ) 6,361 (873 ) Ba or lower 1,023 (305 ) 18 (20 ) 1,041 (325 ) Total $ 12,253 $ (1,281 ) $ 756 $ (596 ) $ 13,009 $ (1,877 ) ($ in millions) Total Corporate Non-hybrid Hybrid Total Rating (1) Fair value Unrealized gain/loss Fair value Unrealized gain/loss Fair value Unrealized gain/loss Aaa $ 797 $ (4 ) $ $ $ 797 $ (4 ) Aa 2,382 (25 ) 168 (22 ) 2,550 (47 ) A 8,196 (349 ) 941 (635 ) 9,137 (984 ) Baa 12,653 (1,445 ) 255 (266 ) 12,908 (1,711 ) Ba or lower 2,201 (628 ) 34 (39 ) 2,235 (667 ) Total $ 26,229 $ (2,451 ) $ 1,398 $ (962 ) $ 27,627 $ (3,413 ) (1) Moody's equivalent rating will not necessarily tie to ratings distributions from the NAIC due to potential timing differences between the various rating suppliers and the number of external rating agencies used in the determination. The unrealized net capital loss of $3.41 billion at December 31, 2008 is driven primarily by significantly widening credit spreads resulting from deteriorating macro economic conditions and continued credit market deterioration. Credit spread widening particularly affected our non-hybrid Baa and lower rated corporate bond holdings, contributing to approximately $2.07 billion of the unrealized net capital loss. The other significant driver of unrealized net capital losses in our corporate bond portfolio is from hybrid securities, contributing $962 million of the unrealized loss. While these securities are generally issued by highly rated financial institutions, they have structural features which make them more sensitive to credit market deterioration. Specifically, features allowing coupon deferral and the extension of call dates have severely impacted prices as the global financial system undergoes significant stress. 88 The following table shows additional details of our hybrid securities reported in corporate fixed income securities. United Kingdom Europe (non-UK) Asia/Australia North America Total ($ in millions) Fair value Unrealized gain/loss Fair value Unrealized gain/loss Fair value Unrealized gain/loss Fair value Unrealized gain/loss Fair value Unrealized gain/loss Tier 1: Public $ 84 $ (64 ) $ 74 $ (78 ) $ 18 $ (8 ) $ 248 $ (217 ) $ 424 $ (367 ) Private 65 (97 ) 233 (248 ) 168 (112 ) 127 (117 ) 593 (574 ) 149 (161 ) 307 (326 ) 186 (120 ) 375 (334 ) 1,017 (941 ) Tier 2: Public 63 (4 ) 113 10 32 (2 ) 10 (3 ) 218 1 Private 8 (3 ) 52 (6 ) 103 (13 ) 163 (22 ) 71 (7 ) 165 4 135 (15 ) 10 (3 ) 381 (21 ) Total hybrids Public 147 (68 ) 187 (68 ) 50 (10 ) 258 (220 ) 642 (366 ) Private 73 (100 ) 285 (254 ) 271 (125 ) 127 (117 ) 756 (596 ) Total $ 220 $ (168 ) $ 472 $ (322 ) $ 321 $ (135 ) $ 385 $ (337 ) $ 1,398 $ (962 ) Allstate's portfolio of privately placed securities are broadly diversified by issuer, industry sector, and by country. The portfolio is made up of approximately 620 issues with an average security value of approximately $21 million. Privately placed corporate obligations generally benefit from increased yields and structural security features such as financial covenants and call protections that provide investors greater protection against credit deterioration, reinvestment risk or fluctuations in interest rates than those typically found in publicly registered debt securities. Additionally, investments in these securities are made after extensive due diligence of the issuer, typically including direct discussions with senior management and on-site visits to company facilities. Ongoing monitoring includes direct periodic dialog with senior management of the issuer and continuous monitoring of operating performance and financial position. Every issue is internally rated with a formal rating affirmation approximately once a year. Foreign government securities totaled $2.68 billion, with 95.7% rated investment grade, at December 31, 2008. 89 Certain collateralized securities are detailed in the following table by Moody's equivalent rating as of December 31, 2008. ($ in millions) Fair value at December 31, 2008 % to Total investments Aaa Aa A Baa Ba or lower MBS U.S. Agency $ 3,284 3.4 % 100.0 % Prime 621 0.7 89.5 6.0 % 2.6 % 1.9 % Alt-A 582 0.6 75.9 5.1 0.9 2.1 16.0 % Other 5 100.0 Total MBS $ 4,492 4.7 % CMBS CMBS $ 3,819 4.0 % 90.3 7.7 0.9 1.0 0.1 Commercial real estate collateralized debt obligations ("CRE CDO") 27 29.6 37.1 29.6 3.7 Total CMBS $ 3,846 4.0 % ABS ABS RMBS non-insured $ 1,641 1.7 % 45.8 29.4 10.2 6.7 7.9 ABS RMBS insured 426 0.4 0.9 13.8 1.9 49.8 33.6 Total ABS RMBS 2,067 2.1 36.5 26.2 8.5 15.5 13.3 Asset-backed collateralized debt obligations ("ABS CDO") 6 100.0 Total asset-backed securities collateralized by sub-prime residential mortgage loans 2,073 2.1 Other collateralized debt obligations: Cash flow CLO 501 0.5 50.6 21.0 19.4 6.0 3.0 Synthetic CDO 47 0.1 6.4 34.0 46.8 12.8 Trust preferred CDO 74 0.1 2.7 75.6 14.9 4.1 2.7 Market value CDO 28 28.6 10.7 7.1 53.6 Project finance CDO 44 25.0 56.8 18.2 CDOs that invest in other CDOs ("CDO squared") 10 60.0 40.0 Collateralized bond obligations 24 16.7 45.8 37.5 Other CLO 50 0.1 100.0 Total other collateralized debt obligations 778 0.8 39.7 25.2 18.8 10.3 6.0 Other asset-backed securities 1,009 1.1 42.0 10.8 22.3 19.2 5.7 Total ABS $ 3,860 4.0 % During 2008, certain financial markets continued to experience price declines due to market and liquidity disruptions. We experienced this illiquidity and disruption in certain of our MBS, CMBS and ABS fixed income securities, particularly in our Prime residential mortgage-backed securities ("Prime"), Alt-A, CMBS, CRE CDO, ABS RMBS, ABS CDO and other collateralized debt obligations ("other CDO") portfolios. These portfolios totaled $7.90 billion, or approximately 8% of our total investments at December 31, 2008. Other securities markets, including certain other asset-backed and real estate-backed securities markets, also experienced illiquidity, but to a lesser degree. We determine the fair values of securities comprising these illiquid portfolios by obtaining information from an independent third-party valuation service provider and brokers. We confirmed the reasonableness of the fair value of these portfolios as of December 31, 2008 by analyzing available market information including, but not limited to, collateral quality, anticipated cash flows, credit enhancements, default rates, loss severities, securities' relative position within their respective capital structures, and credit ratings from statistical rating agencies. 90 The following table summarizes our illiquid portfolios as of December 31, 2008. ($ in millions) Par value (2) Amortized cost (1)(2) Amortized cost as a percentage of par value Fair value Fair value as a percentage of par value Unrealized gain/loss MBS Prime $ 840 $ 826 98.3 % $ 621 73.9 % $ (205 ) Alt-A 1,098 780 71.0 582 53.0 (198 ) CMBS CMBS 5,915 5,815 98.4 3,819 64.6 (1,996 ) CRE CDO 201 25 12.4 27 13.4 2 ABS ABS RMBS 3,681 3,174 86.2 2,067 56.2 (1,107 ) ABS CDO 137 10 7.3 6 4.4 (4 ) Other CDO 2,296 1,894 82.5 778 33.9 (1,116 ) Total $ 14,168 $ 12,524 88.4 $ 7,900 55.8 $ (4,624 ) (1) Amortized cost includes other-than-temporary impairment charges, as applicable. (2) The difference between par value and amortized cost of $1.64 billion is primarily attributable to write-downs. Par value has been reduced by principal payments. 91 The following table presents realized capital gains and losses and principal transactions relating to our illiquid portfolios for the year ended December 31, 2008. Realized capital gains and losses Principal transactions ($ in millions) Sales Impairment write-downs Change in intent write-downs Sold Principal received Acquired MBS Prime $ (25 ) $ (9 ) $ (20 ) $ 340 $ 103 $ 21 Alt-A (37 ) (206 ) (138 ) 130 130 CMBS CMBS (15 ) (226 ) 2,319 177 1,294 CRE CDO (44 ) (45 ) (331 ) 280 5 ABS ABS RMBS (33 ) (224 ) (282 ) 142 623 ABS CDO (63 ) 3 1 Other CDO 3 (335 ) 31 18 11 Total $ (151 ) $ (882 ) $ (997 ) $ 3,245 $ 1,057 $ 1,326 Securities included in our illiquid portfolios with a fair value less than 70% of amortized cost as of December 31, 2008 are shown in the following table. ($ in millions) Fair value Unrealized gain/loss MBS Prime $ 113 $ (113 ) Alt-A 146 (122 ) CMBS CMBS 858 (1,625 ) CRE CDO ABS ABS RMBS 781 (878 ) ABS CDO 4 (3 ) Other CDO 459 (1,054 ) Total $ 2,361 $ (3,795 ) We continue to believe that the unrealized losses on these securities are not predictive of the ultimate performance of the underlying collateral. In the absence of further deterioration in the collateral relative to our positions in the securities' respective capital structures, which could be other than temporary, the unrealized losses should reverse over the remaining lives of the securities. The cash flows of the underlying mortgages or collateral for MBS, CMBS (including CRE CDO) and ABS are generally applied in a pre-determined order and are designed so that each security issued qualifies for a specific original rating. The security issue is typically referred to as the "class". For example, the "senior" portion or "top" of the capital structure which would originally qualify for a rating of Aaa is referred to as the "Aaa class" and typically has priority in receiving the principal repayments on the underlying mortgages. In a sequential structure, underlying collateral principal repayments are directed to the most senior rated Aaa class in the structure until paid in full, after which principal repayments are directed to the next most senior Aaa class in the structure until it is paid in full. Although the various Aaa classes may receive principal sequentially, they may share any losses from the underlying collateral on a pro-rata basis after losses are absorbed by classes with lower original ratings or what may be referred to as more "junior" or "subordinate" securities in the capital structure. The underlying mortgages have fixed interest rates, variable interest rates (such as adjustable rate mortgages ("ARM")) or are hybrid, meaning that they contain features of both fixed and variable rate mortgages. MBS totaled $4.49 billion, with 97.9% rated investment grade, at December 31, 2008. The MBS portfolio is subject to interest rate risk since price volatility and the ultimate realized yield are affected by the rate of prepayment of the underlying mortgages. The credit risk associated with our MBS is mitigated due to the fact that 92 73.1% of the portfolio consists of securities that were issued by, or have underlying collateral that is guaranteed by U.S. government agencies or U.S. government sponsored entities ("U.S. Agency"). Prime are collateralized by residential mortgage loans issued to prime borrowers. The following table shows our Prime portfolio as of December 31, 2008 by vintage year, based upon our participation in the capital structure. ($ in millions) Vintage year Fair value Amortized cost (1) Unrealized gain/loss Capital structure classification (2) 2007 2006 2005 Pre-2005 Aaa Fixed rate $ 100 $ 46 $ 90 $ 260 $ 496 $ 611 $ (115 ) Aaa Hybrid 9 2 54 50 115 199 (84 ) Aa Fixed rate 7 7 8 (1 ) A Hybrid 3 3 8 (5 ) Total $ 109 $ 48 $ 147 $ 317 $ 621 $ 826 $ (205 ) (1) Amortized cost includes other-than-temporary impairment charges, as applicable. (2) May not be consistent with current ratings due to downgrades. Alt-A can be issued by trusts backed by pools of residential mortgages with either fixed or variable interest rates. The mortgage pools can include residential mortgage loans issued to borrowers with stronger credit profiles than sub-prime borrowers, but who do not qualify for prime financing terms due to high loan-to-value ratios or limited supporting documentation. The following table presents information about the collateral in our Alt-A holdings at December 31, 2008. ($ in millions) Fair Value % to Total Investments Alt-A Fixed rate $ 442 0.5 % Variable rate 140 0.1 Total Alt-A $ 582 0.6 % The following table shows our Alt-A portfolio at December 31, 2008 by vintage year, based upon our participation in the capital structure. Vintage year ($ in millions) Capital structure classification (2) 2007 2006 2005 Pre- 2005 Fair value Amortized cost (1) Unrealized gain/loss Aaa Fixed rate $ 44 $ 119 $ 105 $ 151 $ 419 $ 537 $ (118 ) Aaa Hybrid 2 8 13 23 45 (22 ) Aaa Option adjustable rate mortgage 34 25 13 1 73 101 (28 ) Aa Fixed rate 7 16 23 25 (2 ) Aa Option adjustable rate mortgage 2 9 11 14 (3 ) A and lower 4 20 9 33 58 (25 ) Total $ 82 $ 173 $ 153 $ 174 $ 582 $ 780 $ (198 ) (1) Amortized cost includes other-than-temporary impairment charges, as applicable. (2) May not be consistent with current ratings due to downgrades. CMBS totaled $3.85 billion, with 99.9% rated investment grade, at December 31, 2008. The CMBS portfolio is subject to credit risk, but unlike other structured securities, is generally not subject to prepayment risk due to protections within the underlying commercial mortgages whereby borrowers are effectively restricted from prepaying their mortgages due to changes in interest rates. Approximately 91.0% of the CMBS investments are structured securities collateralized by pools of commercial mortgages, broadly diversified across property types and geographical area. 93 The following table shows our CMBS portfolio, excluding CRE CDO, at December 31, 2008 by vintage year, based upon our participation in the capital structure. ($ in millions) Capital structure classification (2) Par value Amortized cost (1) Fair value Unrealized gain/loss Aaa 2007: Super senior (3) $ 383 $ 378 $ 263 $ (115 ) Mezzanine senior (4) 130 122 58 (64 ) Subordinated senior (5) 596 569 166 (403 ) Other (6) 21 22 9 (13 ) 1,130 1,091 496 (595 ) 2006: Super senior (3) 121 121 79 (42 ) Mezzanine senior (4) 81 77 41 (36 ) Subordinated senior (5) 314 300 94 (206 ) Other (6) 63 64 45 (19 ) 579 562 259 (303 ) 2005: Super senior (3) 326 329 260 (69 ) Mezzanine senior (4) 22 22 13 (9 ) Subordinated senior (5) 108 115 48 (67 ) Other (6) 95 95 70 (25 ) 551 561 391 (170 ) Pre-2005 (7) 2,126 2,154 1,936 (218 ) Aaa total 4,386 4,368 3,082 (1,286 ) Aa 1,111 1,179 522 (657 ) A 350 225 172 (53 ) Baa 64 39 39 Ba or lower 4 4 4 Total CMBS $ 5,915 $ 5,815 $ 3,819 $ (1,996 ) (1) Amortized cost includes other-than-temporary impairment charges, as applicable. (2) May not be consistent with current ratings due to upgrades and downgrades. (3) Most senior of the Aaa rated tranches, typically has a high level of credit enhancement of approximately 30%, meaning actual losses in the deal have to reach 30% before incurring a first dollar loss. (4) Middle Aaa rated tranche, typically having credit enhancement of approximately 20%, are subordinate only to the Super senior bonds. (5) Lowest Aaa rated tranche, typically with credit enhancement in the low teens. This bond is subordinate to the Super senior and Mezzanine senior tranches, but still senior to all tranches rated below Aaa. (6) Includes Aaa bonds that were originated in 2005 through 2007 that do not fall into the categories above. These are non-traditional CMBS bonds (large loan pools, single borrower transactions) that did not have a Aaa Senior type breakdown. (7) Prior to 2005, the Aaa bonds in a transaction were generally not divided into Super senior, Mezzanine senior, or Subordinated senior (with the exception of a few deals structured very late in 2004); therefore all 2004 and prior Aaa-rated securities are grouped into this category. The unrealized net capital loss of $2.00 billion at December 31, 2008 on our CMBS portfolio was a result of significant widening of credit spreads due to deteriorating macro economic conditions and continued credit market deterioration. Credit spread widening occurred in all rating classes but was particularly evident in our subordinated senior Aaa, Pre-2005 Aaa-rated and lower rated securities. These holdings accounted for $1.66 billion, or approximately 83% of the unrealized net capital loss. Our analysis suggests that the vast majority of our CMBS portfolio is well insulated from a severe rise in commercial mortgage default rates. Credit protections in the portfolio, including those on subordinated senior Aaa and Aa-rated securities, are multiples of historic high commercial mortgage loss experience and well in excess of our current loss expectations. 94 CRE CDO are structured securities secured primarily by CMBS and other commercial mortgage debt obligations. These securities are generally less liquid and have a higher risk profile than other CMBS. The following table shows our CRE CDO portfolio at December 31, 2008 by vintage year, based upon our participation in the capital structure. Vintage year Fair value Amortized cost (1) Unrealized gain/loss ($ in millions) 2007 2006 2005 Capital structure classification (2) Aa $ 1 $ 14 $ 1 $ 16 $ 14 $ 2 A 3 1 4 8 8 Baa 1 1 1 3 3 Total $ 5 $ 16 $ 6 $ 27 $ 25 $ 2 (1) Amortized cost includes other-than-temporary impairment charges, as applicable. (2) May not be consistent with current ratings due to downgrades. ABS totaled $3.86 billion, with 92.0% rated investment grade, at December 31, 2008. Credit risk is managed by monitoring the performance of the collateral. In addition, many of the securities in the ABS portfolio are credit enhanced with features such as over-collateralization, subordinated structures, reserve funds, guarantees and/or insurance. A portion of the ABS portfolio is also subject to interest rate risk since ultimate realized yields are affected by the rate of prepayment of the underlying assets. ABS RMBS includes securities that are collateralized by mortgage loans issued to borrowers that cannot qualify for Prime or Alt-A financing terms due in part to weak or limited credit history. It also includes securities that are collateralized by certain second lien mortgages regardless of the borrower's credit history. $1.66 billion or 80.2% of the ABS RMBS portfolio consisted of securities that were issued during 2005, 2006 and 2007. At December 31, 2008, 41.0% of securities issued during 2005, 2006 and 2007 were rated Aaa, 20.1% rated Aa, 5.5% rated A, 17.5% rated Baa and 15.9% rated Ba or lower. The following table presents additional information about our ABS RMBS portfolio including a summary by first and second lien collateral at December 31, 2008. ($ in millions) Fair Value % to Total investments ABS RMBS First lien: Fixed rate (1) $ 594 0.6 % Variable rate (1) 1,085 1.1 Total first lien (2) 1,679 1.7 Second lien: Insured 295 0.3 Other 93 0.1 Total second lien (3) 388 0.4 Total ABS RMBS $ 2,067 2.1 % (1) Fixed rate and variable rate refer to the primary interest rate characteristics of the underlying mortgages at the time of issuance. (2) The credit ratings of the first lien ABS RMBS were 41.8% Aaa, 30.3% Aa, 10.0% A, 9.2% Baa and 8.7% Ba or lower at December 31, 2008. (3) The credit ratings of the second lien ABS RMBS were 13.7% Aaa, 8.2% Aa, 1.8% A, 43.3% Baa and 33.0% Ba or lower at December 31, 2008. 95 The following table includes first lien non-insured ABS RMBS by vintage year and the interest rate characteristics of the underlying mortgage product. ($ in millions) Variable rate Fixed rate Fair value Amortized cost (1) Unrealized gain/loss Total first lien non-insured ABS RMBS 2007 $ 124 $ 187 $ 311 $ 546 $ (235 ) 2006 420 143 563 762 (199 ) 2005 226 112 338 496 (158 ) Pre-2005 268 68 336 472 (136 ) Total $ 1,038 $ 510 $ 1,548 $ 2,276 $ (728 ) (1) Amortized cost includes other-than-temporary impairment charges, as applicable. We also own approximately $93 million of second lien ABS RMBS non-insured securities, representing 80.2% of amortized cost. Approximately $39 million, or 41.9%, of this portfolio are 2006 and 2007 vintage years. Together with the first lien non-insured ABS RMBS in the table above, this comprises our $1.64 billion of non-insured ABS RMBS. At December 31, 2008, $426 million or 20.6% of the total ABS RMBS securities are insured by 6 bond insurers and 66.4% of these insured securities were rated investment grade. The following table shows our insured ABS RMBS portfolio at December 31, 2008 by vintage year for the first lien and second lien collateral. Vintage year ($ in millions) 2007 2006 2005 Pre- 2005 Fair value Amortized cost (1) Unrealized gain/loss First lien: $ 35 $ 15 $ 70 $ 11 $ 131 $ 194 $ (63 ) Second lien: 112 110 50 23 295 588 (293 ) Total insured ABS RMBS $ 147 $ 125 $ 120 $ 34 $ 426 $ 782 $ (356 ) (1) Amortized cost includes other-than-temporary impairment charges, as applicable. Other CDO totaled $778 million, with 94.0% rated investment grade, at December 31, 2008. Other CDO consist primarily of obligations secured by high yield and investment grade corporate credits including cash flow CLO, synthetic CDO, trust preferred CDO, market value CDO, project finance CDO, CDO squared, collateralized bond obligations and other CLO. The following table presents realized and unrealized capital gains and losses and principal transactions on our other CDO portfolio for the years ended December 31, 2008. Realized capital gains and losses (1) Principal transactions ($ in millions) Sales Impairment write-downs Unrealized gain/loss Sold Principal received Acquired Other CDO Cash flow CLO $ $ (65 ) $ (690 ) $ 9 $ 6 $ 11 Synthetic CDO (186 ) (160 ) 2 Trust preferred CDO (28 ) (91 ) 11 Market value CDO 2 (38 ) (65 ) 2 Project finance CDO (36 ) CDO squared (67 ) Collateralized bond obligations (7 ) 1 1 Other CLO 1 (18 ) 17 Total $ 3 $ (335 ) $ (1,116 ) $ 31 $ 18 $ 11 (1) For the year ended December 31, 2008, there were no change in intent write-downs. 96 Cash flow CLO are structures where the underlying assets are primarily comprised of below investment grade senior secured corporate loans. The collateral is actively managed by external managers that monitor the collateral performance. The underlying investments are well diversified across industries and among issuers and there have been no downgrades in the portfolio. Cash flow CLO issues differ by seniority. A transaction will typically issue notes with various capital structure class (i.e. Aaa, Aa, A, etc.) as well as equity. The following table shows our cash flow CLO portfolio at December 31, 2008 by vintage year, based upon our participation in the capital structure. ($ in millions) Vintage year Fair value Amortized cost (2) Unrealized gain/loss Capital structure classification (1) 2008 2007 2006 2005 Pre-2005 Aaa $ $ $ 58 $ 52 $ 144 $ 254 $ 350 $ (96 ) Aa 2 39 48 7 10 106 296 (190 ) A 1 22 24 16 34 97 454 (357 ) Baa 5 8 25 38 78 (40 ) Ba or below 4 2 6 13 (7 ) Total $ 3 $ 65 $ 137 $ 83 $ 213 $ 501 $ 1,191 $ (690 ) (1) May not be consistent with current ratings due to downgrades. (2) Amortized cost includes other-than-temporary impairment charges, as applicable. Synthetic CDO primarily consist of a portfolio of corporate credit default swaps ("CDS") which are collateralized by Aaa rated LIBOR-based securities (i.e. "fully funded" synthetic CDO). Our synthetic CDO collateral primarily is actively managed by an external manager monitoring the CDS selection and performance. The following table shows our synthetic CDO at December 31, 2008 by vintage year, based upon our participation in the capital structure. ($ in millions) Vintage year Fair value Amortized cost (2) Unrealized gain/loss Capital structure classification (1) 2007 2006 Aaa $ 25 $ $ 25 $ 85 $ (60 ) Aa 6 16 22 122 (100 ) Total $ 31 $ 16 $ 47 $ 207 $ (160 ) (1) May not be consistent with current ratings due to downgrades. (2) Amortized cost includes other-than-temporary impairment charges, as applicable. Trust preferred CDO underlying assets are primarily comprised of portfolios of preferred securities issued by a diversified portfolio of domestic banks and other financial institutions. The underlying collateral for our trust preferred CDO portfolio is not actively managed and is diversified by issuer, predominately regional banks, with a small percentage of insurance companies. Market value CDO are structurally similar to cash flow CLO. The primary difference is that the market value of the underlying assets is managed in order to enhance returns and the structure is governed by market value based tests. The managers are also offered more flexibility to purchase other asset types including secured leveraged loans, public and private high yield bonds, structured products, mezzanine investments, and equities. Project finance CDO underlying assets are primarily below investment grade senior secured project finance loans and energy finance investments. CDO squared transactions are CDOs where the underlying assets are primarily other cash flow CLO tranches, typically with an average rating of Baa. Other asset-backed securities totaled $1.01 billion at December 31, 2008 and consist primarily of investments secured by portfolios of credit card loans, auto loans, student loans and other consumer and corporate obligations. As of December 31, 2008, the net unrealized losses on these securities were $232 million. Additionally, 24.3% of the other asset-backed securities that are rated Aaa, Aa, A and Baa were insured by five bond insurers. During 2008, we sold $229 million of these securities recognizing a loss of $1 million. In addition, we acquired 97 $46 million of securities during 2008. We also collected $177 million of principal repayments consistent with the expected cash flows during 2008. Insured Investments As of December 31, 2008, we hold $12.29 billion of fixed income securities that are insured by bond insurers, including approximately $11.58 billion or 53.0% of our municipal bond portfolio, $426 million of our ABS RMBS and $252 million of our other asset-backed securities. Additionally, we hold $4 million of corporate bonds and $(13) million in credit default swaps that were directly issued by these bond insurers. 53.0% of our municipal bond portfolio is insured by nine bond insurers and 38.4% of these securities have a Moody's equivalent rating of Aaa or Aa. Our practices for acquiring and monitoring municipal bonds primarily are based on the quality of the primary obligor. As of December 31, 2008, we believe the valuations already reflected a decline in the value of the insurance, and further related declines if any, are not expected to be material. While the valuation of these holdings may be temporarily impacted by negative and rapidly changing market developments, we continue to have the intent and ability to hold the bonds and expect to receive all of the contractual cash flows. As of December 31, 2008, 48.2% of our insured municipal bond portfolio was insured by MBIA, Inc., 24.7% by Ambac Financial Group, Inc., 19.8% by Financial Security Assurance Inc. and 2.7% by Financial Guarantee Insurance Company. Credit ratings without the insurance guarantee are not available in certain cases where the issuer does not solicit the rating agency to provide the rating without the insurance guarantee and, as a result, the rating agency does not disclose it. The ratings of our holdings with insurance guarantee generally follow the rating of the bond insurer. In cases where the rating of the bond insurer is lower than that of the underlying security, the rating without insurance guarantee could be higher than that with the guarantee. 98 The following table shows our insured investments by Moody's equivalent rating with and without the impact to the rating from the insurance guarantee, where it is available, as of December 31, 2008. ($ in millions) Rating with Insurance Guarantee Rating without Insurance Guarantee Rating Fair value Percent to total Rating Fair value Percent to total Municipal bonds Aaa $ 250 2.2 % Aaa $ 20 0.2 % Aa 4,193 36.2 Aa 2,408 20.8 A 3,946 34.1 A 5,909 51.0 Baa 3,145 27.2 Baa 1,705 14.7 Ba 3 Ba 90 0.8 B 38 0.3 B 61 0.5 Caa or lower Caa or lower 7 0.1 Rating without Insurance Guarantee not provided ("NA") NA 1,375 11.9 Total municipal bonds $ 11,575 100.0 % $ 11,575 100.0 % ABS RMBS Aaa $ 4 0.9 % Aaa $ 20 4.7 % Aa 59 13.8 Aa 48 11.3 A 8 1.9 A 59 13.8 Baa 212 49.8 Baa 28 6.6 Ba 52 12.2 Ba 20 4.7 B 31 7.3 B 25 5.9 Caa or lower 60 14.1 Caa or lower 23 5.4 NA NA 203 47.6 Total ABS RMBS $ 426 100.0 % $ 426 100.0 % Other asset-backed securities Aaa $ 20 7.9 % Aaa $ % Aa 24 9.5 Aa A 73 29.0 A 8 3.2 Baa 128 50.8 Baa 134 53.2 Ba or lower 7 2.8 Ba or lower NA NA 110 43.6 Total other asset-backed securities $ 252 100.0 % $ 252 100.0 % Equity securities Equity securities include common stocks, real estate investment trust equity investments and non-redeemable preferred stocks. The equity securities portfolio was $2.81 billion at December 31, 2008 compared to $5.26 billion at December 31, 2007. The decrease is primarily attributable to sales of equity securities with realized gains of $751 million and realized losses of $1.45 billion. Gross unrealized gains totaled $112 million at December 31, 2008 compared to $1.10 billion at December 31, 2007. Gross unrealized losses totaled $444 million at December 31, 2008 compared to $106 million at December 31, 2007. At December 31, 2008, equity securities included $917 million effectively carried on a lower of cost or fair value basis due to the nature of the investment management style employed. There were no equity securities effectively carried on a lower of cost or fair value as of December 31, 2007. Mortgage loans Our mortgage loan portfolio, which is primarily held in the Allstate Financial portfolio, was $10.23 billion and $10.83 billion at December 31, 2008 and 2007, respectively, and comprised primarily of loans secured by first mortgages on developed commercial real estate. Geographical and property type diversification are key considerations used to manage our exposure. The portfolio is diversified across several property types. Our largest exposure to any metropolitan area is also highly diversified, with the largest exposure not exceeding 99 10% of the portfolio. The average debt service coverage ratio represents the amount of cash flows available by the borrower to meet its principal and interest payment obligations. The average debt service coverage ratio of the portfolio as of December 31, 2008 was approximately 2.0, and only approximately 3.1% of the mortgage loan portfolio had a debt service coverage ratio under 1.0. We closely monitor our commercial mortgage loan portfolio on a loan-by-loan basis. Loans with an estimated collateral value less than the loan balance, as well as loans with other characteristics indicative of higher than normal credit risks, are reviewed at least quarterly for purposes of establishing valuation allowances and placing loans on non-accrual status as necessary. The underlying collateral values are based upon either discounted property cash flow projections or a commonly used valuation method that utilizes a one-year projection of expected annual income divided by a market based expected rate of return. We had $4 million of realized capital losses related to valuation allowances on mortgage loans for the year ended December 31, 2008 and had no realized capital losses related to valuation allowances on mortgage loans for the year ended December 31, 2007. Additionally, realized capital losses due to changes in intent to hold mortgage loans to maturity totaled $74 million and $30 million for the years ended December 31, 2008 and 2007, respectively. For further detail, see Note 5 to the consolidated financial statements. Limited partnership interests consist of investments in private equity/debt funds, real estate funds and hedge funds. The overall limited partnership interests portfolio is well diversified across a number of metrics including fund sponsors, vintage years, strategies, geography (including international), and company/property types. The following table presents information about our limited partnership interests as of December 31, 2008. ($ in millions) Private equity/debt funds Real estate funds Hedge funds Total Cost method of accounting ("Cost") $ 733 $ 398 $ 97 $ 1,228 Equity method of accounting 654 431 478 1,563 Total $ 1,387 $ 829 $ 575 $ 2,791 Number of sponsors 86 39 13 Number of individual funds 138 76 80 Largest exposure to single fund $ 43 $ 48 $ 43 Our aggregate limited partnership exposure represented 2.9% and 2.1% of total invested assets as of December 31, 2008 and December 31, 2007, respectively. The following table shows the income from our limited partnership interests by fund type and accounting classification for the years ended December 31. 2008 2007 Equity method of accounting (1) Equity method of accounting Cost Total Cost Total ($ in millions) Private equity/debt funds $ 28 $ 87 $ 115 $ 58 $ 55 $ 113 Real estate funds 8 (35 ) (27 ) 36 79 115 Hedge funds 1 (124 ) (123 ) 1 64 65 Total $ 37 $ (72 ) $ (35 ) $ 95 $ 198 $ 293 (1) Beginning in the fourth quarter of 2008, income from EMA LP is reported in realized capital gains and losses. EMA LP income for periods prior to the fourth quarter of 2008 is reported in net investment income. Loss from limited partnership interests was $35 million for 2008 versus income of $293 million for 2007. The loss from limited partnership interests in 2008 compared to income in 2007 is primarily related to losses from partnerships accounted for under equity method of accounting resulting from reduced valuations on the net asset value of the partnerships. Further, income on EMA LP is recognized on a delay due to the availability of the related financial statements. The recognition of income on hedge funds is primarily on a one-month delay and the income recognition on private equity/debt funds and real estate funds are generally on a three-month delay as of December 31, 2008. As such, the income recognized through December 31, 2008 for EMA LP may not include the full impact for calendar year investment market changes as they will ultimately impact the valuation of the underlying assets or liabilities within the partnerships. Limited partnership interests accounted for under the cost method of accounting recognize income only upon cash distributions by the partnership. 100 Short-term investments Our short-term investment portfolio was $8.91 billion and $3.06 billion at December 31, 2008 and 2007, respectively. The increase in short-term investments was primarily due to liquidity management actions. We invest available cash balances primarily in taxable short-term securities having a final maturity date or redemption date of less than one year. Other investments Our other investments as of December 31, 2008 are comprised primarily of $1.04 billion of bank loans, $1.14 billion of policy loans and $301 million of certain derivatives, including credit default swaps. Bank loans are comprised primarily of senior secured corporate loans and are carried at amortized cost. Policy loans are carried at the unpaid principal balances. Credit default swaps ("CDS") are utilized for both buying and selling credit protection against a specified credit event. In selling protection, CDS are used to replicate fixed income securities and to complement the cash market when credit exposure to certain issuers is not available or when the derivative alternative is less expensive than the cash market alternative. We are not selling protection to acquire revenues as a business activity. When buying protection, the objective is to mitigate credit risk on fixed income holdings in our portfolio. Credit risk includes both default risk and market value exposure due to spread widening. CDS typically have a five-year term. The following table shows the CDS notional amounts and fair value of protection bought or sold as of December 31, 2008. Notional amounts Fair value to notional amount ($ in millions) Property- Liability Allstate Financial Total Fair value (1) Buying protection (recoverable) Single name $ 436 $ 422 $ 858 $ 37 4.3 % Index 638 723 1,361 37 2.7 Total buying protection $ 1,074 $ 1,145 $ 2,219 $ 74 3.3 Selling protection (payable) Single name $ 200 $ 272 $ 472 $ (50 ) (10.6 ) First-to-default 245 245 (48 ) (19.6 ) Index 339 339 (16 ) (4.7 ) Total selling protection $ 539 $ 517 $ 1,056 $ (114 ) (10.8 ) (1) Included as a component of other investments and other liabilities and accrued expenses on the Consolidated Statements of Financial Position. In buying and selling protection CDS, we buy or sell credit protection on an identified single name, a basket of names in a first-to-default ("FTD") structure or credit derivative index ("CDX") that is generally investment grade, and in return pay or receive periodic premiums through expiration or termination of the agreement. With single name CDS, the premium or credit spread generally corresponds to the difference between the yield on the referenced name's public fixed maturity cash instruments and swap rates, at the time the agreement is executed. With FTD baskets, because of the additional credit risk inherent in a basket of named credits, the premium generally corresponds to a high proportion of the sum of the credit spreads of the names in the basket and correlation between the names. CDX index is utilized to take a position on multiple (generally 125) credit entities. Credit events are typically defined as bankruptcy, failure to pay, or restructuring, depending on the nature of the reference credit. If a credit event occurs, we settle with the counterparty, either through physical settlement or cash settlement. In a physical settlement, a reference asset is delivered by the buyer of protection to the seller of protection, in exchange for cash payment at par, while in a cash settlement, the seller pays the difference between par and the prescribed value of the reference asset. When such an event occurs in a single name or FTD basket (for FTD, the first such event occurring for any one name in the basket), the contract terminates at time of settlement. For CDX index, the reference entity's name incurring the credit event is removed from the index while the contract continues until expiration. The maximum payout on a CDS is the contract notional amount. For all CDS, once a credit event and settlement has occurred, there may be subsequent recoveries. Recovery amounts, if any, vary and they may reduce the ultimate amount of net gain or loss. Unrealized net capital losses See Note 5 of the consolidated financial statements for further disclosures regarding unrealized losses on fixed income and equity securities and factors considered in determining whether securities are other-than-temporarily impaired. The unrealized net capital losses totaled $8.81 billion as of December 31, 2008, compared to unrealized net capital gains of $1.91 billion at December 31, 2007 as a result of significantly widening credit spreads and declining equity markets. 101 The following table presents unrealized net capital gains and losses, pre-tax and after-tax at December 31. ($ in millions) 2008 2007 U.S. government and agencies $ 962 $ 918 Municipal (1,717 ) 720 Corporate (3,413 ) 90 Foreign government 469 394 MBS (334 ) (43 ) CMBS (1,994 ) (308 ) ABS (2,459 ) (816 ) Redeemable preferred stock (10 ) 1 Fixed income securities (8,496 ) 956 Equity securities (332 ) 990 Short-term investments 3 Derivatives 11 (33 ) Unrealized net capital gains and losses, pre-tax (8,814 ) 1,913 Amounts recognized for: Insurance reserves (1) (378 ) (1,059 ) DAC and DSI (2) 3,500 512 Amounts recognized 3,122 (547 ) Deferred income taxes 1,954 (478 ) Unrealized net capital gains and losses, after-tax $ (3,738 ) $ 888 (1) The insurance reserves adjustment represents the amount by which the reserve balance would increase if the net unrealized gains in the applicable product portfolios were realized and reinvested at current lower interest rates, resulting in a premium deficiency. Although we evaluate premium deficiencies on the combined performance of our life insurance and immediate annuities with life contingencies, the adjustment primarily relates to structured settlement annuities with life contingencies, in addition to annuity buy-outs and certain payout annuities with life contingencies. (2) The DAC and DSI adjustment represents the amount by which the amortization of DAC and DSI would increase or decrease if the unrealized gains or losses in the respective product portfolios were realized. Recapitalization of the DAC and DSI balances is limited to the originally deferred costs plus interest. The net unrealized loss for the fixed income portfolio totaled $8.50 billion, comprised of $2.54 billion of gross unrealized gains and $11.04 billion of gross unrealized losses at December 31, 2008. This is compared to a net unrealized gain for the fixed income portfolio totaling $956 million at December 31, 2007, comprised of $3.15 billion of gross unrealized gains and $2.20 billion of gross unrealized losses. 102 Gross unrealized gains and losses on fixed income securities by type and sector are provided in the table below. Gross unrealized Amortized cost as a percent of par value Par value (1) Amortized cost Fair value Fair value as a percent of par value ($ in millions) Gains Losses At December 31, 2008 Corporate: Banking $ 4,752 $ 4,378 $ 93 $ (943 ) $ 3,528 92.1 % 74.2 % Financial services 4,654 3,604 23 (571 ) 3,056 77.4 65.7 Consumer goods (cyclical and non-cyclical) 5,135 5,072 54 (486 ) 4,640 98.8 90.4 Utilities 5,422 5,383 132 (434 ) 5,081 99.3 93.7 Capital goods 3,091 3,048 43 (299 ) 2,792 98.6 90.3 Communications 2,011 1,918 19 (188 ) 1,749 95.4 87.0 Basic industry 1,658 1,661 6 (183 ) 1,484 100.2 89.5 Transportation 1,696 1,706 26 (179 ) 1,553 100.6 91.6 Energy 1,672 1,652 15 (145 ) 1,522 98.8 91.0 Technology 1,028 1,006 18 (105 ) 919 97.9 89.4 Other 1,921 1,612 34 (343 ) 1,303 83.9 67.8 Total corporate fixed income portfolio 33,040 31,040 463 (3,876 ) 27,627 93.9 83.6 ABS 7,494 6,319 13 (2,472 ) 3,860 84.3 51.5 Municipal 30,640 23,565 467 (2,184 ) 21,848 76.9 71.3 CMBS 6,116 5,840 10 (2,004 ) 3,846 95.5 62.9 MBS 5,183 4,826 85 (419 ) 4,492 93.1 86.7 Foreign government 3,152 2,206 544 (75 ) 2,675 70.0 84.9 Redeemable preferred stock 40 36 (10 ) 26 90.0 65.0 U.S. government and agencies 5,277 3,272 963 (1 ) 4,234 62.0 80.2 Total fixed income securities $ 90,942 $ 77,104 $ 2,545 $ (11,041 ) $ 68,608 84.8 75.4 (1) Included in par value are zero-coupon securities that are generally purchased at a deep discount to the par value that is received at maturity. The banking, financial services, consumer goods, and utilities sectors had the highest concentration of gross unrealized losses in our corporate fixed income securities portfolio at December 31, 2008. The gross unrealized losses in these sectors were primarily the result of significantly widening credit spreads. As of December 31, 2008, $3.18 billion or 82.0% of the gross unrealized losses in the corporate fixed income portfolio and $6.60 billion or 92.1% of the gross unrealized losses in the remaining fixed income securities related to securities rated investment grade. Credit spreads are the additional yield on fixed income securities above the risk-free rate (typically defined as the yield on U.S. Treasury securities) that market participants require to compensate them for assuming credit, liquidity and/or prepayment risks for fixed income securities with consistent terms. Credit spreads vary with the market's perception of risk and liquidity in a specific issuer or specific sectors. Credit spreads can widen (increase) or tighten (decrease) and may offset or add to the effects of risk-free interest rate changes in the valuation of fixed income securities from period to period. All securities in an unrealized loss position at December 31, 2008 were included in our portfolio monitoring process for determining whether declines in value are other than temporary. 103 The following tables show the composition by credit quality using Moody's equivalent rating of the fixed income securities with gross unrealized losses at December 31, 2008. Rating (1) ($ in millions) Aaa Aa A Baa Ba B Caa or lower In or near default Total unrealized loss Fair value At December 31, 2008 Corporate: Banking $ $ (47 ) $ (673 ) $ (198 ) $ (22 ) $ (3 ) $ $ $ (943 ) $ 2,459 Financial services (46 ) (43 ) (209 ) (231 ) (39 ) (1 ) (2 ) (571 ) 2,503 Consumer goods (cyclical and non-cyclical) (4 ) (58 ) (232 ) (137 ) (40 ) (13 ) (2 ) (486 ) 3,080 Utilities (7 ) (58 ) (308 ) (51 ) (3 ) (7 ) (434 ) 3,359 Capital goods (1 ) (40 ) (165 ) (51 ) (39 ) (3 ) (299 ) 1,897 Communications (6 ) (103 ) (50 ) (26 ) (3 ) (188 ) 1,289 Basic industry (4 ) (15 ) (101 ) (27 ) (36 ) (183 ) 1,208 Transportation (42 ) (78 ) (56 ) (2 ) (1 ) (179 ) 928 Energy (3 ) (6 ) (107 ) (18 ) (11 ) (145 ) 1,080 Technology (1 ) (3 ) (17 ) (53 ) (14 ) (16 ) (1 ) (105 ) 663 Other (1 ) (71 ) (260 ) (11 ) (343 ) 864 Total corporate fixed income portfolio (47 ) (113 ) (1,195 ) (1,836 ) (476 ) (177 ) (30 ) (2 ) (3,876 ) 19,330 ABS (372 ) (641 ) (622 ) (561 ) (103 ) (79 ) (68 ) (26 ) (2,472 ) 3,595 Municipal (226 ) (468 ) (443 ) (780 ) (114 ) (142 ) (11 ) (2,184 ) 12,578 CMBS (1,322 ) (642 ) (25 ) (15 ) (2,004 ) 3,628 MBS (301 ) (37 ) (13 ) (29 ) (14 ) (25 ) (419 ) 1,608 Foreign government (1 ) (5 ) (27 ) (19 ) (23 ) (75 ) 364 Redeemable preferred stock (9 ) (1 ) (10 ) 18 U.S. government and agencies (1 ) (1 ) 230 Total fixed income securities $ (2,270 ) $ (1,901 ) $ (2,303 ) $ (3,257 ) $ (727 ) $ (446 ) $ (109 ) $ (28 ) $ (11,041 ) $ 41,351 Rating % to total unrealized loss (1) Moody's equivalent rating will not necessarily tie to ratings distributions from the NAIC due to potential timing differences between the various rating suppliers and the number of external rating agencies used in the determination. The scheduled maturity dates for fixed income securities in an unrealized loss position at December 31, 2008 are shown below. Actual maturities may differ from those scheduled as a result of prepayments by the issuers. ($ in millions) Unrealized loss Percent to total Fair value Percent to total Due in one year or less $ (26 ) 0.2 % $ 963 2.3 % Due after one year through five years (924 ) 8.4 8,218 19.9 Due after five years through ten years (1,423 ) 12.9 7,291 17.6 Due after ten years (5,777 ) 52.3 19,676 47.6 MBS and ABS (1) (2,891 ) 26.2 5,203 12.6 Total $ (11,041 ) 100.0 % $ 41,351 100.0 % (1) Because of the potential for prepayment, these securities are not categorized based on their contractual maturities. 104 For fixed income securities, 60.4% of the gross unrealized losses at December 31, 2008 were from $5.83 billion of securities with a fair value below 70% of amortized cost, or 8.5% of our fixed income portfolio, at December 31, 2008. The percentage of fair value to amortized cost for fixed income securities with gross unrealized losses at December 31, 2008 are shown in the following table. ($ in millions) Par value (1) Unrealized (loss) gain Fair value % to Total fixed income securities > 80% of amortized cost $ 34,334 $ (2,671 ) $ 30,242 44.1 % 70% to 80% of amortized cost 7,708 (1,703 ) 5,283 7.7 < 70% of amortized cost (2) 17,404 (6,667 ) 5,826 8.5 Gross unrealized losses on fixed income securities 59,446 (11,041 ) 41,351 60.3 Gross unrealized gains on fixed income securities 31,496 2,545 27,257 39.7 Net unrealized gains and losses on fixed income securities $ 90,942 $ (8,496 ) (3) $ 68,608 (3) 100.0 % (1) Included in par value are $9.66 billion of zero-coupon securities that are generally purchased at a deep discount to the par value that is received at maturity. (2) Illiquid portfolios represent $3.80 billion of net unrealized losses and $2.36 billion of fair value. (3) Illiquid portfolios represent $4.62 billion of net unrealized losses and $7.90 billion of fair value. The following table presents gross unrealized losses by type of fixed income security with a fair value below 70% of amortized cost. ($ in millions) Fair value Gross unrealized losses U.S. government and agencies $ $ Municipal 867 (745 ) Corporate 2,397 (1,983 ) Foreign government 29 (28 ) MBS 259 (235 ) CMBS 858 (1,625 ) ABS 1,403 (2,042 ) Redeemable preferred stock 13 (9 ) Total fixed income securities $ 5,826 $ (6,667 ) We continue to believe that the unrealized losses on these securities are not predictive of the ultimate performance. The unrealized losses should reverse over the remaining lives of the securities. As of December 31, 2008, we have the intent and ability to hold these securities to recovery. Our ability to do so is substantially enhanced by our liquidity position, which cushions us from the need to liquidate securities with significant unrealized losses to meet cash obligations. During 2008, our fixed income securities portfolio provided approximately $8.61 billion in principal and interest cash flows, of which substantially all have been received in accordance with the contractual terms. 105 The equity portfolio is comprised of securities in the following sectors. (in millions) Gross unrealized At December 31, 2008 Cost Gains Losses Fair value Consumer goods (cyclical and non-cyclical) $ 548 $ 27 $ (68 ) $ 507 Banking 194 6 (52 ) 148 Financial services 210 4 (41 ) 173 Energy 240 45 (32 ) 253 Basic industry 75 5 (21 ) 59 Utilities 87 3 (17 ) 73 Real estate 122 4 (11 ) 115 Technology 79 5 (10 ) 74 Capital goods 96 3 (9 ) 90 Communications 111 3 (5 ) 109 Transportation 31 4 (4 ) 31 Other (1) 1,344 3 (174 ) 1,173 Total equity securities $ 3,137 $ 112 $ (444 ) $ 2,805 (1) Other consists primarily of index-based securities. The net unrealized loss for the equity portfolio totaled $332 million, comprised of $112 million of unrealized gains and $444 million of unrealized losses at December 31, 2008. This is compared to a net unrealized gain for the equity portfolio totaling $990 million at December 31, 2007, comprised of $1.10 billion of unrealized gains and $106 million of unrealized losses. Within the equity portfolio, the losses were primarily concentrated in the consumer goods, banking, financial services, energy, basic industry, utilities, real estate and technology sectors. The unrealized losses in these sectors were company and sector specific. All securities in an unrealized loss position at December 31, 2008 were included in our portfolio monitoring process for determining whether declines in value are other than temporary. Portfolio Monitoring We have a comprehensive portfolio monitoring process to identify and evaluate, on a case-by-case basis, fixed income and equity securities whose carrying value may be other-than-temporarily impaired. The process includes a quarterly review of all securities using a screening process to identify situations where the fair value, compared to amortized cost for fixed income securities and cost for equity securities, is below established thresholds for certain time periods, or which are identified through other monitoring criteria such as ratings, ratings downgrades or payment defaults. The securities identified, in addition to other securities for which we may have a concern, are evaluated based on facts and circumstances for inclusion on our watch-list. All investments in an unrealized loss position at December 31, 2008 were included in our portfolio monitoring process for determining whether declines in value were other than temporary. We also conduct a portfolio review to recognize impairment on securities in an unrealized loss position for which we do not have the intent and ability to hold until recovery as a result of approved programs involving the disposition of investments for reasons such as negative developments that would change the view of long term investors and their intent to continue to hold the investment, subsequent credit deterioration of an issuer or holding, subsequent further deterioration of capital markets (i.e. debt and equity) and of economic conditions, subsequent further deterioration in the financial services and real estate industries, changes in duration, revisions to strategic asset allocations, liquidity needs, unanticipated federal income tax situations involving capital gains and capital loss carrybacks and carryforwards with specific expiration dates, investment risk mitigation actions, and other new facts and circumstances that would cause a change in our previous intent to hold a security to recovery or maturity. 106 The following table summarizes fixed income and equity securities in a gross unrealized loss position according to significance, aging and investment grade classification. December 31, 2008 December 31, 2007 Fixed income Fixed income ($ in millions except number of issues) Investment grade Below investment grade Equity Total Investment grade Below investment grade Equity Total Category (I): Unrealized loss less than 20% of cost (1) Number of issues 4,303 275 112 4,690 4,058 379 322 4,759 Fair value $ 29,070 $ 1,172 $ 1,269 $ 31,511 $ 31,489 $ 2,446 $ 884 $ 34,819 Unrealized $ (2,523 ) $ (147 ) $ (74 ) $ (2,744 ) $ (1,391 ) $ (146 ) $ (66 ) $ (1,603 ) Category (II): Unrealized loss greater than or equal to 20% of cost for a period of less than 6 consecutive months (1) Number of issues 1,216 356 221 1,793 176 21 192 389 Fair value $ 8,445 $ 1,555 $ 676 $ 10,676 $ 1,096 $ 134 $ 102 $ 1,332 Unrealized $ (5,365 ) $ (902 ) $ (365 ) $ (6,632 ) $ (578 ) $ (80 ) $ (38 ) $ (696 ) Category (III): Unrealized loss greater than or equal to 20% of cost for a period of 6 or more consecutive months, but less than 12 consecutive months (1) Number of issues 208 29 1 238 5 5 Fair value $ 878 $ 136 $ 2 $ 1,016 $ $ $ 1 $ 1 Unrealized $ (1,686 ) $ (197 ) $ (1 ) $ (1,884 ) $ $ $ (2 ) $ (2 ) Category (IV): Unrealized loss greater than or equal to 20% of cost for 12 or more consecutive months (1) Number of issues 41 5 1 47 Fair value $ 79 $ 16 $ 3 $ 98 $ $ $ $ Unrealized $ (200 ) $ (21 ) $ (4 ) $ (225 ) $ $ $ $ Total number of issues 5,768 665 335 6,768 4,234 400 519 5,153 Total fair value (2) $ 38,472 $ 2,879 $ 1,950 $ 43,301 $ 32,585 $ 2,580 $ 987 $ 36,152 Total unrealized losses $ (9,774 ) $ (1,267 ) $ (444 ) $ (11,485 ) $ (1,969 ) $ (226 ) $ (106 ) $ (2,301 ) (1) For fixed income securities, cost represents amortized cost. (2) At December 31, 2008, 93.0% of the fixed income securities portfolio was rated investment grade compared to 92.7% at December 31, 2007. The largest individual unrealized loss was $17 million for category (I), $105 million for category (II), $38 million for category (III) and $27 million for category (IV) as of December 31, 2008. Categories (I) and (II) have generally been adversely affected by overall economic conditions including interest rate increases and the market's evaluation of certain sectors. The degree to which and/or length of time that the securities have been in an unrealized loss position does not suggest that these securities pose a high risk of being other-than-temporarily impaired. Categories (III) and (IV) have primarily been historically adversely affected by industry and issue specific, or issuer specific conditions. At December 31, 2008, Category (III) for fixed income was comprised primarily of fair values of $361 million of ABS RMBS, $133 million of cash flow CLO, $130 million of corporate private and $94 million of CMBS, for a total of $718 million with unrealized losses of $444 million, $420 million, $139 million and $408 million, respectively, for a total of $1.41 billion unrealized losses. No other security type individually represents more than $56 million of fair value within this category. Of the unrealized losses on below investment grade securities, 17.2% were in significant unrealized loss positions (greater than or equal to 20% of amortized cost) for six or more consecutive months prior to December 31, 2008. Included among the securities rated below investment grade are high-yield bonds and securities that were investment grade when originally acquired. We mitigate the credit risk of investing in below investment grade fixed income securities by limiting the percentage of our fixed income portfolio invested in such securities, through diversification of the portfolio, active credit monitoring and portfolio management activities. We continue to believe that the unrealized losses on these securities are not predictive of the ultimate performance. 107 Whenever our initial analysis indicates that a fixed income security's unrealized loss of 20% or more for at least 36 months or any equity security's unrealized loss of 20% or more for at least 12 months is temporary, additional evaluations and management approvals are required to substantiate that a write-down is not appropriate. As of December 31, 2008, one equity security with an unrealized loss of $4 million met these criteria. The following table contains the individual securities with the largest unrealized losses as of December 31, 2008. No other fixed income or equity security had an unrealized loss greater than $33 million or 0.3% of the total unrealized loss on fixed income and equity securities. ($ in millions) Unrealized loss Fair value NAIC rating Unrealized loss category Fair value hierarchy level Exchange traded fund International equity exposure $ (105 ) $ 194 II 1 Municipal (61 ) 13 2 II 2 Other CMBS (44 ) 18 1 II 2 CMBS Subordinated (38 ) 7 1 III 3 Municipal (38 ) 40 2 II 2 Diversified banking institution (37 ) 33 2 II 2 Municipal (37 ) 11 2 II 2 Home equity (36 ) 15 1 III 3 Total $ (396 ) $ 331 We also monitor the quality of our fixed income and bank loan portfolios by categorizing certain investments as "problem," "restructured," or "potential problem." Problem fixed income securities and bank loans are in default with respect to principal or interest and/or are investments issued by companies that have gone into bankruptcy subsequent to our acquisition or loan. Restructured fixed income and bank loan investments have rates and terms that are not consistent with market rates or terms prevailing at the time of the restructuring. Potential problem fixed income or bank loan investments are current with respect to contractual principal and/or interest, but because of other facts and circumstances, we have concerns regarding the borrower's ability to pay future principal and interest, which causes us to believe these investments may be classified as problem or restructured in the future. The following table summarizes problem, restructured and potential problem fixed income securities and bank loans, which are reported in other investments, at December 31. 2008 ($ in millions) Par value (1) Amortized cost (1) Amortized cost as a percent of par value Fair value Fair value as a percent of par value Percent of total fixed income and bank loan portfolios Restructured $ 101 $ 86 85.2 % $ 76 75.3 % 0.1 % Problem 1,027 228 22.2 186 18.1 0.3 Potential problem 1,896 707 37.3 517 27.3 0.7 Total net carrying value $ 3,024 $ 1,021 33.8 $ 779 25.8 1.1 % Cumulative write-downs recognized (2) $ 1,673 2007 ($ in millions) Par value Amortized cost Amortized cost as a percent of par value Fair value Fair value as a percent of par value Percent of total fixed income and bank loan portfolios Restructured $ 38 $ 35 92.1 % $ 35 92.1 % % Problem 363 35 9.6 43 11.8 0.1 Potential problem 319 245 76.8 198 62.1 0.2 Total net carrying value $ 720 $ 315 43.8 $ 276 38.3 0.3 % Cumulative write-downs recognized (2) $ 358 (1) The difference between par value and amortized cost of $2.00 billion at December 31, 2008 is primarily attributable to write-downs. Par value has been reduced by principal payments. (2) Cumulative write-downs recognized only reflects impairment write-downs related to investments within the problem, potential problem and restructured categories. 108 At December 31, 2008, amortized cost for the problem category was $228 million and was comprised of $83 million of corporates (primarily privately placed), $49 million of financial sector-related holdings, $25 million of municipal bonds, $19 million of real estate investment trusts and $15 million of bank loans. Also included were $21 million of market value CDO, $10 million of ABS CDO, $5 million of ABS RMBS, and $1 million of Alt-A. The increase over December 31, 2007 is attributable to the addition of fixed income and bank loan holdings that either are in default with respect to principal or interest and/or are investments issued by companies that went into bankruptcy during the period. The amortized cost of problem investments with a fair value less than 70% of amortized cost totaled $74 million, with unrealized losses of $34 million and fair value of $40 million. At December 31, 2008, amortized cost for the potential problem category was $707 million and was comprised of $218 million of Alt-A, $132 million of other CDO, $74 million of ABS RMBS, $13 million of Other ABS and $6 million of CRE CDO. Also included were $86 million of municipal bonds, $80 million of corporates (primarily privately placed home builders and suppliers), $47 million of financial sector-related holdings, $37 million of foreign government holdings and $14 million of bank loans. The increase over December 31, 2007 is primarily attributable to the additions of certain real estate-related holdings, including securities collateralized by residential and commercial mortgage loans, as well as market value, cash flow and synthetic CDO. Also contributing to the increase were financial sector-related holdings and corporates, primarily privately placed. The amortized cost of potential problem investments with a fair value less than 70% of amortized cost totaled $269 million, with unrealized losses of $161 million and fair value of $108 million. We evaluated each of these investments through our portfolio monitoring process at December 31, 2008 and recorded write-downs when appropriate. We further concluded that any remaining unrealized losses on these investments were temporary in nature and that we have the intent and ability to hold the securities until recovery. Net Investment Income The following table presents net investment income for the years ended December 31. ($ in millions) 2008 2007 2006 Fixed income securities $ 4,783 $ 5,459 $ 5,329 Equity securities 120 114 117 Mortgage loans 618 600 545 Limited partnership interests 62 293 187 Other 249 412 404 Investment income, before expense 5,832 6,878 6,582 Investment expense (210 ) (443 ) (405 ) Net investment income (1) $ 5,622 $ 6,435 $ 6,177 (1) Beginning in the fourth quarter of 2008, income from EMA LP is reported in realized capital gains and losses. EMA LP income for periods prior to the fourth quarter of 2008 is reported in net investment income. The amount of EMA LP income included in net investment income was $24 million in 2008, $198 million in 2007 and $91 million in 2006. The amount of EMA LP loss included in realized capital gains and losses was $97 million in 2008. Total investment expenses decreased $233 million in 2008 compared to 2007, after increasing $38 million in 2007 compared to 2006. The 2008 decrease was primarily due to lower expenses associated with a lower amount of collateral received in connection with securities lending transactions. The average amount of collateral held in connection with securities lending was approximately $2.46 billion in 2008 compared to approximately $4.55 billion in 2007, as a result of actions to reduce our securities lending balances. 109 Net Realized Capital Gains and Losses The following table presents the components of realized capital gains and losses and the related tax effect for the years ended December 31. ($ in millions) 2008 2007 2006 Sales (1) $ (464 ) $ 1,483 $ 491 Impairment write-downs (2) (1,983 ) (163 ) (47 ) Change in intent write-downs (1)(3) (1,752 ) (147 ) (112 ) Valuation of derivative instruments (1,280 ) (77 ) 26 EMA LP income (4) (97 ) Settlement of derivative instruments 486 139 (72 ) Realized capital gains and losses, pre-tax (5,090 ) 1,235 286 Income tax benefit (expense) 1,779 (437 ) (100 ) Realized capital gains and losses, after-tax $ (3,311 ) $ 798 $ 186 (1) To conform to the current period presentation, certain amounts in the prior periods have been reclassified. (2) Impairment write-downs reflect issue specific other-than-temporary declines in fair value, including instances where we could not reasonably assert that the recovery period would be temporary. (3) Change in intent write-downs reflect instances where we cannot assert a positive intent to hold until recovery. (4) Beginning in the fourth quarter of 2008, income from EMA LP is reported in realized capital gains and losses. EMA LP income for periods prior to the fourth quarter of 2008 is reported in net investment income. Sales net realized losses in 2008 were due to net realized losses on equity securities of $701 million comprised of gross losses of $1.45 billion and gross gains of $751 million. The gross losses primarily resulted from the execution of tax planning strategies primarily within our equity portfolios that are effectively carried on a lower of cost or fair value basis to realize capital loss carryback benefits. The net realized gains on sales in 2007 were primarily due to net realized gains on equity securities of $1.14 billion comprised of gross gains of $1.39 billion and gross losses of $252 million. The gross gains were attributable to our continuing tactical reallocation of equity securities in the Property-Liability portfolio. The ten largest losses from sales of individual securities for the year ended December 31, 2008 totaled $239 million and ranged from $12 million to $46 million. Five securities totaling $54 million were in an unrealized loss position greater than or equal to 20% of amortized cost for fixed income securities or cost for equity securities for a period of less than six consecutive months. One security totaling $13 million was in an unrealized loss position greater than or equal to 20% of amortized cost for fixed income securities or cost for equity securities for a period of more than six but less than twelve consecutive months. Our largest aggregate loss on sales and write-downs are shown in the following table by issuer and its affiliates. No other issuer together with its affiliates had an aggregated loss on sales and write-downs greater than 0.8% of the total gross loss on sales and write-downs on fixed income and equity securities. ($ in millions) Fair value at sales ("proceeds") Gain/ loss on Sales Write- downs December 31, 2008 holdings (1) Net unrealized gain (loss) Finance company $ 173 $ (12 ) $ (109 ) $ 7 $ (1 ) Savings and loan 22 (3 ) (87 ) MBS Alt-A (71 ) 23 (6 ) Large international insurer 102 (3 ) (59 ) 54 (6 ) Brokerage 164 (7 ) (53 ) 121 (3 ) Synthetic CDO (50 ) 14 (10 ) Exchange traded funds Dow Jones Financial Index 150 (33 ) (16 ) Exchange traded funds International exposure 24 (12 ) (34 ) 764 (17 ) Bank 100 5 (51 ) 206 (14 ) Finance company (45 ) Mortgage association 386 10 (55 ) 231 10 Total $ 1,121 $ (55 ) $ (630 ) $ 1,420 $ (47 ) (1) Holdings include fixed income securities at amortized cost or equity securities at cost. 110 The circumstances of the above losses are considered to be security or issue specific and are not expected to have a material effect on other holdings in our portfolios. We may sell or change our intent to hold a security until recovery for impaired fixed income or equity securities that were in an unrealized loss position at the previous reporting date, or other investments where the fair value has declined below the amortized cost or cost, in situations where significant unanticipated new facts and circumstances emerge or existing facts and circumstances increase in significance and are anticipated to adversely impact a security's future valuations more than previously expected; including negative developments that would change the view of long term investors and their intent to continue to hold the investment, subsequent credit deterioration of an issuer or holding, subsequent further deterioration in capital markets (i.e. debt and equity) and of economic conditions, subsequent further deterioration in the financial services and real estate industries, liquidity needs, unanticipated federal income tax situations involving capital gains and capital loss carrybacks and carryforwards with specific expiration dates, investment risk mitigation actions, and other new facts and circumstances that would cause a change in our previous intent to hold a security to recovery or maturity. Upon approval of programs involving the expected disposition of investments, portfolio managers identify a population of suitable investments, typically larger than needed to accomplish the objective, from which specific securities are selected to sell. Due to our change in intent to hold until recovery, we recognize impairments on investments within the population that are in an unrealized loss position. Further unrealized loss positions that develop subsequent to the original write-down are recognized in the reporting period in which they occur through the date the program is closed. The program is closed when the objectives of the program are accomplished or a decision is made not to fully complete it, at which time an evaluation is performed of any remaining securities and where appropriate they are redesignated as having the intent to hold to recovery. Reasons resulting in a decision not to complete an approved program include matters such as the mitigation of concerns that led to the initial decision, changes in priorities or new complications that emerge from significant unanticipated developments, such as subsequent significant deterioration which we view to be temporary in nature, to the point at which securities could only be sold at prices below our view of their intrinsic values, or subsequent favorable developments that support a return to having the intent to hold to recovery. Subsequent other-than-temporary impairment evaluations utilize the amortized cost or cost basis that reflect the write-downs. Fixed income securities subject to change in intent write-downs, including those redesignated as intent to hold, continue to earn investment income and any discount or premium from the amortized cost basis that reflects the write-downs is recognized using the effective yield method over the expected life of the security. As previously described above, it is not possible to reliably identify a reasonably likely circumstance that would result in a change in intent to hold securities to recovery leading to the reporting of additional realized capital losses, since they result from significant unanticipated changes. Our fixed income securities and equity securities have gross unrealized losses of $11.04 billion and $444 million, respectively, at December 31, 2008 that we concluded were temporary in nature and we have the intent and ability to hold the securities until recovery. Impairment write-downs for the years ended December 31 are presented in the following table. ($ in millions) 2008 2007 2006 Fixed income securities $ (1,507 ) $ (109 ) $ (16 ) Equity securities (328 ) (25 ) (13 ) Limited partnership interests (112 ) (25 ) (13 ) Short-term investments (1 ) (3 ) Other investments (36 ) (3 ) (2 ) Total impairment write-downs $ (1,983 ) $ (163 ) $ (47 ) $1.02 billion, or 67.9% of the fixed income security write-downs in 2008 related to impaired securities that were performing in line with anticipated or contractual cash flows, but which were written down primarily because of expected deterioration in the performance of the underlying collateral or our assessment of the probability of future default. As of December 31, 2008, for these securities, there have been no defaults or defaults impacting classes lower in the capital structure. $194 million of the fixed income security write-downs in 2008 primarily related to securities experiencing a significant departure from anticipated cash flows; however, we believe they retain economic value and $126 million related to securities for which future cash flows are very uncertain. Equity securities were written down primarily due to the length of time and extent fair value was below cost, considering our assessment of the financial condition, near-term and long-term prospects of the issuer, including relevant industry conditions and trends. 111 Impairment write-downs and cash received, inclusive of sales, on these investments for the year ended December 31, 2008 are presented in the following table. Notwithstanding our intent and ability to hold these securities with impairment write-downs, we concluded that we could not reasonably assert that the recovery period would be temporary. December 31, 2008 Impairment write-downs Cash received (3) ($ in millions) Performing in accordance with anticipated or contractual cash flows Alt A $ $ No defaults in underlying collateral (85 ) 41 Defaults lower in capital structure (115 ) 27 (200 ) 68 ABS RMBS (183 ) 25 ABS CDO (63 ) 5 CMBS and CRE CDO (46 ) 6 Other CDO (94 ) 18 Synthetic CDO (186 ) 8 Corporate Automotive (3 ) 5 Bond reinsurer convertible to perpetual security (22 ) 1 Financials (68 ) 19 Gaming (3 ) Home construction (71 ) 9 Oil and gas (2 ) 4 Publishing (4 ) Real estate and Real Estate Investment Trust (44 ) 3 Telecommunications (15 ) 5 Other (3 ) Subtotal (235 ) 46 Other (17 ) 13 Subtotal (1) (1,024 ) 189 Departure from anticipated or contractual cash flows Future cash flows expected ABS RMBS (35 ) 9 Municipal bonds (7 ) 1 Corporate Broadcasting (23 ) Residual interest trust security (82 ) Equity structured note (30 ) Financials (17 ) 12 Subtotal (2) (194 ) 22 Future cash flows very uncertain- Other CDO (38 ) 2 ABS RMBS (6 ) 1 Corporate Bond insurer (10 ) Financials (71 ) 25 Other (1 ) Subtotal (126 ) 28 Investments disposed (163 ) 159 Total fixed income securities (4) $ (1,507 ) $ 398 Total equity securities $ (328 ) $ 1,159 Total limited partnership interests $ (112 ) $ 30 Total other investments $ (36 ) $ 7 (1) Written down primarily because of expected deterioration in the performance of the underlying collateral or our assessment of the probability of future default. As of December 31, 2008, for the securities with direct interest in the lender, there have been no defaults. For securities supported by collateral, there have been no defaults or defaults have occurred in classes lower in the capital structure. (2) Experienced a significant departure from anticipated residual cash flows. While these fixed income security write-downs were valued at a significant discount to cost, we believe these securities retain economic value. (3) Cash received includes both income and principal collected during the period and proceeds upon sale. (4) Impairment write-downs on our illiquid portfolios were $882 million. 112 Change in intent write-downs totaling $1.75 billion in 2008 included $1.56 billion for fixed income securities, $120 million for equity securities, $74 million for mortgage loans and $3 million for other investments compared to $84 million for fixed income securities, $32 million for equity securities, $30 million for mortgage loans and $1 million for other investments in 2007. The change in intent write-downs in 2008 were a result of our risk mitigation and return optimization programs, enterprise asset allocations and ongoing comprehensive reviews of our portfolios. Change in intent write-downs for year ended December 31, 2008 are presented in the table below. ($ in millions) Fair value of outstanding change in intent assets Criteria Security type SFAS No. 157 level Net realized capital loss (3) Risk mitigation Targeted reductions (1) in commercial CRE CDO 3 $ 27 $ (331 ) real estate exposure where it is anticipated that future downside risk CMBS 2 (22 ) remains. Considerations included 3 29 (203 ) position held in the capital structure, vintage year, illiquidity and Mortgage loans 3 127 (73 ) deteriorating fundamentals. Targeted reductions (1) in residential real estate where management believes there Prime 2 (9 ) is a risk of future material declines in 3 (11 ) price in the event of continued deterioration in the economy. Alt-A 3 34 (138 ) Considerations included position held in the capital structure, projected ABS RMBS 3 51 (281 ) performance of the collateral, and expected internal rates of return. Targeted reductions (1) in financial Financial sector 2 14 (178 ) sector exposure included securities 3 (33 ) issued by certain regional banks and certain large financial institutions. Other 2 4 (18 ) Total risk mitigation 286 (1,297 ) Individual identification 705 (283 ) Enterprise-wide asset allocation 5 (164 ) Other (8 ) Total $ 996 $ (1,752 ) (2) (1) Targeted reductions are made from identified specific investments. (2) Change in intent write-downs on our illiquid portfolios were $997 million. (3) Change in intent write-downs are related to the risk mitigation targeted reduction for this security type for the year and not for the outstanding change in intent assets at December 31, 2008. 113 Investments for which we had changed our intent to hold to recovery as of June 30, 2008 totaled $6.39 billion and included $3.31 billion as part of the risk mitigation and return optimization programs, $2.39 billion of securities as part of our enterprise-wide asset allocation program and $688 million related to individual securities. The following table summarizes the activity related to investments for which we had changed our intent to hold. ($ in millions) Carrying value as of June 30, 2008 $ 6,385 Re-designated as intent to hold to recovery as of October 1, 2008 (1) (2,589 ) Sales: Risk mitigation and return optimization program (2) (1,237 ) Enterprise asset allocation and other programs (1,705 ) Net realized capital gains and losses on sales: Risk mitigation and return optimization program (2) (104 ) Enterprise asset allocation and other programs 46 Additional change in intent designations (3) 1,119 Write-downs (4) (831 ) Other (88 ) Carrying value as of December 31, 2008 $ 996 (1) Net unrealized capital losses on these re-designated investments were $289 million as of December 31, 2008. (2) Net proceeds from the sales of risk mitigation and return optimization actions totaled $1.24 billion with an additional loss of $104 million or 92% of fair values reported at June 30, 2008. (3) Comprised $865 million and $254 million for which we changed our intent to hold in the third and fourth quarter of 2008, respectively, due to unanticipated changes in facts and circumstances. (4) Includes change in intent write-downs of $453 million and $241 million in the third and fourth quarter of 2008, respectively, and impairment write-downs of $122 million and $15 million in the third and fourth quarter of 2008, respectively. Our original objective in our June 30, 2008 risk mitigation and return optimization program was to reduce our exposure to the identified investments in an orderly fashion prior to additional significant negative impacts. Though we were able to complete a considerable portion of the reduction, approximately $1.24 billion of this program, during the third and fourth quarters of 2008 the financial markets experienced additional and severe dislocation. A series of events, which includes the effects of failures of large financial institutions and intermediaries and various intervention by the government, significantly increased the level of uncertainty in the market. These conditions drove significant volatility in the levels of liquidity and put additional and immediate downward pressures on prices of certain of these investments in respect to our estimated intrinsic values. As a result of these market conditions, which have worsened, we determined that we would not be able to sell certain of these investments at our view of their intrinsic values. Investments re-designated at October 1, 2008 as having the intent to hold to recovery due to our inability to dispose of them for values equal to or greater than our view of their intrinsic value are presented in the following table. ($ in millions) Fair value at October 1, 2008 Amortized cost at October 1, 2008 Fair value at December 31, 2008 Amortized cost at December 31, 2008 Corporate $ 618 $ 616 $ 578 $ 592 Finance sector (1) 607 603 469 537 ABS RMBS 591 589 462 610 Municipal 482 482 493 479 Alt-A 126 126 89 121 Prime 53 59 40 55 Corporate privately placed securities 40 40 24 27 Other 79 74 55 78 Total $ 2,596 $ 2,589 $ 2,210 $ 2,499 (1) Includes corporate, corporate privately placed securities and equity securities with financial sector exposure. 114 For the year ended December 31, 2007, we recognized $147 million of losses related to a change in our intent to hold certain investments with unrealized losses in the Property-Liability and Allstate Financial segments until they recover in value. The change in our intent was primarily related to strategic asset allocation decisions and ongoing comprehensive reviews of our portfolios as well as a liquidity strategy in the Property-Liability portfolio. At December 31, 2007, the fair value of securities for which we did not have the intent to hold until recovery totaled $1.68 billion. Valuation and settlement of derivative instruments net realized capital losses totaling $794 million for the year ended December 31, 2008 included $1.28 billion losses on valuation of derivative instruments, including $510 million of losses for the accounting valuation of embedded options in equity indexed notes and convertible fixed income securities, partially offset by $486 million of gains on the settlement of derivative instruments. For the year ended December 31, 2007, net realized capital gains on the valuation and settlement of derivative instruments totaled $62 million. At December 31, 2008, our securities with embedded options totaled $1.46 billion and decreased in fair value from December 31, 2007 by $934 million, comprised of realized capital losses on valuation of $510 million, net sales activity of $350 million, and unrealized net capital losses reported in other comprehensive income ("OCI") of $74 million for the host securities. Net unrealized capital losses were further increased by $7 million due to amortization and impairment write-downs on the host securities. The change in fair value of embedded options is bifurcated from the host securities, separately valued and reported in realized capital gains and losses, while the change in value of the host securities is reported in OCI. Total amortized cost exceeded total fair value by $22 million at December 31, 2008. Valuation gains and losses are converted into cash for securities with embedded options upon our election to sell these securities. In the event the economic value of the options is not realized, we will recover the par value if held to maturity unless the issuer of the note defaults. Total par value exceeded fair value by $346 million at December 31, 2008. Losses on derivatives used for interest rate risk management but which have not been designated as accounting hedges, primarily in our duration management programs, were related to changing interest rates and, to a lesser extent, widening credit spreads. Gains from the risk reduction programs, primarily in our equity hedge program, were related to declines in the fair value of S&P related securities and losses were experienced in our income generation programs and from the valuation changes of embedded options in fixed income securities. A changing interest rate environment will drive changes in our portfolio duration targets at a tactical level. A duration target and range is established with an economic view of liabilities relative to a long-term investment portfolio view. Tactical duration management is accomplished through both cash market transactions including new purchases and derivative activities that generate realized gains and losses. As a component of our approach to managing portfolio duration, realized gains and losses on certain derivative instruments are most appropriately considered in conjunction with the unrealized gains and losses on the fixed income portfolio. This approach mitigates the impacts of general interest rate changes to the overall financial condition of the Company. 115 The table below presents the realized capital gains and losses (pre-tax) on the valuation and settlement of derivative instruments shown by underlying exposure and derivative strategy for the years ended December 31. 2008 2007 2006 2008 Explanations ($ in millions) Valuation Settlements Total Total Total Risk reduction Property Liability Portfolio duration management $ 38 $ (48 ) $ (10 ) $ (50 ) $ (1 ) Net short interest rate futures and municipal interest rate swaps are used to offset the effects of changing interest rates on a portion of the Property-Liability fixed income portfolio that is reported in unrealized net capital gains or losses in OCI. The short interest rate future contracts are exchange traded, daily cash settled and can be exited at any time for minimal additional cost. The 2008 year-to-date ("YTD") settlement loss on futures resulted from decreases in risk free interest rates. Unrealized gains on the fixed income portfolio caused by decreasing interest rates did not offset settlement losses due to widening credit spreads. The municipal interest rate swaps can be terminated at any time for minimal additional cost. Periodic settlements occur quarterly. The 2008 YTD valuation gain represents the changing value of expected future settlements and resulted from increases in the municipal interest rates. Unrealized losses on the municipal fixed income portfolio, caused by widening credit spreads, more than offset the valuation gains on the derivative. Interest rate spike exposure (81 ) (16 ) (97 ) (20 ) Interest rate swaption contracts, with approximately one-year terms, and exchange traded options on treasury futures provide an offset to declining fixed income market values resulting from potential rising interest rates. The existing swaption contracts at December 31, 2008 protect $14.50 billion of notional principal by limiting the decline in value to approximately $1.50 billion for an increase in risk-free rates greater than approximately 150 basis points above those in effect at inception of the contracts. During 2008, $12.00 billion notional of interest rate swaption contracts, executed in the second half of 2007, expired. Additionally, $9.50 billion notional were replaced at a lower strike price and resulted in a settlement loss being recognized. Exchange traded options on treasury futures were utilized in fourth quarter of 2008 to supplement the protection provided by swaption contracts without increasing the counterparty risk associated with OTC contracts. The options on futures contracts at December 31, 2008 protect $4.00 billion of notional principal by limiting the decline in value to approximately $1.50 billion for an increase in risk-free rates greater than approximately 100 basis points above those in effect at inception of the contracts. The 2008 YTD valuation loss resulted from a decrease in interest rates during the year. Interest rate swaption contracts and exchange traded options can expire, terminate early at minimal additional cost, or the option can be exercised. If interest rates do not increase above the strike rate, the maximum remaining potential loss in 2009 is limited to the remaining unrecognized premium cost of $11 million at December 31, 2008. Hedging unrealized gains on equity securities (53 ) 473 420 61 (13 ) Short S&P futures were primarily used to protect unrealized gains on our equity securities portfolio reported in unrealized net capital gains or losses in accumulated OCI. The futures contracts are exchange traded, daily cash settled and can be exited at any time for minimal additional cost. The 2008 YTD settlement gains on futures offset the decline in our unrealized gains on equity securities as equity markets declined. Exchange traded put options provide an offset to significant declines in equity market values below a targeted level. Options can expire, terminate early or the option can be exercised. If the equity index does not fall below the put's strike price, the maximum loss on purchased puts is limited to the amount of the premium paid. The exchange traded put options purchased during third and fourth quarter were replaced at the end of December at lower strikes and resulted in $114 million settlement gain. OTC collars, comprised of purchased puts and written calls were terminated and resulted in $228 million settlement gain. The 2008 YTD valuation loss on options offset the increase in our unrealized gains on equity portfolios as equity markets increased during the last few days of the year. Foreign currency contracts (25 ) (2 ) (27 ) 6 Credit risk reduction 48 48 8 Valuation gain is the result of widening credit spreads on referenced credit entities. Allstate Financial Duration gap management (543 ) 40 (503 ) (27 ) (51 ) Interest rate caps, floors and swaps are used by Allstate Financial to align interest-rate sensitivities of its assets and liabilities. The contracts settle based on differences between current market rates and a contractually specified fixed rate through expiration. The contracts can be terminated and settled at anytime with a minimal additional cost. The maximum loss on caps and floors would be limited to the amount of premium paid for the protection. The change in valuation reflects the changing value of expected future settlements from changing interest rates, which may vary over the period of the contracts. The 2008 YTD losses, resulting from decreasing interest rates, are offset in unrealized gains in OCI to the extent it relates to changes in risk-free rates; however, the impact of widening credit spreads more than offset this benefit. Anticipatory hedging (1 ) 154 153 (30 ) 17 Futures are used to protect investment spread from interest rate changes during mismatches in the timing of cash flows between product sales and the related investment activity. The futures contracts are exchange traded, daily cash settled and can be exited at any time for minimal additional cost. If the cash flow mismatches are such that a positive net investment position is being hedged, there is an offset for the related investments unrealized loss in OCI. The 2008 YTD amounts reflect decreases in risk-free interest rates on a net long position as liability issuances exceeded asset acquisitions. Hedging of interest rate exposure in annuity contracts (22 ) (7 ) (29 ) (22 ) 1 Value of expected future settlements and the associated value of future credited interest, which is reportable in future periods when incurred, decreased due to declining interest rates. Hedging unrealized gains on equity indexed notes 7 7 1 Hedge ineffectiveness (2 ) (2 ) (4 ) (13 ) (7 ) The hedge ineffectiveness of ($2 million) includes $416 million in realized capital losses on swaps that were offset by $414 million in realized capital gains on the hedged risk. 116 2008 2007 2006 2008 Explanations ($ in millions) Valuation Settlements Total Total Total Foreign currency contracts (1 ) (1 ) (13 ) (5 ) Credit risk reduction 20 (3 ) 17 Valuation gain is the results of widening credit spreads on referenced credit entities. Other (27 ) (27 ) (16 ) Total Risk reduction $ (648 ) $ 595 $ (53 ) $ (115 ) $ (59 ) Income generation Asset replication credit exposure Property Liability Allstate Financial Total $ (50) (71) (121) $ 9 9 18 $ (41) (62) (103) $ (12) (18) (30) $ 2 4 6 Credit default swaps are used to replicate fixed income securities and to complement the cash market when credit exposure to certain issuers is not available or when the derivative alternative is less expensive than the cash market alternative. The credit default swaps typically have five year term for which we receive periodic premiums through expiration. The 2008 YTD changes in valuation are due to the widening credit spreads, and would only be converted to cash upon disposition which can be done at any time, or if the credit event specified in the contract occurs. The maximum exposure is equal to the notional amount of the credit derivative. When the credit event specified in the contract occurs, we are obligated to pay the counterparty the notional amount of the contract and receive in return the referenced defaulted security or similar security. As of December 31, 2008, we had $1.06 billion of notional outstanding. Asset replication equity exposure Property Liability (84 ) (84 ) 16 Settlement loss was a result of the decline in equity markets. Commodity derivatives Property Liability (1 ) (43 ) (44 ) 106 (111 ) The settlement losses are the result of decreasing returns on the underlying commodity index. There were no open positions as of December 31, 2008. Total Income generation $ (122 ) $ (109 ) $ (231 ) $ 92 $ (105 ) Accounting Equity indexed notes Allstate Financial $ (290 ) $ $ (290 ) $ 38 $ 35 Equity-indexed notes are fixed income securities that contain embedded options. The changes in valuation of the embedded equity indexed call options are reported in realized capital gains and losses. The results generally track the performance of underlying equity indices. During 2008, one of the embedded options was valued at $0 due to the counterparty's bankruptcy. As a result, an additional $21 million of losses was reported in realized capital gains and losses. Valuation gains and losses are converted into cash upon sale or maturity. In the event the economic value of the options is not realized, we will recover the par value of the host fixed income security if held to maturity unless the issuer of the note defaults. Par value exceeded fair value by $167 million at December 31, 2008. Equity-indexed notes are subject to our comprehensive portfolio monitoring and watchlist processes to identify and evaluate when the carrying value may be other-than-temporarily impaired. As a result of this process, one issue was written-down during 2008 due to the issuer's bankruptcy. The following table compares the December 31, 2008 and December 31, 2007 holdings respectively. ($ in millions) December 31, 2008 Change December 31, 2007 Par value $ 800 $ $ 800 Amortized cost of host contract $ 486 $ (11 ) $ 497 Fair value of equity indexed call option 132 (290 ) 422 Total amortized cost $ 618 $ (301 ) $ 919 Total Fair value $ 633 $ (291 ) $ 924 Unrealized gain/loss $ 15 $ 10 $ 5 Conversion options in fixed income securities Property Liability Allstate Financial (143 (77 ) ) (143 (77 ) ) 19 28 46 37 Convertible bonds are fixed income securities that contain embedded options. Changes in valuation of the embedded option are reported in realized capital gains and losses. The results generally track the performance of underlying equities. Valuation gains and losses are converted into cash upon our election to sell these securities. In the event the economic value of the options is not realized, we will recover the par value of the host fixed income security if held to maturity unless the issuer of the note defaults. Par value exceeded fair value by $179 million at December 31, 2008. Convertible bonds are subject to our comprehensive portfolio monitoring and watchlist processes to identify and evaluate when the carrying value may be other-than-temporarily impaired. As a result of this process, four issues were written-down during 2008. The following table compares the December 31, 2008 and December 31, 2007 holdings respectively. Total (220 ) (220 ) 47 83 ($ in millions) December 31, 2008 Change in Fair Value Change due to Net Sale Activity December 31, 2007 Par value $ 1,005 $ $ (411 ) $ 1,416 Amortized cost of host contract $ 662 $ 18 $ (345 ) $ 989 Fair value of conversion option 201 (220 ) (40 ) 461 Total amortized cost $ 863 $ (202 ) $ (385 ) $ 1,450 Total Fair value $ 826 $ (293 ) $ (350 ) $ 1,469 Unrealized gain/loss $ (37 ) $ (91 ) $ 35 $ 19 Total Accounting $ (510 ) $ $ (510 ) $ 85 $ 118 Total $ (1,280 ) $ 486 $ (794 ) $ 62 $ (46 ) 117 Included in the table above are net realized capital gains on the valuation and settlement of derivative instruments related to our risk mitigation and return optimization programs initiated in 2008 totaling $256 million for the year ended December 31, 2008. These realized capital gains and losses are detailed in the following table for the year ended December 31, 2008. ($ in millions) Valuation Settlement Total Portfolio duration management $ 38 $ 1 $ 39 Interest rate spike exposure (81 ) (16 ) (97 ) Hedging unrealized gains on equity securities (48 ) 342 294 Credit risk hedging 25 (5 ) 20 Total $ (66 ) $ 322 $ 256 The following table presents the breakout by operating segment for net realized capital gains on the valuation and settlements of derivatives for the years ended December 31: ($ in millions) 2008 2007 2006 Property-Liability $ (7 ) $ 118 $ (77 ) Allstate Financial (788 ) (57 ) 31 Corporate and Other 1 1 Total $ (794 ) $ 62 $ (46 ) 118 Fair Value of Financial Assets and Financial Liabilities The following table provides additional details regarding Level 1, 2 and 3 financial assets and financial liabilities by their classification in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position at December 31, 2008. For further discussion of Level 1, 2 and 3 financial assets and financial liabilities, see Note 2 of the consolidated financial statements and the Application of Critical Accounting Estimates section of the MD&A. ($ in millions) Quoted prices in active markets for identical assets (Level 1) Significant other observable inputs (Level 2) Significant unobservable inputs (Level 3) Other valuations and netting Balance as of December 31, 2008 Financial assets Fixed income securities: Corporate $ $ 14,132 $ 486 $ 14,618 Corporate privately placed securities 3,300 9,709 13,009 Municipal 19,323 793 20,116 Municipal ARS 62 1,670 1,732 U.S. government and agencies 662 3,572 4,234 ABS RMBS 2,067 2,067 Alt-A 582 582 Other CDO 778 778 Other ABS 526 526 ABS CDO 6 6 CRE CDO 27 27 CMBS 3,389 430 3,819 Preferred stock 24 2 26 MBS 3,577 333 3,910 Foreign government 2,675 2,675 ABS Credit card, auto and student loans 73 410 483 Total fixed income securities 662 50,127 17,819 68,608 Equity securities: U.S. equities 2,260 1 37 2,298 International equities 217 96 29 342 Other 157 8 165 Total equity securities 2,477 254 74 2,805 Short-term investments: Commercial paper and other 8,343 8,343 Money market funds 563 563 Total short term investments 563 8, 343 8,906 Other investments: Free standing derivatives 812 13 825 Total other investments 812 13 825 Total recurring basis assets 3,702 59,536 17,906 81,144 Non recurring basis 301 301 Valued at cost, amortized cost or using the equity method $ 15,078 15,078 Counterparty and cash collateral netting (1) (525 ) (525 ) Total investments 3,702 59,536 18,207 14,553 95,998 Separate account assets 8,239 8,239 Other assets 1 1 Total financial assets $ 11,941 $ 59,536 $ 18,208 $ 14,553 $ 104,238 % of total financial assets 11.4 % 57.1% 17.5 % 14.0 % 100.0 % Financial liabilities Contractholder funds: Derivatives embedded in annuity contracts $ $ (37 ) $ (265 ) $ (302 ) Other liabilities: Free standing derivatives (1,177 ) (114 ) (1,291 ) Non recurring basis Counterparty and cash collateral netting (1) $ 505 505 Total financial liabilities $ $ (1,214 ) $ (379 ) $ 505 $ (1,088 ) % of total financial liabilities % 111.6 % 34.8 % (46.4 )% 100.0 % (1) In accordance with Financial Accounting Standards Board ("FASB") Staff Position No. FIN 39-1, Amendment of FASB Interpretation No. 39 , we net all fair value amounts recognized for derivative instruments and fair value amounts recognized for the right to reclaim cash collateral or the obligation to return cash collateral executed with the same counterparty under a master netting agreement. At December 31, 2008, the right to reclaim cash collateral was offset by securities held, and the obligation to return collateral was $20 million. 119 The following table provides a summary of changes in fair value during the year ended December 31, 2008 of Level 3 financial assets and financial liabilities held at fair value on a recurring basis at December 31, 2008. Total realized and unrealized gains (losses) included in: Total gain (losses) included in Net Income for instruments still held at December 31, 2008 (4) Net transfers in and/ or (out) of Level 3 ($ in millions) Balance as of January 1, 2008 Net income (1) OCI on Statement of Financial Position Purchases, sales, issuances and settlements, net Balance as of December 31, 2008 Financial assets Fixed income securities: Corporate $ 810 $ (100 ) $ (59 ) $ (380 ) $ 215 $ 486 $ (102 ) Corporate privately placed securities 12,058 (326 ) (1,343 ) (991 ) 311 9,709 (277 ) Municipal 991 3 (255 ) (5 ) 59 793 (5 ) Municipal ARS 486 (130 ) (200 ) 1,514 1,670 ABS RMBS 3,926 (526 ) (566 ) (767 ) 2,067 (444 ) Alt A 1,347 (384 ) (121 ) (260 ) 582 (201 ) Other CDO 2,010 (288 ) (889 ) (35 ) (20 ) 778 (290 ) Other ABS 1,339 (15 ) (159 ) (660 ) 21 526 (10 ) ABS CDO 36 (63 ) 38 (5 ) 6 (63 ) CRE CDO 568 (438 ) 184 (287 ) 27 (182 ) CMBS 265 (41 ) (475 ) (96 ) 777 430 (20 ) Preferred stock 1 1 2 MBS 96 2 (82 ) (26 ) 343 333 Foreign government 19 1 (6 ) (14 ) ABS Credit card, auto and student loans 420 (13 ) (58 ) (158 ) 219 410 Total fixed income securities 24,372 (2,187 ) (3,915 ) (3,876 ) 3,425 17,819 (1,594 ) Equity securities 129 (102 ) 5 20 22 74 (5 ) Other investments: Free-standing derivatives, net 10 (235 ) 124 (101) (2) (106 ) Total investments 24,511 (2,524 ) (3,910 ) (3,732 ) 3,447 17,792 (3) (1,705 ) Other assets 2 (1 ) 1 (1 ) Total recurring Level 3 financial assets $ 24,513 $ (2,525 ) $ (3,910 ) $ (3,732 ) $ 3,447 $ 17,793 $ (1,706 ) Financial liabilities Contractholder funds: Derivatives embedded in annuity contracts $ 4 $ (270 ) $ $ 1 $ $ (265 ) $ (270 ) Total recurring Level 3 financial liabilities $ 4 $ (270 ) $ $ 1 $ $ (265 ) $ (270 ) (1) The effect to net income of financial assets and financial liabilities totals $(2.79) billion and is reported in the Consolidated Statements of Operations as follows: $(2.65) billion in realized capital gains and losses; $134 million in net investment income; $(6) million in interest credited to contractholder funds; and $(270) million in life and annuity contract benefits. (2) Comprises $13 million of financial assets and $(114) million of financial liabilities. (3) Comprises $17.91 billion of investments and $(114) million of free standing derivatives included in financial liabilities. (4) The amounts represent gains and losses included in net income for the period of time that the financial asset or financial liability was determined to be in Level 3. These gains and losses total $(1.98) billion and are reported in the Consolidated Statements of Operations as follows: $(1.81) billion in realized capital gains and losses; $103 million in net investment income; $(1) million in interest credited to contractholder funds; and $(270) million in life and annuity contract benefits. Due to the reduced availability of actual market prices or relevant observable inputs as a result of the decrease in liquidity that has been experienced in the market, all ABS RMBS, Alt-A, ARS backed by student loans and certain ABS and certain CMBS are categorized as Level 3. Transfers into and out of Level 3 during the twelve months ended December 31, 2008 are attributable to a change in the availability of market observable information for individual securities within the respective categories. Due to the continued lack of liquidity for the segment of the ARS market backed by student loans, certain market observable data utilized for valuation purposes became unavailable during 2008, resulting in the transfer of securities to Level 3. As of December 31, 2008, $1.69 billion or 97.3% of our total ARS holdings were thus valued using a discounted cash flow model. Certain inputs to the valuation model that are significant to the overall valuation and not market observable included: estimates of future coupon rates if auction failures continue, maturity assumptions, and illiquidity premium. These same securities were classified as Level 2 measurements as of January 1, 2008. Our ARS holdings that are not backed by student loans have a fair value equal to their corresponding par value based on market observable inputs and, therefore, continue to have a Level 2 classification. As a result of a significant decline in market liquidity during the fourth quarter of 2008, securities in our Prime 2005 through 2007 vintages, ABS auto Aaa-rated, and our below Aaa-rated CMBS were transferred to Level 3. For further discussion of transfers into and out of Level 3, see Note 6 of the consolidated financial statements. 120 The following table presents fair value as a percent of amortized cost for Level 3 investments at December 31, 2008. ($ in millions) Fair value Fair value as a percentage of par value Fair value as a percentage of amortized cost Fixed income securities: Corporate $ 486 70.4 % 91.2 % Corporate privately placed securities 9,709 81.9 91.1 Municipal 793 76.3 79.5 Municipal ARS 1,670 90.5 90.5 ABS RMBS 2,067 56.2 65.1 Alt-A 582 53.0 74.6 Other CDO 778 34.1 41.1 Other ABS 526 66.2 78.3 ABS CDO 6 4.4 60.0 CRE CDO 27 13.4 108.0 CMBS 430 33.2 35.8 Preferred stock 2 100.0 100.0 MBS 333 68.5 70.0 ABS Credit card, auto and student loans 410 81.3 83.8 Total fixed income securities 17,819 68.8 78.3 Equity securities: U.S. equities 37 N/A 105.7 International equities 29 N/A 90.6 Other 8 N/A 100.0 Total equity securities 74 N/A 98.7 Other investments: Free-standing derivatives 13 N/A N/A Total other investments 13 N/A N/A Sub-total recurring Level 3 investments 17,906 69.1 78.4 Non-recurring basis 301 N/A 100.0 Total Level 3 investments $ 18,207 70.2 78.7 Non-recurring investments include certain mortgage loans, limited partnership interests and other investments remeasured at fair value due to our change in intent write-downs and other-than-temporary impairments at December 31, 2008. 121 MARKET RISK Market risk is the risk that we will incur losses due to adverse changes in equity, interest, credit spreads, commodity, or currency exchange rates and prices. Adverse changes to these rates and prices may occur due to changes in the liquidity of a market or market segment, insolvency or financial distress of key market makers or participants or changes in market perceptions of credit worthiness and/or risk tolerance. Our primary market risk exposures are to changes in interest rates, credit spreads and equity prices, although we also have a smaller exposure to changes in foreign currency exchange rates and commodity prices. The active management of market risk is integral to our results of operations. We may use the following approaches to manage exposure to market risk within defined tolerance ranges: 1) rebalancing existing asset or liability portfolios, 2) changing the character of investments purchased in the future and 3) using derivative instruments to modify the market risk characteristics of existing assets and liabilities or assets expected to be purchased. For a more detailed discussion of our use of derivative financial instruments, see Note 6 of the consolidated financial statements. Overview In formulating and implementing guidelines for investing funds, we seek to earn returns that enhance our ability to offer competitive rates and prices to customers while contributing to attractive and stable profits and long-term capital growth. Accordingly, our investment decisions and objectives are a function of the underlying risks and product profiles of each business. Investment policies define the overall framework for managing market and other investment risks, including accountability and controls over risk management activities. Subsidiaries that conduct investment activities follow policies that have been approved by their respective boards of directors. These investment policies specify the investment limits and strategies that are appropriate given the liquidity, surplus, product profile and regulatory requirements of the subsidiary. Executive oversight of investment activities is conducted primarily through subsidiaries' boards of directors and investment committees. For Allstate Financial, its asset-liability management ("ALM") policies further define the overall framework for managing market and investment risks. ALM focuses on strategies to enhance yields, mitigate market risks and optimize capital to improve profitability and returns for Allstate Financial. Allstate Financial ALM activities follow asset-liability policies that have been approved by their respective boards of directors. These ALM policies specify limits, ranges and/or targets for investments that best meet Allstate Financial's business objectives in light of its product liabilities. We manage our exposure to market risk through the use of asset allocation, duration and value-at-risk limits, simulation, and as appropriate, through the use of stress tests. We have asset allocation limits that place restrictions on the total funds that may be invested within an asset class. We have duration limits on the Property-Liability and Allstate Financial investment portfolios and, as appropriate, on individual components of these portfolios. These duration limits place restrictions on the amount of interest rate risk that may be taken. Our value-at-risk limits are intended to restrict the potential loss in fair value that could arise from adverse movements in the fixed income, equity, and currency markets based on historical volatilities and correlations among market risk factors. Comprehensive day-to-day management of market risk within defined tolerance ranges occurs as portfolio managers buy and sell within their respective markets based upon the acceptable boundaries established by investment policies. For Allstate Financial, this day-to-day management is integrated with and informed by the activities of the ALM organization. This integration is intended to result in a prudent, methodical and effective adjudication of market risk and return, conditioned by the unique demands and dynamics of Allstate Financial's product liabilities and supported by the continuous application of advanced risk technology and analytics. Although we apply a similar overall philosophy to market risk, the underlying business frameworks and the accounting and regulatory environments differ considerably between the Property-Liability and Allstate Financial businesses affecting investment decisions and risk parameters. Interest rate risk is the risk that we will incur a loss due to adverse changes in interest rates relative to the interest rate characteristics of interest bearing assets and liabilities. This risk arises from many of our primary activities, as we invest substantial funds in interest-sensitive assets and issue interest-sensitive liabilities. Interest rate risk includes risks related to changes in U.S. Treasury yields and other key risk-free reference yields. We manage the interest rate risk in our assets relative to the interest rate risk in our liabilities. One of the measures used to quantify this exposure is duration. Duration measures the price sensitivity of the assets and liabilities to changes in interest rates. For example, if interest rates increase 100 basis points, the fair value of an asset with a duration of 5 is expected to decrease in value by approximately 5%. At December 31, 2008, the difference between our asset and liability duration was approximately 0.02, compared to a 0.39 gap at 122 December 31, 2007. A positive duration gap indicates that the fair value of our assets is more sensitive to interest rate movements than the fair value of our liabilities. Most of our duration gap is attributable to the Property-Liability operations, with the primary liabilities being auto and homeowners claims. In the management of investments supporting the Property-Liability business, we adhere to an objective of emphasizing safety of principal and consistency of income within a total return framework. This approach is designed to ensure our financial strength and stability for paying claims, while maximizing economic value and surplus growth. This objective generally results in a positive duration mismatch between the Property-Liability assets and liabilities. For the Allstate Financial business, we seek to invest premiums, contract charges and deposits to generate future cash flows that will fund future claims, benefits and expenses, and that will earn stable spreads across a wide variety of interest rate and economic scenarios. To achieve this objective and limit interest rate risk for Allstate Financial, we adhere to a philosophy of managing the duration of assets and related liabilities within predetermined tolerance levels. This philosophy is executed using duration targets for fixed income investments in addition to interest rate swaps, futures, forwards, caps, floors and swaptions to reduce the interest rate risk resulting from mismatches between existing assets and liabilities, and financial futures and other derivative instruments to hedge the interest rate risk of anticipated purchases and sales of investments and product sales to customers. We pledge and receive collateral on certain types of derivative contracts. For futures and option contracts traded on exchanges, we have pledged securities as margin deposits totaling $72 million as of December 31, 2008. For OTC derivative transactions including interest rate swaps, foreign currency swaps, interest rate caps, interest rate floors, and credit default swaps, master netting agreements are used. These agreements allow us to net payments due for transactions covered by the agreements and, when applicable, we are required to post collateral. As of December 31, 2008, we held cash of $20 million and did not have any securities pledged by counterparties as collateral for OTC instruments; we pledged cash of $16 million and securities of $544 million as collateral to counterparties. We performed a sensitivity analysis on OTC derivative collateral requirements by assuming a hypothetical reduction in our S&P's insurance financial strength ratings from AA- to A and a 100 basis point decline in interest rates. The analysis indicated that we would have to post an estimated $449 million in additional collateral with approximately 99.9% attributable to Allstate Financial. The selection of these hypothetical scenarios should not be construed as our prediction of future events, but only as an illustration of the estimated potential effect of such events. We also actively manage our counterparty credit risk exposure by monitoring the level of collateral posted by our counterparties with respect to our receivable positions. To calculate the duration gap between assets and liabilities, we project asset and liability cash flows and calculate their net present value using a risk-free market interest rate adjusted for credit quality, sector attributes, liquidity and other specific risks. Duration is calculated by revaluing these cash flows at alternative interest rates and determining the percentage change in aggregate fair value. The cash flows used in this calculation include the expected maturity and repricing characteristics of our derivative financial instruments, all other financial instruments (as described in Note 6 of the consolidated financial statements), and certain other items including unearned premiums, property-liability claims and claims expense reserves, annuity liabilities and other interest-sensitive liabilities. The projections include assumptions (based upon historical market experience and our experience) that reflect the effect of changing interest rates on the prepayment, lapse, leverage and/or option features of instruments, where applicable. The preceding assumptions relate primarily to mortgage-backed securities, collateralized mortgage obligations, municipal housing bonds, callable municipal and corporate obligations, and fixed rate single and flexible premium deferred annuities. Additionally, the calculations include assumptions regarding the renewal of property-liability policies. Based upon the information and assumptions used in the duration calculation, and interest rates in effect at December 31, 2008, we estimate that a 100 basis point immediate, parallel increase in interest rates ("rate shock") would decrease the net fair value of the assets and liabilities by approximately $81 million, compared to $1.51 billion at December 31, 2007. Reflected in the duration calculation are the effects of a program that uses options on Treasury futures to manage the Property-Liability interest rate risk exposures relative to duration targets, as well as a program that uses interest rate swaptions to manage the risk of a large rate increase. In calculating the impact of a 100 basis point increase on the value of the derivatives, we have assumed interest rate volatility remains constant. Based on the option on Treasury futures and swaption contracts in place at December 31, 2008, we would recognize realized capital gains totaling $135 million in the event of a 100 basis point immediate, parallel interest rate increase and $11 million in realized capital losses in the event of a 100 basis point immediate, parallel interest rate decrease. The selection of a 100 basis point immediate parallel change 123 in interest rates should not be construed as our prediction of future market events, but only as an illustration of the potential effect of such an event. There are $6.79 billion of assets supporting life insurance products such as traditional and interest-sensitive life that are not financial instruments. These assets and the associated liabilities have not been included in the above estimate. The $6.79 billion of assets excluded from the calculation has decreased from the $7.77 billion reported at December 31, 2007 due to capital market changes. Based on assumptions described above, in the event of a 100 basis point immediate increase in interest rates, the assets supporting life insurance products would decrease in value by $515 million, compared to a decrease of $554 million at December 31, 2007. To the extent that conditions differ from the assumptions we used in these calculations, duration and rate shock measures could be significantly impacted. Additionally, our calculations assume that the current relationship between short-term and long-term interest rates (the term structure of interest rates) will remain constant over time. As a result, these calculations may not fully capture the effect of non-parallel changes in the term structure of interest rates and/or large changes in interest rates. Credit spread risk is the risk that we will incur a loss due to adverse changes in credit spreads ("spreads"). This risk arises from many of our primary activities, as we invest substantial funds in spread-sensitive fixed income assets. We manage the spread risk in our assets. One of the measures used to quantify this exposure is spread duration. Spread duration measures the price sensitivity of the assets to changes in spreads. For example, if spreads increase 100 basis points, the fair value of an asset exhibiting a spread duration of 5 is expected to decrease in value by approximately 5%. Spread duration is calculated similarly to interest rate duration. At December 31, 2008, the spread duration of Property-Liability assets was 5.46 and the spread duration of Allstate Financial assets was 4.30. Based upon the information and assumptions we use in this spread duration calculation, and spreads in effect at December 31, 2008, we estimate that a 100 basis point immediate, parallel increase in spreads across all asset classes, industry sectors and credit ratings ("spread shock") would decrease the net fair value of the assets by approximately $3.61 billion, compared to $4.62 billion at December 31, 2007. Reflected in the duration calculation are the effects of our risk mitigation actions that use credit default swaps to manage spread risk. Based on contracts in place at December 31, 2008, we would recognize realized capital gains totaling $64 million in the event of a 100 basis point immediate, parallel spread increase and $64 million in realized capital losses in the event of a 100 basis point immediate, parallel spread decrease. The selection of a 100 basis point immediate parallel change in spreads should not be construed as our prediction of future market events, but only as an illustration of the potential effect of such an event. Equity price risk is the risk that we will incur losses due to adverse changes in the general levels of the equity markets. At December 31, 2008, we held approximately $2.54 billion in common stocks and Exchange Traded Funds ("ETFs"), and $3.65 billion in other securities with equity risk (including primarily convertible securities, limited partnership interests, non-redeemable preferred securities and equity-linked notes), compared to approximately $4.32 billion and $3.76 billion, respectively, at December 31, 2007. Approximately 100.0% and 49.1% of these totals, respectively, represented assets of the Property-Liability operations at December 31, 2008, compared to approximately 100.0% and 50.5%, respectively, at December 31, 2007. Additionally, we had 25,634 contracts in long Standard & Poor's 500 Composite Price Index ("S&P 500") puts at December 31, 2008 with a fair value of $108 million. At December 31, 2008, our portfolio of common stocks and other securities with equity risk had a cash market portfolio beta of approximately 0.66, compared to a beta of approximately 0.95 at December 31, 2007. Beta represents a widely used methodology to describe, quantitatively, an investment's market risk characteristics relative to an index such as the S&P 500. Based on the beta analysis, we estimate that if the S&P 500 increases or decreases by 10%, the fair value of our equity investments will increase or decrease by approximately 6.6%, respectively. Based upon the information and assumptions we used to calculate beta at December 31, 2008, including the effect of the S&P 500 puts, we estimate that an immediate decrease in the S&P 500 of 10% would decrease the net fair value of our equity investments identified above by approximately $343 million, compared to $765 million at December 31, 2007, and an immediate increase in the S&P 500 of 10% would increase the net fair value by $368 million compared to $765 million at December 31, 2007. In calculating the impact of a 10% S&P index perturbation on the value of the puts, we have assumed index volatility remains constant. Based on the S&P 500 index put options in place at December 31, 2008, we would recognize losses totaling $36 million in the event of a 10% increase in the S&P 500 index and $61 million in gains in the event of a 10% decrease. The selection of a 10% immediate decrease in the S&P 500 should not be construed as our prediction of future market events, but only as an illustration of the potential effect of such an event. 124 The beta of our common stocks and other securities with equity risk was determined using Barra's predictive beta. This beta is based on a company's fundamental data. The illustrations noted above may not reflect our actual experience if the future composition of the portfolio (hence its beta) and correlation relationships differ from the historical relationships. At December 31, 2008 and 2007, we had separate accounts assets related to variable annuity and variable life contracts with account values totaling $8.24 billion and $14.93 billion, respectively. Equity risk exists for contract charges based on separate account balances and guarantees for death and/or income benefits provided by our variable products. In 2006, we disposed of substantially all of the variable annuity business through a reinsurance agreement with Prudential as described in Note 3 of the consolidated financial statements, and therefore mitigated this aspect of our risk. Equity risk for our variable life business relates to contract charges and policyholder benefits. Total variable life contract charges for 2008 and 2007 were $95 million and $92 million, respectively. Separate account liabilities related to variable life contracts were $561 million and $905 million in December 31, 2008 and 2007, respectively. At December 31, 2008 and 2007 we had approximately $4.11 billion and $3.98 billion, respectively, in equity-indexed annuity liabilities that provide customers with interest crediting rates based on the performance of the S&P 500. We hedge the risk associated with these liabilities using equity-indexed options and futures, interest rate swaps, and eurodollar futures, maintaining risk within specified value-at-risk limits. Foreign currency exchange rate risk is the risk that we will incur economic losses due to adverse changes in foreign currency exchange rates. This risk primarily arises from our foreign equity investments, including real estate funds, and our Canadian operations. We also have certain funding agreement programs and a small amount of fixed income securities that are denominated in foreign currencies, however, derivatives are used to hedge the foreign currency risk of these funding agreements and approximately 65% of the fixed income securities. At December 31, 2008 and 2007, we had approximately $713 million and $924 million, respectively, in funding agreements denominated in foreign currencies. At December 31, 2008, we had approximately $593 million in foreign currency denominated equity securities, an additional $482 million net investment in our foreign subsidiaries, and $103 million in unhedged non-dollar pay fixed income securities. These amounts were $791 million, $669 million, and $45 million, respectively, at December 31, 2007. Approximately 80.7% of the foreign currency exposure is in the Property-Liability business. Based upon the information and assumptions we used at December 31, 2008, we estimate that a 10% immediate unfavorable change in each of the foreign currency exchange rates that we are exposed to would decrease the value of our foreign currency denominated instruments by approximately $118 million, compared with an estimated $150 million decrease at December 31, 2007. The selection of a 10% immediate decrease in all currency exchange rates should not be construed as our prediction of future market events, but only as an illustration of the potential effect of such an event. Our currency exposure is diversified across 38 currencies, compared to 30 currencies at December 31, 2007. Our largest individual foreign currency exposures at December 31, 2008 were to the Canadian dollar (43.2%) and the Euro (19.2%). The largest individual foreign currency exposures at December 31, 2007 were to the Canadian dollar (45.2%) and the Euro (21.7%). Our primary regional exposure is to Western Europe, approximately 33.2% at December 31, 2008, compared to 35.5% at December 31, 2007. The modeling technique we use to report our currency exposure does not take into account correlation among foreign currency exchange rates. Even though we believe it is very unlikely that all of the foreign currency exchange rates that we are exposed to would simultaneously decrease by 10%, we nonetheless stress test our portfolio under this and other hypothetical extreme adverse market scenarios. Our actual experience may differ from these results because of assumptions we have used or because significant liquidity and market events could occur that we did not foresee. Commodity price risk is the risk that we will incur economic losses due to adverse changes in the prices of commodities. This risk arises from commodity linked investments, such as the Goldman Sachs Commodity Index which is a broad based, oil dominated index. At December 31, 2008 and 2007, we had no exposure to the index. PENSION PLANS We have defined benefit pension plans, which cover most full-time and certain part-time employees and employee-agents. See Note 16 of the consolidated financial statements for a complete discussion of these plans and their effect on the consolidated financial statements. The pension and other postretirement plans may be amended or terminated at any time. Any revisions could result in significant changes to our obligations and our obligation to fund the plans. 125 We report unrecognized pension and other postretirement benefit cost in the Consolidated Statements of Financial Condition as a component of accumulated other comprehensive income in shareholders' equity. It represents differences between the fair value of plan assets and the projected benefit obligation for pension plans and the accumulated postretirement benefit obligation for other postretirement plans that have not yet been recognized as a component of net periodic cost. The measurement of the unrecognized pension and other postretirement benefit cost can vary based upon the fluctuations in the fair value of the plan assets and the actuarial assumptions used for the plans as discussed below. The unrecognized pension and other postretirement benefit cost at December 31, 2008 was $1.07 billion, an increase of $724 million from $344 million at December 31, 2007. The increase was the result of declines in the value of plan assets during 2008 partially offset by an increased discount rate. As of December 31, 2008, each of our qualified pension plans had projected benefit obligations that significantly exceeded plan assets. As of December 31, 2007, each of our U.S. qualified pension plans had projected benefit obligations that slightly exceeded plan assets. As provided for in the Financial Accounting Standards Board Statement of Financial Accounting Standards ("SFAS") No. 87, "Employers' Accounting for Pensions," the market-related value component of expected returns recognizes plan losses and gains on equity securities over a five-year period, which we believe is consistent with the long-term nature of pension obligations. As a result, the effect of changes in fair value on equity securities on our net periodic pension cost may be experienced in periods subsequent to those in which the fluctuations actually occur. Net periodic pension cost in 2009 is estimated to be $122 million based on current assumptions, including settlement charges. This represents a decrease compared to 2008 due to the increase in discount rate for each pension plan, which resulted in lower amortization of net actuarial loss. Net periodic pension cost decreased in 2008 principally due to lower service cost, higher expected returns on plan assets, and lower amortization of net actuarial loss due to higher plan asset values. Net periodic pension cost decreased in 2007 principally due to lower settlement charges and decreases in the amortization of actuarial losses. In each of the years 2008, 2007 and 2006, net pension cost included non-cash settlement charges primarily resulting from lump sum distributions made to agents and in 2006 due to higher lump sum payments made to Allstate employees. Additional settlement charges occurred during 2008 and 2007 also related to the Supplemental Retirement Income Plan as a result of lump sum payments made from the plan. Settlement charges are expected to continue in the future as we settle our remaining agent pension obligations by making lump sum distributions to agents. Amounts recorded for pension cost and accumulated other comprehensive income are significantly affected by fluctuations in the returns on plan assets and the amortization of unrecognized actuarial gains and losses. Plan assets sustained net losses in current and prior periods primarily due to declines in equity and credit markets. These asset losses, combined with all other unrecognized actuarial gains and losses, resulted in amortization of net actuarial loss (and additional net periodic pension cost) of $37 million in 2008 and $116 million in 2007. We anticipate that the unrealized loss for our pension plans will exceed 10% of the greater of the projected benefit obligations or the market-related value of assets in 2010 and into the foreseeable future, resulting in additional amortization and net periodic pension cost. Amounts recorded for net periodic pension cost and accumulated other comprehensive income are also significantly affected by changes in the assumptions used to determine the weighted average discount rate and the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets. The weighted average discount rate is based on rates at which expected pension benefits attributable to past employee service could effectively be settled on a present value basis at the measurement date. We develop the assumed weighted average discount rate by utilizing the weighted average yield of a theoretical dedicated portfolio derived from bonds available in the Barclay corporate bond universe having ratings of at least "AA" by S&P's or at least "Aa" by Moody's on the measurement date with cash flows that match expected plan benefit requirements. Significant changes in discount rates, such as those caused by changes in the yield curve, the mix of bonds available in the market, the duration of selected bonds and expected benefit payments, may result in volatility in pension cost and accumulated other comprehensive income. Holding other assumptions constant, a hypothetical decrease of 100 basis points in the weighted average discount rate would result in an increase of $37 million in net periodic pension cost and a $314 million increase in the unrecognized pension and other postretirement benefit cost liability of our pension plans recorded as accumulated other comprehensive income as of our December 31 measurement date, versus an increase of $47 million in net periodic pension cost and a $369 million increase in the unrecognized pension and other postretirement benefit cost liability as of January 1, 2008, our remeasurement date to transition to a December 31 measurement date under SFAS No. 158, "Employers' Accounting for Defined Benefit Pension and Other Postretirement Plans" ("SFAS No. 158"). A hypothetical increase of 100 basis points in the weighted average 126 discount rate would decrease net periodic pension cost by $8 million and would decrease the unrecognized pension and other postretirement benefit cost liability of our pension plans recorded as accumulated other comprehensive income by $267 million as of December 31, 2008, versus a decrease in net periodic pension cost of $34 million and a $311 million decrease in the net funded status liability as of January 1, 2008. This non-symmetrical range results from the non-linear relationship between discount rates and pension obligations, and changes in the amortization of unrealized net actuarial gains and losses. The expected long-term rate of return on plan assets reflects the average rate of earnings expected on plan assets. While this rate reflects long-term assumptions and is consistent with long-term historical returns, sustained changes in the market or changes in the mix of plan assets may lead to revisions in the assumed long-term rate of return on plan assets that may result in variability of pension cost. Differences between the actual return on plan assets and the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets are a component of unrecognized gains or losses, which may be amortized as a component of net actuarial gains and losses and recorded in accumulated other comprehensive income. As a result, the effect of changes in fair value on our pension cost may be experienced in results of operations in periods subsequent to those in which the fluctuations actually occur. Holding other assumptions constant, a hypothetical decrease of 100 basis points in the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets would result in an increase of $48 million in pension cost at December 31, 2008, compared to $48 million at January 1, 2008. A hypothetical increase of 100 basis points in the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets would result in a decrease in net periodic pension cost of $48 million at December 31, 2008, compared to $48 million at January 1, 2008. We target funding levels that do not restrict the payment of plan benefits in our domestic plans and were within our targeted range as of December 31, 2008. In light of significant market declines occurring at the end of 2008, we expect that contributions of approximately $300 million may be needed for the 2009 plan year to maintain the plans' funded status. This estimate could change significantly following either a dramatic improvement or decline in investment markets. DEFERRED TAXES The total deferred tax valuation allowance is $49 million at December 31, 2008. We evaluate whether a valuation allowance is required each reporting period. A valuation allowance is established if, based on the weight of available evidence, it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred income tax asset will not be realized. In determining whether a valuation allowance is needed, all available evidence is considered. This includes the potential for capital and ordinary loss carryback, future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences, tax planning strategies and future taxable income exclusive of reversing temporary differences. With respect to our evaluation of the need for a valuation allowance related to the deferred tax asset on unrealized losses on fixed income securities, we rely on our assertion that we have the intent and ability to hold the securities to recovery. As a result, the unrealized losses on these securities would not be expected to materialize and no valuation allowance on the associated deferred tax asset is needed. With respect to our evaluation of the need for a valuation allowance related to other capital losses that have not yet been recognized for tax purposes, we utilize prudent and feasible tax planning strategies. These include strategies that optimize the ability to carry back capital losses as well as the ability to offset future capital losses with capital gains that could be recognized for tax purposes. We have remaining capital loss carryback capacity of $1.50 billion from 2007. Included in the $49 million valuation allowance at December 31, 2008 is $40 million relating to the deferred tax asset on capital losses that have not yet been recognized for tax purposes. 127 CAPITAL RESOURCES AND LIQUIDITY Capital Resources consist of shareholders' equity and debt, representing funds deployed or available to be deployed to support business operations or for general corporate purposes. The following table summarizes our capital resources at December 31. ($ in millions) 2008 2007 2006 Common stock, retained income and other shareholders' equity items $ 17,442 $ 21,228 $ 20,855 Accumulated other comprehensive income (4,801 ) 623 991 Total shareholders' equity 12,641 21,851 21,846 Debt 5,659 5,640 4,662 Total capital resources $ 18,300 $ 27,491 $ 26,508 Ratio of debt to shareholders' equity 44.8 % 25.8 % 21.3 % Ratio of debt to capital resources 30.9 % 20.5 % 17.6 % Shareholders' equity decreased in 2008, due to unrealized net capital losses on investments, net loss, share repurchases, dividends paid to shareholders and an increase in the unrecognized pension and other postretirement benefit cost. Shareholders' equity increased in 2007, due to net income and a decline in the unrecognized pension and other postretirement benefit cost, partially offset by share repurchases, decreases in unrealized net capital gains on investments and dividends paid to shareholders. The decrease to shareholders' equity resulting from the increase in the unrecognized pension and other postretirement benefit cost in 2008 was the result of unfavorable investment returns partially offset by the effects of higher discount rates. The change to the unrecognized pension and other postretirement benefit cost had an impact on shareholders' equity of $822 million unfavorable for pension, and $98 million favorable for other post employment benefits ("OPEB"). For further information on the impact to unrecognized pension and other postretirement benefit cost, see Notes 2 and 16 of the consolidated financial statements. The decline in the unrecognized pension and other postretirement benefit cost in 2007 was primarily related to favorable investment performance of the assets and an increase in the discount rate of the pension plans, and lower than assumed claims experience in the other postretirement employee benefit plans. The favorable change to the unrecognized pension and other postretirement benefit cost had an impact on shareholders' equity of $580 million for pension, and $185 million for OPEB. Share repurchases We suspended our $2.00 billion share repurchase program in October 2008 and do not plan to complete it by the target date of March 31, 2009. The number of shares repurchased under the program was 22.7 million shares for $1.07 billion for the year ended December 31, 2008. Since 1995, we have acquired 457 million shares of our common stock at a cost of $19.08 billion, primarily as part of various stock repurchase programs. We have reissued 95 million shares since 1995, primarily associated with our equity incentive plans, the 1999 acquisition of American Heritage Life Investment Corporation and the 2001 redemption of certain mandatorily redeemable preferred securities. The impact of our repurchase programs on total shares outstanding since 1995 has been a net reduction of 360 million shares or 40.2%. Debt increased $19 million in 2008 compared to 2007 and $978 million in 2007 compared to 2006 due to increases in long-term debt. The $750 million of 7.20% Senior Notes due 2009 are scheduled to mature on December 1, 2009. These Senior Notes are expected to be refinanced. For further information on debt issuances, see Note 11 of the consolidated financial statements. At December 31, 2008 and 2007, there were no outstanding commercial paper borrowings. 128 Financial Ratings and Strength The following table summarizes our debt, commercial paper and insurance financial strength ratings. Moody's Standard & Poor's A.M. Best The Allstate Corporation (senior long-term debt) A3 A- a- The Allstate Corporation (commercial paper) P-2 A-2 AMB-1 AIC (insurance financial strength) Aa3 AA- A+ Allstate Life Insurance Company (insurance financial strength) A1 AA- A+ Our ratings are influenced by many factors including our operating and financial performance, asset quality, liquidity, asset/liability management, overall portfolio mix, financial leverage (i.e., debt), exposure to risks such as catastrophes and the current level of operating leverage. On February 2, 2009, A.M. Best affirmed The Allstate Corporation's debt rating of a- as well as the A+ financial strength ratings of AIC and ALIC. A.M. Best also affirmed the commercial paper rating of AMB-1. The outlook for all ratings remained stable. In October 2008, A.M. Best had downgraded The Allstate Corporation's debt rating to a- from a. On January 29, 2009, S&P downgraded the rating for The Allstate Corporation to A- from A+, the financial strength ratings for AIC and ALIC to AA- from AA, and the commercial paper rating of The Allstate Corporation to A-2 from A-1. The outlook for all ratings remained negative. In October 2008, the outlook had been revised to negative from stable. On January 29, 2009, Moody's downgraded the rating for The Allstate Corporation to A3 from A2, the financial strength rating of AIC to Aa3 from Aa2, the financial strength rating of ALIC to A1 from Aa3, and the commercial paper rating of The Allstate Corporation to P-2 from P-1. The outlook for all ratings was revised to stable from negative. In October 2008, Moody's downgraded The Allstate Corporation to A2 from A1 and the financial strength ratings of ALIC to Aa3 from Aa2. We have distinct and separately capitalized groups of subsidiaries licensed to sell property and casualty insurance in New Jersey and Florida that maintain separate group ratings. The ratings of these groups are influenced by the risks that relate specifically to each group. Many mortgage companies require property owners to have insurance from an insurance carrier with a secure financial strength rating from an accredited rating agency. Allstate New Jersey Insurance Company and Encompass Insurance Company of New Jersey, which write auto and homeowners insurance, are rated A- by A.M. Best. Allstate New Jersey Insurance Company also has a Demotech rating of A". On October 29, 2008, A.M. Best placed The Allstate Corporation's subsidiary in Florida, Allstate Floridian, under review with negative implications based upon the uncertainty regarding the FHCF's ability to fund its reimbursement obligations. However, as no catastrophes occurred through the end of the season, A.M. Best removed Allstate Floridian from review and placed it on negative outlook while affirming its rating of B+. Effective May 8, 2008, ALIC, AIC and the Corporation entered into a one-year Amended and Restated Intercompany Liquidity Agreement ("Liquidity Agreement") replacing the Intercompany Liquidity Agreement between ALIC and AIC, dated January 1, 2008. The agreement allows for short-term advances of funds to be made between parties for liquidity and other general corporate purposes. It shall be automatically renewed for subsequent one-year terms unless terminated by the parties. The Liquidity Agreement does not establish a commitment to advance funds on the part of either party. ALIC and AIC each serve as a lender and borrower and the Corporation serves only as a lender. AIC also has a capital support agreement with ALIC effective December 14, 2007. Under the capital support agreement, AIC is committed to provide capital to ALIC to allow for profitable growth while maintaining an adequate capital level. The maximum amount of potential funding under the intercompany and capital support agreements is $1.00 billion. Allstate's domestic property-liability and life insurance subsidiaries prepare their statutory-basis financial statements in conformity with accounting practices prescribed or permitted by the insurance department of the applicable state of domicile. Statutory surplus is a measure that is often used as a basis for determining dividend paying capacity, operating leverage and premium growth capacity, and it is also reviewed by rating agencies in determining their ratings. As of December 31, 2008, AIC's statutory surplus is approximately $13.0 billion compared to $18.0 billion at December 31, 2007. These amounts include ALIC's statutory surplus of $3.2 billion at December 31, 2008, compared to $2.6 billion at December 31, 2007. The decrease is the result of dividends paid to The Allstate Corporation, net loss and unrealized losses on equity securities and investments in ALIC. We have received approval from the Illinois Division of Insurance for the use of two permitted practices in the statutory-basis financial statements related to areas in which statutory accounting is not reflective of the underlying economics during this period of extreme market conditions caused by the current economic crisis. The first permitted practice relates to the statutory accounting for deferred taxes and applies to AIC and ALIC. 129 Specifically, this permitted practice increased the amount of deferred income tax asset that can be recognized in the statutory-basis financial statements and included in statutory surplus from the lesser of the amounts that can be realized in one year or 10% of adjusted statutory surplus to the lesser of deferred taxes that can be realized within 3 years or 15% of adjusted statutory surplus. The permitted practice resulted in an increase in AIC's statutory surplus of $365 million as of December 31, 2008 which included an increase in ALIC's statutory surplus of $140 million. Admitted statutory-basis deferred tax assets on both companies totaled $1.76 billion after the permitted practice reflecting approximately 60% of total potential statutory-basis deferred tax assets before non-admission limitations. The second permitted practice relates to statutory accounting for market value adjusted annuities ("MVAA") whose related assets are held in a separate account in the statutory-basis financial statements. Specifically, this permitted practice resulted in the MVAA related investments being recorded at amortized cost, which is consistent with statutory accounting for other fixed income investments and the book value method of accounting required under Illinois Code for MVAA investments held in a general account. The permitted practice was requested because the Illinois Code is silent on MVAA that are issued by a separate account. In the extreme market conditions of the economic crisis, the market value method of accounting reduced statutory surplus due to unrealized losses on investments caused by wide credit spreads and the liquidity based dislocations in the investment markets in a manner not representative of the economics of the related liabilities. The effect of the permitted practice, which is to value the invested assets and insurance reserves on a book value basis instead of the formerly used market value basis, was $394 million based on October 1, 2008 valuations and grew to $1.24 billion at December 31, 2008 due to an increase of $720 million in the investment unrealized loss position, while the market-based reserves increased $130 million relative to book-basis reserves. The permitted practice eliminated the inconsistent impacts in the amounts determined by the valuation methodologies for invested assets and insurance reserves and resulted in invested assets being valued at $8.07 billion and reserves at $9.17 billion. The ratio of net premiums written to statutory surplus is a common measure of operating leverage used in the property-casualty insurance industry and serves as an indicator of a company's premium growth capacity. Ratios in excess of 3 to 1 are typically considered outside the usual range by insurance regulators and rating agencies. AIC's premium to surplus ratio was 2.0x on December 31, 2008 compared to 1.5x in the prior year. State laws specify regulatory actions if an insurer's risk-based capital ("RBC"), a measure of an insurer's solvency, falls below certain levels. The NAIC has a standard formula for annually assessing RBC. The formula for calculating RBC for property-liability companies takes into account asset and credit risks but places more emphasis on underwriting factors for reserving and pricing. The formula for calculating RBC for life insurance companies takes into account factors relating to insurance, business, asset and interest rate risks. At December 31, 2008, the RBC for each of our domestic insurance companies was within the range that we target. The NAIC has also developed a set of financial relationships or tests known as the Insurance Regulatory Information System to assist state regulators in monitoring the financial condition of insurance companies and identifying companies that require special attention or actions by insurance regulatory authorities. The NAIC analyzes financial data provided by insurance companies using prescribed ratios, each with defined "usual ranges". Generally, regulators will begin to monitor an insurance company if its ratios fall outside the usual ranges for four or more of the ratios. If an insurance company has insufficient capital, regulators may act to reduce the amount of insurance it can issue. The ratios of our domestic insurance companies are within these ranges. 130 Liquidity Sources and Uses Our potential sources of funds principally include activities shown in the following table. Property- Liability Allstate Financial Corporate and Other Receipt of insurance premiums X X Allstate Financial contractholder fund deposits X Reinsurance recoveries X X Receipts of principal, interest and dividends on investments X X X Sales of investments X X X Funds from investment repurchase agreements, securities lending, dollar roll, commercial paper and line of credit agreements X X X Inter-company loans X X X Capital contributions from parent X X Dividends from subsidiaries X X Tax refunds/settlements X X Funds from periodic issuance of additional securities X Funds from the settlement of our benefit plans X Our potential uses of funds principally include activities shown in the following table. Property- Liability Allstate Financial Corporate and Other Payment of claims and related expenses X Payment of contract benefits, maturities, surrenders and withdrawals X Reinsurance cessions and payments X X Operating costs and expenses X X X Purchase of investments X X X Repayment of investment repurchase agreements, securities lending, dollar roll, commercial paper and line of credit agreements X X X Payment or repayment of inter-company loans X X X Capital contributions to subsidiaries X X Dividends to shareholders/parent company X X X Tax payments/settlements X Share repurchases X Debt service expenses and repayment X X X Settlement payments of employee and agent benefit plans X X X We actively manage our financial position and liquidity levels in light of changing market, economic, and business conditions. In 2008, in anticipation of continued volatility and illiquidity in the financial markets, we took actions to enhance our economic and liquidity position pending a return to normal capital market conditions. These actions included: Managing our gross exposure to our largest tail risk exposures: interest rate, equity, and catastrophes through active management of our investment and product portfolios as well as further mitigation through hedging and reinsurance. Accumulating higher cash and short-term investment positions easily convertible to cash from asset sales, principal and interest receipts, calls, maturities and other cash inflows from our investment portfolio. Reducing our securities lending program to $364 million as of December 31, 2008 from $3.39 billion as of December 31, 2007. By reducing the securities lending program, we gained additional direct access to our liquid investments. Proactively selling securities we think will become less liquid. Suspension of share repurchase program. On February 25, 2009, we announced that our shareholder dividend was being revised to $.20. 131 We believe that these actions will provide us with a greater level of flexibility necessary to operate in the current market environment. If market conditions warrant, we may take additional actions to enhance our liquidity position including: Continued retention of portfolio cash flows including approximately $4.85 billion of expected inflows from upcoming maturities, calls and interest receipts on investments over the next six months. The sale of fixed income (government, municipal and investment grade corporate bonds) and equity securities with unrealized capital gains at December 31, 2008. With a focus on preserving capital, we consider investments which are convertible to cash without generating significant additional net realized capital losses as liquidity sources. The following table presents cash and short-term positions easily convertible to cash, and certain other liquid investments meeting this criteria. As of December 31, 2008 ($ in millions) Property- Liability Allstate Financial Corporate and Other Consolidated Cash and short-term positions easily convertible to cash available same day/next day $ 1,577 $ 2,825 $ 1,993 $ 6,395 Other highly liquid investments (1) 3,292 1,320 295 4,907 Other liquid investments (2) 6,027 2,258 972 9,257 Total liquid $ 10,896 $ 6,403 $ 3,260 $ 20,559 Percent of total consolidated cash and investments 11.3 % 6.6 % 3.4 % 21.3 % (1) Other highly liquid investments are defined as assets that are generally saleable within one week, and primarily include common equity securities of $1.56 billion, municipal bonds of $1.08 billion, U.S. government and agencies bonds of $652 million, short-term investments of $624 million and agency pass through securities of $552 million. The amounts shown in the table above represent the amount of our holdings in these assets, excluding any holdings with restrictions. (2) Other liquid investments are defined as assets that are saleable within one quarter, and primarily include municipal bonds of $5.20 billion, short-term investments of $1.87 billion, corporate bonds of $956 million and agency pass through securities of $774 million. The amounts shown in the table above represent the amount that we believe could be sold during the first quarter of 2009, excluding any holdings with restrictions. The above analysis identifies our access to internal sources of liquidity. We believe we have sufficient liquidity to address current planned needs from investments other than those for which we have asserted the intent to hold until recovery combined with targeted sales of certain Allstate Financial products. Additionally, we have existing intercompany agreements in place that facilitate liquidity management at an enterprise level and enhance flexibility across the Company. To increase new money for investing, we have initiated actions to accelerate the recovery of approximately $1.29 billion of tax refunds from the overpayment of 2008 estimated taxes as well as the carryback of 2008 Allstate Financial ordinary losses and Property-Liability capital losses to prior tax years. $320 million in refunds were received in February 2009 and we expect the remaining refunds to be received in the first half of 2009. The carryback of the non-life companies' 2008 capital losses will fully offset the capital gains from 2005 and 2006, resulting in a remaining capital loss carryback capacity of $1.50 billion from 2007. The life companies do not have the ability to carry back any capital losses to prior tax years. Parent Company Capital Capacity At the parent holding company level, we have deployable cash and investments totaling $3.64 billion as of December 31, 2008. These assets include highly liquid securities that are generally saleable within one week totaling $2.29 billion, additional liquid investments that are saleable within one quarter totaling $972 million, and $381 million of investments that trade in illiquid markets. The substantial earnings capacity of the operating subsidiaries is the primary source of capital generation for the Corporation. In 2009, AIC will have the capacity to pay dividends currently estimated at $1.30 billion without prior regulatory approval. We do not anticipate that ALIC will pay dividends to AIC in 2009. In addition, we have access to $1.00 billion of funds from either commercial paper issuance or an unsecured revolving credit facility. This provides capital for the parent company's relatively low fixed charges, estimated at $650 million in 2009, and $750 million of debt maturing in December 2009, to the extent not refinanced prior to maturity. In October 2008, the Corporation completed its previously approved capital contribution of $1.00 billion of invested assets to AIC. In November 2008, AIC purchased a $400 million surplus note from ALIC and made a capital contribution of $600 million to ALIC. An additional amount of approximately $250 million remains under the 132 authority granted by the Corporation and AIC boards on October 15, 2008 and October 20, 2008, respectively, to make capital contributions in the form of cash or securities, by providing a guaranty or guaranties, or by purchasing one or more surplus notes or other securities on or before April 30, 2009. Moreover, in addition to these historic external sources of capital, access to funding from additional sources, including participation in programs offered by the U.S. Treasury and other governmental organizations, are potentially available to the Corporation and its operating subsidiaries for capital and liquidity needs. The Corporation has access to additional borrowing to support liquidity as follows: A commercial paper facility with a borrowing limit of $1.00 billion to cover short-term cash needs. As of December 31, 2008, there were no balances outstanding and therefore the remaining borrowing capacity was $1.00 billion; however, the outstanding balance can fluctuate daily. Our primary credit facility is available for short-term liquidity requirements and backs our commercial paper facility. Our $1.00 billion unsecured revolving credit facility has an initial term of five years expiring in 2012 with two optional one-year extensions that can be exercised at the end of any of the remaining four years of the facility upon approval of existing or replacement lenders providing more than two-thirds of the commitments to lend. The program is fully subscribed among 11 lenders with the largest commitments being $185 million. The commitments of the lenders are several and no lender is responsible for any other lender's commitment if such lender fails to make a loan under the facility. None of the borrowing capacity under this credit facility has been utilized. This facility contains an increase provision that would allow up to an additional $500 million of borrowing provided the increased portion could be fully syndicated at a later date among existing or new lenders. This facility has a financial covenant requiring that we not exceed a 37.5% debt to capital resources ratio as defined in the agreement. This ratio at December 31, 2008 was 20.5%. Although the right to borrow under the facility is not subject to a minimum rating requirement, the costs of maintaining the facility and borrowing under it are based on the ratings of our senior, unsecured, nonguaranteed long-term debt. There were no borrowings under this line of credit during 2008. The total amount outstanding at any point in time under the combination of the commercial paper program and the credit facility cannot exceed the amount that can be borrowed under the credit facility. A universal shelf registration statement was filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission in May 2006 and will expire May 2009. In April 2009, we expect to ask our board of directors for authority to file a replacement universal shelf registration. We can use our current shelf registration to issue an unspecified amount of debt securities, common stock (including 364 million shares of treasury stock as of December 31, 2008), preferred stock, depositary shares, warrants, stock purchase contracts, stock purchase units and securities of subsidiaries. The specific terms of any securities we issue under this registration statement will be provided in the applicable prospectus supplements. Liquidity Exposure Contractholder funds as of December 31, 2008 were $58.41 billion. The following table summarizes contractholder funds by their contractual withdrawal provisions at December 31, 2008. ($ in millions) % to Total Not subject to discretionary withdrawal $ 13,604 23.3 % Subject to discretionary withdrawal with adjustments: Specified surrender charges (1) 25,781 44.1 Market value adjustments (2) 9,586 16.4 Subject to discretionary withdrawal without adjustments (3) 9,442 16.2 Total contractholder funds (4) $ 58,413 100.0 (1) Includes approximately $11.24 billion of liabilities with a contractual surrender charge of less than 5% of the account balance. (2) Approximately $7.96 billion of the contracts with market value adjusted surrenders have a 30-45 day period during which there is no surrender charge or market value adjustment. (3) Includes extendible funding agreements backing medium-term notes outstanding with a par value of $1.45 billion that have been non-extended and become due by October 31, 2009. We have accumulated, and expect to maintain, short-term and other maturing investments to fund the retirement of these obligations. (4) Includes approximately $1.47 billion of contractholder funds on variable annuities reinsured to Prudential effective June 1, 2006. 133 While we are able to quantify scheduled maturities for our institutional products of $3.25 billion in 2009, anticipating retail product surrenders is less precise. Retail life and annuity products may be surrendered by customers for a variety of reasons. Reasons unique to individual customers include a current or unexpected need for cash or a change in life insurance coverage needs. Other key factors that may impact the likelihood of customer surrender include the level of the contract surrender charge, the length of time the contract has been in force, distribution channel, market interest rates, equity market conditions and potential tax implications. In addition, the propensity for retail life insurance policies to lapse is lower than it is for fixed annuities because of the need for the insured to be re-underwritten upon policy replacement. Surrenders and partial withdrawals for our retail annuities decreased 13.9% in 2008 compared to 2007. The annualized surrender and partial withdrawal rate on deferred annuities, interest-sensitive life insurance and Allstate Bank products, based on the beginning of year contractholder funds, was 12.2% and 13.3% in 2008 and 2007, respectively. Allstate Financial strives to promptly pay customers who request cash surrenders, however, statutory regulations generally provide up to six months in most states to fulfill surrender requests. Our institutional products are primarily funding agreements backing medium-term notes. As of December 31, 2008, total institutional products outstanding were $8.94 billion. The following table presents the scheduled maturities for our institutional products outstanding as of December 31, 2008. ($ in millions) 2009 $ 3,249 2010 3,059 2011 760 2012 40 2013 1,750 2016 85 $ 8,943 Our asset-liability management practices limit the differences between the cash flows generated by our investment portfolio and the expected cash flow requirements of our life insurance, annuity and institutional product obligations. Certain remote events and circumstances could constrain our liquidity. Those events and circumstances include, for example, a catastrophe resulting in extraordinary losses, a downgrade in our long-term debt rating of A3, A- and a- (from Moody's, S&P's and A.M. Best, respectively) to non-investment grade status of below Baa3/BBB-/bb, a downgrade in AIC's financial strength rating from Aa3, AA- and A+ (from Moody's, S&P's and A.M. Best, respectively) to below Baa2/BBB/A-, or a downgrade in ALIC's financial strength ratings from A1, AA- and A+ (from Moody's, S&P's and A.M. Best, respectively) to below A1/AA-/A-. The rating agencies also consider the interdependence of our individually rated entities, therefore, a rating change in one entity could potentially affect the ratings of other related entities. The following table summarizes consolidated cash flow activities by business segment. Property-Liability (1) Allstate Financial (1) Corporate and Other (1) Consolidated ($ in millions) 2008 2007 2006 2008 2007 2006 2008 2007 2006 2008 2007 2006 Net cash provided by (used in): Operating activities $ 1,746 $ 2,421 $ 2,454 $ 2,203 $ 2,930 $ 2,589 $ (39 ) $ 82 $ 12 $ 3,910 $ 5,433 $ 5,055 Investing activities 2,012 1,255 (1,257 ) 2,779 266 (2,074 ) (1,003 ) (1,636 ) 1,412 3,788 (115 ) (1,919 ) Financing activities (16 ) 66 (344 ) (5,510 ) (1,997 ) (152 ) (2,179 ) (3,408 ) (2,510 ) (7,705 ) (5,339 ) (3,006 ) Net (decrease) increase in consolidated cash $ (7 ) $ (21 ) $ 130 (1) Business unit cash flows reflect the elimination of intersegment dividends, contributions and borrowings. Property-Liability Lower cash provided by operating activities for Property-Liability in 2008, compared to 2007, was primarily due to higher claim payments resulting from 2008 catastrophe losses and lower investment income. Cash provided by operating activities for Property-Liability in 2007 was comparable to 2006. Cash flows provided by investing activities increased in 2008 compared to 2007, primarily due to decreased purchases of fixed income securities, partially offset by increases in equity securities purchases, lower sales of fixed income securities, and net change in short-term investments. Cash flows provided by investing activities increased in 2007, compared to 2006, primarily due to increased sales of equity securities. 134 Cash used in financing activities in 2008, compared to cash provided by in 2007, was primarily due to decreased tax benefits of share based arrangements in 2008. Cash flows were provided by financing activities in 2007 compared to being used in the financing activities in 2006, primarily due to the repayment of short-term debt in 2006. Cash flows were impacted by dividends paid by AIC to its parent, the Corporation, totaling $3.40 billion, $4.92 billion and $1.01 billion in 2008, 2007 and 2006, respectively. Cash flows were also impacted by capital contributions paid by the Corporation to AIC totaling $1.00 billion and capital contributions paid by AIC to ALIC totaling $1.41 billion in 2008. There were no capital contributions to ALIC in 2007 and 2006. Allstate Financial Lower operating cash flows for Allstate Financial in 2008, compared to 2007, were primarily related to a decrease in investment income and lower premiums, partially offset by income tax refunds in 2008 compared to 2007. Higher operating cash flows for Allstate Financial in 2007, compared to 2006, primarily related to lower operating expenses and tax payments, an increase in investment income, partially offset by increased policy and contract benefit payments and the absence in 2007 of contract charges on the reinsured variable annuity business. Cash flows provided by investing activities increased in 2008 compared to 2007, primarily due to decreased purchases of fixed income securities and mortgage loans, partially offset by lower investment collections and net change in short-term investments. Cash flows from investing activities increased in 2007, compared to 2006, primarily due to increased cash provided by operating activities, partially offset by increased cash used in financing activities. Higher cash flows used in financing activities in 2008 compared to 2007 were primarily due to higher maturities and retirements of institutional products, partially offset by higher contractholder fund deposits. Cash flows used in financing activities increased in 2007, compared to 2006, primarily due to lower contractholder fund deposits. For quantification of the changes in contractholder funds, see the Allstate Financial Segment section of the MD&A. There were no dividends paid by Allstate Financial in 2008. In 2007 and 2006, financing cash flows were impacted by dividends paid by Allstate Financial totaling $742 million and $725 million, respectively. Allstate Financial cash flows from financing activities were also impacted by funds paid by AIC to ALIC totaling $1.41 billion in 2008. The $1.41 billion includes capital contributions paid in cash totaling $607 million and the issuance of two surplus notes, each with a principal sum of $400 million, to AIC in exchange for cash totaling $800 million. Allstate Financial cash flows from financing activities exclude capital contributions to ALIC comprising the transfer to ALIC from AIC of non-cash assets totaling $342 million and the transfer of a $50 million surplus note to Kennett Capital Inc. from ALIC in exchange for a note receivable with a principal sum equal to that of the surplus note, which was originally issued to ALIC by a subsidiary of ALIC. One of the surplus notes issued to AIC in 2008 was subsequently canceled and forgiven by AIC resulting in the recognition of a capital contribution equal to the outstanding principal balance of the surplus note of $400 million. There were no capital contributions to ALIC in 2007 and 2006. Corporate and Other Fluctuations in the Corporate and Other operating cash flows were primarily due to the timing of intercompany settlements. Investing activities primarily relate to investments in the portfolios of Kennett Capital Holdings, LLC. Financing cash flows of the Corporate and Other segment reflect actions such as fluctuations in short-term debt, repayment of debt, proceeds from the issuance of debt, dividends to shareholders of The Allstate Corporation and share repurchases; therefore, financing cash flows are affected when we increase or decrease the level of these activities. 135 Contractual Obligations and Commitments Our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2008 and the payments due by period are shown in the following table. ($ in millions) Total Less than 1 year 1-3 years 4-5 years Over 5 years Liabilities for collateral and repurchase agreements (1) $ 340 $ 340 $ $ $ Contractholder funds (2) 77,303 10,797 24,190 10,739 31,577 Reserve for life-contingent contract benefits (2) 32,986 1,338 3,814 2,516 25,318 Long-term debt (3) 12,320 1,094 620 1,138 9,468 Capital lease obligations (3) 62 12 17 10 23 Operating leases (3) 712 198 261 136 117 Unconditional purchase obligations (3) 302 122 131 40 9 Defined benefit pension plans and other postretirement benefit plans (3)(4) 5,595 338 356 369 4,532 Reserve for property-liability insurance claims and claims expense (5) 19,456 8,699 5,923 2,088 2,746 Other liabilities and accrued expenses (6)(7) 4,100 3,972 85 17 26 Net unrecognized tax benefits (8) 21 21 Total contractual cash obligations $ 153,197 $ 26,910 $ 35,418 $ 17,053 $ 73,816 (1) Liabilities for collateral and repurchase agreements are typically fully secured with cash. We manage our short-term liquidity position to ensure the availability of a sufficient amount of liquid assets to extinguish short-term liabilities as they come due in the normal course of business, including utilizing potential sources of liquidity as disclosed previously. (2) Contractholder funds represent interest-bearing liabilities arising from the sale of products such as interest-sensitive life, fixed annuities, including immediate annuities without life contingencies, bank deposits and institutional products. The reserve for life-contingent contract benefits relates primarily to traditional life and immediate annuities with life contingencies. These amounts reflect the present value of estimated cash payments to be made to contractholders and policyholders. Certain of these contracts, such as immediate annuities without life contingencies and institutional products, involve payment obligations where the amount and timing of the payment is essentially fixed and determinable. These amounts relate to (i) policies or contracts where we are currently making payments and will continue to do so and (ii) contracts where the timing of a portion or all of the payments has been determined by the contract. Extendible funding agreements backing medium-term notes outstanding are reflected in the table above at the maturity date accelerated in accordance with the contractholders' election to not extend the maturity date. Other contracts, such as interest-sensitive life, fixed deferred annuities, traditional life and immediate annuities with life contingencies and voluntary accident and health insurance, involve payment obligations where a portion or all of the amount and timing of future payments is uncertain. For these contracts and bank deposits, the Company is not currently making payments and will not make payments until (i) the occurrence of an insurable event such as death or illness or (ii) the occurrence of a payment triggering event such as the surrender of or partial withdrawal on a policy or deposit contract, which is outside of the control of the Company. We have estimated the timing of payments related to these contracts based on historical experience and our expectation of future payment patterns. Uncertainties relating to these liabilities include mortality, morbidity, expenses, customer lapse and withdrawal activity, estimated additional deposits for interest-sensitive life contracts, and renewal premium for life policies, which may significantly impact both the timing and amount of future payments. Such cash outflows reflect adjustments for the estimated timing of mortality, retirement, and other appropriate factors, but are undiscounted with respect to interest. As a result, the sum of the cash outflows shown for all years in the table exceeds the corresponding liabilities of $58.41 billion for contractholder funds and $12.88 billion for reserve for life-contingent contract benefits as included in the Consolidated Statements of Financial Position as of December 31, 2008. The liability amount in the Consolidated Statements of Financial Position reflects the discounting for interest as well as adjustments for the timing of other factors as described above. (3) Our payment obligations relating to long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating leases, unconditional purchase obligations and pension and OPEB contributions are managed within the structure of our intermediate to long-term liquidity management program. Amount differs from the balance presented on the Consolidated Statements of Financial Position as of December 31, 2008 because the long-term debt amount above includes interest. (4) The pension plans' obligations in the next 12 months represent our planned contributions, and the remaining years' contributions are projected based on the average remaining service period using the current underfunded status of the plans. The OPEB plans' obligations are estimated based on the expected benefits to be paid. These liabilities are discounted with respect to interest, and as a result the sum of the cash outflows shown for all years in the table exceeds the corresponding liability amount of $1.93 billion included in other liabilities and accrued expenses on the Consolidated Statements of Financial Position. (5) Reserve for property-liability insurance claims and claims expense is an estimate of amounts necessary to settle all outstanding claims, including claims that have been incurred but not reported as of the balance sheet date. We have estimated the timing of these payments based on our historical experience and our expectation of future payment patterns. However, the timing of these payments may vary significantly from the amounts shown above, especially for IBNR claims. The ultimate cost of losses may vary materially from recorded amounts which are our best estimates. The reserve for property-liability insurance claims and claims expense includes loss reserves related to asbestos and environmental claims as of December 31, 2008, of $1.93 billion and $250 million, respectively. (6) Other liabilities primarily include accrued expenses and certain benefit obligations and claim payments and other checks outstanding. Certain of these long-term liabilities are discounted with respect to interest, as a result the sum of the cash outflows shown for all years in the table exceeds the corresponding liability amount of $4.09 billion. 136 (7) Balance sheet liabilities not included in the table above include unearned and advance premiums of $10.79 billion and deferred tax liabilities netted in the net deferred tax asset of $3.79 billion. These items were excluded as they do not meet the definition of a contractual liability as we are not contractually obligated to pay these amounts to third parties. Rather, they represent an accounting mechanism that allows us to present our financial statements on an accrual basis. In addition, other liabilities of $708 million were not included in the table above because they did not represent a contractual obligation or the amount and timing of their eventual payment was sufficiently uncertain. (8) Net unrecognized tax benefits relate to Financial Accounting Standards Board Interpretation No. 48, "Accounting for Uncertainty in Income Taxes" ("FIN 48"). We believe it is reasonably possible that the FIN 48 liability balance will not significantly increase or decrease within the next 12 months. The resolution of this obligation may be for an amount different than what we have accrued. Our contractual commitments as of December 31, 2008 and the payments due by period are shown in the following table. ($ in millions) Total Less than 1 year 1-3 years 4-5 years Over 5 years Other commitments conditional $ 13 $ 11 $ 2 $ $ Other commitments unconditional 1,945 216 1,052 616 61 Total commitments $ 1,958 $ 227 $ 1,054 $ 616 $ 61 Contractual commitments represent investment commitments such as private placements, limited partnership interests and mortgage loans. We have agreements in place for services we conduct, generally at cost, between subsidiaries relating to insurance, reinsurance, loans and capitalization. All material inter-company transactions have appropriately been eliminated in consolidation. Inter-company transactions among insurance subsidiaries and affiliates have been approved by the appropriate departments of insurance as required. For a more detailed discussion of our off-balance sheet arrangements, see Note 6 of the consolidated financial statements. ENTERPRISE RISK AND RETURN MANAGEMENT Allstate has established enterprise risk and return management ("ERRM") processes and infrastructure to effectively manage risk within our tolerances while optimizing risk adjusted returns. We have a senior management committee called the Enterprise Risk & Return Council ("ERRC") which is responsible for overseeing enterprise risks. Enterprise risk and return management is a disciplined, holistic, integrated and interactive approach to risk that is conducted under an overall framework which: Increases transparency thereby providing additional insight when setting enterprise strategy Identifies potential events that could have a significant impact on Allstate Proactively manages risk and optimizes our overall profile consistent with Allstate's risk appetite Provides greater assurance of achieving Allstate's objectives Allows Allstate to pursue a return commensurate with the risks taken Allstate's Board of Directors and Audit Committee provide enterprise risk management oversight by reviewing enterprise principles, guidelines and limits for Allstate's significant risks and by monitoring major risk exposures, trends and actions management has taken to control these risks. Allstate's primary risk exposures result from the capital markets, followed by catastrophes and operational risk events. Allstate has been proactive in the face of financial market and economic turbulence by responding quickly to reduce exposures in "at risk" asset classes, implementing risk mitigation and return optimization programs designed to protect our investment portfolio values, and enhancing our liquidity position through a series of actions. Risk management is primarily executed within the business units where risk is undertaken. Our risk management programs include appropriate governance policies with established tolerances and risk limits, stochastic modeling software and analyses, risk identification, evaluation, prioritization, treatment and monitoring practices and effective communication and reporting. Chief Risk Officers and managers in the various business units are responsible for managing, measuring, evaluating, and reporting risks as appropriate in their respective areas within the risk appetite of the overall enterprise. This includes items such as monitoring appropriate tolerances and managing exposure to catastrophes; managing the impacts to invested assets and liabilities 137 related to changes in risk free interest rates, credit spreads and equity markets through value at risk, duration and convexity metrics; managing liquidity levels in light of changing market, economic and business conditions; and evaluating risks related to credit exposures through credit value at risk measurements. As appropriate, consistent enterprise-wide measurement standards and limits are applied to key risks and are integrated into such processes as strategic and financial planning, capital management and enterprise risk reporting. Business unit measures and practices are aligned with overall enterprise standards. Economic Capital is the amount of capital required to provide a given level of safety to stakeholders over a specific time horizon, given a defined enterprise-wide tolerance for risk. Companies employ various methods and standards for determining economic capital. At Allstate, we utilize an internally developed enterprise stochastic model as significant input into our determination of an appropriate level of enterprise economic capital to hold, ensuring that we achieve regulatory RBC within the range that we target and appropriately consider rating agency perspectives. Our economic capital model accounts for the unique and specific nature and interaction of the risks inherent in our various businesses. Economic capital modeling capabilities enable us to more fully understand risk distributions and optimize risk/reward tradeoffs across the portfolio of businesses and various risks. These capabilities allow us to view risk and return decisions holistically which may provide opportunities for enhanced returns to shareholders at similar or lower levels of risk than might be achieved if modeling and analyses were only applied at the business unit and individual risk level. Areas we are pursuing that may provide such opportunities include risk mitigation and return optimization programs in our investment portfolio and more emphasis on total return economics and absolute returns in addition to traditional net credit spreads. We have also established an internal capital support agreement between certain legal entities to more fully capitalize on diversification benefits within the enterprise. REGULATION AND LEGAL PROCEEDINGS We are subject to extensive regulation and we are involved in various legal and regulatory actions, all of which have an effect on specific aspects of our business. For a detailed discussion of the legal and regulatory actions in which we are involved, see Note 13 of the consolidated financial statements. PENDING ACCOUNTING STANDARDS There are several pending accounting standards that we have not implemented either because the standard has not been finalized or the implementation date has not yet occurred. For a discussion of these pending standards, see Note 2 of the consolidated financial statements. The effect of implementing certain accounting standards on our financial results and financial condition is often based in part on market conditions at the time of implementation of the standard and other factors we are unable to determine prior to implementation. For this reason, we are sometimes unable to estimate the effect of certain pending accounting standards until the relevant authoritative body finalizes these standards or until we implement them. 138 
