CIK: 899051
Company Name: ALLSTATE CORP
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2008-02-27


Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Page Overview 33 2007 Highlights 33 Consolidated Net Income 34 Application of Critical Accounting Estimates 34 Property-Liability 2007 Highlights 49 Property-Liability Operations 51 Allstate Protection Segment 53 Discontinued Lines and Coverages Segment 67 Property-Liability Investment Results 68 Property-Liability Claims and Claims Expense Reserves 69 Allstate Financial 2007 Highlights 85 Allstate Financial Segment 86 Investments 97 Market Risk 117 Pension Plans 122 Capital Resources and Liquidity 124 Enterprise Risk Management 133 Regulation and Legal Proceedings 134 Pending Accounting Standards 134 32 OVERVIEW The following discussion highlights significant factors influencing the consolidated financial position and results of operations of The Allstate Corporation (referred to in this document as "we", "our", "us", the "Company" or "Allstate"). It should be read in conjunction with the 5-year summary of selected financial data, consolidated financial statements and related notes found under Part II, Item 6 and Item 8 contained herein. Further analysis of our insurance segments is provided in the Property-Liability Operations (which includes the Allstate Protection and the Discontinued Lines and Coverages segments) and in the Allstate Financial Segment sections of Management's Discussion and Analysis ("MD&A"). The segments are consistent with the way in which we use financial information to evaluate business performance and to determine the allocation of resources. Allstate's goal is to reinvent protection and retirement for the consumer. To achieve this goal, Allstate is focused on the following operating priorities: consumer focus, operational excellence, enterprise risk and return, and capital management. The most important factors we monitor to evaluate the financial condition and performance of our company include: For Allstate Protection: premium written, the number of policies in force ("PIF"), retention, price changes, claim frequency (rate of claim occurrence per policy in force) and severity (average cost per claim), catastrophes, loss ratio, expenses, underwriting results and sales of all products and services; For Allstate Financial: premiums and deposits, benefit and investment spread, amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs, expenses, operating income, net income, invested assets, product returns, and profitably growing distribution partner relationships; For Investments: credit quality/experience, stability of long-term returns, total returns, cash flows, and asset and liability duration; and For financial condition: our financial strength ratings, operating leverage, debt leverage, book value per share, and return on equity. 2007 HIGHLIGHTS Net income decreased 7.2% to $4.64 billion in 2007 from $4.99 billion in 2006. Net income per diluted share decreased 0.9% to $7.77 in 2007 from $7.84 in 2006. Total revenues increased 2.7% to $36.77 billion in 2007 from $35.80 billion in 2006. Realized capital gains on a pre-tax basis were $1.24 billion in 2007 compared to $286 million in 2006. Net investment income increased 4.2% in 2007 compared to 2006. Book value per diluted share increased 10.7% to $38.58 as of December 31, 2007 from $34.84 as of December 31, 2006. For the twelve months ended December 31, 2007, return on the average of beginning and ending period shareholders' equity decreased 2.6 points to 21.2% from 23.8% for the twelve months ended December 31, 2006. Stock repurchases totaled $3.55 billion for 2007. As of December 31, 2007, our $4.00 billion share repurchase program, which commenced in November 2006, had $240 million remaining and is expected to be completed by March 31, 2008. This program was increased from $3.00 billion in May 2007. 33 Property-Liability premiums earned decreased 0.5% to $27.23 billion in 2007 from $27.37 billion in 2006. The Property-Liability combined ratio was 89.8 for 2007 compared to 83.6 for 2006. Allstate Your Choice Auto Insurance ("YCA") continued to add customers in 2007, bringing the total YCA policies sold since inception to 3.2 million. Allstate Financial net income increased 0.2% to $465 million in 2007 from $464 million in 2006. CONSOLIDATED NET INCOME For the years ended December 31, (in millions) 2007 2006 2005 Revenues Property-liability insurance premiums earned $ 27,233 $ 27,369 $ 27,039 Life and annuity premiums and contract charges 1,866 1,964 2,049 Net investment income 6,435 6,177 5,746 Realized capital gains and losses 1,235 286 549 Total revenues 36,769 35,796 35,383 Costs and expenses Property-liability insurance claims and claims expense (17,667 ) (16,017 ) (21,175 ) Life and annuity contract benefits (1,589 ) (1,570 ) (1,615 ) Interest credited to contractholder funds (2,681 ) (2,609 ) (2,403 ) Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs (4,704 ) (4,757 ) (4,721 ) Operating costs and expenses (3,103 ) (3,033 ) (2,997 ) Restructuring and related charges (29 ) (182 ) (41 ) Interest expense (333 ) (357 ) (330 ) Total costs and expenses (30,106 ) (28,525 ) (33,282 ) Loss on disposition of operations (10 ) (93 ) (13 ) Income tax expense (2,017 ) (2,185 ) (323 ) Net income $ 4,636 $ 4,993 $ 1,765 Property-Liability $ 4,258 $ 4,614 $ 1,431 Allstate Financial 465 464 416 Corporate and Other (87 ) (85 ) (82 ) Net income $ 4,636 $ 4,993 $ 1,765 APPLICATION OF CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America ("GAAP") requires management to adopt accounting policies and make estimates and assumptions that affect amounts reported in the consolidated financial statements. The most critical estimates include those used in determining: Investment Fair Value and Impairment Derivative Instrument Hedge Accounting and Fair Value 34 Deferred Policy Acquisition Cost ("DAC") Amortization Reserve for Property-Liability Insurance Claims and Claims Expense Estimation Reserve for Life-Contingent Contract Benefits Estimation In applying these policies, management makes subjective and complex judgments that frequently require estimates about matters that are inherently uncertain. Many of these policies, estimates and related judgments are common in the insurance and financial services industries; others are specific to the Company's businesses and operations. It is reasonably likely that changes in these estimates could occur from period to period and result in a material impact on our consolidated financial statements. A brief summary of each of these critical accounting estimates follows. For a more detailed discussion of the effect of these estimates on our consolidated financial statements, and the judgments and assumptions related to these estimates, see the referenced sections of this document. For a complete summary of our significant accounting policies, see Note 2 of the consolidated financial statements. Investment Fair Value and Impairment The fair value of our investments in fixed income and equity securities is based on observable market quotations, other market observable data, or is derived from such quotations and market observable data. We utilize third party pricing servicers, brokers and internal valuation models to determine fair value. We gain assurance of the overall reasonableness and consistent application of the assumptions and methodologies and compliance with accounting standards for fair value determination through our ongoing monitoring of the fair values received or derived internally. Our exposure to changes in market conditions is discussed more fully in the Market Risk section of the MD&A. We are responsible for the determination of fair value and the supporting assumptions and methodologies. We employ independent third party pricing servicers to gather, analyze, and interpret market information and derive fair values based upon relevant assumptions and methodologies for each applicable security. In situations where sufficient market observable information is not available for a particular security through the sources as agreed to with us, no quote is provided by the service providers. For these securities, fair value is determined either by requesting brokers who are knowledgeable about these securities to provide a quote or we internally determine fair values employing widely accepted pricing valuation models. Changing market conditions in the fourth quarter of 2007, were incorporated into valuation assumptions, and reflected in the fair values which were validated by calibration and other analytical techniques to available market observable data. Third party pricing servicers consolidate market transactions and other key valuation model inputs from multiple sources and provide pricing information in the form of a single fair value for each security for which a fair value request is agreed. For equity securities, which comprise approximately 3% of our holdings, they provide market quotations for completed transactions on the measurement date. The other fair values provided are derived from their proprietary pricing models. The sources used by these servicers include, but are not limited to, market prices from recently completed transactions and transactions of comparable securities, interest rate yield curves, credit spreads, currency rates, and other market-observable information as applicable, as well as widely accepted valuation models developed on a proprietary basis. Their proprietary pricing models are based on discounted cashflow methodology and they may take into account, among other things, market observable information as of the measurement date from the sources described above; and the specific attributes of the security being valued including its term, interest rate and credit rating (consistent with those we use to report our holdings by credit rating); industry sector, and where applicable, collateral quality and other issue or issuer specific information. To operate these models effectively requires seasoned professional judgment and experience. 35 In cases where market transactions or other market observable data is limited, the degree of judgment varies with the availability of market observable information. For approximately 4.5% of our holdings, where our third party pricing servicers cannot provide fair value determinations for fixed income securities, we obtain quotes from brokers familiar with the security who may consider transactions or activity in similar securities, if any, among other information, similar to our third party pricing servicers. The brokers providing the quotes are generally from the brokerage divisions of leading financial institutions with market making, underwriting and distribution expertise. The fair value of securities, such as privately-placed securities, where our pricing servicers or brokers cannot provide fair value determinations, is determined using widely accepted valuation methods and models. These internally developed models are appropriate for each class of security, involve some degree of judgment, and include inputs that may not be market observable. Our models are based on discounted cash flow methodology and calculate a single best estimate of fair value for each security. Our internally developed pricing models use credit ratings and liquidity risk associated with privately-placed securities which are difficult to independently observe and verify. Inputs used in these fair value estimates include specific attributes of the security being valued including; coupon rate, weighted average life, an internal credit rating assigned by us, (which is generally consistent with any external ratings and those we use to report our holdings by credit rating), sector of the issuer, and call provisions. Our assumptions incorporate market information as of the measurement date that represents what we believe independent third parties would use to determine fair value, which include: interest rate yield curves, quoted market prices of comparable securities, credit spreads, estimated liquidity premiums and other applicable market data. Our assumption for liquidity risk associated with privately-placed securities reduces the value of these securities to reflect their reduced liquidity as compared to similar securities that are publicly traded. Additionally, no assumption is included in the valuation of privately placed securities for an increase to the value to reflect the generally enhanced structural features of the securities, such as covenants or change of control protection. However, judgment is required in developing these estimates and, as a result, the estimated fair value of these securities may differ from amounts that would be realized upon an orderly sale of the securities at the measurement date. The use of different assumptions may have a material effect on the estimated fair values. We employ control processes to determine the reasonableness of the fair value of our fixed income and equity securities. Our processes are designed to assure the values provided are accurately recorded and that the data and the valuation method utilized is appropriate and consistently applied and that the assumptions are reasonable and representative of fair value. For example, we may validate the reasonableness of prices by comparing the information obtained from our pricing vendors to other third party pricing sources for certain securities. Our control processes also include reviews, when fair value determinations are expected to be more variable, by management with relevant expertise and management who are independent of those charged with executing investing transactions, of these fair value determinations to validate their reasonableness. 36 The following table identifies those investments carried at fair value as of December 31, 2007 by method of determination: Investments (in millions) Carrying Value Percent to total Fair value based on internal sources $ 11,265 9.5 % Fair value based on external sources 88,443 74.3 Total fixed income and equity securities 99,708 83.8 Fair value of derivatives 473 0.4 Mortgage loans, policy loans, bank loans and certain limited partnership and other investments, valued at cost, amortized cost and the equity method 18,799 15.8 Total $ 118,980 100.0 % For investments classified as available for sale, the difference between fair value and amortized cost for fixed income securities and cost for equity securities, net of certain other items and deferred income taxes (as disclosed in Note 5), is reported as a component of accumulated other comprehensive income on the Consolidated Statements of Financial Position and is not reflected in the operating results of any period until reclassified to net income upon the consummation of a transaction with an unrelated third party or when declines in fair values are deemed other-than-temporary. The assessment of other-than-temporary impairment of a security's fair value is performed on a portfolio review as well as a case-by-case basis considering a wide range of factors. For our portfolio review evaluations, we ascertain whether there are any approved programs involving the disposition of investments such as changes in duration, revisions to strategic asset allocations and liquidity actions, as well as any dispositions anticipated by the portfolio managers. In these instances, we recognize impairments on securities designated as subject to these approved anticipated actions if the security is in an unrealized loss position. There are a number of assumptions and estimates inherent in evaluating impairments and determining if they are other-than-temporary, including: 1) our ability and intent to hold the investment for a period of time sufficient to allow for an anticipated recovery in value; 2) the expected recoverability of principal and interest; 3) the length of time and extent to which the fair value has been less than amortized cost for fixed income securities or cost for equity securities; 4) the financial condition, near-term and long-term prospects of the issue or issuer, including relevant industry conditions and trends, and implications of rating agency actions and offering prices; and 5) the specific reasons that a security is in a significant unrealized loss position, including market conditions which could affect liquidity. Additionally, once assumptions and estimates are made, any number of changes in facts and circumstances could cause us to subsequently determine that an impairment is other-than-temporary, including: 1) general economic conditions that are worse than previously forecasted or that have a greater adverse effect on a particular issuer or industry sector than originally estimated; 2) changes in the facts and circumstances related to a particular issue or issuer's ability to meet all of its contractual obligations; and 3) changes in facts and circumstances or new information obtained which causes a change in our ability or intent to hold a security to maturity or until it recovers in value. Changes in assumptions, facts and circumstances could result in additional charges to earnings in future periods to the extent that losses are realized. The charge to earnings, while potentially significant to net income, would not have a significant effect on shareholders' equity since the majority of our portfolio is designated as available-for-sale and carried at fair value and as a result, any related net unrealized loss would already be reflected as a component of accumulated other comprehensive income in shareholders' equity. 37 The determination of the amount of impairment is an inherently subjective process based on periodic evaluation of the factors described above. Such evaluations and assessments are revised as conditions change and new information becomes available. We update our evaluations regularly and reflect changes in impairments in results of operations as such evaluations are revised. The use of different methodologies and assumptions as to the determination of the fair value of investments and the timing and amount of impairments may have a material effect on the amounts presented within the consolidated financial statements. For a more detailed discussion of the risks relating to changes in investment values and levels of investment impairment as well as the potential causes of such changes, see Note 5 of the consolidated financial statements and the Investments, Market Risk, Enterprise Risk Management and Forward-looking Statements and Risk Factors sections of this document. Derivative Instrument Hedge Accounting and Fair Value We primarily use derivative financial instruments to manage our exposure to market risk and in conjunction with asset/liability management, particularly in the Allstate Financial segment. When derivatives meet specific criteria, they may be designated as accounting hedges and accounted for as fair value, cash flow, foreign currency fair value, or foreign currency cash flow hedges. When designating a derivative as an accounting hedge, we formally document the hedging relationship and risk management objective and strategy. The documentation identifies the hedging instrument, the hedged item, the nature of the risk being hedged and the methodology used to assess the effectiveness of the hedging instrument in offsetting the exposure to changes in the hedged item's fair value attributable to the hedged risk. In the case of a cash flow hedge, this documentation includes the exposure to changes in the hedged transaction's variability in cash flows attributable to the hedged risk. We do not exclude any component of the change in fair value of the hedging instrument from the effectiveness assessment. At each reporting date, we confirm that the hedging instrument continues to be highly effective in offsetting the hedged risk. The accounting for derivatives is complex and interpretations of the applicable accounting standards continue to evolve in practice. Judgment is applied in determining the availability and application of hedge accounting designations and the appropriate accounting treatment under the applicable accounting standards. If it is determined that hedge accounting designations were not appropriately applied, reported net income could be materially affected. Differences in judgment as to the availability and application of hedge accounting designations and the appropriate accounting treatment may result in differing impacts on our financial statements from those previously reported. Measurements of ineffectiveness of hedging relationships are also subject to evolving interpretations and estimations which may have a material effect on net income. The fair value of exchange traded derivative contracts is based on observable market quotations in active markets, whereas the fair value of non-exchange traded derivative contracts is determined using widely accepted pricing models and other appropriate valuation methods. These techniques involve some degree of judgment and include inputs that may not be observable in the market. The fair value of derivatives, depending on the type of derivative, can be affected by changes in interest rates, foreign exchange rates, financial indices, credit spreads, market volatility and liquidity. Values can also be affected by changes in estimates and assumptions used in pricing models. Such assumptions include estimates of volatility, interest rates, foreign exchange rates, other financial indices and credit ratings. Included in the analysis of the fair value is the risk of counterparty default. The use of different assumptions may have material effects on the estimated derivative fair value amounts, as well as the amount of reported net income. Also, fluctuations in the fair value of derivatives which have not been designated for hedge accounting may result in significant volatility in net income. 38 The following table presents the valuation of our derivatives by method of determining fair value. (in millions) Fair Value of Derivative Contracts Fair value based on quoted market prices $ 101 Fair value based on models and other valuation methods 932 Fair value of derivatives related to Allstate Financial Products (117 ) Total fair value of derivatives $ 916 For further discussion of these policies and quantification of the impacts of these estimates and assumptions, see Note 6 of the consolidated financial statements and the Investments, Market Risk, Enterprise Risk Management and Forward-looking Statements and Risk Factors sections of this document. Deferred Policy Acquisition Cost Amortization We incur significant costs in connection with acquiring business. In accordance with GAAP, costs that vary with and are primarily related to acquiring business are deferred and recorded as an asset on the Consolidated Statements of Financial Position. DAC related to property-liability contracts is amortized to income as premiums are earned, typically over periods of six to twelve months. The amortization methodology for DAC for Allstate Financial policies and contracts includes significant assumptions and estimates. DAC related to traditional life insurance is amortized over the premium paying period of the related policies in proportion to the estimated revenues on such business. Significant assumptions relating to estimated premiums, investment returns, which include investment income and realized capital gains and losses, as well as mortality, persistency and expenses to administer the business are established at the time the policy is issued and are generally not revised during the life of the policy. The assumptions for determining DAC amortization and recoverability are consistent with the assumptions used to calculate reserves for life-contingent contract benefits. Any deviations from projected business in force resulting from actual policy terminations differing from expected levels and any estimated premium deficiencies may result in a change to the rate of amortization in the period such events occur. Generally, the amortization periods for these contracts approximates the estimated lives of the policies. The recovery of DAC is dependent upon the future profitability of this business. We periodically review the adequacy of reserves and recoverability of DAC for these contracts on an aggregate basis using actual experience. In the event actual experience is significantly adverse compared to the original assumptions any remaining unamortized DAC balance must be expensed to the extent not recoverable and a premium deficiency reserve may be required if the remaining DAC balance is insufficient to absorb the deficiency. DAC related to interest-sensitive life, annuities and other investment contracts is amortized in proportion to the incidence of the total present value of gross profits, which includes both actual historical gross profits ("AGP") and estimated future gross profits ("EGP") expected to be earned over the estimated lives of the contracts. The amortization is net of interest on the prior period DAC balance using rates established at the inception of the contracts. Actual amortization periods generally range from 15-30 years; however, incorporating estimates of customer surrender rates, partial withdrawals and deaths generally results in the majority of the DAC being amortized during the surrender charge period. The cumulative DAC amortization is reestimated and adjusted by a cumulative charge or credit to results of operations when there is a difference between the incidence of actual versus expected gross profits in a reporting period or when there is a change in total EGP. AGP and EGP consist of the following components: benefit margins primarily from cost of insurance contract charges less mortality; investment margins including realized capital gains and losses; and 39 expense margins including surrender and other contract charges, less maintenance expenses. The amount of EGP is principally dependent on assumptions for investment returns, including capital gains and losses on assets supporting contract liabilities, interest crediting rates to policyholders, the effect of any hedges, persistency, mortality and expenses. Of these factors, we anticipate that investment returns, credited interest, persistency, mortality, and expenses are reasonably likely to have the greatest impact on the amount of DAC amortization. Changes in these assumptions can be offsetting and the Company is unable to predict their future movements or offsetting impacts over time. Each reporting period, DAC amortization is recognized in proportion to AGP for that period adjusted for interest on the prior period DAC balance. This amortization process includes an assessment of AGP compared to EGP, the actual amount of business remaining in-force and realized capital gains and losses on investments supporting the product liability. The impact of realized capital gains and losses on amortization of DAC depends upon which product liability is supported by the assets that give rise to the gain or loss. If the AGP is less than EGP in the period, but the total EGP is unchanged, the amount of DAC amortization will generally decrease, resulting in a current period increase to earnings. The opposite result generally occurs when the AGP exceeds the EGP in the period, but the total EGP is unchanged. Annually we review all assumptions underlying the projections of EGP, including investment returns, interest crediting rates, mortality, persistency, and expenses. Management annually updates assumptions used in the calculation of EGP. At each reporting period we assess whether any revisions to assumptions used to determine DAC amortization are required. These reviews and updates may result in amortization acceleration or deceleration, which are commonly referred to as "DAC unlocking". If the update of assumptions causes total EGP to increase, the rate of DAC amortization will generally decrease, resulting in a current period increase to earnings. A decrease to earnings generally occurs when the assumption update causes the total EGP to decrease. Over the past three years, our most significant DAC assumption updates that resulted in a change to EGP and the amortization of DAC have been revisions to expected future investment returns, expenses, mortality and in-force or persistency assumptions resulting in net DAC amortization deceleration of $14 million in 2007, net DAC amortization acceleration of $2 million in 2006, and net DAC amortization deceleration of $2 million in 2005. The 2005 amortization deceleration included $55 million related to our subsequently disposed variable annuity business for which we no longer have any DAC, but was largely offset by $51 million of amortization acceleration related to investment contracts. The amortization acceleration on fixed annuity investment contracts was primarily due to higher than expected lapses on market value adjusted annuities and faster than anticipated investment portfolio yield declines. For quantification of the impact of these estimates and assumptions on Allstate Financial, see the Allstate Financial Segment and Forward-looking Statements and Risk Factors sections of this document and Note 2 and 10 of the consolidated financial statements. Reserve for Property-Liability Insurance Claims and Claims Expense Estimation Reserves are established to provide for the estimated costs of paying claims and claims expenses under insurance policies we have issued. Property-Liability underwriting results are significantly influenced by estimates of property-liability insurance claims and claims expense reserves. These reserves are an estimate of amounts necessary to settle all outstanding claims, including claims that have been incurred but not reported ("IBNR"), as of the financial statement date. Characteristics of Reserves Reserves are established independently of business segment management for each business segment and line of business based on estimates of the ultimate cost to settle claims, less losses that have been paid. The significant lines of business are auto, homeowners, and 40 other lines for Allstate Protection, and asbestos, environmental, and other discontinued lines for Discontinued Lines and Coverages. Allstate Protection's claims are typically reported promptly with relatively little reporting lag between the date of occurrence and the date the loss is reported. Auto and homeowners liability losses generally take an average of about two years to settle, while auto physical damage, homeowners property and other personal lines have an average settlement time of less than one year. Discontinued Lines and Coverages involve long-tail losses, such as those related to asbestos and environmental claims, which often involve substantial reporting lags and extended times to settle. Reserves are the difference between the estimated ultimate cost of losses incurred and the amount of paid losses as of the reporting date. Reserves are estimated for both reported and unreported claims, and include estimates of all expenses associated with processing and settling all incurred claims. We update our reserve estimates quarterly and as new information becomes available or as events emerge that may affect the resolution of unsettled claims. Changes in prior year reserve estimates (reserve reestimates), which may be material, are determined by comparing updated estimates of ultimate losses to prior estimates, and the differences are recorded as property-liability insurance claims and claims expenses in the Consolidated Statements of Operations in the period such changes are determined. Estimating the ultimate cost of claims and claims expenses is an inherently uncertain and complex process involving a high degree of judgment and is subject to the evaluation of numerous variables. The Actuarial Methods used to Develop Reserve Estimates Reserves estimates are derived by using several different actuarial estimation methods that are variations on one primary actuarial technique. The actuarial technique is known as a "chain ladder" estimation process in which historical loss patterns are applied to actual paid losses and reported losses (paid losses plus individual case reserves established by claim adjusters) for an accident year or a report year to create an estimate of how losses are likely to develop over time. An accident year refers to classifying claims based on the year in which the claims occurred. A report year refers to classifying claims based on the year in which the claims are reported. Both classifications are used to prepare estimates of required reserves for payments to be made in the future. The key assumptions affecting our reserve estimates comprise data elements including claim counts, paid losses, case reserves, and development factors calculated with this data. In the chain ladder estimation technique, a ratio (development factor) is calculated which compares current period results to results in the prior period for each accident year. A three-year or two-year average development factor, based on historical results, is usually multiplied by the current period experience to estimate the development of losses of each accident year into the next time period. The development factors for the future time periods for each accident year are compounded over the remaining future periods to calculate an estimate of ultimate losses for each accident year. The implicit assumption of this technique is that an average of historical development factors is predictive of future loss development, as the significant size of our experience data base achieves a high degree of statistical credibility in actuarial projections of this type. The effects of inflation are implicitly considered in the reserving process, the implicit assumption being that a multi-year average development factor includes an adequate provision. Occasionally, unusual aberrations in loss patterns are caused by external and internal factors such as changes in claim reporting, settlement patterns, unusually large losses, process changes, legal or regulatory changes, and other influences. In these instances, analyses of alternate development factor selections are performed to evaluate the effect of these factors, and actuarial judgment is applied to make appropriate development factor assumptions needed to develop a best estimate of ultimate losses. How Reserve Estimates are Established and Updated Reserve estimates are developed at a very detailed level, and the results of these numerous micro-level best estimates are aggregated to form a consolidated reserve estimate. For example, over one thousand actuarial estimates of the types described 41 above are prepared each quarter to estimate losses for each line of insurance, major components of losses (such as coverages and perils), major states or groups of states and for reported losses and IBNR. The actuarial methods described above are used to analyze the settlement patterns of claims by determining the development factors for specific data elements that are necessary components of a reserve estimation process. Development factors are calculated quarterly for data elements such as, claim counts reported and settled, paid losses, and paid losses combined with case reserves. The calculation of development factors from changes in these data elements also impacts claim severity (average cost per claim) trends, which is a common industry reference used to explain changes in reserve estimates. The historical development patterns for these data elements are used as the assumptions to calculate reserve estimates. Often, several different estimates are prepared for each detailed component, incorporating alternative analyses of changing claim settlement patterns and other influences on losses, from which we select our best estimate for each component, occasionally incorporating additional analyses and actuarial judgment, as described above. These micro-level estimates are not based on a single set of assumptions. Actuarial judgments that may be applied to these components of certain micro-level estimates generally do not have a material impact on the consolidated level of reserves. Moreover, this detailed micro-level process does not permit or result in a compilation of a company-wide roll up to generate a range of needed loss reserves that would be meaningful. Based on our review of these estimates, our best estimate of required reserves for each state/line/coverage component is recorded for each accident year, and the required reserves for each component are summed to create the reserve balances carried on our Consolidated Statements of Financial Position. Reserves are reestimated quarterly, by combining historical results with current actual results to calculate new development factors. This process incorporates the historic and latest actual trends, and other underlying changes in the data elements used to calculate reserve estimates. New development factors are likely to differ from previous development factors used in prior reserve estimates because actual results (claims reported or settled, losses paid, or changes to case reserves) occur differently than the implied assumptions contained in the previous development factor calculations. If claims reported, paid losses, or case reserves changes are greater or lower than the levels estimated by previous development factors, reserve reestimates increase or decrease. When actual development of these data elements is different than the historical development pattern used in a prior period reserve estimate, a new reserve is determined. The difference between indicated reserves based on new reserve estimates and recorded reserves (the previous estimate) is the amount of reserve reestimate and an increase or decrease in property-liability insurance claims and claims expense will be recorded in the Consolidated Statements of Operations. Total Property-liability reserve reestimates, after-tax, as a percent of net income, in 2005, 2006 and 2007 were 17.2%, 12.6% and 2.4%, respectively. For Property-Liability, the 3-year average of reserve reestimates as a percentage of total reserves was a favorable 3.1%, for Allstate Protection, the 3-year average of reserve estimates was a favorable 4.3% and for Discontinued Lines and Coverages the 3-year average of reserve reestimates was an unfavorable 5.2%, each of these results being consistent within a reasonable actuarial tolerance for our respective businesses. Allstate Protection reserve reestimates were primarily the result of claim severity development that was better than expected and late reported loss development that was better than expected due to lower frequency trends, and for Discontinued Lines and Coverages, reestimates were primarily a result of increased reported claim activity (claims frequency). A more detailed discussion of reserve reestimates is presented in the Property-Liability Claims and Claims Expense Reserves section of this document. 42 The following table shows claims and claims expense reserves by operating segment and line of business as of December 31: (in millions) 2007 2006 2005 Allstate Protection Auto $ 10,175 $ 9,995 $ 10,460 Homeowners 2,279 2,226 3,675 Other Lines 2,131 2,235 2,619 Total Allstate Protection $ 14,585 $ 14,456 $ 16,754 Discontinued Lines and Coverages Asbestos 1,302 1,375 1,373 Environmental 232 194 205 Other Discontinued Lines 541 585 599 Total Discontinued Lines and Coverages $ 2,075 $ 2,154 $ 2,177 Total Property-Liability $ 16,660 $ 16,610 $ 18,931 Allstate Protection Reserve Estimates Factors Affecting Reserve Estimates Reserve estimates are developed based on the processes and historical development trends as previously described. These estimates are considered in conjunction with known facts and interpretations of circumstances and factors including our experience with similar cases, actual claims paid, differing payment patterns and pending levels of unpaid claims, loss management programs, product mix and contractual terms, changes in law and regulation, judicial decisions, and economic conditions. When we experience changes of the type previously mentioned, we may need to apply actuarial judgment in the determination and selection of development factors considered more reflective of the new trends, such as combining shorter or longer periods of historical results with current actual results to produce development factors based on two-year, three-year, or longer development periods to reestimate our reserves. For example, if a legal change is expected to have a significant impact on the development of claim severity for a coverage which is part of a particular line of insurance in a specific state, actuarial judgment is applied to determine appropriate development factors that will most accurately reflect the expected impact on that specific estimate. Another example would be when a change in economic conditions is expected to affect the cost of repairs to damaged autos or property for a particular line, coverage, or state, actuarial judgment is applied to determine appropriate development factors to use in the reserve estimate that will most accurately reflect the expected impacts on severity development. As claims are reported, for certain liability claims of sufficient size and complexity, the field adjusting staff establishes case reserve estimates of ultimate cost, based on their assessment of facts and circumstances related to each individual claim. For other claims which occur in large volumes and settle in a relatively short time frame, it is not practical or efficient to set case reserves for each claim, and a statistical case reserve is set for these claims based on estimating techniques previously described. In the normal course of business, we may also supplement our claims processes by utilizing third party adjusters, appraisers, engineers, inspectors, other professionals and information sources to assess and settle catastrophe and non-catastrophe related claims. Historically, the case reserves set by the field adjusting staff have not proven to be an entirely accurate estimate of the ultimate cost of claims. To provide for this, a development reserve is estimated using previously described processes, and allocated to pending claims as a supplement to case reserves. Typically, the case and supplemental development reserves comprise about 90% of total reserves. 43 Another major component of reserves is IBNR. Typically, IBNR comprises about 10% of total reserves. Generally, the initial reserves for a new accident year are established based on severity assumptions for different business segments, lines, and coverages based on historical relationships to relevant inflation indicators, and reserves for prior accident years are statistically determined using processes previously described. Changes in auto current year claim severity are generally influenced by inflation in the medical and auto repair sectors of the economy. We mitigate these effects through various loss management programs. Injury claims are affected largely by medical cost inflation while physical damage claims are affected largely by auto repair cost inflation and used car prices. For auto physical damage coverages, we monitor our rate of increase in average cost per claim against a weighted average of the Maintenance and Repair price index and the Parts & Equipment price index. We believe our claim settlement initiatives, such as improvements to the claim review and settlement process, the use of special investigative units to detect fraud and handle suspect claims, litigation management and defense strategies, as well as various other loss management initiatives underway, contribute to the mitigation of injury and physical damage severity trends. Changes in homeowners current year claim severity are generally influenced by inflation in the cost of building materials, the cost of construction and property repair services, the cost of replacing home furnishings and other contents, the types of claims that qualify for coverage, deductibles and other economic and environmental factors. We employ various loss management programs to mitigate the effect of these factors. As loss experience for the current year develops for each type of loss, it is monitored relative to initial assumptions until it is judged to have sufficient statistical credibility. From that point in time and forward, reserves are reestimated using statistical actuarial processes to reflect the impact actual loss trends have on development factors incorporated into the actuarial estimation processes. Statistical credibility is usually achieved by the end of the first calendar year, however, when trends for the current accident year exceed initial assumptions sooner, they are usually given credibility, and reserves are increased accordingly. The very detailed processes for developing reserve estimates and the lack of a need and existence of a common set of assumptions or development factors, limits aggregate reserve level testing for variability of data elements. However, by applying standard actuarial methods to consolidated historic accident year loss data for major loss types, comprising auto injury losses, auto physical damage losses and homeowner losses, we develop variability analyses consistent with the way we develop reserves by measuring the potential variability of development factors, as described in the section titled, "Potential Reserve Estimate Variability" below. Causes of Reserve Estimate Uncertainty Since reserves are estimates of the unpaid portions of claims and claims expenses that have occurred, including IBNR losses, the establishment of appropriate reserves, including reserves for catastrophes, requires regular reevaluation and refinement of estimates to determine our ultimate loss estimate. At each reporting date, the highest degree of uncertainty in estimates of losses arises from claims remaining to be settled for the current accident year and the most recent preceding accident year. The greatest degree of uncertainty exists in the current accident year because the current accident year contains the greatest proportion of losses that have not been reported or settled but must be estimated as of the current reporting date. Most of these losses relate to damaged property such as automobiles and homes, and to medical care for injuries from accidents. During the first year after the end of an accident year, a large portion of the total losses for that accident year are settled. When accident year 44 losses paid through the end of the first year following the initial accident year are incorporated into updated actuarial estimates, the trends inherent in the settlement of claims emerge more clearly. Consequently, this is the point in time at which we tend to make our largest reestimates of losses for an accident year. After the second year, the losses that we pay for an accident year typically relate to claims that are more difficult to settle, such as those involving serious injuries or litigation. Private passenger auto insurance provides a good illustration of the uncertainty of future loss estimates: our typical annual percentage payout of reserves for an accident year is approximately 45% in the first year after the end of the accident year, 20% in the second year, 15% in the third year, 10% in the fourth year, and the remaining 10% thereafter. Reserves for Catastrophe Losses Property-Liability claims and claims expense reserves also include reserves for catastrophe losses. Catastrophe losses are an inherent risk of the property-liability insurance industry that have contributed, and will continue to contribute, to potentially material year-to-year fluctuations in our results of operations and financial position. We define a "catastrophe" as an event that produces pretax losses before reinsurance in excess of $1 million and involves multiple first party policyholders, or an event that produces a number of claims in excess of a preset, per-event threshold of average claims in a specific area, occurring within a certain amount of time following the event. Catastrophes are caused by various natural events including high winds, winter storms, tornadoes, hailstorms, wildfires, tropical storms, hurricanes, earthquakes, and volcanoes. We are also exposed to man-made catastrophic events, such as certain acts of terrorism or industrial accidents. The nature and level of catastrophes in any period cannot be predicted. The estimation of claims and claims expense reserves for catastrophes also comprises estimates of losses from reported claims and IBNR, primarily for damage to property. In general, our estimates for catastrophe reserves are based on claim adjuster inspections and the application of historical loss development factors as described previously. However, depending on the nature of the catastrophe, as noted above, the estimation process can be further complicated. For example, for hurricanes, complications could include the inability of insureds to be able to promptly report losses, limitations placed on claims adjusting staff affecting their ability to inspect losses, determining whether losses are covered by our homeowners policy (generally for damage caused by wind or wind driven rain), or specifically excluded coverage caused by flood, estimating additional living expenses, and assessing the impact of demand surge, exposure to mold damage, and the effects of numerous other considerations, including the timing of a catastrophe in relation to other events, such as at or near the end of a financial reporting period, which can affect the availability of information needed to estimate reserves for that reporting period. In these situations, we may need to adapt our practices to accommodate these circumstances in order to determine a best estimate of our losses from a catastrophe. As an example, in 2005 to complete an estimate for certain areas affected by Hurricane Katrina and not yet inspected by our claims adjusting staff, or where we believed our historical loss development factors were not predictive, we relied on analysis of actual claim notices received compared to total policies in force, as well as visual, governmental and third party information, including aerial photos, area observations, and data on wind speed and flood depth to the extent available. Potential Reserve Estimate Variability The aggregation of numerous micro-level estimates for each business segment, line of insurance, major components of losses (such as coverages and perils), and major states or groups of states for reported losses and IBNR forms the reserve liability recorded in the Consolidated Statements of Financial Position. Because of this detailed approach to developing our reserve estimates, there is not a single set of assumptions that determine our reserve estimates at the consolidated level. Moreover, management does not compile a range of reserve estimates because management does not believe the processes that we follow will produce a statistically credible or reliable 45 actuarial reserve range that would be meaningful. Reserve estimates, by their very nature, are very complex to determine and subject to significant judgment, and do not represent an exact determination for each outstanding claim. Accordingly, as actual claims, and/or paid losses, and/or case reserve results emerge, our estimate of the ultimate cost to settle will be different than previously estimated. To develop a statistical indication of potential reserve variability within reasonably likely possible outcomes, an actuarial technique (stochastic modeling) is applied to the countrywide consolidated data elements for paid losses and paid losses combined with case reserves separately for injury losses, auto physical damage losses, and homeowners losses excluding catastrophe losses. Based on the combined historical variability of the development factors calculated for these data elements an estimate of the standard error or standard deviation around these reserve estimates is calculated within each accident year for the last eleven years for each type of loss. The variability of these reserve estimates within one standard deviation of the mean (a measure of frequency of dispersion often viewed to be an acceptable level of accuracy) is believed by management to represent a reasonable and statistically probable measure of potential variability. Based on our products and coverages, historical experience, the statistical credibility of our extensive data, and stochastic modeling of actuarial chain ladder methodologies used to develop reserve estimates, we estimate that the potential variability of our Allstate Protection reserves, within a reasonable probability of other possible outcomes, may be approximately plus or minus 4%, or plus or minus $400 million in net income. A lower level of variability exists for auto injury losses, which comprise approximately 70% of reserves, due to their relatively stable development patterns over a longer duration of time required to settle claims. Other types of losses, such as auto physical damage, homeowners losses and other losses, which comprise about 30% of reserves, tend to have greater variability, but are settled in a much shorter period of time. Although this evaluation reflects most reasonably likely outcomes, it is possible the final outcome may fall below or above these amounts. Historical variability of reserve estimates is reported in the Property-Liability Claims and Claims Expense Reserves section of this document. Adequacy of Reserve Estimates We believe our net claims and claims expense reserves are appropriately established based on available methodology, facts, technology, laws and regulations. We calculate and record a single best reserve estimate, in conformance with generally accepted actuarial standards, for each line of insurance, its components (coverages and perils), and state, for reported losses and for IBNR losses and as a result we believe that no other estimate is better than our recorded amount. Due to the uncertainties involved, the ultimate cost of losses may vary materially from recorded amounts, which are based on our best estimates. Discontinued Lines and Coverages Reserve Estimates Characteristics of Discontinued Lines Exposure We continue to receive asbestos and environmental claims. Asbestos claims relate primarily to bodily injuries asserted by people who were exposed to asbestos or products containing asbestos. Environmental claims relate primarily to pollution and related clean-up costs. Our exposure to asbestos, environmental and other discontinued lines claims arises principally from assumed reinsurance coverage written during the 1960s through the mid-1980s, including reinsurance on primary insurance written on large United States companies, and from direct excess insurance written from 1972 through 1985, including substantial excess general liability coverages on large U.S. companies. Additional exposure stems from direct primary commercial insurance written during the 1960s through the mid-1980s. Other discontinued lines exposures primarily relate to general liability and product liability mass tort claims, such as those for medical devices and other products. 46 In 1986, the general liability policy form used by us and others in the property-liability industry was amended to introduce an "absolute pollution exclusion," which excluded coverage for environmental damage claims, and to add an asbestos exclusion. Most general liability policies issued prior to 1987 contain annual aggregate limits for product liability coverage. General liability policies issued in 1987 and thereafter contain annual aggregate limits for product liability coverage and annual aggregate limits for all coverages. Our experience to date is that these policy form changes have limited the extent of our exposure to environmental and asbestos claim risks. Our exposure to liability for asbestos, environmental, and other discontinued lines losses manifests differently depending on whether it arises from assumed reinsurance coverage, direct excess insurance, or direct primary commercial insurance. The direct insurance coverage we provided that covered asbestos, environmental and other discontinued lines was substantially "excess" in nature. Direct excess insurance and reinsurance involve coverage written by us for specific layers of protection above retentions and other insurance plans. The nature of excess coverage and reinsurance provided to other insurers limits our exposure to loss to specific layers of protection in excess of policyholder retention on primary insurance plans. Our exposure is further limited by the significant reinsurance that we had purchased on our direct excess business. Our assumed reinsurance business involved writing generally small participations in other insurers' reinsurance programs. The reinsured losses in which we participate may be a proportion of all eligible losses or eligible losses in excess of defined retentions. The majority of our assumed reinsurance exposure, approximately 85%, is for excess of loss coverage, while the remaining 15% is for pro-rata coverage. Our direct primary commercial insurance business did not include coverage to large asbestos manufacturers. This business comprises a cross section of policyholders engaged in many diverse business sectors located throughout the country. How Reserve Estimates are Established and Updated We conduct an annual review in the third quarter of each year to evaluate and establish asbestos, environmental and other discontinued lines reserves. Reserves are recorded in the reporting period in which they are determined. Using established industry and actuarial best practices and assuming no change in the regulatory or economic environment, this detailed and comprehensive "ground up" methodology determines asbestos reserves based on assessments of the characteristics of exposure (e.g. claim activity, potential liability, jurisdiction, products versus non-products exposure) presented by individual policyholders, and determines environmental reserves based on assessments of the characteristics of exposure (e.g. environmental damages, respective shares of liability of potentially responsible parties, appropriateness and cost of remediation) to pollution and related clean-up costs. The number and cost of these claims is affected by intense advertising by trial lawyers seeking asbestos plaintiffs, and entities with asbestos exposure seeking bankruptcy protection as a result of asbestos liabilities, initially causing a delay in the reporting of claims, often followed by an acceleration and an increase in claims and claims expenses as settlements occur. After evaluating our insureds' probable liabilities for asbestos and/or environmental claims, we evaluate our insureds' coverage programs for such claims. We consider our insureds' total available insurance coverage, including the coverage we issued. We also consider relevant judicial interpretations of policy language and applicable coverage defenses or determinations, if any. Evaluation of both the insureds' estimated liabilities and our exposure to the insureds depends heavily on an analysis of the relevant legal issues and litigation environment. This analysis is conducted by our specialized claims adjusting staff and legal counsel. Based on these evaluations, case reserves are 47 established by claims adjusting staff and actuarial analysis is employed to develop an IBNR reserve, which includes estimated potential reserve development and claims that have occurred but have not been reported. As of December 31, 2007, IBNR was 63.2% of combined asbestos and environmental reserves. For both asbestos and environmental reserves, we also evaluate our historical direct net loss and expense paid and incurred experience to assess any emerging trends, fluctuations or characteristics suggested by the aggregate paid and incurred activity. Other Discontinued Lines and Coverages Reserves for Other Discontinued Lines provide for remaining loss and loss expense liabilities related to business no longer written by us, other than asbestos and environmental, and are presented in the following table. (in millions) 2007 2006 2005 Other mass torts $ 189 $ 185 $ 203 Workers' compensation 133 140 151 Commercial and other 219 260 245 Other discontinued lines $ 541 $ 585 $ 599 Other mass torts describes direct excess and reinsurance general liability coverage provided for cumulative injury losses other than asbestos and environmental. Workers' compensation and commercial and other include run-off from discontinued direct primary, direct excess and reinsurance commercial insurance operations of various coverage exposures other than asbestos and environmental. Reserves are based on considerations similar to those previously described, as they relate to the characteristics of specific individual coverage exposures. Potential Reserve Estimate Variability Establishing Discontinued Lines and Coverages net loss reserves for asbestos, environmental and other discontinued lines claims is subject to uncertainties that are much greater than those presented by other types of claims. Among the complications are lack of historical data, long reporting delays, uncertainty as to the number and identity of insureds with potential exposure and unresolved legal issues regarding policy coverage; unresolved legal issues regarding the determination, availability and timing of exhaustion of policy limits; plaintiffs' evolving and expanding theories of liability; availability and collectibility of recoveries from reinsurance; retrospectively determined premiums and other contractual agreements; estimates of the extent and timing of any contractual liability; the impact of bankruptcy protection sought by various asbestos producers and other asbestos defendants; and other uncertainties. There are also complex legal issues concerning the interpretation of various insurance policy provisions and whether those losses are covered, or were ever intended to be covered, and could be recoverable through retrospectively determined premium, reinsurance or other contractual agreements. Courts have reached different and sometimes inconsistent conclusions as to when losses are deemed to have occurred and which policies provide coverage; what types of losses are covered; whether there is an insurer obligation to defend; how policy limits are determined; how policy exclusions and conditions are applied and interpreted; and whether clean-up costs represent insured property damage. Our reserves for asbestos and environmental exposures could be affected by tort reform, class action litigation, and other potential legislation and judicial decisions. Environmental exposures could also be affected by a change in the existing federal Superfund law and similar state statutes. There can be no assurance that any reform legislation will be enacted or that any such legislation will provide for a fair, effective and cost-efficient system for settlement of asbestos or environmental claims. We believe these issues are not likely to be resolved in the near future, and the ultimate costs may vary materially from the amounts currently recorded resulting in material changes in 48 loss reserves. Historical variability of reserve estimates is demonstrated in the Property-Liability Claims and Claims Expense Reserves section of this document. Adequacy of Reserve Estimates Management believes its net loss reserves for environmental, asbestos and other discontinued lines exposures are appropriately established based on available facts, technology, laws, regulations, and assessments of other pertinent factors and characteristics of exposure (e.g. claim activity, potential liability, jurisdiction, products versus non-products exposure) presented by individual policyholders, assuming no change in the legal, legislative or economic environment. Due to the uncertainties and factors described above, management believes it is not practicable to develop a meaningful range for any such additional net loss reserves that may be required. Further Discussion of Reserve Estimates For further discussion of these estimates and quantification of the impact of reserve estimates, reserve reestimates and assumptions, see Notes 7 and 13 to the consolidated financial statements and the Catastrophe Losses, Property-Liability Claims and Claims Expense Reserves and Forward-looking Statements and Risk Factors sections of this document. Reserve for Life-Contingent Contract Benefits Estimation Benefits for these contracts are payable over many years; accordingly, the reserves are calculated as the present value of future expected benefits to be paid, reduced by the present value of future expected net premiums. Long-term actuarial assumptions of future investment yields, mortality, morbidity, policy terminations and expenses are used when establishing the reserve for life-contingent contract benefits payable under insurance policies including traditional life insurance, life-contingent annuities and voluntary health products. These assumptions, which for life-contingent annuities and traditional life insurance are applied using the net level premium method, include provisions for adverse deviation and generally vary by such characteristics as type of annuity benefit or coverage, year of issue and policy duration. Future investment yield assumptions are determined based upon prevailing investment yields as well as estimated reinvestment yields. Mortality, morbidity and policy termination assumptions are based on our experience and industry experience. Expense assumptions include the estimated effects of inflation and expenses to be incurred beyond the premium-paying period. These assumptions are established at the time the policy is issued, are consistent with assumptions for determining DAC amortization for these contracts, and are generally not changed during the policy coverage period. However, if actual experience emerges in a manner that is significantly adverse relative to the original assumptions, adjustments to DAC or reserves may be required resulting in a charge to earnings which could have a material adverse effect on our operating results and financial condition. We periodically review the adequacy of these reserves and recoverability of DAC for these contracts on an aggregate basis using actual experience. In the event that actual experience is significantly adverse compared to the original assumptions any remaining unamortized DAC balance must be expensed to the extent not recoverable and the establishment of a premium deficiency reserve may be required. The effects of changes in reserve estimates are reported in the results of operations in the period in which the changes are determined. The company has not recognized a charge of this nature in the three years ended December 31, 2007. We anticipate that mortality, investment and reinvestment yields, and policy terminations are the factors that would be most likely to require adjustment to these reserves or related DAC. For further discussion of these policies, see Note 8 of the consolidated financial statements and the Forward-looking Statements and Risk Factors section of this document. PROPERTY-LIABILITY 2007 HIGHLIGHTS Premiums written, an operating measure that is defined and reconciled to premiums earned on page 54, decreased 1.2% to $27.18 billion in 2007 from $27.53 billion in 2006. Allstate brand 49 standard auto premiums written increased 2.1% to $16.04 billion in 2007 from $15.70 billion in 2006. Allstate brand homeowners premiums written decreased 3.6% to $5.71 billion in 2007 from $5.93 billion in 2006. The impact of the cost of the catastrophe reinsurance program on premiums written totaled $896 million in 2007 compared to $607 million in 2006. Excluding this cost, premiums written decreased 0.2% in 2007 from 2006. Premium operating measures and statistics contributing to the overall Allstate brand standard auto premiums written growth were the following: 0.9% increase in PIF as of December 31, 2007 compared to December 31, 2006 1.5% decrease in new issued applications in 2007 compared to 2006 0.5 point decline in the renewal ratio to 89.5% in 2007 compared to 90.0% in 2006 0.7% increase in the six month policy term average premium to $423 in 2007 from $420 in 2006 Premium operating measures and statistics contributing to the overall Allstate brand homeowners premiums written decline were the following: 3.4% decrease in PIF as of December 31, 2007 compared to December 31, 2006 18.6% decrease in new issued applications in 2007 compared to 2006 0.8 point decline in the renewal ratio to 86.5% in 2007 compared to 87.3% in 2006 2.2% increase in the twelve month policy term average premium to $850 in 2007 from $832 in 2006 The Allstate brand standard auto loss ratio increased 4.3 points to 65.8 in 2007 from 61.5 in 2006. Standard auto property damage gross claim frequency increased 3.7% in 2007 from 2006, and bodily injury gross claim frequency decreased 1.9% in 2007 from 2006. Auto property damage and bodily injury paid severities increased 1.8% and 6.0%, respectively, in 2007 from 2006. The Allstate brand homeowners loss ratio, which includes catastrophes, increased 16.1 points to 66.5 in 2007 from 50.4 in 2006. Homeowner gross claim frequency, excluding catastrophes, increased 7.1% in 2007 from 2006. Homeowners paid severity, excluding catastrophes, increased 10.6% in 2007 from 2006. Catastrophe losses in 2007 totaled $1.41 billion compared to $810 million in 2006. Impact of prior year reserve reestimates on catastrophe losses was $127 million unfavorable in 2007 compared to a favorable impact of $223 million in 2006. Prior year net favorable reserve reestimates in 2007 totaled $172 million compared to $971 million in 2006. Underwriting income for Property-Liability was $2.78 billion in 2007 compared to $4.50 billion in 2006. The combined ratio was 89.8 in 2007 compared to 83.6 in 2006. Underwriting income (loss), a measure not based on GAAP, is defined below. Investments as of December 31, 2007 decreased 1.8% from December 31, 2006 and net investment income increased 6.4% in 2007 compared to 2006. 50 We introduced innovative products and services such as Allstate YCA, Allstate Your Choice Homeowners ("YCH"), Allstate Blue SM , Allstate Green SM and Encompass Edge SM . PROPERTY-LIABILITY OPERATIONS Overview Our Property-Liability operations consist of two business segments: Allstate Protection and Discontinued Lines and Coverages. Allstate Protection is comprised of two brands, the Allstate brand and Encompass brand. Allstate Protection is principally engaged in the sale of personal property and casualty insurance, primarily private passenger auto and homeowners insurance, to individuals in the United States and Canada. Discontinued Lines and Coverages includes results from insurance coverage that we no longer write and results for certain commercial and other businesses in run-off. These segments are consistent with the groupings of financial information that management uses to evaluate performance and to determine the allocation of resources. Underwriting income (loss), a measure that is not based on GAAP and is reconciled to net income on page 52, is calculated as premiums earned, less claims and claims expense ("losses"), amortization of DAC, operating costs and expenses and restructuring and related charges, as determined using GAAP. We use this measure in our evaluation of results of operations to analyze the profitability of the Property-Liability insurance operations separately from investment results. It is also an integral component of incentive compensation. It is useful for investors to evaluate the components of income separately and in the aggregate when reviewing performance. Net income is the GAAP measure most directly comparable to underwriting income (loss). Underwriting income (loss) should not be considered as a substitute for net income and does not reflect the overall profitability of the business. The table below includes GAAP operating ratios we use to measure our profitability. We believe that they enhance an investor's understanding of our profitability. They are calculated as follows: Claims and claims expense ("loss") ratio the ratio of claims and claims expense to premiums earned. Loss ratios include the impact of catastrophe losses. Expense ratio the ratio of amortization of DAC, operating costs and expenses, and restructuring and related charges to premiums earned. Combined ratio the ratio of claims and claims expense, amortization of DAC, operating costs and expenses, and restructuring and related charges to premiums earned. The combined ratio is the sum of the loss ratio and the expense ratio. The difference between 100% and the combined ratio represents underwriting income (loss) as a percentage of premiums earned. We have also calculated the following impacts of specific items on the GAAP operating ratios because of the volatility of these items between fiscal periods. Effect of catastrophe losses on combined ratio the percentage of catastrophe losses included in claims and claims expense to premiums earned. This ratio includes prior year reserve reestimates of catastrophe losses. Effect of prior year reserve reestimates on combined ratio the percentage of prior year reserve reestimates included in claims and claims expense to premiums earned. This ratio includes prior year reserve reestimates of catastrophe losses. Effect of restructuring and related charges on combined ratio the percentage of restructuring and related charges to premiums earned. Effect of Discontinued Lines and Coverages on combined ratio the ratio of claims and claims expense and other costs and expenses in the Discontinued Lines and Coverages segment to Property-Liability premiums earned. The sum of the effect of Discontinued Lines and Coverages on the combined ratio and the Allstate Protection combined ratio is equal to the Property-Liability combined ratio. 51 Summarized financial data, a reconciliation of underwriting income (loss) to net income and GAAP operating ratios for our Property-Liability operations for the years ended December 31, are presented in the following table. (in millions, except ratios) 2007 2006 2005 Premiums written $ 27,183 $ 27,526 $ 27,391 Revenues Premiums earned $ 27,233 $ 27,369 $ 27,039 Net investment income 1,972 1,854 1,791 Realized capital gains and losses 1,416 348 516 Total revenues 30,621 29,571 29,346 Costs and expenses Claims and claims expense (17,667 ) (16,017 ) (21,175 ) Amortization of DAC (4,121 ) (4,131 ) (4,092 ) Operating costs and expenses (2,634 ) (2,567 ) (2,369 ) Restructuring and related charges (27 ) (157 ) (39 ) Total costs and expenses (24,449 ) (22,872 ) (27,675 ) Loss on disposition of operations (1 ) Income tax expense (1,914 ) (2,084 ) (240 ) Net income $ 4,258 $ 4,614 $ 1,431 Underwriting income (loss) $ 2,784 $ 4,497 $ (636 ) Net investment income 1,972 1,854 1,791 Income tax expense on operations (1,413 ) (1,963 ) (63 ) Realized capital gains and losses, after-tax 915 227 339 Loss on disposition of operations, after-tax (1 ) Net income $ 4,258 $ 4,614 $ 1,431 Catastrophe losses (1) $ 1,409 $ 810 $ 5,674 GAAP operating ratios Claims and claims expense ratio 64.9 58.5 78.3 Expense ratio 24.9 25.1 24.1 Combined ratio 89.8 83.6 102.4 Effect of catastrophe losses on combined ratio (1) 5.2 3.0 21.0 Effect of prior year reserve reestimates on combined ratio (1) (0.6 ) (3.5 ) (1.7 ) Effect of restructuring and related charges on combined ratio 0.1 0.6 0.1 Effect of Discontinued Lines and Coverages on combined ratio 0.2 0.5 0.7 (1) Reserve reestimates included in catastrophe losses totaled $127 million unfavorable in 2007, $223 million favorable in 2006 and $94 million unfavorable in 2005. 52 ALLSTATE PROTECTION SEGMENT Overview and Strategy The Allstate Protection segment sells primarily private passenger auto and homeowners insurance to individuals through Allstate Exclusive Agencies and Customer Information Centers under the Allstate brand and through independent agencies under both the Allstate brand and the Encompass brand. The key elements of the Allstate Protection strategy of consumer focus, innovation and loyalty are: Strategic marketing to drive growth Expand and increase effectiveness of distribution Maintain leadership in pricing sophistication Provide innovative products and services Extend claims competitive advantage Maintain a strong support foundation by continuing to effectively manage people, investments, technology and capital In our strategy for the Allstate brand, we are seeking, through the utilization of our distribution channels, our sophisticated risk segmentation process ("Tiered Pricing") and targeted consumer marketing, to attract and retain high lifetime value customers who will potentially provide profitability over the course of their relationship with us. We maintain a comprehensive marketing approach throughout the U.S. We have aligned agency and management compensation and the overall strategies of the Allstate brand to best serve our customers by basing certain incentives on Allstate brand profitability, PIF growth, retention, and sales of financial products. We differentiate the Allstate brand from competitors by offering a choice of products, including Allstate YCA with options such as safe driving deductibles and a safe driving bonus, Allstate YCH with options such as a claim-free bonus and greater ability to tailor insurance coverage, Allstate Blue our non-standard auto product with features such as a loyalty bonus and roadside assistance coverage and Allstate Green, our new eco-friendly insurance option that offers consumers a convenient way to help the environment. Our strategy for the Encompass brand includes enhancing pricing and product sophistication through our Tiered Pricing approach with the Encompass Edge product, increasing distribution effectiveness and improving agency technology interfaces to support profitable growth. We are positioning the brand to expand product breadth and improve independent agency penetration by leveraging technology and service capabilities. Tiered Pricing and underwriting are designed to enhance both our competitive position and profit potential, and produce a broader range of premiums that is more refined than the range generated by the standard/non-standard model. Tiered Pricing includes our Strategic Risk Management program, which uses a number of risk evaluation factors including, to the extent legally permissible, insurance scoring based on information that is obtained from credit reports. We continue to expand the number of tiers with successive rating program releases. Substantially all of new and approximately 86% of renewal business written for Allstate brand auto uses Tiered Pricing. For Allstate brand homeowners, approximately 93% of new and 57% of renewal business written uses Tiered Pricing. For Allstate brand auto and homeowners business, our results indicate that over time, Tiered Pricing has improved our mix of customers towards those who we consider 53 high lifetime value that generally have better retention and more favorable loss experience. Usually, standard auto customers are expected to have lower risks of loss than non-standard auto customers. We are pursuing improvements in the overall customer experience through actions targeted to increase customer satisfaction and retention. These programs are designed around establishing customer service expectations and customer relationship building. Our claims strategy focuses on delivering fast, fair and consistent claim service while achieving loss cost management and customer satisfaction. We continue to enhance technology to integrate our distribution channels, improve customer service, facilitate the introduction of new products and services and reduce infrastructure costs related to supporting agencies and handling claims. These actions and others are designed to optimize the effectiveness of our distribution and service channels by increasing the productivity of the Allstate brand's exclusive agencies and our direct channel. We continue to manage our property catastrophe exposure in order to provide our shareholders an acceptable return on the risks assumed in our property business and to reduce the variability of our earnings, while providing protection to our customers. Our property business includes personal homeowners, commercial property and other property lines. As of December 31, 2007, we have surpassed our goal to have no more than a 1% likelihood of exceeding our expected annual aggregate catastrophe losses by $2 billion, net of reinsurance, based on modeled assumptions and applications currently available. The use of different assumptions and updates to industry models could materially change the projected loss. Property catastrophe exposure management includes purchasing reinsurance in areas that have known exposure to hurricanes, earthquakes, wildfires, fires following earthquakes and other catastrophes. We are working for changes in the regulatory environment, including fewer restrictions on underwriting, recognizing the need for and improving appropriate risk based pricing and promoting the creation of government sponsored, privately funded solutions for large catastrophes. While the actions that we take will be primarily focused on reducing the catastrophe exposure in our property business, we also consider their impact on our ability to market our auto lines. Pricing of property products is typically intended to establish returns that we deem acceptable over a long-term period. Losses, including losses from catastrophic events and weather-related losses (such as wind, hail, lightning and freeze losses not meeting our criteria to be declared a catastrophe) are accrued on an occurrence basis within the policy period. Therefore, in any reporting period, loss experience from catastrophic events and weather-related losses may contribute to negative or positive underwriting performance relative to the expectations we incorporated into the products' pricing. Accordingly, property products are more capital intensive than other personal lines products. Premiums written , an operating measure, is the amount of premiums charged for policies issued during a fiscal period. Premiums earned is a GAAP measure. Premiums are considered earned and are included in the financial results on a pro-rata basis over the policy period. The portion of premiums written applicable to the unexpired terms of the policies is recorded as unearned premiums on our Consolidated Statements of Financial Position. Since the Allstate brand policy periods are typically 6 months for auto and 12 months for homeowners, Encompass standard auto and homeowners policy periods are typically 12 months and non-standard auto policy periods are typically 6 months, rate changes will generally be recognized in premiums earned over a period of 6 to 24 months. During this period, premiums written at a higher rate will cause an increase in the balance of unearned premiums on our Consolidated Statements of Financial Position. 54 The following table shows the unearned premium balance at December 31 and the timeframe in which we expect to recognize these premiums as earned. % earned after (in millions) 2007 2006 90 days 180 days 270 days 360 days Allstate brand: Standard auto $ 4,092 $ 3,971 74.0 % 98.6 % 99.7 % 100.0 % Non-standard auto 302 349 72.2 % 97.4 % 99.4 % 100.0 % Homeowners 3,322 3,332 43.7 % 75.8 % 94.3 % 100.0 % Other personal lines 1,413 1,441 39.1 % 67.8 % 85.5 % 92.0 % Total Allstate brand 9,129 9,093 57.5 % 85.5 % 95.5 % 98.8 % Encompass brand: Standard auto 572 573 43.8 % 75.5 % 94.1 % 100.0 % Non-standard auto 15 23 75.7 % 100.0 % 100.0 % 100.0 % Homeowners 303 316 44.2 % 76.1 % 94.4 % 100.0 % Other personal lines 66 73 44.4 % 76.2 % 94.3 % 100.0 % Total Encompass brand 956 985 44.4 % 76.1 % 94.3 % 100.0 % Total Allstate Protection unearned premiums $ 10,085 $ 10,078 56.3 % 84.6 % 95.4 % 98.9 % A reconciliation of premiums written to premiums earned for the years ended December 31 is presented in the following table. (in millions) 2007 2006 2005 Premiums written: Allstate Protection $ 27,183 $ 27,525 $ 27,393 Discontinued Lines and Coverages 1 (2 ) Property-Liability premiums written 27,183 27,526 27,391 Decrease (increase) in unearned premiums (1) 17 (354 ) (349 ) Other (1) 33 197 (3 ) Property-Liability premiums earned $ 27,233 $ 27,369 $ 27,039 Premiums earned: Allstate Protection $ 27,232 $ 27,366 $ 27,038 Discontinued Lines and Coverages 1 3 1 Property-Liability $ 27,233 $ 27,369 $ 27,039 (1) Year ended December 31, 2006 includes the transfer at January 1, 2006 of $152 million in unearned premiums to Property-Liability related to the loan protection business previously managed by Allstate Financial. Prior periods have not been reclassified. 55 Premiums written by brand are shown in the following table. Allstate brand Encompass brand Total Allstate Protection (in millions) 2007 2006 2005 2007 2006 2005 2007 2006 2005 Standard auto (1) $ 16,035 $ 15,704 $ 15,173 $ 1,125 $ 1,138 $ 1,174 $ 17,160 $ 16,842 $ 16,347 Non-standard auto (1) 1,179 1,386 1,587 68 94 116 1,247 1,480 1,703 Homeowners 5,711 5,926 6,040 538 589 611 6,249 6,515 6,651 Other personal lines (2) 2,397 2,548 2,523 130 140 169 2,527 2,688 2,692 Total $ 25,322 $ 25,564 $ 25,323 $ 1,861 $ 1,961 $ 2,070 $ 27,183 $ 27,525 $ 27,393 (1) 2007 includes the impact from the fourth quarter 2007 discontinuation and reinstatement of mandatory personal injury protection in the state of Florida. (2) Other personal lines include commercial lines, condominium, renters, involuntary auto and other personal lines. Premiums earned by brand are shown in the following table. Allstate brand Encompass brand Total Allstate Protection (in millions) 2007 2006 2005 2007 2006 2005 2007 2006 2005 Standard auto $ 15,952 $ 15,591 $ 15,034 $ 1,127 $ 1,160 $ 1,186 $ 17,079 $ 16,751 $ 16,220 Non-standard auto 1,232 1,436 1,642 76 98 125 1,308 1,534 1,767 Homeowners 5,732 5,793 5,792 551 590 583 6,283 6,383 6,375 Other personal lines 2,426 2,546 2,514 136 152 162 2,562 2,698 2,676 Total $ 25,342 $ 25,366 $ 24,982 $ 1,890 $ 2,000 $ 2,056 $ 27,232 $ 27,366 $ 27,038 Premium operating measures and statistics that are used to analyze the business are calculated and described below. Measures and statistics presented for Allstate brand exclude Allstate Canada, loan protection and specialty auto. New issued applications: Item counts of automobiles or homeowners insurance applications for insurance policies that were issued during the period. Does not include automobiles that are added by existing customers. Renewal ratio: Renewal policies issued during the period, based on contract effective dates, divided by the total policies issued 6 months prior for auto (12 months prior for Encompass brand standard auto) or 12 months prior for homeowners. PIF: Policy counts are based on items rather than customers. A multi-car customer would generate multiple item (policy) counts, even if all cars were insured under one policy. Average premium gross written: Gross premiums written divided by issued item count. Gross premiums written do not include the impacts from mid-term premium adjustments, ceded reinsurance premiums, or premium refund accruals. Allstate brand average premiums represent the appropriate policy term for each line, which is 6 months for auto and 12 months for homeowners. Encompass brand average premiums represent the appropriate policy term for each line, which is 12 months for standard auto and homeowners and 6 months for non-standard auto. 56 Standard auto premiums written increased 1.9% to $17.16 billion in 2007 from $16.84 billion in 2006, following a 3.0% increase in 2006 from $16.35 billion in 2005. Allstate brand Encompass brand Standard Auto 2007 2006 2005 2007 2006 2005 PIF (thousands) 18,254 18,084 17,613 1,103 1,124 1,144 Average premium- gross written (1) $ 423 $ 420 $ 417 $ 969 $ 983 $ 984 Renewal ratio (%) (1) 89.5 90.0 90.5 75.0 76.4 75.0 (1) Policy term is six months for Allstate brand and twelve months for Encompass brand. Allstate brand standard auto premiums written increased 2.1% to $16.04 billion in 2007 from $15.70 billion in 2006, following a 3.5% increase in 2006 from $15.17 billion in 2005. The Allstate brand standard auto premiums written increase in 2007 compared to 2006 was due to increases in PIF and average premium. The 0.9% increase in Allstate brand standard auto PIF as of December 31, 2007 compared to December 31, 2006 was primarily the result of growth in policies available for renewal. Our Allstate brand standard auto growth strategy includes actions such as the continued rollout of YCA policy options, increased marketing, the continued refinement of Tiered Pricing, underwriting actions and agency growth, while recognizing that the impact of catastrophe management actions on cross-sell opportunities and competitive pressures in certain markets may lessen their success. Allstate brand standard auto new issued applications are shown in the table below. (in thousands) 2007 2006 2005 Allstate brand standard auto Hurricane exposure states (1) 1,018 1,037 999 California 315 319 316 All other states 621 627 612 Total new issued applications 1,954 1,983 1,927 (1) Hurricane exposure states are Alabama, Connecticut, Delaware, Florida, Georgia, Louisiana, Maine, Maryland, Mississippi, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New York, North Carolina, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, South Carolina, Texas and Virginia and Washington, D.C. Allstate brand standard auto average premium increased 0.7% in 2007 compared to 2006. Standard auto average premium is impacted by rate changes, geographic and product shifts in the mix of business and changes in customer preferences. The Allstate brand standard auto renewal ratio declined 0.5 points in 2007 compared to 2006 due to competitive conditions and the impact of our property catastrophe management actions on cross-sell opportunities. Allstate brand standard auto premiums written increased in 2006 compared to 2005 due to increases in PIF and average premium. The 2.7% increase in Allstate brand standard auto PIF as of December 31, 2006 compared to December 31, 2005 was primarily the result of growth in policies available for renewal and new issued applications. Allstate brand standard auto average premium increased 0.7% in 2006 compared to 2005 primarily due to higher average new premiums reflecting a shift by policyholders to newer and more expensive autos, partly offset by net rate decreases. The Allstate brand standard auto renewal ratio declined 0.5 points in 2006 compared to 2005 due to competitive pressures in certain states. Encompass brand standard auto premiums written decreased 1.1% to $1.13 billion in 2007 from $1.14 billion in 2006, following a 3.1% decrease in 2006 from $1.17 billion in 2005. The Encompass brand standard auto premiums written decrease in 2007 compared to 2006 was due to declines in PIF and average premium. The 1.9% decline in Encompass brand standard auto PIF as of December 31, 2007 compared to December 31, 2006 was due to a decline in the policies available to renew more than 57 offsetting new business production. The 12-month average premium decreased 1.4% in 2007 compared to 2006 due to a change in the mix of business to policies with basic coverages and fewer features resulting in lower average premium. We expect the rate of decline in Encompass brand standard auto PIF to continue to moderate as we pursue growth opportunities in this channel. Our Encompass brand growth strategy includes the continued rollout of Encompass Edge, which provides more segmented pricing of auto and homeowners coverage. Encompass brand standard auto premiums written decreased in 2006 compared to 2005 due to declines in PIF. The 1.8% decline in Encompass brand standard auto PIF as of December 31, 2006 compared to December 31, 2005 was due to a decline in the policies available to renew and from the negative impact of our catastrophe management actions in certain markets more than offsetting new business. The 12-month average premium decreased 0.1% in 2006 compared to 2005. Rate increases that are indicated based on loss trend analysis to achieve a targeted return will continue to be pursued in all locations. The following table shows the net rate changes that were approved for standard auto during 2007 and 2006. These rate changes do not reflect initial rates filed for insurance subsidiaries initially writing new business in a state. # of States Countrywide(%) (1) State Specific(%) (2) 2007 (4) 2006 (3) 2007 (4) 2006 (3) 2007 (4) 2006 (3) Allstate brand 25 26 1.3 (0.2 ) 4.4 (0.6 ) Encompass brand 12 16 0.4 (0.4 ) 1.2 (1.7 ) (1) Represents the impact in the states where rate changes were approved during 2007 and 2006, respectively, as a percentage of total countrywide prior year-end premiums written. (2) Represents the impact in the states where rate changes were approved during 2007 and 2006, respectively, as a percentage of total prior year-end premiums written in those states. (3) The prior period has been restated to conform to the current period presentation. (4) Excludes the impact of rate changes in the state of Florida relating to the discontinuation and reinstatement of mandatory personal injury protection. Non-standard auto premiums written decreased 15.7% to $1.25 billion in 2007 from $1.48 billion in 2006, following a 13.1% decrease in 2006 from $1.70 billion in 2005. Allstate brand Encompass brand Non-Standard Auto 2007 2006 2005 2007 2006 2005 PIF (thousands) 829 943 1,110 56 85 99 Average premium- gross written (six months) $ 617 $ 617 $ 629 $ 526 $ 535 $ 561 Renewal ratio (%) 76.1 75.9 77.6 65.0 67.3 65.3 Allstate brand non-standard auto premiums written decreased 14.9% to $1.18 billion in 2007 from $1.39 billion in 2006, following a 12.7% decrease in 2006 from $1.59 billion in 2005. The Allstate brand non-standard auto premiums written decrease in 2007 compared to 2006 was due to declines in PIF. PIF decreased 12.1% as of December 31, 2007 compared to December 31, 2006 due to new business production insufficient to offset the decline in polices available to renew. Allstate brand non-standard auto new issued applications increased 9.6% in 2007 compared to 2006 primarily due to the introduction of our Allstate Blue product, which has been launched in 12 states as of December 31, 2007. The Allstate brand non-standard auto average premium in 2007 was comparable to 2006. 58 Allstate brand non-standard auto premiums written decreased in 2006 compared to 2005 due to declines in PIF and average premium. PIF decreased 15.0% as of December 31, 2006 compared to December 31, 2005 due to new business production insufficient to offset the inherently low renewal ratio in this business. Allstate brand non-standard auto new issued applications decreased 11.4% in 2006 compared to 2005. The decline of 1.9% in average premium in 2006 compared to 2005 is due to a shift in the geographic mix of business and net rate decreases. Encompass brand non-standard auto premiums written decreased 27.7% to $68 million in 2007 from $94 million in 2006, following a 19.0% decrease in 2006 from $116 million in 2005. The Encompass brand non-standard auto premiums written decrease in 2007 compared to 2006 was primarily due to declines in PIF, because new business was insufficient to offset the decline in polices available to renew, and lower average premium due to geographic shifts in the mix of business, partially offset by recent non-standard auto rate changes in specific markets. Encompass brand non-standard auto premiums written decreased in 2006 compared to 2005, primarily due to declines in PIF and average premium. Rate increases that are indicated based on loss trend analysis to achieve a targeted return will continue to be pursued in all locations. The following table shows the net rate changes that were approved for non-standard auto during 2007 and 2006. These rate changes do not reflect initial rates filed for insurance subsidiaries initially writing new business in a state. # of States Countrywide(%) (1) State Specific(%) (2) 2007 (4) 2006 (3) 2007 (4) 2006 (3) 2007 (4) 2006 (3) Allstate brand 9 3 1.0 (1.6 ) 4.7 (4.3 ) Encompass brand 7 3 8.1 14.6 (0.2 ) (1) Represents the impact in the states where rate changes were approved during 2007 and 2006, respectively, as a percentage of total countrywide prior year-end premiums written. (2) Represents the impact in the states where rate changes were approved during 2007 and 2006, respectively, as a percentage of total prior year-end premiums written in those states. (3) The prior period has been restated to conform to the current period presentation. (4) Excludes the impact of rate changes in the state of Florida relating to the discontinuation and reinstatement of mandatory personal injury protection. Homeowners premiums written decreased 4.1% to $6.25 billion in 2007 from $6.52 billion in 2006, following a 2.0% decrease in 2006 from $6.65 billion in 2005. Excluding the cost of catastrophe reinsurance, premiums written declined 0.1% in 2007 compared to 2006. For a more detailed discussion on reinsurance, see the Property-Liability Claims and Claims Expense Reserves section of the MD&A and Note 9 of the consolidated financial statements. Allstate brand Encompass brand Homeowners 2007 2006 2005 2007 2006 2005 PIF (thousands) 7,570 7,836 7,828 484 527 545 Average premium- gross written (12 months) $ 850 $ 832 $ 799 $ 1,181 $ 1,136 $ 1,086 Renewal ratio (%) 86.5 87.3 88.2 80.0 84.0 88.1 Allstate brand homeowners premiums written decreased 3.6% to $5.71 billion in 2007 from $5.93 billion in 2006, following a 1.9% decrease in 2006 from $6.04 billion in 2005. The Allstate brand homeowners premiums written decrease in 2007 compared to 2006 was due to increases in ceded 59 reinsurance premiums and a 3.4% decline in PIF, due to lower new issued applications and renewal ratio, partially offset by increases in average premium, reflecting rate changes, including our net cost of reinsurance. Actions taken to manage our catastrophe exposure in areas with known exposure to hurricanes, earthquakes, wildfires, fires following earthquakes and other catastrophes have had an impact on our new business writings for homeowners insurance, as demonstrated by the decline in Allstate brand homeowners new issued applications in the following table. We expect this trend to continue in 2008 as we continue to address our catastrophe exposure. (in thousands) 2007 2006 2005 Allstate brand homeowners Hurricane exposure states (1) 377 472 574 California 25 56 111 All other states 401 459 497 Total new issued applications 803 987 1,182 (1) Hurricane exposure states are Alabama, Connecticut, Delaware, Florida, Georgia, Louisiana, Maine, Maryland, Mississippi, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New York, North Carolina, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, South Carolina, Texas and Virginia and Washington, D.C. Allstate brand homeowners premiums written declined in 2006 compared to 2005 due to increases in ceded reinsurance premiums, partially offset by increases in PIF and average premium. The 0.1% increase in Allstate brand homeowners PIF as of December 31, 2006 compared to December 31, 2005 was the result of growth in policies available for renewal. PIF and the renewal ratio will continue to be negatively impacted by our catastrophe management actions such as our decision to discontinue offering coverage by Allstate Floridian Insurance Company and its subsidiaries ("Allstate Floridian") on approximately 120,000 property policies as part of a renewal rights and reinsurance arrangement with Royal Palm Insurance Company ("Royal Palm") entered into in 2006 ("Royal Palm 1"), and separately, an additional 106,000 property policies under a renewal rights agreement with Royal Palm entered into in 2007 ("Royal Palm 2"). Allstate Floridian no longer offers coverage on the policies involved in Royal Palm 1 and Royal Palm 2 when they expire, at which time Royal Palm may offer coverage to these policyholders. The policies involved in Royal Palm 1 and Royal Palm 2 expired at a rate of 4% in the fourth quarter of 2006, and 81% during 2007, and are expected to expire at a rate of 14% in the first quarter of 2008 and 1% in the second quarter of 2008. The Allstate brand homeowners renewal ratio declined 0.8 points in 2007 compared to 2006, primarily due to our catastrophe management actions. The Allstate brand homeowners average premium increased 2.2% in 2007 compared to 2006, primarily due to higher average renewal premiums related to increases in insured value and approved rate changes, including our net cost of reinsurance, partially offset by a shift in geographic mix as our catastrophe management actions reduce premiums written in areas with generally higher average premiums. The Allstate brand homeowners average premium increased 4.1% in 2006 compared to 2005, primarily due to higher average renewal premiums related to increases in insured value and rate changes approved, including our net cost of reinsurance. The Allstate brand homeowners renewal ratio declined 0.9 points in 2006 compared to 2005, primarily due to our catastrophe management actions. Encompass brand homeowners premiums written decreased 8.7% to $538 million in 2007 from $589 million in 2006, following a 3.6% decrease in 2006 from $611 million in 2005. The Encompass brand homeowners premiums written decrease in 2007 compared to 2006 was due to increases in ceded 60 reinsurance premiums and a decline in PIF, partially offset by increases in average premium. The 8.2% decline in Encompass brand homeowners PIF as of December 31, 2007 compared to December 31, 2006 was partially due to a decline in the renewal ratio in 2007 compared to 2006, primarily due to our catastrophe management actions in certain markets. The 12 month average premium increased 4.0% in 2007 compared to 2006 due to rate actions taken in the current year, including those taken for our net cost of reinsurance, and increases in insured value. Encompass brand homeowners premiums written decreased in 2006 compared to 2005 due to increases in ceded reinsurance and declines in PIF, partially offset by increases in average premium. The 3.3% decline in Encompass brand homeowners PIF as of December 31, 2006 compared to December 31, 2005 was due to lower retention. The decline in the renewal ratio in 2006 compared to 2005 was primarily due to catastrophe management actions. The 12 month average premium increased 4.6% in 2006 compared to 2005 due to rate actions taken during the current and prior year and increases in insured value. We continue to pursue rate changes for homeowners in all locations when indicated. The following table shows the net rate changes that were approved for homeowners during 2007 and 2006, including rate changes approved based on our net cost of reinsurance. For a discussion relating to reinsurance costs, see the Property-Liability Claims and Claims Expense Reserves section of the MD&A and Note 13 of the consolidated financial statements. # of States Countrywide(%) (1) State Specific(%) (2) 2007 2006 (3) 2007 2006 (3) 2005 2006 (3) Allstate brand (4) 33 26 3.6 2.4 5.8 5.5 Encompass brand (4) 26 22 2.3 2.3 4.3 6.7 (1) Represents the impact in the states where rate changes were approved during 2007 and 2006, respectively, as a percentage of total countrywide prior year-end premiums written. (2) Represents the impact in the states where rate changes were approved during 2007 and 2006, respectively, as a percentage of total prior year-end premiums written in those states. (3) The prior period has been restated to conform to the current period presentation. (4) Includes Washington D.C. 61 Underwriting results are shown in the following table. (in millions) 2007 2006 2005 Premiums written $ 27,183 $ 27,525 $ 27,393 Premiums earned $ 27,232 $ 27,366 $ 27,038 Claims and claims expense (17,620 ) (15,885 ) (21,008 ) Amortization of DAC (4,121 ) (4,131 ) (4,092 ) Other costs and expenses (2,626 ) (2,557 ) (2,360 ) Restructuring and related charges (27 ) (157 ) (39 ) Underwriting income (loss) $ 2,838 $ 4,636 $ (461 ) Catastrophe losses $ (1,409 ) $ (810 ) $ (5,674 ) Underwriting income (loss) by line of business Standard auto $ 1,665 $ 2,320 $ 1,620 Non-standard auto 264 309 354 Homeowners 571 1,472 (1,983 ) Other personal lines 338 535 (452 ) Underwriting income (loss) $ 2,838 $ 4,636 $ (461 ) Underwriting income (loss) by brand Allstate brand $ 2,634 $ 4,451 $ (437 ) Encompass brand 204 185 (24 ) Underwriting income (loss) $ 2,838 $ 4,636 $ (461 ) Allstate Protection generated underwriting income of $2.84 billion during 2007 compared to $4.64 billion in 2006. The decrease was primarily due to lower favorable prior year reserve reestimates, higher catastrophe losses, increases in auto and homeowners claim frequency excluding catastrophes, higher current year claim severity and increases in the cost of catastrophe reinsurance. Current year claim severity expectations continue to be consistent with relevant indices. For further discussion and quantification of the impact of reserve estimates and assumptions, see the Application of Critical Accounting Estimates and Property-Liability Claims and Claims Expense Reserves sections of the MD&A. Allstate Protection generated underwriting income of $4.64 billion during 2006 compared to an underwriting loss of $461 million in 2005. The improvement was due to lower catastrophe losses, increased premiums earned, declines in auto and homeowners claim frequency excluding catastrophes and higher favorable reserve reestimates related to prior years including $223 million of favorable development relating to catastrophe losses, partially offset by the higher cost of the catastrophe reinsurance program and increased current year severity. 62 Loss ratios are a measure of profitability. Loss ratios by product, and expense and combined ratios by brand, are shown in the following table. These ratios are defined on page 51. Effect of Catastrophe Losses on the Loss Ratio 2007 2006 2005 2007 2006 2005 Allstate brand loss ratio: Standard auto 65.8 61.5 65.7 0.6 0.6 2.9 Non-standard auto 54.9 56.1 57.8 0.2 2.6 Homeowners 66.5 50.4 110.7 19.5 10.9 70.5 Other personal lines 60.4 52.1 91.7 5.0 (0.9 ) 35.3 Total Allstate brand loss ratio 64.9 57.8 78.2 5.3 2.8 21.8 Allstate brand expense ratio 24.7 24.7 23.5 Allstate brand combined ratio 89.6 82.5 101.7 Encompass brand loss ratio: Standard auto 64.2 60.0 66.9 0.4 (0.3 ) 1.7 Non-standard auto 75.0 76.5 67.2 1.0 0.8 Homeowners 54.6 58.6 77.8 12.0 17.3 30.6 Other personal lines 61.8 81.6 82.1 2.2 7.9 17.9 Total Encompass brand loss ratio 61.6 62.1 71.3 3.9 5.6 11.2 Encompass brand expense ratio 27.6 28.7 29.9 Encompass brand combined ratio 89.2 90.8 101.2 Total Allstate Protection loss ratio 64.7 58.1 77.7 5.2 3.0 21.0 Allstate Protection expense ratio 24.9 25.0 24.0 Allstate Protection combined ratio 89.6 83.1 101.7 Standard auto loss ratio increased 4.3 points for the Allstate brand in 2007 compared to 2006 due to lower favorable reserve reestimates related to prior years, and higher claim frequency and claim severity excluding catastrophes, partially offset by higher premiums earned. Standard auto loss ratio for the Encompass brand increased 4.2 points in 2007 compared to 2006 due to lower favorable reserve reestimates related to prior years. Standard auto loss ratio decreased 4.2 points for the Allstate brand and 6.9 points for the Encompass brand in 2006 compared to 2005 due to lower catastrophes, higher premiums earned in the Allstate brand, lower claim frequency excluding catastrophes and favorable reserve reestimates related to prior years, partially offset by higher current year claim severity. Non-standard auto loss ratio decreased 1.2 points for the Allstate brand in 2007 compared to 2006 due to favorable reserve reestimates related to prior years. Non-standard auto loss ratio for the Encompass brand decreased 1.5 points in 2007 compared to 2006 primarily driven by lower claim frequency. Non-standard auto loss ratio decreased 1.7 points for the Allstate brand in 2006 compared to 2005 due to lower catastrophes, lower claim frequency and favorable reserve reestimates related to prior years, partially offset by higher current year claim severity and lower premiums earned. Non-standard auto loss ratio for the Encompass brand increased 9.3 points in 2006 compared to 2005 due to higher current year claim severity, lower premiums earned, and higher catastrophes, partially offset by lower claim frequency excluding catastrophes. 63 Homeowners loss ratio for the Allstate brand increased 16.1 points in 2007 compared to 2006 due to higher catastrophe losses, the absence of favorable non-catastrophe reserve reestimates related to prior years, higher claim severity, higher ceded earned premium for catastrophe reinsurance, and higher claim frequency excluding catastrophes. Homeowners loss ratio for the Encompass brand decreased 4.0 points in 2007 compared to 2006 primarily due to lower catastrophe losses. Homeowners loss ratio decreased 60.3 points for the Allstate brand and 19.2 points for the Encompass brand in 2006 compared to 2005 due to lower catastrophes, higher premiums earned, lower claim frequency excluding catastrophes, and higher favorable Allstate brand reserve reestimates related to prior years, partially offset by higher current year claim severity and higher ceded earned premium for catastrophe reinsurance. Expense ratio for Allstate Protection decreased 0.1 points in 2007 compared to 2006 primarily due to lower restructuring charges offset by increased spending on advertising and investments in marketing and technology for product and service innovations. In 2006, the ratio increased 1.0 points when compared to 2005 primarily due to increased restructuring and related charges due to a Voluntary Termination Offer ("VTO"), increased employee benefits and incentives, increased marketing and the impact of higher ceded premiums for catastrophe reinsurance. For a more detailed discussion of the 2006 restructuring charges, see Note 12 of the consolidated financial statements. The impact of specific costs and expenses on the expense ratio is included in the following table. Allstate brand Encompass brand Allstate Protection 2007 2006 2005 2007 2006 2005 2007 2006 2005 Amortization of DAC 14.8 14.7 14.7 20.1 19.7 20.5 15.1 15.1 15.1 Other costs and expenses 9.8 9.4 8.7 7.5 8.7 9.1 9.7 9.3 8.7 Restructuring and related charges 0.1 0.6 0.1 0.3 0.3 0.1 0.6 0.2 Total expense ratio 24.7 24.7 23.5 27.6 28.7 29.9 24.9 25.0 24.0 The expense ratio for the standard auto and homeowners businesses generally approximates the total Allstate Protection expense ratio of 24.9 in 2007, 25.0 in 2006 and 24.0 in 2005. The expense ratio for the non-standard auto business generally is lower than the total Allstate Protection expense ratio due to lower agent commission rates and higher average premiums for non-standard auto as compared to standard auto. The Encompass brand DAC amortization is higher on average than Allstate brand DAC amortization due to higher commission rates. DAC We establish a DAC asset for costs that vary with and are primarily related to acquiring business, principally agents' remuneration, premium taxes, certain underwriting costs and direct mail solicitation expenses. For the Allstate Protection business, DAC is amortized to income over the period in which premiums are earned. The balance of DAC for each product type at December 31, is included in the following table. Allstate brand Encompass brand Allstate Protection (in millions) 2007 2006 2007 2006 2007 2006 Standard auto $ 579 $ 575 $ 110 $ 108 $ 689 $ 683 Non-standard auto 42 47 2 3 44 50 Homeowners 454 470 60 62 514 532 Other personal lines 218 207 12 13 230 220 Total DAC $ 1,293 $ 1,299 $ 184 $ 186 $ 1,477 $ 1,485 64 Catastrophe Management Historical Catastrophe Experience Since the beginning of 1992, the average annual impact of catastrophes on our Property-Liability loss ratio was 7.1 points. However, this average does not reflect the impact of some of the more significant actions we have taken to limit our catastrophe exposure. Consequently, we think it is useful to consider the impact of catastrophes after excluding losses that are now partially or substantially covered by the California Earthquake Authority ("CEA"), Florida Hurricane Catastrophe Fund ("FHCF") or placed with a third party, such as hurricane coverage in Hawaii. The average annual impact of all catastrophes, excluding losses from Hurricanes Andrew and Iniki and losses from California earthquakes, on our Property-Liability loss ratio was 5.8 points since the beginning of 1992. Comparatively, the average annual impact of catastrophes on the homeowners loss ratio for the years 1992 through 2007 is shown in the following table. Average annual impact of catastrophes on the homeowners loss ratio Average annual impact of catastrophes on the homeowners loss ratio excluding losses from Hurricanes Andrew and Iniki, and losses from California earthquakes Florida 102.2 48.7 Other hurricane exposure states 25.3 25.1 Total hurricane exposure states 32.7 27.4 All other 21.8 15.7 Total 27.7 22.0 Over time we have limited our aggregate insurance exposure to catastrophe losses in certain regions of the country that are subject to high levels of natural catastrophes. Limitations include our participation in various state facilities, such as the CEA, which provides insurance for California earthquake losses; the FHCF, which provides reimbursements on certain qualifying Florida hurricane losses; and other state facilities, such as wind pools. However, the impact of these actions may be diminished by the growth in insured values, the effect of state insurance laws and regulations and by the effect of competitive considerations. In addition, in various states we are required to participate in assigned risk plans, reinsurance facilities and joint underwriting associations that provide insurance coverage to individuals or entities that otherwise are unable to purchase such coverage from private insurers. Because of our participation in these and other state facilities such as wind pools, we may be exposed to losses that surpass the capitalization of these facilities and/or to assessments from these facilities. Actions we have taken or are considering to maintain an acceptable catastrophe exposure level in our property business include: purchasing reinsurance or engaging in other forms of risk transfer arrangements; limitations on new business writings; not offering continuing coverage to some existing policyholders; withdrawing from certain geographic markets; changes in rates, deductibles and coverage; changes to underwriting requirements, including limitations in coastal and adjacent counties; discontinuing coverage for certain types of residences; and/or 65 removing wind coverage from certain policies and allowing our agencies to help customers apply for wind coverage through state facilities such as wind pools. Hurricanes We consider the greatest areas of potential catastrophe losses due to hurricanes to generally be major metropolitan centers in counties along the eastern and gulf coasts of the United States. Generally, the average premium on a property policy near these coasts is greater than other areas. However, average premiums are not considered commensurate with the inherent risk of loss. We have addressed our risk of hurricane loss by, among other actions, purchasing reinsurance for specific states and on a countrywide basis for our personal lines property insurance in areas most exposed to hurricanes (for further information on our reinsurance program see the Property-Liability Claims and Claims Expense Reserves section of the MD&A); limiting personal homeowners new business writings in coastal areas in southern and eastern states; not offering continuing coverage on certain policies in coastal counties in certain states; and entering into Royal Palm 1 and Royal Palm 2. Our actions are expected to continue during 2008 in northeastern and certain other hurricane prone states. Earthquakes During 2006, we began taking actions countrywide to significantly reduce our exposure to the risk of earthquake losses. These actions included purchasing reinsurance on a countrywide basis and in the state of Kentucky; no longer offering new optional earthquake coverage in most states; removing optional earthquake coverage upon renewal in most states; and entering into arrangements in many states to make earthquake coverage available through other insurers for new and renewal business. Allstate's premiums written attributable to optional earthquake coverage totaled approximately $3 million in 2007 compared to $33 million in 2006. Additional reductions in policies in force are anticipated in 2008. Upon completion of these actions, we expect to retain only approximately 40,000 policies in force due to regulatory and other reasons. We also will continue to have exposure to earthquake risk on certain policies and coverages that do not specifically exclude coverage for earthquake losses, including our auto policies, and to fires following earthquakes. Allstate policyholders in the state of California are offered coverage through the CEA, a privately-financed, publicly-managed state agency created to provide insurance coverage for earthquake damage. Allstate is subject to assessments from the CEA under certain circumstances as explained in Note 13 of the consolidated financial statements. Fires Following Earthquakes Actions taken related to our risk of loss from fires following earthquakes include changing homeowners underwriting requirements in California and purchasing additional reinsurance on a countrywide basis excluding Florida and on a statewide basis in California and Kentucky. Wildfires Actions we are taking to reduce our risk of loss from wildfires include changing homeowners underwriting requirements in certain states and including California wildfire losses in our 2008 aggregate excess reinsurance agreement. Catastrophe losses related to the Southern California wildfires that occurred during October 2007 totaled $318 million. 66 Allstate Protection Outlook Allstate Protection premiums written in 2008 are anticipated to be slightly higher than 2007 levels. We expect continued growth of Allstate brand standard auto premiums written due to increased PIF resulting from improved agency effectiveness and further optimization in our advertising and higher average premium, partially offset by the impact of competition and the estimated effects of catastrophe management actions on homeowners and other property premiums. We will continue the introduction of our innovative products and services. Allstate Blue is anticipated to contribute positively to the non-standard written premium trends and our presence in the non-standard market. Encompass Edge is expected to contribute to the Encompass growth trends. Loss costs are expected to increase faster than average premiums. We expect that volatility in the level of catastrophes we experience will contribute to variation in our underwriting results; however, this volatility will be somewhat mitigated due to our catastrophe management actions, including purchases of reinsurance. We plan to continue to study the efficiencies of our operations and cost structure for additional areas where costs may be reduced. Any reductions in costs we achieve, however, may be offset by the costs of other new initiatives, such as expenditures for marketing and technology. We expect advertising expense in 2008 to be comparable to 2007. DISCONTINUED LINES AND COVERAGES SEGMENT Overview The Discontinued Lines and Coverages segment includes results from insurance coverage that we no longer write and results for certain commercial and other businesses in run-off. Our exposure to asbestos, environmental and other discontinued lines claims is reported in this segment. We have assigned management of this segment to a designated group of professionals with expertise in claims handling, policy coverage interpretation, exposure identification and reinsurance collection. As part of its responsibilities, this group is also regularly engaged in policy buybacks, settlements and reinsurance assumed and ceded commutations. Summarized underwriting results for the years ended December 31, are presented in the following table. (in millions) 2007 2006 2005 Premiums written $ $ 1 $ (2 ) Premiums earned $ 1 $ 3 $ 1 Claims and claims expense (47 ) (132 ) (167 ) Operating costs and expenses (8 ) (10 ) (9 ) Underwriting loss $ (54 ) $ (139 ) $ (175 ) Underwriting loss of $54 million in 2007 primarily related to a $63 million reestimate of environmental reserves and a $6 million reestimate of asbestos reserves as a result of the annual third quarter 2007 ground up reserve review, partially offset by a $46 million reduction in the reinsurance recoverable valuation allowance related to Equitas Limited's improved financial position as a result of its reinsurance coverage with National Indemnity Company. The cost of administering claims settlements totaled $14 million, $19 million and $18 million for the years ended December 31, 2007, 2006 and 2005, respectively. Underwriting loss of $139 million in 2006 primarily related to an $86 million reestimate of asbestos reserves, a $10 million reestimate of environmental reserves and a $26 million increase in the allowance for future uncollectible reinsurance recoverables. 67 During 2005, the underwriting loss was primarily due to reestimates of asbestos reserves totaling $139 million. See the Property-Liability Claims and Claims Expense Reserves section of the MD&A for a more detailed discussion. Discontinued Lines and Coverages Outlook We may continue to experience asbestos losses in the future. These losses could be due to the potential adverse impact of new information relating to new and additional claims or the impact of resolving unsettled claims based on unanticipated events such as litigation or legislative, judicial and regulatory actions. Because of our annual "ground up" review, we believe that our reserves are appropriately established based on available information, technology, laws and regulations. We continue to be encouraged that the pace of industry asbestos claim activity has slowed, perhaps reflecting various state legislative and judicial actions with respect to medical criteria and increased legal scrutiny of the legitimacy of claims. PROPERTY-LIABILITY INVESTMENT RESULTS Net investment income increased 6.4% in 2007 when compared to 2006, after increasing 3.5% in 2006 when compared to 2005. The 2007 increase was principally due to increased partnership income and increased portfolio yields. The 2006 increase was due to higher income from partnerships and higher fixed income portfolio balances. The following table presents the average pretax investment yields for the year ended December 31. 2007 (1)(2) 2006 (1)(2) 2005 (1)(2) Fixed income securities: tax-exempt 5.1 % 5.1 % 5.2 % Fixed income securities: tax-exempt equivalent (3) 7.4 7.4 7.6 Fixed income securities: taxable 5.5 5.3 5.0 Equity securities (3) 2.7 2.7 2.8 Mortgage loans 5.6 5.2 5.5 Limited partnership interests (3) 16.0 17.2 19.0 Total portfolio 5.4 5.2 5.0 (1) Pretax yield is calculated as investment income (including dividend income in the case of equity securities) divided by the average of the investment balances at the beginning and end of period and interim quarters. (2) Amortized cost basis is used to calculate the average investment balance for fixed income securities and mortgage loans. Cost is used for equity securities. Cost or the equity method of accounting basis is used for limited partnership interests. (3) To conform to current period presentation, prior periods have been reclassified 68 Net realized capital gains and losses, after-tax were $915 million in 2007 compared to $227 million in 2006 and $339 million in 2005. The following table presents the factors driving the net realized capital gains and losses results. (in millions) 2007 2006 2005 Investment write-downs $ (44 ) $ (26 ) $ (30 ) Dispositions 1,342 451 516 Valuation of derivative instruments (15 ) 43 10 Settlements of derivative instruments 133 (120 ) 20 Realized capital gains and losses, pretax 1,416 348 516 Income tax expense (501 ) (121 ) (177 ) Realized capital gains and losses, after-tax $ 915 $ 227 $ 339 For a further discussion of net realized capital gains and losses, see the Investments section of the MD&A. Property-Liability Investment Outlook Increased levels of dividends paid by Allstate Insurance Company ("AIC") to The Allstate Corporation in 2007, combined with a similar level of dividends anticipated in 2008, may lead to a decline in portfolio balances and investment income. PROPERTY-LIABILITY CLAIMS AND CLAIMS EXPENSE RESERVES Property-Liability underwriting results are significantly influenced by estimates of property-liability claims and claims expense reserves. For a description of our reserve process, see Note 7 of the consolidated financial statements and for a further description of our reserving policies and the potential variability in our reserve estimates, see the Application of Critical Accounting Estimates section of the MD&A. These reserves are an estimate of amounts necessary to settle all outstanding claims, including IBNR claims, as of the reporting date. The facts and circumstances leading to our quarterly reestimates of reserves relate to revisions to the development factors used to predict how losses are likely to develop from the end of a reporting period until all claims have been paid. Reestimates occur because actual losses are likely different than that predicted by the estimated development factors used in prior reserve estimates. At December 31, 2007, the impact of a reserve reestimation corresponding to a one percent increase or decrease in net reserves would be a decrease or increase of approximately $108 million in net income. The table below shows total net reserves as of December 31, 2007, 2006 and 2005 for Allstate brand, Encompass brand and Discontinued Lines and Coverages lines of business. (in millions) 2007 2006 2005 Allstate brand $ 13,456 $ 13,220 $ 15,423 Encompass brand 1,129 1,236 1,331 Total Allstate Protection $ 14,585 $ 14,456 $ 16,754 Discontinued Lines and Coverages 2,075 2,154 2,177 Total Property-Liability $ 16,660 $ 16,610 $ 18,931 69 The table below shows reserves, net of reinsurance, representing the estimated cost of outstanding claims as they were recorded at the beginning of years 2007, 2006 and 2005, and the effect of reestimates in each year. 2007 2006 2005 (in millions) Jan 1 Reserves Reserve Reestimate (1) Jan 1 Reserves Reserve Reestimate (1) Jan 1 Reserves Reserve Reestimate (1) Allstate brand $ 13,220 $ (167 ) $ 15,423 $ (1,085 ) $ 13,204 $ (613 ) Encompass brand 1,236 (52 ) 1,331 (18 ) 1,230 (22 ) Total Allstate Protection $ 14,456 $ (219 ) $ 16,754 $ (1,103 ) $ 14,434 $ (635 ) Discontinued Lines and Coverages 2,154 47 2,177 132 2,327 167 Total Property-Liability $ 16,610 $ (172 ) $ 18,931 $ (971 ) $ 16,761 $ (468 ) Reserve reestimates, after-tax $ (112 ) $ (631 ) $ (304 ) Net income 4,636 4,993 1,765 Reserve reestimates as a % of net income 2.4 % 12.6 % 17.2 % (1) Favorable reserve reestimates are shown in parentheses. Allstate Protection The table below shows Allstate Protection net reserves representing the estimated cost of outstanding claims as they were recorded at the beginning of years 2007, 2006 and 2005, and the effect of reestimates in each year. 2007 2006 2005 (in millions) Jan 1 Reserves Reserve Reestimate Jan 1 Reserves Reserve Reestimate Jan 1 Reserves Reserve Reestimate Auto $ 9,995 $ (311 ) $ 10,460 $ (737 ) $ 10,228 $ (661 ) Homeowners 2,226 115 3,675 (244 ) 1,917 7 Other personal lines 2,235 (23 ) 2,619 (122 ) 2,289 19 Total Allstate Protection $ 14,456 $ (219 ) $ 16,754 $ (1,103 ) $ 14,434 $ (635 ) Underwriting income (loss) 2,838 4,636 (461 ) Reserve reestimates as a % of underwriting income (loss) 7.7 % 23.8 % 137.7 % Auto reserve reestimates in 2007 were primarily the result of auto severity development that was better than expected. Auto reserve reestimates in 2006 and 2005 were primarily the result of auto injury severity development that was better than expected and late reported loss development that was better than expected, primarily due to lower frequency trends in recent years. Unfavorable homeowners reserve reestimates in 2007 were primarily due to catastrophe reserve reestimates attributable to increased claim expense reserves primarily for 2005 events and increased loss reserves including reopened claims arising from litigation filed in conjunction with a Louisiana deadline for filing suits related to Hurricane Katrina. 70 Homeowners reserve reestimates in 2006 were primarily due to favorable catastrophe reestimates attributable to lower loss estimates for additional living expenses and mold for Hurricane Katrina, late reported loss development that was better than expected and injury severity development that was better than expected. Unfavorable homeowner reserve reestimates in 2005 were primarily due to severity development that was greater than expected. In 2005, reestimates included $66 million related to 2004 hurricanes of which $31 million was the Florida Citizens assessment that was accruable in 2005. These were offset primarily by late reported loss development that was better than expected. Other personal lines reserve reestimates in 2007 and 2005 were primarily the result of claim severity development different than anticipated in previous estimates. Other personal lines reserve reestimates in 2006 were primarily due to favorable catastrophe reestimates and the result of claim severity development different than anticipated in previous estimates. Pending, new and closed claims for Allstate Protection, for the years ended December 31, are summarized in the following table. Number of Claims 2007 2006 2005 Auto Pending, beginning of year 522,544 569,334 551,211 New 5,450,438 5,256,600 5,615,440 Total closed (5,421,384 ) (5,303,390 ) (5,597,317 ) Pending, end of year 551,598 522,544 569,334 Homeowners Pending, beginning of year 72,988 197,326 84,910 New 805,461 835,900 1,329,164 Total closed (798,220 ) (960,238 ) (1,216,748 ) Pending, end of year 80,229 72,988 197,326 Other lines Pending, beginning of year 42,254 79,560 60,572 New 270,962 312,546 427,956 Total closed (273,265 ) (349,852 ) (408,968 ) Pending, end of year 39,951 42,254 79,560 Total Allstate Protection Pending, beginning of year 637,786 846,220 696,693 New 6,526,861 6,405,046 7,372,560 Total closed (6,492,869 ) (6,613,480 ) (7,223,033 ) Pending, end of year 671,778 637,786 846,220 We believe the net loss reserves for Allstate Protection exposures are appropriately established based on available facts, technology, laws and regulations. 71 The following tables reflect the accident years to which the reestimates shown above are applicable for Allstate brand, Encompass brand and Discontinued Lines and Coverages lines of business. Favorable reserve reestimates are shown in these tables in parentheses. 2007 Prior year reserve reestimates (in millions) 1997 & Prior 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 Total Allstate brand $ 103 $ $ 10 $ 16 $ (5 ) $ 15 $ 5 $ (10 ) $ (225 ) $ (76 ) $ (167 ) Encompass brand (1 ) (4 ) 3 6 (4 ) (39 ) (13 ) (52 ) Total Allstate Protection 103 9 12 (5 ) 18 11 (14 ) (264 ) (89 ) (219 ) Discontinued Lines and Coverages 47 47 Total Property-Liability $ 150 $ $ 9 $ 12 $ (5 ) $ 18 $ 11 $ (14 ) $ (264 ) $ (89 ) $ (172 ) 2006 Prior year reserve reestimates (in millions) 1996 & Prior 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 Total Allstate brand $ 18 $ (8 ) $ (3 ) $ (5 ) $ (2 ) $ (22 ) $ (2 ) $ (48 ) $ (282 ) $ (731 ) $ (1,085 ) Encompass brand (6 ) (10 ) (22 ) 20 (18 ) Total Allstate Protection 18 (8 ) (3 ) (5 ) (2 ) (28 ) (2 ) (58 ) (304 ) (711 ) (1,103 ) Discontinued Lines and Coverages 132 132 Total Property-Liability $ 150 $ (8 ) $ (3 ) $ (5 ) $ (2 ) $ (28 ) $ (2 ) $ (58 ) $ (304 ) $ (711 ) $ (971 ) 2005 Prior year reserve reestimates (in millions) 1995 & Prior 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 Total Allstate brand $ 124 $ (5 ) $ (1 ) $ (17 ) $ 1 $ (15 ) $ (10 ) $ (43 ) $ (256 ) $ (391 ) $ (613 ) Encompass brand (2 ) (1 ) (6 ) (9 ) (4 ) (22 ) Total Allstate Protection 124 (5 ) (1 ) (17 ) 1 (17 ) (11 ) (49 ) (265 ) (395 ) (635 ) Discontinued Lines and Coverages 167 167 Total Property-Liability $ 291 $ (5 ) $ (1 ) $ (17 ) $ 1 $ (17 ) $ (11 ) $ (49 ) $ (265 ) $ (395 ) $ (468 ) Allstate brand experienced $167 million, $1.09 billion and $613 million of favorable prior year reserve reestimates in 2007, 2006 and 2005, respectively. In 2007, this was primarily due to auto severity development that was better than expected, partially offset by unfavorable reserve reestimates of catastrophe losses. In 2006 and 2005, this was primarily due to auto injury severity development and late reported loss development that was better than expected and changes in reserve reestimates of catastrophe losses which were favorable in 2006 and unfavorable in 2005. These trends are primarily responsible for revisions to loss development factors, as previously described, used to predict how losses are likely to develop from the end of a reporting period until all claims have been paid. Because these trends cause actual losses to differ from those predicted by the 72 estimated development factors used in prior reserve estimates, reserves are revised as actuarial studies validate new trends based on the indications of updated development factor calculations. The impact of these reestimates on the Allstate brand underwriting income (loss) is shown in the table below. (in millions) 2007 2006 2005 Reserve reestimates $ 167 $ 1,085 $ 613 Allstate brand underwriting income (loss) 2,634 4,451 (437 ) Reserve reestimates as a % of underwriting income (loss) 6.3 % 24.4 % 140.3 % Encompass brand Reserve reestimates in 2007, 2006 and 2005 were related to lower than anticipated claim settlement costs. The impact of these reestimates on the Encompass brand underwriting income (loss) is shown in the table below. (in millions) 2007 2006 2005 Reserve reestimates $ 52 $ 18 $ 22 Encompass brand underwriting income (loss) 204 185 (24 ) Reserve reestimates as a % of underwriting income (loss) 25.5 % 9.7 % 91.7 % Discontinued Lines and Coverages We conduct an annual review in the third quarter of each year to evaluate and establish asbestos, environmental and other discontinued lines reserves. Reserves are recorded in the reporting period in which they are determined. Using established industry and actuarial best practices and assuming no change in the regulatory or economic environment, this detailed and comprehensive "ground up" methodology determines reserves based on assessments of the characteristics of exposure (e.g. claim activity, potential liability, jurisdiction, products versus non-products exposure) presented by policyholders. Reserve reestimates for the Discontinued Lines and Coverages, as shown in the table below, were increased primarily for environmental in 2007 and for asbestos in 2006 and 2005. 2007 2006 2005 (in millions) Jan 1 Reserves Reserve Reestimate Jan 1 Reserves Reserve Reestimate Jan 1 Reserves Reserve Reestimate Asbestos Claims $ 1,375 $ 17 $ 1,373 $ 86 $ 1,464 $ 139 Environmental Claims 194 63 205 10 232 2 Other Discontinued Lines 585 (33 ) 599 36 631 26 Total Discontinued Lines and Coverages $ 2,154 $ 47 $ 2,177 $ 132 $ 2,327 $ 167 Underwriting (loss) income (54 ) (139 ) (175 ) Reserve reestimates as a % of underwriting (loss) income (87.0 )% (95.0 )% (95.4 )% Reserve additions for asbestos in 2007, 2006 and 2005, totaling $17 million, $86 million and $139 million, respectively, were primarily for products-related coverage. They were essentially a result of a continuing level of increased claim activity being reported by excess and primary insurance policyholders with existing active claims, excess policyholders with new claims, and reestimates of liabilities for 73 increased assumed reinsurance cessions, as ceding companies (other insurance carriers) also experienced increased claim activity. Increased claim activity over prior estimates has also resulted in an increased estimate for future claims reported. These trends are consistent with the trends of other carriers in the industry, which we believe are related to increased publicity and awareness of coverage, ongoing litigation and bankruptcy actions. The 2007 asbestos reserve addition also includes the write-off of uncollectible reinsurance for a single foreign reinsurer. The reserve additions for environmental in 2007 were for increased claim activity related to site-specific remediations where the clean-up cost estimates and responsibility for the clean-up have been more fully determined. This increased claim activity over prior estimates has also resulted in an increased estimate for future claims reported. IBNR now represents 55% of total net environmental reserves, 3 points higher than at December 31, 2006. The table below summarizes reserves and claim activity for asbestos and environmental claims before (Gross) and after (Net) the effects of reinsurance for the past three years. 2007 2006 2005 (in millions, except ratios) Gross Net Gross Net Gross Net Asbestos claims Beginning reserves $ 2,198 $ 1,375 $ 2,205 $ 1,373 $ 2,427 $ 1,464 Incurred claims and claims expense 12 17 143 86 200 139 Claims and claims expense paid (157 ) (90 ) (150 ) (84 ) (422 ) (230 ) Ending reserves $ 2,053 $ 1,302 $ 2,198 $ 1,375 $ 2,205 $ 1,373 Annual survival ratio 13.1 14.5 14.7 16.4 5.2 6.0 3-year survival ratio 8.5 9.7 9.4 10.5 9.9 10.7 Environmental claims Beginning reserves $ 249 $ 194 $ 252 $ 205 $ 281 $ 232 Incurred claims and claims expense 120 63 22 10 3 2 Claims and claims expense paid (29 ) (25 ) (25 ) (21 ) (32 ) (29 ) Ending reserves $ 340 $ 232 $ 249 $ 194 $ 252 $ 205 Annual survival ratio 11.7 9.4 9.8 8.9 7.9 7.2 3-year survival ratio 11.8 9.3 8.1 7.7 5.2 6.0 Combined environmental and asbestos claims Annual survival ratio 12.9 13.4 14.0 14.8 5.4 6.1 3-year survival ratio 8.8 9.6 9.3 10.1 9.0 9.7 Percentage of IBNR in ending reserves 63.2 % 66.5 % 68.0 % The survival ratio is calculated by taking our ending reserves divided by payments made during the year. This is a commonly used but extremely simplistic and imprecise approach to measuring the adequacy of asbestos and environmental reserve levels. Many factors, such as mix of business, level of coverage provided and settlement procedures have significant impacts on the amount of environmental and asbestos claims and claims expense reserves, claim payments and the resultant ratio. As payments result in corresponding reserve reductions, survival ratios can be expected to vary over time. 74 In 2007, the asbestos survival ratio declined due to continuing claim payments. In 2006, the asbestos survival ratios improved due to reserve additions and a reduced level of claim payments. In 2007, the environmental survival ratios improved due to reserve additions. Our net asbestos reserves by type of exposure are shown in the following table. December 31, 2007 December 31, 2006 December 31, 2005 (in millions) Active Policy- holders Net Reserves % of Reserves Active Policy- holders Net Reserves % of Reserves Active Policy- holders Net Reserves % of Reserves Direct policyholders: Primary 52 $ 23 2 % 47 $ 15 1 % 46 $ 18 1 % Excess 346 222 17 340 214 16 333 180 13 Total 398 245 19 % 387 229 17 % 379 198 14 % Assumed reinsurance 216 16 203 15 215 16 IBNR 841 65 943 68 960 70 Total net reserves $ 1,302 100 % $ 1,375 100 % $ 1,373 100 % Total reserve additions $ 17 $ 86 $ 139 During the last three years, 94 direct primary and excess policyholders reported new claims, and claims of 78 policyholders were closed, increasing the number of active policyholders by 16 during the period. The 16 increase comprised 3 from 2007, 8 from 2006 and 5 from 2005. The increase of 3 from 2007 included 26 new policyholders reporting new claims and the closing of 23 policyholders' claims. IBNR net reserves decreased by $102 million. At December 31, 2007 IBNR represented 65% of total net asbestos reserves, 3 points lower than at December 31, 2006. IBNR provides for reserve development of known claims and future reporting of additional unknown claims from current and new policyholders and ceding companies. Pending, new, total closed and closed without payment claims for asbestos and environmental exposures for the years ended December 31, are summarized in the following table. Number of Claims 2007 2006 2005 Asbestos Pending, beginning of year 9,175 8,806 8,630 New 876 1,220 1,635 Total closed (795 ) (851 ) (1,459 ) Pending, end of year 9,256 9,175 8,806 Closed without payment 364 596 829 Environmental Pending, beginning of year 4,771 4,896 5,775 New 603 612 689 Total closed (627 ) (737 ) (1,568 ) Pending, end of year 4,747 4,771 4,896 Closed without payment 370 513 1,115 75 Property-Liability Reinsurance Ceded For Allstate Protection, we utilize reinsurance to reduce exposure to catastrophe risk and manage capital, and to support the required statutory surplus and the insurance financial strength ratings of certain subsidiaries such as Allstate Floridian Insurance Company ("AFIC") and Allstate New Jersey Insurance Company. We purchase significant reinsurance where we believe the greatest benefit may be achieved relative to our aggregate countrywide exposure. The price and terms of reinsurance and the credit quality of the reinsurer are considered in the purchase process, along with whether the price can be appropriately reflected in the costs that are considered in setting future rates charged to policyholders. We also participate in various reinsurance mechanisms, including industry pools and facilities, which are backed by the financial resources of the property-liability insurance company market participants, and have historically purchased reinsurance to mitigate long-tail liability lines, including environmental, asbestos and other discontinued lines exposures. We retain primary liability as a direct insurer for all risks ceded to reinsurers. The impacts of reinsurance on our reserve for claims and claims expense at December 31 are summarized in the following table, net of allowances we have established for uncollectible amounts. Reserve for Property-Liability insurance claims and claims expense Reinsurance recoverables, net (in millions) 2007 2006 2007 2006 Industry pools and facilities $ 1,862 $ 1,920 $ 1,275 $ 1,325 Asbestos and environmental 2,393 2,447 912 930 Other including allowance for future uncollectible reinsurance recoverables 14,610 14,499 117 79 Total Property-Liability $ 18,865 $ 18,866 $ 2,304 $ 2,334 Reinsurance recoverables include an estimate of the amount of property-liability insurance claims and claims expense reserves that may be ceded under the terms of the reinsurance agreements, including incurred but not reported unpaid losses. We calculate our ceded reinsurance estimate based on the terms of each applicable reinsurance agreement, including an estimate of how IBNR losses will ultimately be ceded under the agreement. We also consider other limitations and coverage exclusions under our reinsurance agreements. Accordingly, our estimate of reinsurance recoverables is subject to similar risks and uncertainties as our estimate of reserve for property-liability claims and claims expense. We believe the recoverables are appropriately established; however, as our underlying reserves continue to develop, the amount ultimately recoverable may vary from amounts currently recorded. We regularly evaluate the reinsurers and the respective amounts recoverable, and a provision for uncollectible reinsurance is recorded if needed. The establishment of reinsurance recoverables and the related allowance for uncollectible reinsurance recoverables is also an inherently uncertain process involving estimates. Changes in estimates could result in additional changes to the Consolidated Statements of Operations. The allowance for uncollectible reinsurance relates to Discontinued Lines and Coverages reinsurance recoverables and was $185 million and $235 million at December 31, 2007 and 2006, respectively. These amounts represent 16.4% and 20.5%, respectively of the related reinsurance recoverable balances. The allowance is based upon our ongoing review of amounts outstanding, length of collection periods, changes in reinsurer credit standing, and other relevant factors. In addition, in the ordinary course of business, we may become involved in coverage disputes with certain of our reinsurers which may ultimately result in lawsuits and arbitrations brought by or against such reinsurers to determine the parties' rights and obligations under the various reinsurance agreements. We employ dedicated specialists 76 to manage reinsurance collections and disputes. We also consider recent developments in commutation activity between reinsurers and cedants, and recent trends in arbitration and litigation outcomes in disputes between cedants and reinsurers in seeking to maximize our reinsurance recoveries. For further discussion on the decrease in the allowance for uncollectible reinsurance, see Note 9 of the consolidated financial statements. Adverse developments in the insurance industry have led to a decline in the financial strength of some of our reinsurance carriers, causing amounts recoverable from them and future claims ceded to them to be considered a higher risk. There has also been consolidation activity in the industry, which causes reinsurance risk across the industry to be concentrated among fewer companies. In addition, over the last several years the industry has increasingly segregated asbestos, environmental, and other discontinued lines exposures into separate legal entities with dedicated capital. Regulatory bodies in certain cases have supported these actions. We are unable to determine the impact, if any, that these developments will have on the collectibility of reinsurance recoverables in the future. The largest reinsurance recoverable balances are shown in the following table at December 31, net of allowances we have established for uncollectible amounts. Reinsurance recoverable on paid and unpaid claims, net A.M. Best Financial Strength Rating 2007 2006 (in millions) Industry pools and facilities Michigan Catastrophic Claim Association ("MCCA") N/A $ 1,023 $ 1,022 New Jersey Unsatisfied Claim and Judgment Fund N/A 105 127 North Carolina Reinsurance Facility N/A 64 67 FHCF N/A 47 70 National Flood Insurance Program ("NFIP") N/A 22 33 Other 14 6 Total 1,275 1,325 Asbestos, Environmental and Other Lloyd's of London ("Lloyd's") A 240 271 Employers Reinsurance Corporation A+ 90 85 Harper Insurance Limited N/A 60 67 Clearwater Insurance Company A 44 45 SCOR A- 28 41 New England Reinsurance Corporation N/A 27 25 Other, including allowance for future uncollectible reinsurance recoverables 540 475 Total 1,029 1,009 Total Property-Liability $ 2,304 $ 2,334 77 The effects of reinsurance ceded on our property-liability premiums earned and claims and claims expense for the years ended December 31, are summarized in the following table. (in millions) 2007 2006 2005 Ceded property-liability premiums earned $ 1,356 $ 1,113 $ 586 Ceded property-liability claims and claims expense Industry pool and facilities FHCF $ 22 $ 146 $ 197 NFIP 65 32 3,298 MCCA 60 36 267 Other 72 71 73 Subtotal industry pools and facilities 219 285 3,835 Asbestos, Environmental and other 151 129 182 Ceded property-liability claims and claims expense $ 370 $ 414 $ 4,017 For the years ended December 31, 2007 and 2006, ceded property-liability premiums earned increased $243 million and $527 million, respectively, when compared to prior years, as a result of amounts incurred for catastrophe reinsurance when compared to the prior year. Ceded property-liability claims and claims expense decreased in 2007 as a result of lower qualifying losses eligible to be ceded to the FHCF, but higher losses eligible to be ceded to NFIP and MCCA. Ceded property-liability claims and claims expense for asbestos and environmental and other claims were primarily the result of reserve reestimates. Ceded property-liability claims and claims expense decreased in 2006 primarily as a result of lower qualifying losses eligible to be ceded to the FHCF, NFIP and the MCCA. For further discussion see the Discontinued Lines and Coverages Segment and Property-Liability Claims and Claims Expense Reserves sections of the MD&A. For a detailed description of the MCCA, FHCF and Lloyd's, see Note 9 of the consolidated financial statements. At December 31, 2007, other than the recoverable balances listed above, no other amount due or estimated to be due from any single Property-Liability reinsurer was in excess of $20 million. Allstate sells and administers policies as a participant in the NFIP. Ceded premiums earned include $257 million, $232 million and $199 million, in 2007, 2006, and 2005, respectively, and ceded losses incurred include $65 million, $32 million and $3.30 billion, in 2007, 2006 and 2005, respectively, for this program. Under the arrangement, the Federal Government is obligated to pay all claims. The NFIP has no impact on our net income or financial position and is included net of ceded premiums and losses with our other personal lines business in our Consolidated Statements of Operations. We receive expense allowances from NFIP as reimbursement for underwriting administration, commission, claims management and adjuster fees. These policies are not included in any of our core business statistics such as PIF, loss ratio, or catastrophe losses. We enter into certain inter-company insurance and reinsurance transactions for the Property-Liability operations in order to maintain underwriting control and manage insurance risk among various legal entities. These reinsurance agreements have been approved by the appropriate regulatory authorities. All significant inter-company transactions have been eliminated in consolidation. An affiliate of the company, Allstate Texas Lloyd's ("ATL"), a syndicate insurance company, cedes 100% of its business net of reinsurance with external parties to AIC. At December 31, 2007 and 2006, ATL 78 had $5 million and $58 million, respectively, of reinsurance recoverable primarily related to losses incurred from Hurricane Rita which occurred in 2005. Catastrophe Reinsurance Our personal lines catastrophe reinsurance program was designed, utilizing our risk management methodology, to address our exposure to catastrophes nationwide. Our program provides reinsurance protection to us for catastrophes including storms named or numbered by the National Weather Service, wildfires, earthquakes and fires following earthquakes. As discussed below, our reinsurance program is comprised of agreements that provide coverage for the occurrence of certain qualifying catastrophes in specific states including New York, New Jersey, Connecticut, Rhode Island and Texas ("multi-peril"); additional coverage for hurricane catastrophe losses in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut ("North-East") and in other states along the southern and eastern coasts ("South-East"); in California for fires following earthquakes ("California fires following earthquakes"); in Kentucky for earthquakes and fires following earthquakes ("Kentucky"); and four agreements for our exposure in Florida. The Florida component of the reinsurance program, which expires on May 31, 2008, is designed separately from the other components of the program to address the distinct needs of our separately capitalized legal entities in that state. Another reinsurance agreement provides coverage nationwide, excluding Florida, for the aggregate or sum of catastrophe losses in excess of an annual retention associated with storms named or numbered by the National Weather Service, California wildfires, earthquakes and fires following earthquakes ("aggregate excess"). For further discussion on catastrophe reinsurance, see Note 9 to the consolidated financial statements. During January 2008 we completed the renewal of our multi-peril, South-East, California fires following earthquakes, Kentucky and aggregate excess agreements, all of which will be effective June 1, 2008. The North-East agreement was placed in June 2007 and is effective June 15, 2007 to June 8, 2010. While the South-East agreement is for one-year expiring May 31, 2009, the multi-peril and California fires following earthquakes agreements have been placed as one, two and three year contracts, each providing one-third of the total limits and expiring as of May 31, 2009, 2010 and 2011, respectively. We have the right to cancel the two and three year contracts upon timely notice on the first and second anniversary dates. The Kentucky agreement has been placed as a three year term contract. This contract can be canceled on the first anniversary date. The aggregate excess agreement comprises three contracts: one contract expiring on May 31, 2009 and two contracts expiring on May 31, 2010. We designed this layered approach to placing our reinsurance coverage to lessen the amount of reinsurance being placed in the market in any one year. We also expect to place contracts for the state of Florida later this year, once the Florida Hurricane Catastrophe Fund's plans are known, and to have them effective for the hurricane season beginning on June 1, 2008. The multi-peril agreements have various retentions and limits commensurate with the amount of catastrophe risk, measured on an annual basis, in each covered state. The multi-peril agreement for Connecticut and Rhode Island provides that losses resulting from the same occurrence but taking place in both states may be combined to meet the agreement's per occurrence retention and limit. A description of these retentions and limits appears in the following tables and charts. One-third of the coverage expires each year with each of the three contracts in this agreement. The North-East agreement was placed with a Cayman Island insurance company, Willow Re Ltd., that had completed an offering to unrelated investors for principal at risk, variable market rate notes of $250 million to collateralize hurricane catastrophe losses covered by this agreement. Amounts payable under the reinsurance agreement will be based on an index created by applying predetermined percentages representing our market share, to insured personal property and auto industry losses in the 79 covered area as reported by Property Claim Services ("PCS"), a division of Insurance Services Offices, Inc., limited to our actual losses. The North-East agreement provides that losses arising from the same occurrence but taking place in the three states may be combined to meet the agreement's per occurrence retention and limit. The Florida reinsurance program that is expected to be effective June 1, 2008 will replace the current program and should be similar in design, assuming there is no further change in Florida insurance laws, however with lower retentions and limits as our exposures have been reduced. Our current program comprises, four separate agreements, entered into by Allstate Floridian for personal property excess catastrophe losses in Florida, effective June 1, 2007 for one year. These agreements coordinate coverage with the FHCF, including our elected participation in the optional temporary increase in coverage limit ("TICL"), (collectively "FHCF"). The four agreements are listed and described below. FHCF Retention provides coverage on $120 million of losses in excess of $50 million and is 80% placed, with one reinstatement of limit. FHCF Sliver provides coverage on 10% co-participation of the FHCF payout, or $87 million and is 100% placed, with one reinstatement of limit. FHCF Back-up provides coverage after the FHCF reimbursement protection is utilized on $905 million of losses in excess of $172 million and is 90% placed. FHCF Excess provides coverage on $739 million of losses in excess of the FHCF Retention and the FHCF Back-up agreements and is 100% placed, with one reinstatement of limit. The FHCF provides 90% reimbursement on qualifying Allstate Floridian property losses up to an estimated maximum of $905 million in excess of a retention of $172 million, including reimbursement of eligible loss adjustment expenses at 5%, for each of the two largest hurricanes and $57 million for all other hurricanes for the season beginning June 1, 2007. Recoveries from the FHCF on policies included in our reinsurance agreements with Universal Insurance Company and Royal Palm, respectively, are ceded to those companies in proportion to total losses qualifying for recovery. In addition, certain recoveries from our four Florida reinsurance agreements attributable to policies reinsured under our reinsurance agreement with Royal Palm are remitted to Royal Palm in proportion to total losses qualifying for recovery. We have approximately $200 million or 10% of the aggregate excess agreement limits for the June 1, 2008 to May 31, 2009 period, $25 million or 5% of the South-East agreement limit, $250 million or 100% of the North-East agreement limit and $203 million or 11% of the Florida component placed with alternative market sources. Alternative market sources refers to a reinsurer that hedge funds, private equity firms, or investment banks substantially or wholly support; retrocedes 100% of its assumed liability to a specific retrocessionaire; provides collateral to us equal to its assumed per occurrence limit; or funding is provided by an unrelated third party issuance of bonds financing the reinsurance limit ("catastrophe bond"). We estimate that the total annualized cost of all catastrophe reinsurance programs for the year beginning June 1, 2008 will be approximately $660 million per year or $165 million per quarter, including an estimate for reinsurance coverage in Florida. This is compared to approximately $900 million per year for our total annualized cost for the year beginning June 1, 2007, or an estimated annualized cost decrease of $240 million beginning June 1, 2008. The estimated decrease is due in part to our reduced exposure in Florida following our non-renewal activities over the past year. The total cost of our reinsurance programs during 2007 was $216 million in the first quarter, $231 million in the second quarter, $227 million in the third quarter and $222 million in the fourth quarter. The cost during 2008 is estimated to be $225 million in the first quarter of 2008, $205 million in the second quarter and 80 $165 million in the third and fourth quarters. We continue to attempt to capture our reinsurance cost in premium rates as allowed by state regulatory authorities. We are currently involved in proceedings regarding homeowners insurance rates and our ability to capture these reinsurance costs in various states including California, Florida and Texas. Since the financial condition of the reinsurer is a critical deciding factor when entering into an agreement, the reinsurance agreements have been placed in the global reinsurance market with all limits on our Florida program and the majority of limits on our other programs placed with reinsurers who currently have an A.M. Best insurance financial strength rating of A or better. The remaining limits are placed with reinsurers who currently have an A.M. Best insurance financial strength rating no lower than A-, with three exceptions. One of the exceptions has a Standard & Poor's ("S&P") rating of AA, one has a rating of AA- and we have collateral for the entire contract limit exposure for the reinsurer which is not rated by either rating agency. Because of these factors, we do not expect that our ability to cede losses in the future will be impaired. The terms, retentions and limits for Allstate's catastrophe management reinsurance agreements in place as of June 1, 2008 are listed in the following tables. % Placed ($ in millions) Effective Date Yr 1 Yr 2 Yr 3 Reinstatement Retention Per Occurrence Limit Aggregate excess (1) 6/1/2008 95 47.5 N/A None $ 2,000 $ 2,000 California fires following earthquakes (2) 6/1/2008 95 63 32 2 limits each year for each contract, prepaid 750 750 Multi-peril (3) : 6/1/2008 Connecticut/Rhode Island 80 53 27 2 limits each year for each contract, prepaid 200 200 New Jersey 95 63 32 2 limits each year for each contract, prepaid 200 300 80 53 27 2 limits each year for each contract, prepaid 500 200 New York 80 53 27 2 limits each year for each contract, prepaid 750 1,000 Texas (4) 95 63 32 2 limits each year for each contract, prepaid 500 500 South-East (5) 6/1/2008 95 N/A N/A 1 reinstatement, premium required 500 500 Kentucky (6) 6/1/2008 95 95 95 3 limits over 3 years, prepaid 10 40 North-East (7) 6/15/2007 34 34 34 None 1,600 745 (1) Aggregate excess This agreement has a contract, effective 6/1/2007 to 5/31/2009, and two contracts, effective 6/1/2008 to 5/31/2010. It covers the aggregation of qualifying losses for storms named or numbered by the National Weather Service, fires following earthquakes, and California wildfires, in the two year contracts, or earthquakes, in the one year contract, for Allstate Protection personal lines auto and property business countrywide, except for Florida, in excess of $2 billion in aggregated losses per contract year. Losses recoverable if any, from our California fires following earthquakes, multi-peril, North-East, 81 South-East and Kentucky agreements are excluded when determining coverage under this agreement. Losses on the North-East agreement do not inure under the one year contract. The one year contract is 47.5% placed or $950 million of the total $2 billion limit. The two year term contracts are collectively 47.5% placed or $950 million of the total $2 billion limit leaving Allstate the option to place up to an additional 47.5% in year two. The preliminary reinsurance premium is subject to redetermination for exposure changes. (2) California fires following earthquakes This agreement has one year, two year and three year contracts that are effective 6/1/2008 and expiring 5/31/2009, 2010 and 2011, respectively. This agreement covers Allstate Protection personal property excess catastrophe losses in California for fires following earthquakes. The preliminary retention and reinsurance premium are subject to redetermination for exposure changes at each anniversary, except for the one year contract in which the retention is not subject to adjustment. (3) Multi-peril These agreements have one year, two year and three year contracts that are effective 6/1/2008 and expiring 5/31/2009, 2010 and 2011, respectively. These agreements cover the Allstate Protection personal property excess catastrophe losses. The preliminary retention and reinsurance premium are subject to redetermination for exposure changes at each anniversary, except for the one year contract in which the retention is not subject to adjustment. (4) The Texas agreement is with ATL, a syndicate insurance company. ATL also has a 100% reinsurance agreement with AIC covering losses in excess of and/or not reinsured by the Texas agreement. (5) South-East This agreement is effective 6/1/2008 for 1 year and covers Allstate Protection personal property excess catastrophe losses for storms named or numbered by the National Weather Service. This agreement covers personal property business in the states of Louisiana, Mississippi, Alabama, Georgia, South Carolina, North Carolina, Virginia, Maryland, Delaware and Pennsylvania and the District of Columbia. The preliminary reinsurance premium is subject to redetermination for exposure changes. (6) Kentucky This agreement is effective 6/1/2008 for three years and covers Allstate Protection personal property excess catastrophe losses for earthquakes and fires following earthquakes. This agreement provides three limits over three years subject to two limits being available in any one contract year. (7) North-East This agreement is effective 6/15/2007 to 6/8/2010 and covers Allstate Protection personal property and auto excess catastrophe losses for hurricanes. This agreement covers 34% of $745 million, our estimated share of estimated modified personal property industry catastrophe losses between $9.2 billion and $13.5 billion, or 34% of our catastrophe losses between $1.6 billion (initial trigger) and $2.3 billion (exhaustion point) in the states of New York, New Jersey and Connecticut. Qualifying losses under this agreement are also eligible to be ceded under the New York, New Jersey and Connecticut and Rhode Island multi-peril and the one-year aggregate excess contract effective 6/1/2007 to 5/31/2009. 82 Allstate Floridian (program expiring May 31, 2008) (in millions) Effective Date % Placed Reinstatement Retention Per Occurrence Limit FHCF Retention (1) 6/1/2007 80 2 limits over 1-year term, prepaid 50 120 FHCF (2) 6/1/2007 90 Annual remeasurements with a first and second season coverage provision 172 for the 2 largest storms, 57 for all other storms 905 FHCF Sliver (3) 6/1/2007 100 2 limits over 1-year term, prepaid 172 10% co-participation of the FHCF recoveries estimated at $905, up to a limit of $87 FHCF Back-up (4) 6/1/2007 90 1 limit over 1-year term Back-up for FHCF 905 FHCF Excess (5) 6/1/2007 100 2 limits over 1-year term, prepaid In excess of the FHCF and FHCF Back-up agreements 739 (1) FHCF Retention provides coverage beginning 6/1/2007 for 1 year covering personal property excess catastrophe losses on policies written by Allstate Floridian, including policies remaining in force with Allstate Floridian and ceded to Royal Palm. The preliminary reinsurance premium is subject to redetermination for exposure changes. (2) FHCF (Florida Hurricane Catastrophe Fund) provides 90% reimbursement on qualifying personal property losses up to a maximum per hurricane season, including policies remaining in force and underwritten by Allstate Floridian Insurance Company and Allstate Floridian Indemnity Company and ceded to Universal and Royal Palm. Limits and retentions are calculated for Allstate Floridian Insurance Company and each of its subsidiaries independently, and are subject to annual remeasurements based on 6/30 exposure data. As of 12/31/2007, the limits are $687 million for Allstate Floridian Insurance Company, $143 million for Allstate Floridian Indemnity Company, $59 million for Encompass Floridian Insurance Company, and $16 million for Encompass Floridian Indemnity Company for a total of $905 million. Retentions for each of the Floridian companies are $131 million for Allstate Floridian Insurance Company, $27 million for Allstate Floridian Indemnity Company, $11 million for Encompass Floridian Insurance Company, and $3 million for Encompass Floridian Indemnity Company for a total of $172 million. (3) FHCF Sliver provides coverage beginning 6/1/2007 for 1 year covering primarily excess catastrophe losses not reimbursed by the FHCF. The provisional retention is $172 million and is subject to adjustment upward or downward to an actual retention that will equal the FHCF retention as respects business covered by this contract, including policies remaining in force with Allstate Floridian and ceded to Royal Palm. The preliminary reinsurance premium is subject to redetermination for exposure changes. (4) FHCF Back-up provides coverage beginning 6/1/2007 for 1 year covering personal property excess catastrophe losses and is contiguous to the FHCF payout. Coverage includes all in force policies. Recoveries, with certain limitations, are shared with Royal Palm in proportion to total losses qualifying for recovery. As the FHCF capacity is paid out, the retention on this agreement automatically adjusts to mirror the amount of the payout. The preliminary reinsurance premium is subject to redetermination for exposure changes. (5) FHCF Excess provides coverage beginning 6/1/2007 for 1 year covering excess catastrophe losses. Coverage includes all in force policies. Recoveries, with certain limitations, are shared with Royal Palm in proportion to total losses qualifying for recovery. The retention on this agreement is designed to attach above and contiguous to the FHCF and FHCF Back-up. As the FHCF and the FHCF Back-up are paid out, the retention automatically adjusts to mirror the amount of the payout. The preliminary reinsurance premium is subject to redetermination for exposure changes. 83 Highlights of certain other contract terms and conditions for all of Allstate's catastrophe management reinsurance agreements effective June 1, 2008 are listed in the following table. South-East Aggregate Excess Multi-peril, California fires following earthquakes and Kentucky North-East Allstate Floridian (1) Business Reinsured Personal Lines Property business Personal Lines Property and Auto business Personal Lines Property business Personal Lines Property and Auto business Personal Lines Property business Location(s) 10 states and Washington, DC Nationwide except Florida Each specific state Multi-peril states include New York, New Jersey, Texas, Connecticut and Rhode Island New York, New Jersey and Connecticut Florida Covered Losses 1 specific peril storms named or numbered by the National Weather Service 3 specific perils storms named or numbered by the National Weather Service, fires following earthquakes, and California wildfires in the two year contracts or earthquakes in the one year contract Multi-peril includes hurricanes and earthquakes California fires following earthquakes: 1 specific peril fires following earthquakes Kentucky earthquakes and fires following earthquakes Hurricanes Multi-peril includes hurricanes and earthquakes Exclusions, other than typical market negotiated exclusions Automobile Terrorism Commercial Assessment exposure to CEA Terrorism Commercial Automobile Terrorism Commercial Terrorism Commercial Automobile Terrorism Commercial Loss Occurrence Sum of all qualifying losses from named or numbered storms by the National Weather Service over 96 hours Sum of all qualifying losses and sum of all qualifying occurrences (Aggregate) Losses over 96 hours from a named or numbered storm Losses over 168 hours for an earthquake Losses over 168 hours within a 336 hour period for fires following an earthquake Multi-peril Sum of all qualifying earthquakes, fires following earthquakes and wildfire losses for a specific occurrence over 168 hours. Windstorm related occurrences over 96 hours. Riot related occurrences over 72 hours. California fires following earthquakes occurrences over 168 hours. Kentucky earthquake and fires following earthquake occurrences over 168 hours within a 336 hour period. Hurricane event our market share of PCS' estimated modified industry catastrophe losses Sum of all qualifying losses for specific occurrences over 168 hours Windstorm related occurrences over 96 hours Riot related occurrences over 72 hours Loss adjustment expenses included within ultimate net loss 12.5% of qualifying losses 12.5% of qualifying losses 12.5% of qualifying losses 12.5% of qualifying losses 12.5% of qualifying losses (1) Allstate Floridian information relates to the FHCF Retention, FHCF, FHCF Sliver, FHCF Back-up and FHCF Excess agreements effective June 1, 2007 and expiring May 31, 2008. 84 ALLSTATE FINANCIAL 2007 HIGHLIGHTS Net income was $465 million in 2007 compared to $464 million in 2006. Contractholder fund deposits totaled $8.99 billion for 2007 compared to $10.48 billion for 2006. Net investment income increased 3.0% in 2007 compared to 2006 despite a 2.2% decrease in investments as of December 31, 2007 compared to December 31, 2006. Allstate Financial paid dividends of $742 million in 2007. These dividends include $725 million paid by Allstate Life Insurance Company ("ALIC") to its parent AIC. Effective June 1, 2006, Allstate Financial disposed of substantially all of its variable annuity business through reinsurance with Prudential Financial Inc. ("Prudential"). Additionally, Allstate Financial transferred its loan protection business to the Allstate Protection segment effective January 1, 2006. The following table presents the results of operations attributable to our reinsured variable annuity business for the period of 2006 prior to the disposition and 2005. Additionally, 2005 also includes the results of operations of the loan protection business transferred to Allstate Protection in 2006. (in millions) 2006 2005 Life and annuity premiums and contract charges $ 136 $ 416 Net investment income 17 51 Realized capital gains and losses (8 ) (7 ) Total revenues 145 460 Life and annuity contract benefits (13 ) (148 ) Interest credited to contractholder funds (24 ) (63 ) Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs (44 ) (47 ) Operating costs and expenses (43 ) (163 ) Total costs and expenses (124 ) (421 ) Loss on disposition of operations (89 ) Income from operations before income tax expense (1) $ (68 ) $ 39 (1) For 2006, income from operations before income tax expense attributable to the variable annuity business reinsured to Prudential included an investment spread and benefit spread of $(7) million and $13 million, respectively. For 2005, income from operations before income tax expense attributable to the variable annuity business reinsured to Prudential and the loan protection business transferred to Allstate Protection included an investment spread and benefit spread of $(12) million and $5 million, respectively. 85 ALLSTATE FINANCIAL SEGMENT Overview and Strategy The Allstate Financial segment is a major provider of life insurance, retirement and investment products, and voluntary accident and health insurance to individual and institutional customers. We serve these customers through Allstate exclusive agencies, the Workplace Division and non-proprietary distribution channels. Allstate Financial's mission is to reinvent retirement and protection for the middle market consumer. To achieve its mission and reach its financial goals, Allstate Financial's primary objectives are to deepen financial services relationships with Allstate customers, dramatically expand the workplace business and build consumer-driven innovation capabilities and culture. We will continue to drive scale through non-proprietary distribution channel relationships and leverage future innovations across those channels. We will also enhance our operational excellence. In addition to focusing on higher return markets, products, and distribution channels, Allstate Financial will improve its financial performance through capital efficiency and enterprise risk and return management capabilities and practices. Allstate Financial's strategy provides a platform designed to profitably grow its business. Based upon Allstate's strong financial position and brand, our customers look to us to help meet their retirement and protection needs through trusted relationships. We have unique access to potential customers through cross-sell opportunities within the Allstate exclusive agencies and employer relationships through our Workplace Division. Our investment expertise, strong operating platform and solid relationships with leading distribution partners provide a foundation to deliver value to our customers and shareholders. We plan to continue offering a suite of products that provides financial protection primarily to middle market consumers and help them better prepare for retirement. Our products include fixed annuities including deferred, immediate and indexed; interest-sensitive, traditional and variable life insurance; voluntary accident and health insurance; and funding agreements backing medium-term notes. Banking products and services are also offered to customers through the Allstate Bank. Our products are sold through several distribution channels including Allstate exclusive agencies, which include exclusive financial specialists, independent agents (including master brokerage agencies and workplace enrolling agents), and financial service firms such as banks, broker-dealers and specialized structured settlement brokers. Allstate Bank products can also be obtained directly through the Internet and a toll-free number. Our institutional product line consists primarily of funding agreements sold to unaffiliated trusts that use them to back medium-term notes issued to institutional and individual investors. 86 Summarized financial data for the years ended December 31 is presented in the following table. (in millions) 2007 2006 2005 Revenues Life and annuity premiums and contract charges $ 1,866 $ 1,964 $ 2,049 Net investment income 4,297 4,173 3,830 Realized capital gains and losses (193 ) (77 ) 19 Total revenues 5,970 6,060 5,898 Costs and expenses Life and annuity contract benefits (1,589 ) (1,570 ) (1,615 ) Interest credited to contractholder funds (2,681 ) (2,609 ) (2,403 ) Amortization of DAC (583 ) (626 ) (629 ) Operating costs and expenses (441 ) (468 ) (632 ) Restructuring and related charges (2 ) (24 ) (2 ) Total costs and expenses (5,296 ) (5,297 ) (5,281 ) Loss on disposition of operations (10 ) (92 ) (13 ) Income tax expense (199 ) (207 ) (188 ) Net income $ 465 $ 464 $ 416 Investments at December 31 $ 74,256 $ 75,951 $ 75,233 Net Income in 2007 was comparable to 2006 as lower losses associated with dispositions of operations were almost entirely offset by a decline in total revenues. Net income increased 11.5% in 2006 compared to 2005, due to higher revenues, partially offset by higher total costs and expenses and the recognition in 2006 of losses relating to the disposition of substantially all of our variable annuity business. Analysis of Revenues Total revenues decreased 1.5% or $90 million in 2007 compared to 2006, due to higher net realized capital losses and lower premiums and contract charges, partially offset by higher net investment income. Total revenues increased 2.7% or $162 million in 2006 compared to 2005 due to higher net investment income partially offset by net realized capital losses in 2006 compared to net realized capital gains in 2005, and lower premiums and contract charges. Life and annuity premiums and contract charges Premiums represent revenues generated from traditional life insurance, immediate annuities with life contingencies, accident and health and other insurance products that have significant mortality or morbidity risk. Contract charges are revenues generated from interest-sensitive and variable life insurance, fixed annuities, institutional products and variable annuities for which deposits are classified as contractholder funds or separate accounts liabilities. Contract charges are assessed against the contractholder account values for maintenance, administration, cost of insurance and surrender prior to contractually specified dates. As a result, changes in contractholder funds are considered in the evaluation of growth and as indicators of future levels of revenues. Subsequent to the close of our reinsurance transaction with Prudential effective June 1, 2006, variable annuity contract charges on the business subject to the transaction are fully reinsured to Prudential and presented net of reinsurance on the Consolidated Statements of Operations (see Note 3 to the consolidated financial statements). 87 The following table summarizes life and annuity premiums and contract charges by product. (in millions) 2007 2006 2005 Premiums Traditional life insurance $ 286 $ 281 $ 282 Immediate annuities with life contingencies 204 278 197 Accident and health and other 380 340 439 Total premiums 870 899 918 Contract charges Interest-sensitive life insurance 915 853 786 Fixed annuities 79 73 65 Variable annuities 1 139 280 Bank and other 1 Total contract charges (1) 996 1,065 1,131 Life and annuity premiums and contract charges $ 1,866 $ 1,964 $ 2,049 (1) Contract charges for 2007, 2006 and 2005 include contract charges related to the cost of insurance totaling $652 million, $638 million and $631 million, respectively. Total premiums decreased 3.2% in 2007 compared to 2006 as higher sales of accident and health insurance products sold through the Allstate Workplace Division and traditional life insurance products were more than offset by a decline in sales of life contingent immediate annuities due to market competitiveness. Total premiums decreased 2.1% in 2006 compared to 2005. Excluding the impact of the transfer of the loan protection business to the Allstate Protection segment effective January 1, 2006, premiums increased 11.7% in 2006 compared to 2005. This increase in 2006 was attributable primarily to increased premiums on immediate annuities with life contingencies, due to certain pricing refinements and a more favorable pricing environment in 2006. Additionally, in 2006, excluding the impact of the transfer of the loan protection business, accident and health and other premiums increased $14 million due to increased sales of these products. Contract charges decreased 6.5% in 2007 compared to 2006 due to the disposal of substantially all of our variable annuity business through reinsurance effective June 1, 2006. Excluding contract charges on variable annuities, substantially all of which are reinsured to Prudential effective June 1, 2006, contract charges increased 7.5% in 2007 compared to 2006. This increase reflects growth in interest-sensitive life insurance policies in force and, to a lesser extent, higher contract charges on fixed annuities. The increase in contract charges on fixed annuities was mostly attributable to higher contract surrenders. Contract charges decreased 5.8% in 2006 compared to 2005. Excluding contract charges on variable annuities, contract charges increased 8.8% in 2006 compared to 2005. The increase was mostly due to higher contract charges on interest-sensitive life products resulting from growth of business in force. Contract charges on fixed annuities were slightly higher in 2006 due to increased surrender charges. Contractholder funds represent interest-bearing liabilities arising from the sale of individual and institutional products, such as interest-sensitive life insurance, fixed annuities, funding agreements and bank deposits. The balance of contractholder funds is equal to the cumulative deposits received and interest credited to the contractholder less cumulative contract maturities, benefits, surrenders, withdrawals and contract charges for mortality or administrative expenses. 88 The following table shows the changes in contractholder funds. (in millions) 2007 2006 2005 Contractholder funds, beginning balance $ 62,031 $ 60,040 $ 55,709 Deposits Fixed annuities 3,636 6,007 5,926 Institutional products (funding agreements) 3,000 2,100 3,773 Interest-sensitive life insurance 1,402 1,416 1,404 Variable annuity and life deposits allocated to fixed accounts 1 99 395 Bank and other deposits 952 856 883 Total deposits 8,991 10,478 12,381 Interest credited 2,689 2,666 2,404 Maturities, benefits, withdrawals and other adjustments Maturities of institutional products (3,165 ) (2,726 ) (3,090 ) Benefits (1,668 ) (1,517 ) (1,348 ) Surrenders and partial withdrawals (5,872 ) (5,945 ) (4,734 ) Contract charges (801 ) (749 ) (698 ) Net transfers from (to) separate accounts 13 (145 ) (339 ) Fair value hedge adjustments for institutional products 34 38 (289 ) Other adjustments (1) (277 ) (109 ) 44 Total maturities, benefits, withdrawals and other adjustments (11,736 ) (11,153 ) (10,454 ) Contractholder funds, ending balance $ 61,975 $ 62,031 $ 60,040 (1) The table above illustrates the changes in contractholder funds, which are presented gross of reinsurance recoverables on the Consolidated Statements of Financial Position. The table above is intended to supplement our discussion and analysis of revenues, which are presented net of reinsurance on the Consolidated Statements of Operations. As a result, the net change in contractholder funds associated with products reinsured to third parties is reflected as a component of the other adjustments line. This includes, but is not limited to, the net change in contractholder funds associated with the reinsured variable annuity business subsequent to the effective date of our reinsurance agreements with Prudential (see Note 3 to the consolidated financial statements). Contractholder funds decreased 0.1% in 2007 and increased 3.3% and 7.8% in 2006 and 2005, respectively. Average contractholder funds increased 1.6% in 2007 compared to 2006, 5.5% in 2006 compared to 2005 and 13.1% in 2005 compared to 2004. Contractholder deposits decreased 14.2% in 2007 compared to 2006. This decline was primarily due to lower deposits on fixed annuities partially offset by higher deposits on funding agreements. The decline of 39.5% in fixed annuity deposits in 2007 compared to 2006 was due to our strategy to raise new business returns for these products combined with lower industry-wide fixed annuity sales. Deposits on institutional products increased 42.9% in 2007 compared to 2006. Sales of our institutional products vary from period to period based on management's assessment of market conditions. Contractholder deposits decreased 15.4% in 2006 compared to 2005 due to decreased deposits on funding agreements and, to a lesser extent, the classification of the net change in variable annuity contractholder funds as "other adjustments" subsequent to the effective date of our reinsurance agreements with Prudential. These items were partially offset by higher fixed annuity deposits. Allstate Financial prioritized the allocation of fixed income investments to support sales of retail products having the best opportunity for sustainable growth and return while maintaining a retail market presence. Consequently, sales of institutional products varied from period to period. In 2006, deposits on institutional products declined 44.3% compared to 2005. Higher fixed annuity deposits in 2006 were the result of a $546 million increase in deposits on Allstate Treasury-Linked Annuity contracts. This increase 89 was partially offset by modest declines in deposits on traditional deferred annuities and market value adjusted annuities. These declines were in part impacted by our actions to improve new business returns and reduced consumer demand. Consumer demand for fixed annuities is influenced by market interest rates on short-term deposit products and equity market conditions, which can increase the relative attractiveness of competing investment alternatives. Surrenders and partial withdrawals decreased 1.2% in 2007 compared to 2006. This decline was due to lower surrenders and partial withdrawals on interest-sensitive life insurance policies and the classification of the net change in variable annuity contractholder funds as "other adjustments" subsequent to the effective date of our reinsurance agreements with Prudential. These declines were partially offset by an 11.2% increase in surrenders and partial withdrawals on fixed annuities. The surrenders and partial withdrawals line in the table above, for 2006 includes $120 million related to the reinsured variable annuity business. The surrender and partial withdrawal rate on deferred fixed annuities, interest-sensitive life insurance products and Allstate Bank products, based on the beginning of period contractholder funds, was 13.3% in 2007 compared to 13.9% in 2006. The improvement in the surrender and partial withdrawal rate in 2007 compared to 2006 was primarily due to a block of corporate owned life insurance policies that terminated in 2006 due to the bankruptcy of the policyholder. Surrenders and partial withdrawals increased 25.6% in 2006 compared to 2005, while the surrender and partial withdrawal rate increased to 13.9% for 2006 from 11.7% for 2005. The increase in the surrender and partial withdrawal rate in 2006 was influenced by multiple factors, including the relatively low interest rate environment during the preceding years, which reduced reinvestment opportunities and increased the number of policies with little or no surrender charge protection. Also influencing the increase were our crediting rate strategies related to renewal business implemented to improve investment spreads on selected contracts. Net investment income increased 3.0% in 2007 compared to 2006 and 9.0% in 2006 compared to 2005. The 2007 increase was primarily due to higher average portfolio balances, increased portfolio yields and higher income from limited partnership interests. The 2006 increase was due to increased portfolio yields and higher average portfolio balances. Higher average portfolio balances in both years resulted primarily from the investment of cash flows from operating activities and, in 2006, financing activities related primarily to deposits from fixed annuities, funding agreements and interest-sensitive life policies. The higher portfolio yields in both periods were primarily due to increased yields on floating rate instruments resulting from higher short-term market interest rates and improved yields on fixed rate assets supporting fixed annuities. For certain products, the yield changes on our floating rate instruments are primarily offset by changes in crediting rates to holders of our floating rate contracts, resulting in minimal impact on net income. Realized capital gains and losses are reflected in the following table for the years ended December 31. (in millions) 2007 2006 2005 Investment write-downs $ (118 ) $ (21 ) $ (24 ) Dispositions (18 ) (87 ) 88 Valuation of derivative instruments (63 ) (17 ) (105 ) Settlement of derivative instruments 6 48 60 Realized capital gains and losses, pretax (193 ) (77 ) 19 Income tax benefit (expense) 68 27 (7 ) Realized capital gains and losses, after-tax $ (125 ) $ (50 ) $ 12 90 For further discussion of realized capital gains and losses, see the Investments section of MD&A. Analysis of Costs and Expenses Total costs and expenses in 2007 were consistent with 2006 as increased interest credited to contractholder funds and life and annuity contract benefits were offset by lower amortization of DAC, operating costs and expenses, and restructuring and related charges. Total costs and expenses increased 0.3% in 2006 compared to 2005 due to higher interest credited to contractholder funds and restructuring and related charges, partially offset by lower operating costs and expenses and life and annuity contract benefits. Life and annuity contract benefits increased 1.2% or $19 million in 2007 compared to 2006 due to increased contract benefits on life insurance products, partially offset by lower contract benefits on annuities. Increased contract benefits on life insurance products in 2007 were primarily due to unfavorable mortality experience, litigation related costs recognized in 2007 in the form of additional policy benefits on certain universal life policies written prior to 1992, and higher contract benefits associated with the Workplace Division. The decline in contract benefits on annuities was mostly attributable to favorable mortality experience on immediate annuities with life contingencies and the absence in 2007 of contract benefits on the reinsured variable annuity business, partially offset by an increase in the implied interest on immediate annuities with life contingencies. This implied interest totaled $547 million and $539 million in 2007 and 2006, respectively. Life and Annuity contract benefits decreased 2.8% or $45 million in 2006 compared to 2005 due to the absence in 2006 of amounts related to the loan protection business that was transferred to Allstate Protection beginning in 2006 and the absence in 2006 of contract benefits related to the reinsured variable annuity business in the period subsequent to the effective date of the reinsurance agreement. Excluding the impact of the loan protection business in 2005 and the reinsured variable annuity business, contract benefits increased 6.1% or $90 million in 2006 compared to 2005 due primarily to growth in business in force and, to a lesser extent, an increase in the implied interest on immediate annuities with life contingences to $539 million in 2006 from $530 million in 2005. We analyze our mortality and morbidity results using the difference between premiums, contract charges earned for the cost of insurance and life and annuity contract benefits excluding the portion related to the implied interest on immediate annuities with life contingencies ("benefit spread"). The benefit spread by product group is disclosed in the following table. (in millions) 2007 2006 2005 Life insurance $ 515 $ 549 $ 544 Annuities (35 ) (43 ) (80 ) Total benefit spread $ 480 $ 506 $ 464 Interest credited to contractholder funds increased 2.8% or $72 million in 2007 compared to 2006 and 8.6% or $206 million in 2006 compared to 2005. Both increases were due primarily to growth in average contractholder funds and, to a lesser extent, higher weighted average interest crediting rates on institutional products, which are detailed in the table below. These increases were partially offset by the impact of the reinsured variable annuity business. Excluding the impact of the reinsured variable annuity business, interest credited to contractholder funds increased 3.7% in 2007 compared to 2006 and 10.5% in 2006 compared to 2005. In order to analyze the impact of net investment income and interest credited to policyholders on net income, we review the difference between net investment income and the sum of interest credited to contractholder funds and the implied interest on immediate annuities with life contingencies, which is 91 included as a component of life and annuity contract benefits on the Consolidated Statements of Operations ("investment spread"). The investment spread by product group is shown in the following table. (in millions) 2007 2006 2005 Annuities $ 505 $ 481 $ 318 Life insurance 63 60 65 Institutional products 87 88 98 Bank 18 16 12 Net investment income on investments supporting capital 396 380 404 Total investment spread $ 1,069 $ 1,025 $ 897 To further analyze investment spreads the following table summarizes the weighted average investment yield on assets supporting product liabilities and capital, interest crediting rates on investment type products and investment spreads on those products during 2007, 2006 and 2005. Weighted Average Investment Yield Weighted Average Interest Crediting Rate Weighted Average Investment Spreads 2007 2006 2005 2007 2006 2005 2007 2006 2005 Interest-sensitive life insurance 6.2 % 6.2 % 6.3 % 4.6 % 4.7 % 4.8 % 1.6 % 1.5 % 1.5 % Deferred fixed annuities 5.8 5.7 5.5 3.7 3.7 3.8 2.1 2.0 1.7 Immediate fixed annuities with and without life contingencies 7.1 7.2 7.4 6.5 6.6 6.7 0.6 0.6 0.7 Institutional products 6.1 6.0 4.6 5.2 5.0 3.6 0.9 1.0 1.0 Investments supporting capital, traditional life and other products 6.1 5.7 6.2 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A The following table summarizes our product liabilities as of December 31 and indicates the account value of those contracts and policies in which an investment spread is generated. (in millions) 2007 2006 2005 Immediate fixed annuities with life contingencies $ 8,294 $ 8,144 $ 7,894 Other life contingent contracts and other 4,918 4,642 4,588 Reserve for life-contingent contracts benefits $ 13,212 $ 12,786 $ 12,482 Interest-sensitive life insurance $ 9,539 $ 9,050 $ 8,842 Deferred fixed annuities 34,214 35,533 33,890 Immediate fixed annuities without life Contingencies 3,921 3,783 3,603 Institutional products 12,983 12,467 12,431 Allstate Bank 832 773 882 Market value adjustments related to derivative instruments and other 486 425 392 Contractholder funds $ 61,975 $ 62,031 $ 60,040 92 Amortization of DAC decreased 6.9% or $43 million in 2007 compared to 2006 and decreased 0.5% or $3 million in 2006 compared to 2005. The components of amortization of DAC are summarized in the following table. (in millions) 2007 2006 2005 Amortization of DAC before amortization relating to realized capital gains and losses and changes in assumptions (1) $ (614 ) $ (674 ) $ (504 ) Amortization relating to realized capital gains and losses (2) 17 50 (127 ) Amortization deceleration (acceleration) for changes in assumptions ("DAC unlocking") (3) 14 (2 ) 2 Total amortization of DAC $ (583 ) $ (626 ) $ (629 ) (1) Amortization of DAC before amortization relating to realized capital gains and losses and changes in assumptions for 2006 and 2005 includes $(72) million and $(103) million, respectively, relating to the reinsured variable annuity business. (2) Amortization relating to realized capital gains and losses for 2006 and 2005 includes $28 million and $1 million, respectively, relating to the reinsured variable annuity business. (3) Amortization deceleration (acceleration) for changes in assumptions ("DAC unlocking") for 2005 includes $55 million relating to the reinsured variable annuity business. There was no DAC unlocking related to variable annuities in 2006. The decrease in amortization of DAC in 2007 compared to 2006 was due to the absence in 2007 of amortization on the reinsured variable annuity business. Excluding amortization relating to the reinsured variable annuity business, amortization of DAC in 2007 was consistent with 2006 as increased amortization related to higher gross profits on fixed annuities and a decline in the credit to income for amortization relating to realized capital gains and losses were partially offset by lower amortization related to interest-sensitive life insurance contracts and a favorable impact relating to our annual comprehensive review of DAC assumptions (commonly referred to as "DAC unlocking"). The decline in amortization related to interest-sensitive life insurance contracts was the result of a write-down in 2006 totaling $27 million for the present value of future profits related to a block of corporate owned life insurance policies that terminated due to the bankruptcy of the policyholder. The slight decline in amortization of DAC in 2006 compared to 2005 was driven mostly by a favorable change in amortization relating to realized capital gains and losses and a reduction in amortization on our reinsured variable annuity business, almost entirely offset by the impact of higher gross profits on investment contracts and the write-off in 2006 totaling $27 million related to the block of corporate owned life insurance policies described above. The impact of realized capital gains and losses on amortization of DAC is dependent upon the relationship between the assets that give rise to the gain or loss and the product liability supported by the assets. Fluctuations result from changes in the impact of realized capital gains and losses on actual and expected gross profits. 93 The DAC asset was reduced by $726 million in 2006 as a result of the disposition of substantially all of our variable annuity business. The changes in the DAC asset are detailed in the following tables. (in millions) Beginning balance December 31, 2006 Impact of adoption of SOP 05-1 (1) Acquisition costs deferred Amortization before effect of realized capital gains and losses and changes in assumptions (2) Amortization relating to realized capital gains and losses (2) Amortization (acceleration) decleration for changes in assumptions (2) (3) Effect of unrealized capital gains and losses Ending balance December 31, 2007 Traditional life and other $ 841 $ $ 149 $ (108 ) $ $ $ $ 882 Interest-sensitive life 1,774 264 (187 ) 12 18 30 1,911 Fixed annuities 1,219 (11 ) 220 (312 ) 5 (4 ) 372 1,489 Variable annuities 4 (2 ) 2 Other 10 2 (5 ) 7 Total $ 3,848 $ (11 ) $ 635 $ (614 ) $ 17 $ 14 $ 402 $ 4,291 (in millions) Beginning balance December 31, 2005 Impact of Disposal of variable annuities Acquisition costs deferred Amortization before effect of realized capital gains and losses and changes in assumptions (2) Amortization relating to realized capital gains and losses (2) Amortization (acceleration) decleration for changes in assumptions (2) (3) Effect of unrealized capital gains and losses Ending balance December 31, 2006 Traditional life and other $ 807 $ $ 142 $ (108 ) $ $ $ $ 841 Interest-sensitive life 1,696 272 (220 ) (3 ) (18 ) 47 1,774 Fixed annuities 1,072 360 (266 ) 24 16 13 1,219 Variable annuities 730 (726 ) 46 (75 ) 29 4 Other 13 2 (5 ) 10 Total $ 4,318 $ (726 ) $ 822 $ (674 ) $ 50 $ (2 ) $ 60 $ 3,848 (1) The adoption of Statement of Position 05-1, "Accounting by Insurance Enterprises for Deferred Acquisition Costs in Connection with Modifications or Exchanges of Insurance Contracts" ("SOP 05-1"), resulted in a $7 million after-tax adjustment to unamortized DAC related to the impact on future estimated gross profits from the changes in accounting for certain costs associated with contract continuations that no longer qualify for deferral under SOP 05-1. The adjustment was recorded as a reduction of retained income at January 1, 2007 and a reduction of the DAC balance of $11 million, pretax. (2) Included as a component of amortization of DAC on the Consolidated Statements of Operations. (3) Commonly referred to as "DAC unlocking". Operating costs and expenses decreased 5.8% in 2007 compared to 2006 and decreased 25.9% in 2006 compared to 2005. The following table summarizes operating costs and expenses. (in millions) 2007 2006 2005 Non-deferrable acquisition costs $ 167 $ 175 $ 245 Other operating costs and expenses 274 293 387 Total operating costs and expenses $ 441 $ 468 $ 632 Restructuring and related charges $ 2 $ 24 $ 2 Non-deferrable acquisition costs and other operating costs and expenses declined in 2007 compared to 2006 due to expenses in 2006 related to the reinsured variable annuity business. Subsequent to the effective date of the reinsurance agreement for the variable annuity business, operating costs and expenses benefited from a servicing fee paid by Prudential for Allstate Financial's servicing of the business during a 24 month or less transition period following the effective date of the reinsurance agreement. Non-deferrable acquisition costs and other operating costs and expenses for 2006 included $19 million and $24 million, respectively, related to the reinsured variable annuity business for the period 94 of 2006 prior to the effective date of the reinsurance agreement. Excluding expenses associated with the impact of the reinsured variable annuity business in the period of 2006 prior to the effective date of the reinsurance agreement, non-deferrable acquisition expenses increased 7.1% in 2007 compared to 2006 due to higher non-deferrable commissions on certain Workplace Division products and other operating costs and expenses increased 1.9% due to higher investment in technology. Non-deferrable acquisition costs declined 28.6% in 2006 compared to 2005 due primarily to the transfer of the loan protection business to Allstate Protection effective January 1, 2006 and a reduction in non-deferrable commissions, which was primarily due to the reinsured variable annuity business. Non-deferrable acquisition costs related to the loan protection business amounted to $39 million in 2005. Other operating costs and expenses declined $94 million or 24.3% in 2006 compared to 2005. The reinsured variable annuity business and the transfer of the loan protection business resulted in $51 million of this reduction. The remaining decline related to a $28 million charge in the prior year for an increase in a liability for future benefits of a previously discontinued benefit plan, and expense savings initiatives, including the VTO. For more information on the VTO, see Note 12 to the Consolidated Financial Statements. Restructuring and related charges for 2006 reflect costs related to the VTO. Loss on disposition of operations for 2007, 2006 and 2005 totaled $10 million, $92 million and $13 million, respectively. In 2007, the net loss was primarily comprised of losses associated with the anticipated disposition of our direct response long-term care business that is currently held for sale, partially offset by amortization of the deferred reinsurance gain and other adjustments associated with reinsured variable annuity business. The net loss in 2006 was almost entirely attributable to the reinsured variable annuity business. In 2005, the net loss was related to several individually insignificant gains and losses for anticipated dispositions. Income tax expense decreased by 3.9% or $8 million in 2007 compared to 2006 and increased by 10.1% or $19 million in 2006 compared to 2005. The decline in 2007 compared to 2006 was due to lower income from operations before income tax expense and an energy tax credit that reduced income tax expense. The increase in 2006 compared to 2005 was due to increased income from operations before income tax expense partially offset by a slight decline in the effective tax rate. Reinsurance Ceded We enter into reinsurance agreements with unaffiliated reinsurers to limit our risk of mortality and morbidity losses. In addition, Allstate Financial has used reinsurance to effect the acquisition or disposition of certain blocks of business. We retain primary liability as a direct insurer for all risks ceded to reinsurers. As of both December 31, 2007 and 2006, 48% of our face amount of life insurance in force was reinsured. As of December 31, 2007 and 2006, for certain term life insurance policies, we ceded up to 90% of the mortality risk depending on the length of the term. Additionally, we ceded substantially all of the risk associated with our variable annuity business and we cede 100% of the morbidity risk on substantially all of our long-term care contracts. Beginning in July 2007, for new life insurance contracts, we ceded the mortality risk associated with coverage in excess of $3 million per life for contracts issued to individuals age 70 and over, and we ceded the mortality risk associated with coverage in excess of $5 million per life for most other contracts. Also beginning in July 2007, for certain large contracts that meet specific criteria, the Company's retention limit was increased to $10 million per life. In the period prior to July 2007, but subsequent to August 1998, we ceded the mortality risk associated with coverage in excess of $2 million per life, except in 2006 for certain instances when specific criteria were met, we ceded the mortality risk associated with coverage in excess of $5 million per life. For business sold prior 95 to October 1998, we ceded mortality risk in excess of specific amounts up to $1 million per individual life. The changes in Allstate Financial's retention guidelines for new life insurance contracts did not have a significant impact on the results of operations in 2007 or 2006. Amounts recoverable from reinsurers by type of policy or contract at December 31, are summarized in the following table. Reinsurance recoverable on paid and unpaid claims (in millions) 2007 2006 Annuities (1) $ 1,423 $ 1,654 Life insurance 1,373 1,225 Long-term care 619 518 Other 97 96 Total Allstate Financial $ 3,512 $ 3,493 (1) Reinsurance recoverables as of December 31, 2007 and 2006 include $1.26 billion and $1.49 billion, respectively, for general account reserves related to reinsured variable annuities. The estimation of reinsurance recoverables is impacted by the uncertainties involved in the establishment of reserves. Our reinsurance recoverables, summarized by reinsurer as of December 31, are shown in the following table. Reinsurance recoverable on paid and unpaid claims S&P Financial Strength Rating (in millions) 2007 2006 Prudential Insurance Company of America AA $ 1,261 $ 1,490 Employers Reassurance Corporation A+ 541 439 RGA Reinsurance Company AA- 327 295 Transamerica Life Group AA 288 233 Swiss Re Life and Health America, Inc. AA- 173 161 Paul Revere Life Insurance Company BBB+ 147 147 Scottish Re Group BB+ 111 127 Munich American Reassurance AA- 103 92 Security Life of Denver AA 86 73 Mutual of Omaha Insurance AA- 80 79 Manulife Insurance Company AAA 78 82 Triton Insurance Company NR 73 65 Lincoln National Life Insurance AA 63 59 American Health & Life Insurance Co. NR 57 50 Other (1) 124 101 Total $ 3,512 $ 3,493 (1) As of December 31, 2007 and 2006, the other category includes $84 million and $74 million, respectively, of recoverables due from reinsurers with an investment grade credit rating from S&P. 96 We continuously monitor the creditworthiness of reinsurers in order to determine our risk of recoverability on an individual and aggregate basis, and a provision for uncollectible reinsurance is recorded if needed. No amounts have been deemed unrecoverable in the three-years ended December 31, 2007. We enter into certain inter-company reinsurance transactions for the Allstate Financial operations in order to maintain underwriting control and manage insurance risk among various legal entities. These reinsurance agreements have been approved by the appropriate regulatory authorities. All significant inter-company transactions have been eliminated in consolidation. Allstate Financial Outlook We plan to increase sales of our financial products by Allstate exclusive agencies by developing and bringing to market new innovative, consumer-driven financial products and features targeted to middle market customers. We plan to grow sales of our Workplace Division products and increase focus on larger employers. Sales of our institutional products will be impacted by management's assessment of market liquidity, credit spreads and other market conditions. Market conditions may also influence whether maturing contracts are replaced with new issuances. We expect operating costs and expenses to increase over the prior year as a result of increased spending for the development of innovative products, additional marketing and growth of our Allstate exclusive agency and Workplace Division distribution channels as well as a reduction in the variable annuity servicing fee from Prudential. We expect that these expense increases will be partially mitigated by our continuing focus on operating efficiency. We plan to balance targeted new business return improvement with investments in growth initiatives and sales. Initially, investments in growth are expected to slow the improvement of returns and may reduce the price competitiveness of certain products, such as our fixed annuities, and slow or reduce the growth in sales and net income. The transition of our investment objective from primarily income generation to increased focus on increasing total returns may result in increased volatility in net investment income and realized capital gains and losses from period to period. Increased allocations to alternative investment classes, such as limited partnership interests and other equity-based assets, may also contribute to this volatility. Increased levels of dividends paid by Allstate Financial in 2007, combined with the anticipated dividends in 2008, may lead to a decline in invested assets and investment income. INVESTMENTS Overview and Strategy An important component of our financial results is the return on our investment portfolios. Investment portfolios are segmented between the Property-Liability, Allstate Financial and Corporate and Other operations. The investment portfolios are managed based upon the nature of each respective business and its corresponding liability structure. The Property-Liability portfolio's investment strategy emphasizes safety of principal and consistent income generation, within a total return framework. This approach, which has produced competitive returns over time, is designed to ensure financial strength and stability for paying claims, while maximizing economic value and surplus growth. We employ a strategic asset allocation model, which 97 considers the nature of the liabilities and risk tolerances, as well as the risk and return parameters of the various asset classes in which we invest. The model's recommended asset allocation, along with duration and liquidity considerations, guides our initial asset allocation. This is further adjusted based on an analysis of other potential market opportunities available. Portfolio performance is measured against benchmarks at target allocation weights. The Allstate Financial portfolio's investment strategy has historically focused on the need for risk-adjusted spread to support the underlying liabilities to achieve return on capital and profitable growth. We believe investment spread is maximized by selecting assets that perform favorably on a long-term basis and by disposing of certain assets to minimize the effect of downgrades and defaults. We believe this strategy maintains the investment spread necessary to sustain income over time. The portfolio management approach employs a combination of recognized market, analytical and proprietary modeling, including a strategic asset allocation model, as the primary basis for the allocation of interest sensitive, illiquid and credit assets as well as for determining overall below investment grade exposure and diversification requirements. Within the ranges set by the strategic asset allocation model, tactical investment decisions are made in consideration of prevailing market conditions. We will be adding a total return framework to the management of Allstate Financial's assets to further enhance long-term returns and leverage our active management capabilities. The Corporate and Other portfolio's investment strategy balances the pursuit of competitive returns with the unique liquidity needs of the portfolio relative to the overall corporate capital structure. The portfolio is primarily invested in high quality, highly-liquid fixed income and short-term securities with additional investments in less liquid holdings in order to enhance overall returns. In conjunction with our priority of optimizing the returns we realize for the risks we accept, we will be undertaking selected new investment strategies. The first is exploring the adoption of an enhanced enterprise-wide asset allocation model. This model will provide opportunities for enhanced returns by considering our total liability profile rather than a more limited business unit profile. This should allow us to capitalize on the diversification of risk within the enterprise and to invest in a broader and more global array of asset types. This shift in strategy will improve overall returns for the same level of portfolio risk being assumed today, although it may result in a different mix of assets held in the business segments. We are also forming investment subsidiaries, one within Allstate Financial and the other within Corporate and Other, to pursue investment opportunities not efficiently held within our insurance operations. The creation of these subsidiaries improves our capital management by enabling higher return investment strategies. As a result of these strategies and enterprise asset allocation, there may be a different mix in the reporting of returns between investment income, realized capital gains and losses, unrealized capital gains and losses and higher investment expenses. Additionally, these strategies may result in increased leverage from investing activities. 98 As a result of tactical decisions in each of the portfolios, we may sell securities during a period in which fair value has declined below amortized cost for fixed income securities or cost for equity securities. Portfolio monitoring, which includes identifying securities that are other-than-temporarily impaired and recognizing other-than-temporary impairments on securities in an unrealized loss position for which we do not have the intent and ability to hold until recovery, are conducted regularly. For more information, see the Portfolio Monitoring section of the MD&A. Portfolio Composition The composition of the investment portfolios at December 31, 2007 is presented in the table below. Also see Notes 2 and 5 of the consolidated financial statements for investment accounting policies and additional information. Property-Liability Allstate Financial (3) Corporate and Other (3) Total (in millions) Percent to total Percent to total Percent to total Percent to total Fixed income securities (1) $ 32,128 78.5 % $ 59,837 80.6 % $ 2,486 65.1 % $ 94,451 79.4 % Equity securities (2) 5,155 12.6 102 0.1 5,257 4.4 Mortgage loans 794 1.9 10,036 13.5 10,830 9.1 Limited partnership interests 1,416 3.5 998 1.3 87 2.3 2,501 2.1 Short-term 1,333 3.3 480 0.7 1,245 32.6 3,058 2.6 Other 79 0.2 2,803 3.8 1 2,883 2.4 Total $ 40,905 100.0 % $ 74,256 100.0 % $ 3,819 100.0 % $ 118,980 100.0 % (1) Fixed income securities are carried at fair value. Amortized cost basis for these securities was $31.70 billion, $59.40 billion and $2.40 billion for Property-Liability, Allstate Financial and Corporate and Other, respectively. (2) Equity securities are carried at fair value. Cost basis for these securities was $4.17 billion and $102 million for Property-Liability and Allstate Financial, respectively. (3) Balances reflect the elimination of related party investments between Allstate Financial and Corporate and Other. Total investments decreased to $118.98 billion at December 31, 2007, from $119.76 billion at December 31, 2006, primarily due to decreased net unrealized gains on fixed income and equity securities and lower funds associated with collateral received in conjunction with securities lending and other activities, partially offset by positive cash flows from operating activities. The Property-Liability investment portfolio decreased to $40.91 billion at December 31, 2007, from $41.66 billion at December 31, 2006, primarily due to dividends paid by AIC to The Allstate Corporation and decreased net unrealized gains on equity and fixed income securities, partially offset by positive cash flows from operating activities and the repayment of a $500 million intercompany note by ALIC to its parent, AIC. The Allstate Financial investment portfolio decreased to $74.25 billion at December 31, 2007, from $75.95 billion at December 31, 2006, primarily due to decreased net unrealized gains on fixed income securities, the payment of dividends to AIC, the repayment of ALIC's intercompany note to its parent, AIC, and lower funds associated with collateral received in conjunction with securities lending and other activities, partially offset by positive cash flows from operating activities. The Corporate and Other investment portfolio increased to $3.82 billion at December 31, 2007, from $2.14 billion at December 31, 2006, primarily due to dividends received from AIC and the proceeds from the $1 billion of junior subordinated securities issued in May 2007, partially offset by cash flows used in financing activities. Total investments at amortized cost related to collateral received in connection with securities lending business activities, funds received in connection with securities repurchase agreements and collateral 99 posted by counterparties related to derivative transactions decreased to $3.46 billion at December 31, 2007, from $4.14 billion at December 31, 2006. As of December 31, 2007 and 2006, these investments were carried at fair value and classified in fixed income securities totaling $2.85 billion and $2.63 billion, respectively, and short-term investments totaling $549 million and $1.55 billion, respectively. Securities lending activities are primarily used as an investment yield enhancement, and are conducted with third parties such as brokerage firms. We obtain collateral, typically in the form of cash, in an amount generally equal to 102% to 105% of the fair value of domestic and foreign securities, respectively, and monitor the market value of the securities loaned on a daily basis with additional collateral obtained as necessary. The cash we receive is invested in short-term and fixed income investments, and an offsetting liability to return the collateral is recorded in other liabilities and accrued expenses. Fixed Income Securities See Note 5 of the consolidated financial statements for a table showing the amortized cost, unrealized gains, unrealized losses and fair value for each type of fixed income security for the years ended December 31, 2007 and 2006. The following table shows fixed income securities by type at December 31. Fair Value (in millions) 2007 2006 U.S. government and agencies $ 4,421 $ 4,033 Municipal 25,307 25,608 Corporate 38,467 39,798 Foreign government 2,936 2,818 Mortgage-backed securities 6,959 7,916 Commercial mortgage-backed securities 7,617 7,837 Asset-backed securities 8,679 9,211 Redeemable preferred stock 65 72 Total fixed income securities $ 94,451 $ 97,293 During 2007, certain financial markets experienced decreased liquidity. This was particularly evident in the markets for securities collateralized by sub-prime residential mortgages. We experienced this illiquidity particularly in our asset-backed residential mortgage-backed securities ("ABS RMBS"), asset-backed collateralized debt obligations ("ABS CDOs"), Alt-A residential mortgage-backed securities ("Alt-A") and commercial real estate collateralized debt obligations ("CRE CDO") portfolios. These portfolios totaled $5.88 billion or less than 5% of our total investments at December 31, 2007. Certain other asset-backed and real estate-backed securities markets experienced illiquidity, but to a lesser degree. The fair values of securities comprising the illiquid portfolios are obtained from our contracted third-party pricing servicers and brokers. We evaluated the reasonableness of the fair value of these portfolios as of December 31, 2007 by comparing vendor prices to alternative third-party pricing and valuation servicers, both of which consider available market information including, but not limited to, collateral quality, anticipated cash flows, credit enhancements, default rates, loss severities, and credit ratings from rating agencies. In addition, we also considered the reasonableness of security values based upon the securities' relative position within their respective capital structures in determining the reasonableness of fair values, on a portfolio basis, for the above referenced securities as of December 31, 2007. 100 Municipal bonds , including tax-exempt and taxable securities, totaled $25.31 billion and 96.8% were rated investment grade at December 31, 2007. As of December 31, 2007, approximately $13.0 billion or 51.4% of our municipal bond portfolio is insured by eight bond insurers and 99.0% have a Moody's equivalent rating of Aaa or Aa. Our practices for acquiring and monitoring municipal bonds primarily take into consideration the quality of the underlying security. As of December 31, 2007, we believe that the valuations already reflect a significant decline in the value of the insurance, and further such declines if any, are not expected to be material. While the valuation of these holdings may be temporarily impacted by negative market developments, we continue to have the intent and ability to hold the bonds and expect to receive all of the contractual cash flows. As of December 31, 2007, 34.6% of our insured municipal bond portfolio was insured by MBIA, 25.6% by AMBAC, 19.4% by FSA and 16.6% by FGIC. In total, we hold $14.4 billion of fixed income securities that are insured by bond insurers, including $911 million of our ABS RMBS and $474 million of our other asset-backed securities discussed below. Additionally, we hold $46 million of corporate bonds that were directly issued by these bond insurers. Included in our municipal bond portfolio at December 31, 2007 are $2.56 billion of auction rate securities ("ARS") that have long-term stated maturities, with the interest rate reset based on auctions every 7, 28 or 35 days depending on the specific security. At the auction date, if the quantity of sell orders exceeds the quantity of purchase orders, the auction "fails" and the issuers are forced to pay a "maximum rate" as defined for each issue. The maximum rate is designed so that its prolonged use is an incentive to the issuer to call and refinance the long-term bonds. The effect of this incentive may be lessened to the extent that the maximum rate is closer to current market rates. When auctions are successfully completed, the interest rate reset normally corresponds with the short-term rate associated with the reset period. Our holdings primarily have a Moody's equivalent rating of Aaa and fair value was estimated at the corresponding par value at December 31, 2007. We make our investment decisions based on the underlying credit of each security, which for approximately 90% of our holdings are pools of student loans for which at least 85% of the collateral is insured by the U.S. Department of Education. During February of 2008, dealers were no longer supporting auctions with their own bids as they had in the past and we experienced failed auctions for $1.81 billion of our ARS holdings for which we are currently receiving the maximum rate. The entire ARS portfolio will come up for auction in March 2008. We anticipate that failed auctions may persist and more of our holdings will reset at the maximum rate. Auctions will continue to be conducted as scheduled for each of the securities. While these developments continue in the market, par value of these holdings may not be representative of the fair value of these securities. Accordingly, subsequent auctions could be more successful resulting in interest rates being more in line with the 7, 28 or 35 day reset periods. Corporate bonds totaled $38.47 billion and 91.3% were rated investment grade at December 31, 2007. As of December 31, 2007, $17.34 billion, or 45.1% of the portfolio consisted of privately placed securities compared to $17.31 billion or 43.5% at December 31, 2006. Privately placed securities primarily consist of corporate issued senior debt securities that are in unregistered form and are directly negotiated with the borrower. All privately placed corporate securities are rated by The National Association of Insurance Commissioners ("NAIC") based on information provided to them and are also internally rated. Additionally, approximately 25.7% of the privately placed corporate securities in our portfolio are rated by 101 an independent rating agency. The following table summarizes the privately placed corporate securities portfolio by credit quality as of December 31, 2007. (in millions) Property-Liability Allstate Financial Corporate and Other Total NAIC rating Moody's equivalent rating Fair value Net unrealized gains and losses Fair value Net unrealized gains and losses Fair value Net unrealized gains and losses Fair value Net unrealized gains and losses Percent of fair value to total 1 Aaa/Aa/A $ 770 $ (21 ) $ 6,922 $ 95 $ $ $ 7,692 $ 74 44.4 % 2 Baa 626 2 7,769 42 8,395 44 48.4 3 Ba 90 (3 ) 850 (26 ) 940 (29 ) 5.4 4 B 144 (1 ) 90 (7 ) 3 1 237 (7 ) 1.4 5 Caa or lower 31 (2 ) 38 (2 ) 69 (4 ) 0.4 6 In or near default 1 3 2 6 Total $ 1,662 $ (25 ) $ 15,672 $ 102 $ 5 $ 1 $ 17,339 $ 78 100.0 % Allstate's portfolio of privately placed securities are broadly diversified by issuer, industry sector, and by country. The portfolio is made up of approximately 650 issues with an average security value of approximately $26 million. Privately placed corporate obligations generally benefit from increased yields and structural security features such as financial covenants and call protections that provide investors greater protection against credit deterioration, reinvestment risk or fluctuations in interest rates than those typically found in publicly registered debt securities. Additionally, investments in these securities are made after extensive due diligence of the issuer, typically including direct discussions with senior management and on-site visits to company facilities. Ongoing monitoring includes direct periodic dialog with senior management of the issuer and continuous monitoring of operating performance and financial position. Every issue is internally rated with a formal rating affirmation once a year. Hybrid securities are carried at fair value and total $2.81 billion and $2.23 billion at December 31, 2007 and 2006, respectively. For further discussion on hybrid securities, see Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements. Foreign government securities totaled $2.94 billion and 90.8% were rated investment grade at December 31, 2007. Mortgage-backed securities ("MBS") totaled $6.96 billion and 100.0% were rated investment grade at December 31, 2007. The credit risk associated with MBS is mitigated due to the fact that 62.0% of the portfolio consists of securities that were issued by, or have underlying collateral that is guaranteed by U.S. government agencies or U.S. government sponsored entities ("U.S. Agency"). The MBS portfolio is subject to interest rate risk since price volatility and the ultimate realized yield are affected by the rate of prepayment of the underlying mortgages. 102 The following table shows MBS by type and Moody's equivalent rating at December 31, 2007. (in millions) Fair value % to Total Investments Aaa Aa A MBS U.S. Agency $ 4,317 3.6 % 100.0 % % % Prime 1,290 1.1 98.2 1.8 Alt-A 1,347 1.1 94.7 4.3 1.0 Other 5 100.0 Total MBS $ 6,959 5.8 % The following table presents information about the collateral in our Alt-A holdings at December 31, 2007. (in millions) Fair value % to Total Investments Alt-A Fixed rate $ 720 0.6 % Variable rate 627 0.5 Total Alt-A $ 1,347 1.1 % Alt-A mortgage-backed securities are at fixed or variable rates and include certain securities that are collateralized by residential mortgage loans issued to borrowers with stronger credit profiles than sub-prime borrowers, but do not qualify for prime financing terms due to high loan-to-value ratios or limited supporting documentation. Fair value represents 95.7% of the amortized cost of these securities. At December 31, 2007, the Alt-A portfolio had net unrealized losses of $61 million, which were comprised of $2 million of gross unrealized gains and $63 million of gross unrealized losses. $1.08 billion or 79.9% of these securities were issued during 2005, 2006 and 2007. We hold $623 million of Alt-A securities acquired during 2007, which were rated Aaa by one or more rating agencies at the time of purchase. Commercial Mortgage-Backed Securities ("CMBS") totaled $7.62 billion and 99.7% were rated investment grade at December 31, 2007. Approximately 85.7% of the CMBS investments are pools of commercial mortgages, broadly diversified across property types and geographical area. The CMBS portfolio is subject to credit risk, but unlike other structured products, is generally not subject to prepayment risk due to protections within the underlying commercial mortgages, whereby borrowers are effectively restricted from prepaying their mortgages due to changes in interest rates. Credit defaults can result in credit directed prepayments. The following table shows CMBS by type and Moody's equivalent rating at December 31, 2007. (in millions) Fair value % to Total Investments Aaa Aa A Baa CMBS $ 7,049 5.9 % 79.4 % 13.3 % 5.7 % 1.6 % CRE CDO 568 0.5 33.3 31.1 25.2 10.4 Total CMBS $ 7,617 6.4 % CRE CDO are investments secured primarily by commercial mortgage-backed securities and other commercial mortgage debt obligations. These securities are generally less liquid and have a higher risk profile than other commercial mortgage-backed securities. Fair value represents 78.7% of the amortized 103 cost of these securities. At December 31, 2007, CRE CDOs had net unrealized losses of $155 million, which were comprised of $1 million of gross unrealized gains and $156 million of gross unrealized losses. In addition to the quality of the loans and securities collateralizing the CRE CDOs, influential factors in our analysis are the adequacy of subordination and strength of the CRE CDO management team. Asset-backed securities ("ABS") totaled $8.68 billion and 98.0% were rated investment grade at December 31, 2007. Credit risk is managed by monitoring the performance of the collateral. In addition, many of the securities in the ABS portfolio are credit enhanced with features such as over-collateralization, subordinated structures, reserve funds, guarantees and/or insurance. A portion of the ABS portfolio is also subject to interest rate risk since, for example, price volatility and ultimate realized yields are affected by the rate of prepayment of the underlying assets. The following table shows ABS by type at December 31, 2007. (in millions) Fair Value % to Total Investments Aaa Aa A Baa Ba or Lower ABS ABS RMBS $ 3,926 3.3 % 71.8 % 21.2 % 6.0 % 0.1 % 0.9 % ABS CDOs 36 86.1 13.9 Total asset-backed securities collateralized by sub- prime residential mortgage loans 3,962 3.3 Other collateralized debt obligations 2,026 1.7 34.0 26.5 27.5 8.3 3.7 Other asset-backed securities 2,691 2.3 70.2 6.5 11.4 9.1 2.8 Total ABS $ 8,679 7.3 % The following table presents additional information about our ABS RMBS portfolio including a summary by first and second lien collateral at December 31, 2007. (in millions) Fair value % to Total Investments ABS RMBS First lien: Fixed rate (1) $ 1,119 0.9 % Variable rate (1) 1,956 1.7 Total first lien (2) 3,075 2.6 Second lien: Insured 688 0.6 Other 163 0.1 Total second lien (3) 851 0.7 Total ABS RMBS $ 3,926 3.3 % (1) Fixed rate and variable rate refer to the primary interest rate characteristics of the underlying mortgages at the time of issuance. (2) The credit ratings of the first lien ABS RMBS were 66.4% Aaa, 26.3% Aa and 7.3% A at December 31, 2007. (3) The credit ratings of the second lien ABS RMBS were 91.1% Aaa, 2.5% Aa, 1.8% A, 0.2% Baa and 4.4% Ba or lower at December 31, 2007. 104 ABS RMBS portfolio includes securities that are collateralized by mortgage loans issued to borrowers that cannot qualify for prime or alternative financing terms due in part to an impaired or limited credit history. It also includes securities that are collateralized by certain second lien mortgages regardless of the borrower's credit history. Fair value represents 88.7% of the amortized cost of these securities. As of December 31, 2007, the ABS RMBS portfolio had net unrealized losses of $500 million, which were comprised of $2 million of gross unrealized gains and $502 million of gross unrealized losses. At December 31, 2007, $911 million or 31.9% of the total ABS RMBS securities that are rated Aaa and Aa are insured by 6 bond insurers. $3.24 billion or 82.5% of the portfolio consisted of securities that were issued during 2005, 2006 and 2007. At December 31, 2007, 81.9% of these securities were rated Aaa, 15.4% rated Aa, 1.4% rated A, 0.1% rated Baa and 1.2% rated Ba or lower. During 2007, three second lien ABS RMBS with a value of $16 million were downgraded within the investment grade ratings. Four second lien securities with a fair value of $38 million were downgraded from investment grade to below investment grade ratings. During 2007, we sold $456 million of ABS RMBS, recognizing a loss of $8 million. We also collected $946 million of principal repayments consistent with the expected cash flows. These repayments represent approximately 25.7% of the amortized cost of our outstanding portfolio at December 31, 2006. ABS CDOs are securities collateralized by a variety of residential mortgage-backed and other securities, which may include sub-prime RMBS. Fair value represents 47.4% of the amortized cost of these securities. As of December 31, 2007, this portfolio had net unrealized losses of $40 million. Writedowns during 2007 were recorded on our ABS RMBS and ABS CDOs totaling $20 million and $62 million, respectively. We did not record any write-downs related to our Alt-As or CRE CDOs. We continue to believe that the unrealized losses on these securities are not necessarily predictive of the performance of the underlying collateral. In the absence of further deterioration in the collateral relative to our positions in the securities' respective capital structures, which could require other-than-temporary impairments, the unrealized losses should reverse over the remaining lives of the securities. Other collateralized debt obligations totaled $2.03 billion and 96.3% are rated investment grade at December 31, 2007. Other collateralized debt obligations consist primarily of obligations secured by high yield and investment grade corporate credits including $1.2 billion of collateralized loan obligations; $299 million of synthetic CDOs; $192 million of primarily bank trust preferred CDOs; $122 million of market value CDOs; $58 million of CDOs that invest in other CDOs ("CDO squared"); and $53 million of collateralized bond obligations. The CDO squared holdings contain immaterial amounts of ABS CDOs, ranging up to 4% of the underlying collateral. The cash flows used to pay principle and interest are derived from the other CDO's collateral except for synthetic CDOs which rely on cash flows from the underlying credit default swaps. As of December 31, 2007, net unrealized losses on the other collateralized debt obligations was $259 million. Other asset-backed securities consist primarily of investments secured by portfolios of credit card loans, auto loans, student loans and other consumer and corporate obligations. As of December 31, 2007, the net unrealized losses on these securities was $17 million. Additionally, 17.6% of the other asset-backed securities that are rated Aaa were insured by five bond insurers. We may utilize derivative financial instruments to help manage the exposure to interest rate risk, and to a lesser extent currency and credit risks, from the fixed income securities portfolio. For a more detailed discussion of interest rate, and currency risks and our use of derivative financial instruments, see the Net realized capital gains and losses and Market Risk sections of the MD&A and Note 6 of the consolidated financial statements. 105 The following table summarizes the credit quality of the fixed income securities portfolio at December 31, 2007. (in millions) Property-Liability Allstate Financial Corporate and Other Total NAIC Rating Moody's Equivalent Fair Value Percent to total Fair Value Percent to total Fair Value Percent to total Fair Value Percent to total 1 Aaa/Aa/A $ 27,594 85.9 % $ 41,399 69.2 % $ 2,465 99.2 % $ 71,458 75.7 % 2 Baa 2,604 8.1 15,754 26.3 3 0.1 18,361 19.4 Investment grade (1) 30,198 94.0 57,153 95.5 2,468 99.3 89,819 95.1 3 Ba 812 2.5 2,092 3.5 2,904 3.0 4 B 854 2.7 439 0.8 3 0.1 1,296 1.4 5 Caa or lower 225 0.7 140 0.2 13 0.5 378 0.4 6 In or near default 39 0.1 13 2 0.1 54 0.1 Below investment grade 1,930 6.0 2,684 4.5 18 0.7 4,632 4.9 Total $ 32,128 100.0 % $ 59,837 100.0 % $ 2,486 100.0 % $ 94,451 100.0 % (1) Defined as a security having a rating from the NAIC of 1 or 2; a rating of Aaa, Aa, A or Baa from Moody's or a rating of AAA, AA, A or BBB from Standard & Poor's, Fitch or Dominion or a rating of aaa, aa, a or bbb from A.M. Best; or a comparable internal rating if an externally provided rating is not available. Equity Securities Equity securities include common stocks, real estate investment trust equity investments and non-redeemable preferred stocks. The equity securities portfolio was $5.26 billion at December 31, 2007 compared to $6.15 billion at December 31, 2006. The decrease is primarily attributable to sales of equity securities with realized gains totaling $1.14 billion for the year ended December 31, 2007. Gross unrealized gains totaled $1.10 billion at December 31, 2007 compared to $1.77 billion at December 31, 2006. Gross unrealized losses totaled $106 million at December 31, 2007 compared to $20 million at December 31, 2006. Mortgage Loans Our mortgage loan portfolio, which is primarily held in the Allstate Financial portfolio was $10.83 billion at December 31, 2007 and $9.47 billion at December 31, 2006, and comprised primarily of loans secured by first mortgages on developed commercial real estate. Geographical and property type diversification are key considerations used to manage our exposure. We closely monitor our commercial mortgage loan portfolio on a loan-by-loan basis. Loans with an estimated collateral value less than the loan balance, as well as loans with other characteristics indicative of higher than normal credit risks, are reviewed by financial and investment management at least quarterly for purposes of establishing valuation allowances and placing loans on non-accrual status when and if necessary. The underlying collateral values are based upon either discounted property cash flow projections or a commonly used valuation method that utilizes a one-year projection of expected annual income divided by a market based expected rate of return. We had no realized capital losses related to write-downs on mortgage loans for the years ended December 31, 2007, 2006 and 2005. Limited partnership interests Limited partnership interests totaled $2.50 billion, or 2.1% of total investments, at December 31, 2007. Limited partnership interests primarily have exposure to private equity, real estate and hedge funds. This balance has increased 53.9% since December 31, 2006. Of the Limited Partnership Interests held at December 31, 2007, 52.6% were accounted for under the Equity Method of accounting, the remaining 47.4% were carried at cost. Short-Term Investments Our short-term investment portfolio was $3.06 billion and $2.43 billion at December 31, 2007 and 2006, respectively. We invest available cash balances primarily in taxable short-term securities having a final maturity date or redemption date of less than one year. 106 Other investments Our other investments are comprised primarily of $1.21 billion of bank loans and $1.08 billion of policy loans. Bank loans are comprised primarily of senior secured corporate loans and are carried at amortized cost. Policy loans are carried at the unpaid principal balances. Unrealized Gains and Losses See Note 5 of the consolidated financial statements for further disclosures regarding unrealized losses on fixed income and equity securities and factors considered in determining whether securities are other-than-temporarily impaired. The unrealized net capital gains on fixed income and equity securities at December 31, 2007 totaled $1.95 billion, a decrease of $2.34 billion since December 31, 2006. The decrease in net unrealized net capital gains was related primarily to increased unrealized losses on investment grade fixed income securities, resulting from widening credit spreads and credit exposure related to collateralized securities, which more than offset the effects of declining interest rates and sales of equity securities with net realized gains totaling $1.14 billion. Credit spreads are the additional yield on fixed income securities above the risk-free rate (typically defined as the yield on U.S. treasury securities), that market participants require to compensate them for assuming credit, liquidity and or repayment risks for fixed income securities with consistent terms. Credit spreads vary with the market's perception of risk and liquidity in specific fixed income markets. Credit spreads can widen (increase) or tighten (decrease) and may offset or add to the effects of risk-free interest rate changes in the valuation of fixed income securities from period to period. Gross unrealized gains and losses on fixed income securities by type and sector are provided in the table below. (in millions) Gross unrealized At December 31, 2007 Amortized cost Gains Losses Fair value Corporate: Banking $ 6,539 $ 78 $ (227 ) $ 6,390 Consumer goods (cyclical and non-cyclical) 6,030 101 (113 ) 6,018 Utilities 5,778 250 (72 ) 5,956 Financial services 5,343 54 (180 ) 5,217 Capital goods 3,597 79 (44 ) 3,632 Communications 2,474 68 (25 ) 2,517 Basic industry 2,022 47 (14 ) 2,055 Transportation 1,907 45 (31 ) 1,921 Other 1,821 56 (38 ) 1,839 Energy 1,752 51 (8 ) 1,795 Technology 1,114 23 (10 ) 1,127 Total corporate fixed income portfolio 38,377 852 (762 ) 38,467 U.S. government and agencies 3,503 918 4,421 Municipal 24,587 816 (96 ) 25,307 Foreign government 2,542 397 (3 ) 2,936 Mortgage-backed securities 7,002 57 (100 ) 6,959 Commercial mortgage-backed securities 7,925 79 (387 ) 7,617 Asset-backed securities 9,495 30 (846 ) 8,679 Redeemable preferred stock 64 2 (1 ) 65 Total fixed income securities $ 93,495 $ 3,151 $ (2,195 ) $ 94,451 107 The banking, financial services, consumer goods, and utilities sectors had the highest concentration of gross unrealized losses in our corporate fixed income securities portfolio at December 31, 2007. The gross unrealized losses in these sectors were primarily company specific and the result of widening credit spreads. As of December 31, 2007, $598 million or 78.5% of the gross unrealized losses in the corporate fixed income portfolio and $1.37 billion or 95.7% of the gross unrealized losses in the remaining fixed income securities related to securities rated investment grade. Unrealized losses on investment grade securities are principally related to rising interest rates or changes in credit spreads since the securities were acquired. All securities in an unrealized loss position at December 31, 2007 were included in our portfolio monitoring process for determining whether declines in value are other-than-temporary. The following table shows the composition by credit quality of the fixed income securities with gross unrealized losses at December 31, 2007. (in millions) NAIC Rating Moody's Equivalent Unrealized Loss Percent to Total Fair Value Percent to Total 1 Aaa/Aa/A $ (1,506 ) 68.6 % $ 24,554 69.8 % 2 Baa (463 ) 21.1 8,031 22.8 Investment grade (1,969 ) 89.7 32,585 92.6 3 Ba (144 ) 6.6 1,640 4.7 4 B (54 ) 2.4 683 2.0 5 Caa or lower (28 ) 1.3 256 0.7 6 In or near default 1 Below investment grade (226 ) 10.3 2,580 7.4 Total $ (2,195 ) 100.0 % $ 35,165 100.0 % The table above includes 40 securities with a fair value totaling $351 million and an unrealized loss of $18 million that have not yet received an NAIC rating, for which we have assigned a comparable internal rating. Due to lags between the funding of an investment, execution of final legal documents, filing with the Securities Valuation Office ("SVO") of the NAIC, and rating by the SVO, we generally have a small number of securities that have a pending rating. Unrealized losses on investment grade securities principally relate to changes in interest rates or changes in credit spreads, which reflect liquidity conditions of the related markets, since the securities were acquired. Of the unrealized losses on below investment grade securities, there were no significant unrealized loss positions (greater than or equal to 20% of amortized cost) for six or more consecutive months prior to December 31, 2007. Included among the securities rated below investment grade are high-yield bonds and securities that were investment grade when originally acquired. We mitigate the credit risk of investing in below investment grade fixed income securities by limiting the percentage of our fixed income portfolio invested in such securities, through diversification of the portfolio, active credit monitoring and portfolio management. 108 The scheduled maturity dates for fixed income securities in an unrealized loss position at December 31, 2007 are shown below. Actual maturities may differ from those scheduled as a result of prepayments by the issuers. (in millions) Unrealized Loss Percent to Total Fair Value Percent to Total Due in one year or less $ (7 ) 0.3 % $ 786 2.2 % Due after one year through five years (139 ) 6.3 4,031 11.5 Due after five years through ten years (252 ) 11.5 6,199 17.6 Due after ten years (851 ) 38.8 13,389 38.1 Mortgage- and asset- backed securities (1) (946 ) 43.1 10,760 30.6 Total $ (2,195 ) 100.0 % $ 35,165 100.0 % (1) Because of the potential for prepayment, these securities are not categorized based on their contractual maturities. The equity portfolio is comprised of securities in the following sectors. (in millions) Gross unrealized At December 31, 2007 Fair Value Cost Gains Losses Consumer goods (cyclical and non-cyclical) $ 997 $ 169 $ (19 ) $ 1,147 Financial services 724 97 (26 ) 795 Technology 455 131 (7 ) 579 Energy 328 202 (4 ) 526 Capital goods 363 130 (4 ) 489 Basic industry 235 103 (2 ) 336 Communications 258 80 (6 ) 332 Banking 277 20 (12 ) 285 Real estate 168 108 (7 ) 269 Utilities 111 42 (1 ) 152 Transportation 51 13 (1 ) 63 Other (1) 300 1 (17 ) 284 Total equities $ 4,267 $ 1,096 $ (106 ) $ 5,257 (1) Other consists primarily of index-based securities. At December 31, 2007, the financial services, consumer goods and banking sectors had the highest concentration of gross unrealized losses in our equity portfolio, which were company and sector specific. We expect the eventual recovery of these securities and the related sectors. All securities in an unrealized loss position at December 31, 2007 were included in our portfolio monitoring process for determining whether declines in value are potentially other-than-temporary. We use several methodologies to estimate the fair value of fixed income and equity securities and exchange traded and non-exchange traded derivative contracts. For a discussion of these methods, see the Application of Critical Accounting Estimates section of the MD&A. Portfolio Monitoring We have a comprehensive portfolio monitoring process to identify and evaluate, on a case-by-case basis, fixed income and equity securities whose carrying value may be other-than-temporarily impaired. The process includes a quarterly review of all securities using a screening process to identify situations where the fair value, compared to amortized cost for fixed income 109 securities, and cost for equity securities is below established thresholds for certain time periods, or which are identified through other monitoring criteria such as ratings downgrades or payment defaults. The securities identified, in addition to other securities for which we may have a concern, are evaluated based on facts and circumstances for inclusion on our watch-list. We also conduct a portfolio review to recognize impairment on securities in an unrealized loss position for which we do not have the intent and ability to hold until recovery as a result of approved programs involving the disposition of investments for reasons such as changes in duration, revisions to strategic asset allocations and liquidity actions, as well as certain dispositions anticipated by portfolio managers. All investments in an unrealized loss position at December 31, 2007 were included in our portfolio monitoring process for determining whether declines in value were other-than-temporary. 110 The following table summarizes fixed income and equity securities in a gross unrealized loss position according to significance, aging and investment grade classification. December 31, 2007 December 31, 2006 Fixed Income Fixed Income (in millions except number of issues) Investment Grade Below Investment Grade Equity Total Investment Grade Below Investment Grade Equity Total Category (I): Unrealized loss less than 20% of cost (1) Number of Issues 4,058 379 322 4,759 4,883 184 180 5,247 Fair Value $ 31,489 $ 2,446 $ 884 $ 34,819 $ 31,402 $ 1,193 $ 179 $ 32,774 Unrealized $ (1,391 ) $ (146 ) $ (66 ) $ (1,603 ) $ (593 ) $ (33 ) $ (14 ) $ (640 ) Category (II): Unrealized loss greater than or equal to 20% of cost for a period of less than 6 consecutive months (1) Number of Issues 176 21 192 389 1 2 27 30 Fair Value $ 1,096 $ 134 $ 102 $ 1,332 $ $ 4 $ 9 $ 13 Unrealized $ (578 ) $ (80 ) $ (38 ) $ (696 ) $ $ (1 ) $ (4 ) $ (5 ) Category (III): Unrealized loss greater than or equal to 20% of cost for a period of 6 or more consecutive months, but less than 12 consecutive months (1) Number of Issues 5 5 17 17 Fair Value $ $ $ 1 $ 1 $ $ $ 2 $ 2 Unrealized $ $ $ (2 ) $ (2 ) $ $ $ (1 ) $ (1 ) Category (IV): Unrealized loss greater than or equal to 20% of cost for 12 or more consecutive months (1) Number of Issues 4 4 Fair Value $ $ $ $ $ $ $ 1 $ 1 Unrealized $ $ $ $ $ $ $ (1 ) $ (1 ) Total Number of Issues 4,234 400 519 5,153 4,884 186 228 5,298 Total Fair Value $ 32,585 $ 2,580 $ 987 $ 36,152 $ 31,402 $ 1,197 $ 191 $ 32,790 Total Unrealized Losses $ (1,969 ) $ (226 ) $ (106 ) $ (2,301 ) $ (593 ) $ (34 ) $ (20 ) $ (647 ) (1) For fixed income securities, cost represents amortized cost. 111 The largest individual unrealized loss was $12 million for category (I) and $26 million for category (II) as of December 31, 2007. Categories (I) and (II) have generally been adversely affected by overall economic conditions including interest rate increases and the market's evaluation of certain sectors. The degree to which and/or length of time that the securities have been in an unrealized loss position does not suggest that these securities pose a high risk of being other-than-temporarily impaired. Categories (III) and (IV) have primarily been adversely affected by industry and issue specific, or issuer specific conditions. All of the securities in these categories are monitored for other-than-temporary impairment. We expect that the fair values of these securities will recover over time. Whenever our initial analysis indicates that a fixed income security's unrealized loss of 20% or more for at least 36 months or any equity security's unrealized loss of 20% or more for at least 12 months is temporary, additional evaluations and management approvals are required to substantiate that a write-down is not appropriate. As of December 31, 2007, no securities met these criteria. The following table contains the individual securities with the largest unrealized losses as of December 31, 2007. No other fixed income or equity security had an unrealized loss greater than $11 million or 0.5% of the total unrealized loss on fixed income and equity securities. (in millions) Unrealized Loss Fair Value NAIC Rating Unrealized Loss Category ABS CDO $ (25 ) $ 19 1 II ABS RMBS 2006- 2 nd lien (16 ) 11 3 II ABS RMBS 2006- 2 nd lien (15 ) 14 4 II Financial Services (15 ) 33 3 II Financial Services (12 ) 10 1 II ABS RMBS 2007- 1 st lien (12 ) 16 1 II Synthetic CDO (12 ) 53 1 I Synthetic CDO (12 ) 23 1 II Synthetic CDO (12 ) 18 1 II Total $ (131 ) $ 197 We monitor the quality of our fixed income and bank loan portfolios by categorizing certain investments as "problem", "restructured" or "potential problem." Problem fixed income securities and bank loans are in default with respect to principal or interest and/or are investments issued by companies that have gone into bankruptcy subsequent to our acquisition or loan. Restructured fixed income and bank loan investments have rates and terms that are not consistent with market rates or terms prevailing at the time of the restructuring. Potential problem fixed income or bank loan investments are current with respect to contractual principal and/or interest, but because of other facts and circumstances, we have concerns regarding the borrower's ability to pay future principal and interest, which causes us to believe these investments may be classified as problem or restructured in the future. 112 The following table summarizes problem, restructured and potential problem fixed income securities and bank loans at December 31. 2007 2006 (in millions) Amortized cost Fair value Percent of total Fixed Income and Bank Loan portfolios Amortized cost Fair value Percent of total Fixed Income and Bank Loan portfolios Problem $ 35 $ 43 0.1 % $ 65 $ 84 0.1 % Restructured 35 35 33 33 Potential problem 245 198 0.2 139 149 0.2 Total net carrying value $ 315 $ 276 0.3 % $ 237 $ 266 0.3 % Cumulative write-downs recognized (1) $ 358 $ 298 (1) Cumulative write-downs recognized only reflects write-downs related to investments within the problem, potential problem and restructured categories. We have experienced a decrease in the amortized cost of investments categorized as problem and an increase in the amortized cost of investments categorized potential problem as of December 31, 2007 compared to December 31, 2006. The decrease in the problem category was primarily due to dispositions, including the pay-off of certain airline related investments. The increase in the potential problem category was primarily due to the addition of certain ABS CDOs, as well as a corporate bond issued by a prime mortgage lender. We evaluated each of these investments through our portfolio monitoring process at December 31, 2007 and recorded write-downs when appropriate. We further concluded that any remaining unrealized losses on these investments were temporary in nature and that we have the intent and ability to hold the securities until recovery. While these balances may increase in the future, particularly if economic conditions are unfavorable, management expects that the total amount of investments in these categories will remain low relative to the total fixed income securities and bank loans portfolios. Net Investment Income The following table presents net investment income for the years ended December 31. (in millions) 2007 2006 2005 Fixed income securities $ 5,459 $ 5,329 $ 5,112 Equity securities 114 117 109 Mortgage loans 600 545 503 Limited partnership interests 293 187 140 Other 412 404 193 Investment income, before expense 6,878 6,582 6,057 Investment expense (443 ) (405 ) (311 ) Net investment income $ 6,435 $ 6,177 $ 5,746 113 Net Realized Capital Gains and Losses The following tables present the components of realized capital gains and losses and the related tax effect for the years ended December 31. (in millions) 2007 2006 2005 Investment write-downs $ (163 ) $ (47 ) $ (55 ) Dispositions 1,336 379 619 Valuation of derivative instruments (77 ) 26 (95 ) Settlement of derivative instruments 139 (72 ) 80 Realized capital gains and losses, pretax 1,235 286 549 Income tax expense (437 ) (100 ) (189 ) Realized capital gains and losses, after-tax $ 798 $ 186 $ 360 Dispositions in the above table include sales, losses recognized in anticipation of dispositions and other transactions such as calls and prepayments. We may sell impaired fixed income or equity securities that were in an unrealized loss position at the previous reporting date, or other investments where the fair value has declined below the carrying value, in situations where new factors such as negative developments, subsequent credit deterioration, liquidity needs, and newly identified market opportunities cause a change in our previous intent to hold a security to recovery or maturity. Dispositions in 2007 included net realized gains on sales and other transactions such as calls and prepayments of $1.48 billion and losses recorded in connection with anticipated dispositions of $147 million. The net realized gains on sales and other transactions were primarily due to net realized gains on equity securities of $1.14 billion comprised of gross gains of $1.39 billion and gross losses of $252 million. The gross gains were attributable to our continuing tactical reallocation of equity securities in the Property-Liability portfolio. Dispositions in 2006 included net realized gains on sales and other transactions such as calls and prepayments of $491 million and losses recorded in connection with anticipated dispositions of $112 million. The net realized gains on sales and other transactions were comprised of gross gains of $958 million and gross losses of $467 million. The $467 million in gross losses primarily consisted of $314 million from sales of fixed income securities and $94 million from sales of equity securities. During our comprehensive portfolio reviews, we determine whether there are any approved programs involving the expected disposition of investments such as changes in duration, revisions to strategic asset allocations and liquidity actions, as well as dispositions anticipated by the portfolio managers resulting from their on-going comprehensive reviews of the portfolios. Upon approval of such programs, portfolio managers identify a population of suitable investments, typically larger than needed to accomplish the objective, from which specific securities are selected to sell. Due to our change in intent to hold until recovery, we recognize impairments on investments within the population that are in an unrealized loss position. When the objectives of the programs are accomplished, any remaining securities are redesignated as intent to hold until recovery. For the year ended December 31, 2007, we recognized $147 million of losses related to a change in our intent to hold certain investments with unrealized losses in the Property-Liability and Allstate Financial segments until they recover in value. The change in our intent was primarily related to strategic asset allocation decisions and ongoing comprehensive reviews of our portfolios as well as a liquidity strategy in the Property-Liability portfolio. At December 31, 2007, the fair value of securities for which we did not have the intent to hold until recovery totaled $1.68 billion. 114 For the year ended December 31, 2006, we recognized $112 million of losses related to a change in our intent to hold certain securities with unrealized losses until they recover in value. The change in our intent was driven by certain approved programs, including funding for the disposition through reinsurance of substantially all of Allstate Financial's variable annuity business, yield enhancement strategies for Allstate Financial, a liquidity strategy review for Corporate and Other segment, changes to strategic asset allocations for Property-Liability and ongoing comprehensive reviews of our portfolios. These programs were completed during 2006. At December 31, 2006, the fair value of securities for which we did not have the intent to hold until recovery totaled $375 million. 115 The table below presents the realized capital gains and losses (pretax) on the valuation and settlement of derivative instruments shown by underlying exposure and derivative strategy for the years ended December 31. (in millions) 2007 2006 2005 Interest rate exposure Asset/liability management Anticipatory hedging $ (30 ) $ 17 $ (9 ) Futures used to protect investment spread from changes in interest rates that arise from mismatches in the timing of cashflows from Allstate Financial products and the related investment activity. Amounts primarily reflect cash settlements. Duration gap management (27 ) (51 ) (57 ) Interest rate caps, floors and swaps are used by Allstate Financial to align interest-rate sensitivities of its assets and liabilities. The 2007 loss resulted from declining interest rates, approximately $20 million related to cash settlements. Ineffectiveness (13 ) (7 ) (7 ) Represents hedge accounting ineffectiveness, including the gains and losses realized upon the termination of the hedging instrument. Portfolio duration management (69 ) (1 ) 26 Net short interest rate derivatives are used to offset the effects of changing interest rates on the value of our Property-Liability fixed income portfolio which are reported in unrealized net capital gains in accumulated other comprehensive income. The 2007 loss resulted from declining interest rates, approximately $55 million related to cash settlements. Hedging of interest rate exposure in annuity contracts (22 ) 1 (1 ) Interest rate caps used to offset the effect of changing interest rates linked to treasury rates on certain Allstate Financial annuity contracts, which are reported in credited interest. The results include cash settlements and valuation changes The 2007 net loss represents approximately $50 million of losses from changes in valuation due to the decline in interest rates and $28 million of gain from cash settlements. Equity exposure Asset replication and hedging unrealized gains on equity securities 72 (13 ) (1 ) S&P futures were primarily used to protect unrealized gains on our equity securities portfolio reported in unrealized net capital gains in accumulated other comprehensive income or to replicate equity returns. The results are primarily cash settlements. Embedded derivatives- conversion options in fixed income securities and equity indexed notes 84 118 42 Certain fixed income securities, such as convertible bonds and equity linked notes, contain embedded derivatives. The changes in valuation of the embedded derivatives are reported in realized capital gains and losses. The results generally track the performance of underlying equity indices. Valuation gains and losses would be converted into cash for convertible securities upon our conversion or sale of these securities but will be eliminated if held to maturity; for equity indexed notes upon sale or maturity. Credit exposure Asset replication (29 ) 6 2 Credit default swaps used to replicate fixed income securities to complement the cash market when credit exposure to certain issuers is not available or when the derivative alternative is less expensive than the cash market alternative. The amounts primarily reflect non-cash changes in valuation due to fluctuating credit spreads, which would be converted to cash upon termination or a default on an underlying credit obligation. Commodity exposure Commodity derivatives for excess return 106 (111 ) (8 ) Commodity excess return swaps derivatives diversify our holdings and enhance overall returns. The amounts were primarily cash settlements and reflect returns on the underlying index. We have no holdings outstanding at December 31, 2007. Currency exposure Foreign currency contracts (7 ) (5 ) Other Other (3 ) (2 ) $ 62 $ (46 ) $ (15 ) 116 A changing interest rate environment will drive changes in our portfolio duration targets at a tactical level. A duration target and range is established with an economic view of liabilities relative to a long-term portfolio view. Tactical duration management is accomplished through both cash market transactions including new purchases and derivative activities that generate realized gains and losses. As a component of our approach to managing portfolio duration, realized gains and losses on certain derivative instruments are most appropriately considered in conjunction with the unrealized gains and losses on the fixed income portfolio. This approach mitigates the impacts of general interest rate changes to the overall financial condition of the Corporation as shown in the Market Risk section of the MD&A. Approximately $53 million or 31.8% of the losses relate to the valuations of derivative instruments are associated with economic hedging instruments that support investments whose valuation changes are reported in shareholders' equity. The ten largest losses from sales of individual securities for the year ended December 31, 2007 totaled $58 million with the largest loss being $8 million and the smallest loss being $3 million. The one security comprising the $8 million was in an unrealized loss position greater than or equal to 20% of amortized cost for fixed income securities or cost for equity securities for a period of less than six consecutive months. Our largest aggregate loss on dispositions and writedowns are shown in the following table by issuer and its affiliates, and issue for government securities. No other issuer together with its affiliates had an aggregated loss on dispositions and writedowns greater than 1.0% of the total gross loss on dispositions and writedowns on fixed income and equity securities. (in millions) Fair Value at Disposition ("Proceeds") Loss on Dispositions (1) Write- downs December 31, 2007 Holdings (2) Net Unrealized Gain (Loss) ABS CDO $ $ $ (37 ) $ $ Solar energy general limited liability company (19 ) 15 Prime mortgage lender 24 (1 ) (14 ) 33 (4 ) ABS RMBS 2006 2 nd lien (13 ) 4 Financial services 48 (10 ) (2 ) 127 (23 ) ABS CDO (11 ) 44 (25 ) ABS CDO (11 ) US government securities 41 (9 ) 97 Managed health care 13 (8 ) Total $ 126 $ (28 ) $ (107 ) $ 320 $ (52 ) (1) Dispositions include losses recognized in anticipation of dispositions. (2) Holdings include fixed income securities at amortized cost or equity securities at cost. The circumstances of the above losses are considered to be security specific or issue specific and are not expected to have a material effect on other holdings in our portfolios. MARKET RISK Market risk is the risk that we will incur losses due to adverse changes in equity, interest, commodity, or currency exchange rates and prices. Adverse changes to these rates and prices may occur due to changes in the liquidity of a market or market segment, or to changes in market perceptions of credit worthiness and/or risk tolerance. Our primary market risk exposures are to changes in interest 117 rates and equity prices, although we also have a smaller exposure to changes in foreign currency exchange rates and commodity prices. The active management of market risk is integral to our results of operations. We may use the following approaches to manage exposure to market risk within defined tolerance ranges: 1) rebalancing existing asset or liability portfolios, 2) changing the character of investments purchased in the future and 3) using derivative instruments to modify the market risk characteristics of existing assets and liabilities or assets expected to be purchased. For a more detailed discussion of our use of derivative financial instruments, see Note 6 of the consolidated financial statements. Overview We generate substantial investible funds from our Property-Liability and Allstate Financial businesses. In formulating and implementing guidelines for investing funds, we seek to earn returns that enhance our ability to offer competitive rates and prices to customers while contributing to attractive and stable profits and long-term capital growth. Accordingly, our investment decisions and objectives are a function of the underlying risks and product profiles of each business. Investment policies define the overall framework for managing market and other investment risks, including accountability and controls over risk management activities. Subsidiaries that conduct investment activities follow policies that have been approved by their respective boards of directors. These investment policies specify the investment limits and strategies that are appropriate given the liquidity, surplus, product profile and regulatory requirements of the subsidiary. Executive oversight of investment activities is conducted primarily through subsidiaries' boards of directors and investment committees. For Allstate Financial, its asset-liability management ("ALM") policies further define the overall framework for managing market and investment risks. ALM focuses on strategies to enhance yields, mitigate market risks and optimize capital to improve profitability and returns for Allstate Financial. Allstate Financial ALM activities follow asset-liability policies that have been approved by their respective boards of directors. These ALM policies specify limits, ranges and/or targets for investments that best meet Allstate Financial's business objectives in light of its product liabilities. We manage our exposure to market risk through the use of asset allocation, duration and value-at-risk limits, simulation, and as appropriate, through the use of stress tests. We have asset allocation limits that place restrictions on the total funds that may be invested within an asset class. We have duration limits on the Property-Liability and Allstate Financial investment portfolios, and as appropriate, on individual components of these portfolios. These duration limits place restrictions on the amount of interest rate risk that may be taken. Our value-at-risk limits are intended to restrict the potential loss in fair value that could arise from adverse movements in the fixed income, equity, and currency markets based on historical volatilities and correlations among market risk factors. Comprehensive day-to-day management of market risk within defined tolerance ranges occurs as portfolio managers buy and sell within their respective markets based upon the acceptable boundaries established by investment policies. For Allstate Financial, this day-to-day management is integrated with and informed by the activities of the ALM organization. This integration results in a prudent, methodical and effective adjudication of market risk and return, conditioned by the unique demands and dynamics of Allstate Financial's product liabilities and supported by the continuous application of advanced risk technology and analytics. Although we apply a similar overall philosophy to market risk, the underlying business frameworks and the accounting and regulatory environments differ considerably between the Property-Liability and Allstate Financial businesses affecting investment decisions and risk parameters. Interest rate risk is the risk that we will incur a loss due to adverse changes in interest rates relative to the interest rate characteristics of interest bearing assets and liabilities. This risk arises from many of our 118 primary activities, as we invest substantial funds in interest sensitive assets and issue interest sensitive liabilities. Interest rate risk includes risks related to changes in U.S. Treasury yields and other key benchmarks as well as changes in interest rates resulting from the widening credit spreads and credit exposure to collateralized securities. We manage the interest rate risk in our assets relative to the interest rate risk in our liabilities. One of the measures used to quantify this exposure is duration. Duration measures the price sensitivity of the assets and liabilities to changes in interest rates. For example, if interest rates increase 100 basis points, the fair value of an asset with a duration of 5 is expected to decrease in value by approximately 5%. At December 31, 2007, the difference between our asset and liability duration was approximately 0.39, compared to a 0.23 gap at December 31, 2006. A positive duration gap indicates that the fair value of our assets is more sensitive to interest rate movements than the fair value of our liabilities. Most of our duration gap is attributable to the Property-Liability operations, with the primary liabilities being auto and homeowners claims. In the management of investments supporting the Property-Liability business, we adhere to an objective of emphasizing safety of principal and consistency of income within a total return framework. This approach is designed to ensure our financial strength and stability for paying claims, while maximizing economic value and surplus growth. This objective generally results in a positive duration mismatch between the Property-Liability assets and liabilities. For the Allstate Financial business, we seek to invest premiums, contract charges and deposits to generate future cash flows that will fund future claims, benefits and expenses, and that will earn stable spreads across a wide variety of interest rate and economic scenarios. To achieve this objective and limit interest rate risk for Allstate Financial, we adhere to a philosophy of managing the duration of assets and related liabilities within predetermined tolerance levels. This philosophy is executed using interest rate swaps, futures, forwards, caps, floors and swaptions to reduce the interest rate risk resulting from mismatches between existing assets and liabilities, and financial futures and other derivative instruments to hedge the interest rate risk of anticipated purchases and sales of investments and product sales to customers. We pledge and receive collateral on certain types of derivative contracts. For futures and option contracts traded on exchanges, we have pledged securities as margin deposits totaling $55 million as of December 31, 2007. For over-the-counter derivative transactions including interest rate swaps, foreign currency swaps, interest rate caps, interest rate floor agreements, and credit default swaps, master netting agreements are used. These agreements allow us to net payments due for transactions covered by the agreements, and when applicable, we are required to post collateral. As of December 31, 2007, we held cash of $72 million and securities of $226 million pledged by counterparties as collateral for over-the-counter instruments; we pledged cash of $1 million and securities of $107 million as collateral to counterparties. To calculate the duration gap between assets and liabilities, we project asset and liability cash flows and calculate their net present value using a risk-free market interest rate adjusted for credit quality, sector attributes, liquidity and other specific risks. Duration is calculated by revaluing these cash flows at alternative interest rates and determining the percentage change in aggregate fair value. The cash flows used in this calculation include the expected maturity and repricing characteristics of our derivative financial instruments, all other financial instruments (as described in Note 6 of the consolidated financial statements), and certain other items including unearned premiums, property-liability claims and claims expense reserves, interest-sensitive liabilities and annuity liabilities. The projections include assumptions (based upon historical market experience and our experience) that reflect the effect of changing interest rates on the prepayment, lapse, leverage and/or option features of instruments, where applicable. The preceding assumptions relate primarily to mortgage-backed securities, collateralized mortgage obligations, 119 municipal housing bonds, callable municipal and corporate obligations, and fixed rate single and flexible premium deferred annuities. Additionally, the calculations include assumptions regarding the renewal of property-liability policies. Based upon the information and assumptions used in the duration calculation, and interest rates in effect at December 31, 2007, we estimate that a 100 basis point immediate, parallel increase in interest rates ("rate shock") would decrease the net fair value of the assets and liabilities by approximately $1.51 billion, compared to $1.76 billion at December 31, 2006. Reflected in the duration calculation are the effects of a program that uses short futures to manage the Property-Liability interest rate risk exposures relative to duration targets, as well as a program that uses interest rate swaptions to manage the risk of a large rate increase. In calculating the impact of a 100 basis point increase on the swaption value, we have assumed interest rate volatility remains constant. Based on the short futures and swaption contracts in place at December 31, 2007, we would recognize realized capital gains totaling $361 million in the event of a 100 basis point immediate, parallel interest rate increase and $195 million in realized capital losses in the event of a 100 basis point immediate, parallel interest rate decrease. The selection of a 100 basis point immediate parallel change in interest rates should not be construed as our prediction of future market events, but only as an illustration of the potential effect of such an event. There are $7.77 billion of assets supporting life insurance products such as traditional and interest-sensitive life that are not financial instruments. These assets and the associated liabilities have not been included in the above estimate. The $7.77 billion of assets excluded from the calculation has increased from the $7.08 billion reported at December 31, 2006 due to an increase in the in-force account value of interest-sensitive life products. Based on assumptions described above, in the event of a 100 basis point immediate increase in interest rates, the assets supporting life insurance products would decrease in value by $554 million, compared to a decrease of $457 million at December 31, 2006. To the extent that conditions differ from the assumptions we used in these calculations, duration and rate shock measures could be significantly impacted. Additionally, our calculations assume that the current relationship between short-term and long-term interest rates (the term structure of interest rates) will remain constant over time. As a result, these calculations may not fully capture the effect of non-parallel changes in the term structure of interest rates and/or large changes in interest rates. Equity price risk is the risk that we will incur losses due to adverse changes in the general levels of the equity markets. At December 31, 2007, we held approximately $4.32 billion in common stocks and $3.76 billion in other securities with equity risk (including primarily convertible securities, limited partnership funds, non-redeemable preferred securities and equity-linked notes), compared to approximately $5.87 billion and $2.99 billion, respectively, at December 31, 2006. Approximately 100.0% and 50.5% of these totals, respectively, represented assets of the Property-Liability operations at December 31, 2007, compared to approximately 100.0% and 53.5%, respectively, at December 31, 2006. Additionally, we had 120 contracts in short Standard & Poor's 500 Composite Price Index ("S&P 500") futures at December 31, 2007 with a fair value of $44 million. At December 31, 2007, our portfolio of common stocks and other securities with equity risk had a beta of approximately 0.95, compared to a beta of approximately 1.02 at December 31, 2006. Beta represents a widely used methodology to describe, quantitatively, an investment's market risk characteristics relative to an index such as the S&P 500. Based on the beta analysis, we estimate that if the S&P 500 increases or decreases by 10%, the fair value of our equity investments will increase or decrease by approximately 9.5%, respectively. Based upon the information and assumptions we used to calculate beta at December 31, 2007, we estimate that an immediate decrease in the S&P 500 of 10% would decrease the net fair value of our equity investments identified above by approximately $765 million, compared to $824 million at December 31, 2006. The selection of a 10% immediate decrease 120 in the S&P 500 should not be construed as our prediction of future market events, but only as an illustration of the potential effect of such an event. The beta of our common stocks and other securities with equity risk was determined by comparing the monthly total returns of these investments to monthly total returns of the S&P 500 over a three-year historical period. Since beta is historically based, projecting future price volatility using this method involves an inherent assumption that historical volatility and correlation relationships between stocks and the composition of our portfolio will not change in the future. Therefore, the illustrations noted above may not reflect our actual experience if future volatility and correlation relationships differ from the historical relationships. At December 31, 2007 and 2006, we had separate accounts assets related to variable annuity and variable life contracts with account values totaling $14.93 billion and $16.17 billion, respectively. Equity risk exists for contract charges based on separate account balances and guarantees for death and/or income benefits provided by our variable products. In 2006, we disposed of substantially all of the variable annuity business through a reinsurance agreement with Prudential as described in Note 3 of the consolidated financial statements, and therefore mitigated this aspect of our risk. Equity risk for our variable life business relates to contract charges and policyholder benefits. Total variable life contract charges for 2007 and 2006 were $92 million and $86 million, respectively. Separate account liabilities related to variable life contracts were $905 and $826 million in December 31, 2007 and 2006, respectively. At December 31, 2007 and 2006 we had approximately $3.98 billion and $3.47 billion, respectively, in equity-indexed annuity liabilities that provide customers with interest crediting rates based on the performance of the S&P 500. We hedge the risk associated with these liabilities using equity-indexed options and futures, interest rate swaps, and eurodollar futures, maintaining risk within specified value-at-risk limits. Foreign currency exchange rate risk is the risk that we will incur economic losses due to adverse changes in foreign currency exchange rates. This risk primarily arises from our foreign equity investments, including real estate funds and our Canadian operations. We also have certain funding agreement programs and a small amount of fixed income securities that are denominated in foreign currencies, however, derivatives are used to effectively hedge the foreign currency risk of these funding agreements and of approximately half the securities. At December 31, 2007 and 2006, we had approximately $924 million and $1.02 billion, respectively, in funding agreements denominated in foreign currencies. At December 31, 2007, we had approximately $791 million in foreign currency denominated equity securities, an additional $669 million net investment in our foreign subsidiaries, and $45 million in unhedged non-dollar pay fixed income securities. These amounts were $637 million, $559 million, and $0 million, respectively, at December 31, 2006. Approximately 89.5% of the foreign currency exposure is in the Property-Liability business. Based upon the information and assumptions we used at December 31, 2007, we estimate that a 10% immediate unfavorable change in each of the foreign currency exchange rates that we are exposed to would decrease the value of our foreign currency denominated instruments by approximately $150 million, compared with an estimated $120 million decrease at December 31, 2006. The selection of a 10% immediate decrease in all currency exchange rates should not be construed as our prediction of future market events, but only as an illustration of the potential effect of such an event. Our currency exposure is diversified across 30 currencies, compared to 21 currencies at December 31, 2006. Our largest individual foreign currency exposures at December 31, 2007 were to the Canadian dollar (45.2%) and the Euro (21.7%). The largest individual foreign currency exposures at December 31, 2006 were to the Canadian dollar (44.8%) and the Euro (20.9%). Our primary regional exposure is to Western Europe, approximately 35.5% at December 31, 2007, compared to 33.4% at December 31, 2006. 121 The modeling technique we use to report our currency exposure does not take into account correlation among foreign currency exchange rates. Even though we believe it is very unlikely that all of the foreign currency exchange rates that we are exposed to would simultaneously decrease by 10%, we nonetheless stress test our portfolio under this and other hypothetical extreme adverse market scenarios. Our actual experience may differ from these results because of assumptions we have used or because significant liquidity and market events could occur that we did not foresee. Commodity price risk is the risk that we will incur economic losses due to adverse changes in the prices of commodities. This risk arises from our commodity linked investments, such as the Goldman Sachs Commodity Index which is a broad based, oil dominated index. At December 31, 2007 and 2006, we had approximately $0 million and $572 million exposure to the index, respectively. This exposure was almost entirely within Property-Liability. Based upon the information and assumptions available at December 31, 2007, we estimate that a 10% immediate unfavorable change to the commodity index would decrease the value of our commodity investments by $0 million, compared with an estimated $57 million decrease at December 31, 2006. The selection of a 10% immediate decrease in commodity prices should not be construed as our prediction of future market events, but only as an illustration of the potential effect of such an event. PENSION PLANS We have defined benefit pension plans, which cover most full-time and certain part-time employees and employee-agents. See Note 16 of the consolidated financial statements for a complete discussion of these plans and their effect on the consolidated financial statements. The pension and other postretirement plans may be amended or terminated at any time. Any revisions could result in significant changes to our obligations and our obligation to fund the plans. We report the net funded status of our pension and other postretirement plans in the Consolidated Statements of Financial Condition as a component of accumulated other comprehensive income in shareholder's equity. It represents the differences between the fair value of plan assets and the projected benefit obligation for pension plans and the accumulated postretirement benefit obligation for other postretirement plans that have not yet been recognized as a component of net periodic cost. The measurement of the net funded status can vary based upon the fluctuations in the fair value of the plan assets and the actuarial assumptions used for the plans as discussed below. The net underfunded status of the pension and other post-retirement benefit obligation at December 31, 2007 was $344 million, a decrease of $765 million from $1.1 billion at December 31, 2006. As of December 31, 2007, each of our qualified pension plans had net assets that exceeded its projected benefit obligation, based on an October 31, 2007 measurement date, although as of January 1, 2008, the fair value of plan assets had declined to the extent that certain plans' projected benefit obligations slightly exceeded plan assets. As provided for in the Financial Accounting Standards Board issued Statement of Financial Accounting Standard ("SFAS") No. 87 "Employers' Accounting for Pensions," the market-related value component of expected returns recognizes plan equity losses and gains over a five-year period, which we believe is consistent with the long-term nature of pension obligations. As a result, the effect of changes in fair value on our net periodic pension cost may be experienced in periods subsequent to those in which the fluctuations actually occur. Net periodic pension cost in 2008 is estimated to be $138 million based on current assumptions. Net periodic pension cost decreased in 2007 principally due to lower settlement charges and decreases in the amortization of actuarial losses. Net periodic pension cost increased in 2006 principally due to higher settlement charges, an increase in the weighted average discount rate assumption which is based on 122 long-term interest rates and the amortization of actuarial losses. In each of the years 2007, 2006 and 2005, net pension cost included non-cash settlement charges primarily resulting from lump sum distributions made to agents and in 2006 due to higher lump sum payments made to Allstate employees. Additional settlement charges occurred during 2007 also related to the Supplemental Retirement Income Plan ("SRIP") as a result of lump sum payments made from the plan. Settlement charges are expected to continue in the future as we settle our remaining agent pension obligations by making lump sum distributions to agents. Amounts recorded for pension cost and accumulated other comprehensive income are significantly affected by fluctuations in the returns on plan assets and the amortization of unrecognized actuarial gains and losses. Plan assets sustained net losses in prior periods primarily due to declines in equity markets. These asset losses, combined with all other unrecognized actuarial gains and losses, resulted in amortization of net actuarial loss (and additional net periodic pension cost) of $116 million in 2007 and $143 million in 2006. We anticipate that the unrealized loss for our pension plans will exceed 10% of the greater of the projected benefit obligations or the market-related value of assets during the foreseeable future, resulting in additional amortization and net periodic pension cost. Amounts recorded for net periodic pension cost and accumulated other comprehensive income are also significantly affected by changes in the assumptions used to determine the weighted average discount rate and the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets. The weighted average discount rate is based on rates at which expected pension benefits attributable to past employee service could effectively be settled on a present value basis at the measurement date. We develop the assumed weighted average discount rate by utilizing the weighted average yield of a theoretical dedicated portfolio derived from bonds available in the Lehman corporate bond universe having ratings of at least "AA" by Standard & Poor's or at least "Aa" by Moody's on the measurement date with cash flows that match expected plan benefit requirements. Significant changes in discount rates, such as those caused by changes in the yield curve, the mix of bonds available in the market, the duration of selected bonds and expected benefit payments, may result in volatility in pension cost and accumulated other comprehensive income. Holding other assumptions constant, a hypothetical decrease of 100 basis points in the weighted average discount rate would result in an increase of $47 million in net periodic pension cost and a $369 million increase in the net funded status liability of our pension plans recorded as accumulated other comprehensive income after-tax as of January 1, 2008, our remeasurement date to transition to a December 31 measurement date under SFAS No. 158, versus an increase of $55 million in net periodic pension cost and a $423 million increase in the net funded status liability as of October 31, 2006. A hypothetical increase of 100 basis points in the weighted average discount rate would decrease net periodic pension cost by $34 million and would decrease the net funded status liability of our pension plans recorded as accumulated other comprehensive income after-tax by $311 million as of January 1, 2008, versus a decrease in net periodic pension cost of $48 million and a $353 million decrease in the net funded status liability as of October 31, 2006. This non-symmetrical range results from the non-linear relationship between discount rates and pension obligations, and changes in the amortization of unrealized net actuarial gains and losses. The expected long-term rate of return on plan assets reflects the average rate of earnings expected on plan assets. While this rate reflects long-term assumptions and is consistent with long-term historical returns, sustained changes in the market or changes in the mix of plan assets may lead to revisions in the assumed long-term rate of return on plan assets that may result in variability of pension cost. Differences between the actual return on plan assets and the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets are a component of unrecognized gains or losses, which may be amortized as a component of net 123 actuarial gains and losses and recorded in accumulated other comprehensive income. As a result, the effect of changes in fair value on our pension cost may be experienced in results of operations in periods subsequent to those in which the fluctuations actually occur. Holding other assumptions constant, a hypothetical decrease of 100 basis points in the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets would result in an increase of $48 million in pension cost at January 1, 2008, compared to $42 million at October 31, 2006. A hypothetical increase of 100 basis points in the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets would result in a decrease in net periodic pension cost of $48 million at January 1, 2008, compared to $42 million at October 31, 2006. CAPITAL RESOURCES AND LIQUIDITY Capital Resources consist of shareholders' equity and debt, representing funds deployed or available to be deployed to support business operations or for general corporate purposes. The following table summarizes our capital resources at December 31. (in millions) 2007 2006 2005 Common stock, retained income and other shareholders' equity items $ 21,228 $ 20,855 $ 18,104 Accumulated other comprehensive income 623 991 2,082 Total shareholders' equity 21,851 21,846 20,186 Debt 5,640 4,662 5,300 Total capital resources $ 27,491 $ 26,508 $ 25,486 Ratio of debt to shareholders' equity 25.8 % 21.3 % 26.3 % Ratio of debt to capital resources 20.5 % 17.6 % 20.8 % Shareholders' equity increased in 2007, due to net income and a decline in the net underfunded status of the pension and other post-retirement benefit obligation, partially offset by share repurchases, decreases in unrealized net capital gains on investments and dividends paid to shareholders. Shareholders' equity increased in 2006, due to net income which was partially offset by share repurchases, dividends paid to shareholders, decreases in unrealized net capital gains on investments, and the recognition of the net funded status of pension and other post retirement benefit obligations recognized with the adoption of SFAS No. 158. For further information on SFAS No. 158, see Notes 2 and 16 of the consolidated financial statements. The decline in the net underfunded status of the pension and other post-retirement benefit obligation in 2007 is primarily related to favorable investment performance of the assets and an increase in the discount rate of the pension plans, and lower than assumed claims experience in the other post-retirement employee benefit plans. The favorable impact on shareholders' equity was $580 million for pension, and $185 million for other post employment benefits ("OPEB"). Share repurchases Our $4.00 billion share repurchase program, which commenced in November 2006, is expected to be completed by March 31, 2008. As of December 31, 2007, this program had $240 million remaining. This program was increased from $3.00 billion in May 2007, reflecting the amount of proceeds received from our issuance of $1.00 billion of junior subordinated securities as described below. Share repurchases during 2007 included an accelerated stock repurchase agreement totaling $500 million. In February 2008, we announced a new $2.00 billion share repurchase program that will commence upon completion of our current $4 billion program during March 2008. The new program is expected to be completed by March 31, 2009. 124 Since 1995, we have acquired 430 million shares of our common stock at a cost of $17.76 billion, primarily as part of various stock repurchase programs. We have reissued 94 million shares since 1995, primarily associated with our equity incentive plans, the 1999 acquisition of American Heritage Life Investment Corporation ("AHL") and the 2001 redemption of certain mandatorily redeemable preferred securities. The impact of our repurchase programs on total shares outstanding since 1995 has been a net reduction of 333 million shares or 37.2%. Debt increased in 2007 due to increases in long-term debt. Long-term debt increased due to the May 2007 issuance of $500 million of Series A 6.50% Fixed-to-Floating Rate Junior Subordinated Debentures with a final maturity date of 2067 and $500 million of Series B 6.125% Fixed-to-Floating Rate Junior Subordinated Debentures with a final maturity date of 2067 (together the "Debentures"), utilizing the registration statement filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission ("SEC") in May 2006. These securities will be treated in part as equity by Moody's and S&P in their assessment of the Company's credit rating. Series A will be considered 100% equity by S&P until 2037, and 75% equity by Moody's until 2017 and 50% equity until 2037. Series B will be considered 100% and 75% equity by S&P and Moody's, respectively, until 2017. For further information on the debt issuances, see Note 11 of the consolidated financial statements. Debt decreased in 2006, primarily due to net decreases in long-term debt and short-term debt as no commercial paper borrowings were outstanding. Long-term debt decreased due to the December 1, 2006 repayment of $550 million of 5.375% Senior Notes in accordance with their scheduled maturity. We also elected to redeem our $200 million of 7.83% junior subordinated debentures due in 2045, thereby triggering the redemption of 200,000 shares of the 7.83% mandatorily redeemable preferred securities of subsidiary trust ("trust preferred securities") originally issued by Allstate Financing II, an unconsolidated variable interest entity ("VIE"). The debentures and trust preferred securities were redeemed at a price of 103.915% plus accrued and unpaid interest. In 2006, we also purchased a headquarters office building previously owned by a consolidated synthetic lease VIE for $78 million, further reducing long-term debt. The 2006 redemptions were made from available sources of liquidity including the issuance in March 2006 of $650 million of 5.95% Senior Notes due 2036, utilizing the registration statement filed with the SEC in August 2003. At December 31, 2007 and 2006, there were no outstanding commercial paper borrowings. Financial Ratings and Strength The following table summarizes our debt, commercial paper and insurance financial strength ratings at December 31, 2007. Moody's Standard & Poor's A.M. Best The Allstate Corporation (senior long-term debt) A1 A+ a The Allstate Corporation (commercial paper) P-1 A-1 AMB-1 AIC (insurance financial strength) Aa2 AA A+ ALIC (insurance financial strength) Aa2 AA A+ Our ratings are influenced by many factors including our operating and financial performance, asset quality, liquidity, asset/liability management, overall portfolio mix, financial leverage (i.e., debt), exposure to risks such as catastrophes and the current level of operating leverage. There were no changes to the ratings listed above during 2007. 125 AIC entered into a capital support agreement with ALIC effective December 14, 2007. AIC also entered into an intercompany liquidity agreement with ALIC effective January 1, 2008. Under the capital support agreement, AIC is committed to provide capital to ALIC to allow for profitable growth while maintaining financial strength ratings at or above those of its parent, AIC. The intercompany liquidity agreement establishes a mechanism under which short-term advances of funds may be made between AIC and ALIC for liquidity and other general corporate purposes. The maximum amount of potential funding under each of these agreements is $1.0 billion. During 2006, ALIC issued an intercompany note in the amount of $500 million payable to its parent, AIC, which was repaid in the first quarter of 2007. ALIC used the funds to accelerate purchases of investments based on its outlook of the availability of acceptable investments in the beginning of 2007. The impacts of these loans are eliminated in consolidation. We have distinct groups of subsidiaries licensed to sell property and casualty insurance in New Jersey and Florida that maintain separate group ratings. The ratings of these groups are influenced by the risks that relate specifically to each group. Many mortgage companies require property owners to have insurance from an insurance carrier with a secure financial strength rating from an accredited rating agency. Allstate New Jersey Insurance Company and Encompass Insurance Company of New Jersey, which write auto and homeowners insurance, are rated A- by A.M. Best. Allstate New Jersey Insurance Company also has a Demotech rating of A". Allstate Floridian, which writes primarily property insurance, has an A.M. Best rating of B+ with a negative outlook. This rating is in part dependent upon the catastrophe exposure reduction provided by our catastrophe reinsurance program in Florida. We expect to place this program for the 2008 hurricane season later this year. AFIC and its subsidiary, Allstate Floridian Indemnity Company, also have Demotech financial stability ratings of A'. Encompass Floridian Insurance Company and Encompass Floridian Indemnity Company, both subsidiaries of AFIC, have Demotech financial stability ratings of A'. Allstate's domestic property-liability and life insurance subsidiaries prepare their statutory basis financial statements in conformity with accounting practices prescribed or permitted by the insurance department of the applicable state of domicile. Statutory surplus is a measure that is often used as a basis for determining dividend paying capacity, operating leverage and premium growth capacity, and it is also reviewed by rating agencies in determining their ratings. As of December 31, 2007, AIC's statutory surplus is approximately $18.0 billion compared to $19.1 billion at December 31, 2006. The ratio of net premiums written to statutory surplus is a common measure of operating leverage used in the property-casualty insurance industry and serves as an indicator of a company's premium growth capacity. Ratios in excess of 3 to 1 are typically considered outside the usual range by insurance regulators and rating agencies. AIC's premium to surplus ratio was 1.5x on December 31, 2007 compared to 1.4x in the prior year. State laws specify regulatory actions if an insurer's risk-based capital ("RBC"), a measure of an insurer's solvency, falls below certain levels. The NAIC has a standard formula for annually assessing RBC. The formula for calculating RBC for property-liability companies takes into account asset and credit risks but places more emphasis on underwriting factors for reserving and pricing. The formula for calculating RBC for life insurance companies takes into account factors relating to insurance, business, asset and interest rate risks. At December 31, 2007, the RBC for each of our domestic insurance companies was above levels that would require regulatory actions. The NAIC has also developed a set of financial relationships or tests known as the Insurance Regulatory Information System to assist state regulators in monitoring the financial condition of insurance companies and identifying companies that require special attention or actions by insurance regulatory 126 authorities. The NAIC analyzes financial data provided by insurance companies using prescribed ratios, each with defined "usual ranges". Generally, regulators will begin to monitor an insurance company if its ratios fall outside the usual ranges for four or more of the ratios. If an insurance company has insufficient capital, regulators may act to reduce the amount of insurance it can issue. The ratios of our domestic insurance companies are within these ranges. Liquidity Sources and Uses Our potential sources of funds principally include activities shown in the following table. Property- Liability Allstate Financial Corporate and Other Receipt of insurance premiums X X Allstate Financial contractholder fund deposits X Reinsurance recoveries X X Receipts of principal, interest and dividends on investments X X X Sales of investments X X X Funds from investment repurchase agreements, securities lending, dollar roll, commercial paper and lines of credit agreements X X X Inter-company loans X X X Capital contributions from parent X X Dividends from subsidiaries X X Tax refunds/settlements X Funds from periodic issuance of additional securities X Funds from the settlement of our benefit plans X Our potential uses of funds principally include activities shown in the following table. Property- Liability Allstate Financial Corporate and Other Payment of claims and related expenses X Payment of contract benefits, maturities, surrenders and withdrawals X Reinsurance cessions and payments X X Operating costs and expenses X X X Purchase of investments X X X Repayment of investment repurchase agreements, securities lending, dollar roll, commercial paper and lines of credit agreements X X X Payment or repayment of inter-company loans X X X Capital contributions to subsidiaries X X Dividends to shareholders/parent company X X X Tax payments/settlements X X Share repurchases X Debt service expenses and repayment X X X Settlement payments of employee and agent benefit plans X X X 127 The following table summarizes consolidated cash flow activities by business segment. Property-Liability (1) Allstate Financial (1) Corporate and Other (1) Consolidated (in millions) 2007 2006 2005 2007 2006 2005 2007 2006 2005 2007 2006 2005 Net cash provided by (used in): Operating activities $ 2,421 $ 2,454 $ 2,872 $ 2,930 $ 2,589 $ 2,502 $ 82 $ 12 $ 231 $ 5,433 $ 5,055 $ 5,605 Investing activities 1,255 (1,257 ) 421 266 (2,074 ) (4,854 ) (1,636 ) 1,412 (718 ) (115 ) (1,919 ) (5,151 ) Financing activities 66 (344 ) 370 (1,997 ) (152 ) 2,498 (3,408 ) (2,510 ) (3,423 ) (5,339 ) (3,006 ) (555 ) Net (decrease) increase in consolidated cash $ (21 ) $ 130 $ (101 ) (1) Business unit cash flows reflect the elimination of intersegment dividends and borrowings. Property-Liability Cash provided by operating activities for Property-Liability in 2007 was comparable to 2006. Lower cash provided by operating activities for Property-Liability in 2006, compared to 2005, was primarily due to higher claim payments related to the prior year hurricanes, partially offset by increased premiums. Cash flows provided by investing activities increased in 2007, compared to 2006, primarily due to increased sales of equity securities. Cash flows used in investing activities increased in 2006, compared to 2005, primarily due to higher investment purchases, partially offset by proceeds from sales of securities. Cash flows were provided by financing activities in 2007 compared to being used in the financing activities in 2006, primarily due to the repayment of short-term debt in 2006. Cash flows used in financing activities increased in 2006, compared to 2005, primarily due to the repayment of short-term debt. Cash flows were impacted by dividends paid by AIC to its parent, The Allstate Corporation, totaling $4.92 billion, $1.01 billion and $3.86 billion in 2007, 2006 and 2005, respectively. During 2008, AIC will have the capacity to pay a total of $4.96 billion in dividends without obtaining prior approval from the Illinois Department of Insurance. For a description of limitations on the payment of these dividends, see Note 15 of the consolidated financial statements. Allstate Financial Higher operating cash flows for Allstate Financial in 2007, compared to 2006, primarily related to lower operating expenses and tax payments, an increase in investment income, partially offset by increased policy and contract benefit payments and the absence in 2007 of contract charges on the reinsured variable annuity business. Higher operating cash flows for Allstate Financial in 2006, compared to 2005, primarily related to higher investment income. Cash flows from investing activities increased in 2007, compared to 2006, primarily due to increased cash provided by operating activities, partially offset by increased cash used in financing activities. Cash flows used in investing activities decreased in 2006 primarily due to decreased net cash provided by financing activities, partially offset by the investment of higher operating cash flows. Cash flows used in investing activities in 2006 also include the settlements related to the disposition through reinsurance of substantially all our variable annuity business. Cash flows used in financing activities increased in 2007, compared to 2006, primarily due to lower contractholder fund deposits. Cash used in financing activities increased in 2006 as a result of lower contractholder fund deposits and higher surrenders and partial withdrawals. For quantification of the changes in contractholder funds, see the Allstate Financial Segment section of the MD&A. Financing cash flows were impacted by dividends paid by Allstate Financial totaling $742 million, $725 million and $290 million in 2007, 2006 and 2005, respectively. 128 A portion of the Allstate Financial product portfolio, including fixed annuity, interest-sensitive life insurance and certain funding agreements, is subject to surrender and withdrawal at the discretion of contractholders. The following table summarizes Allstate Financial's liabilities for these products by their contractual withdrawal provisions at December 31, 2007. (in millions) 2007 Not subject to discretionary withdrawal $ 11,909 Subject to discretionary withdrawal with adjustments: Specified surrender charges (1) 25,928 Market value (2) 9,234 Subject to discretionary withdrawal without adjustments (3) 14,904 Total Contractholder funds (4) $ 61,975 (1) Includes $10.22 billion of liabilities with a contractual surrender charge of less than 5% of the account balance. (2) Approximately $8.26 billion of the contracts with market value adjusted surrenders have a 30-45 day period during which there is no surrender charge or market value adjustment including approximately $1.45 billion with a period commencing during 2008. (3) Includes $5.63 billion of extendible funding agreements backing medium-term notes outstanding with an initial maturity of 13 months from the effective date of the contract that require contractholders to elect a maturity extension each month for a period of 5 to 10 years, depending on the contract terms, up to the contractually specified final maturity date. The contractually specified final maturity dates begin in 2009 and are definitive unless the maturity dates are accelerated in accordance with the contractholders' election to not extend the maturity date, in which case the contracts mature 12 months thereafter. The contracts have an annual coupon step-up feature when extended. Based upon the elections made as of December 31, 2007, approximately $4.20 billion will mature during 2008. In addition, from January 1, 2008 through February 15, 2008, approximately $827 million elected to not extend the initial maturity date. (4) Includes approximately $1.12 billion of contractholder funds on variable annuities reinsured to Prudential effective June 1, 2006. To ensure we have the appropriate level of liquidity in this segment, we perform actuarial tests on the impact to cash flows of policy surrenders and other actions under various scenarios. Depending upon the years in which certain policy types were sold with specific surrender provisions, Allstate Financial's cash flow could vary due to higher surrender of policies exiting their surrender charge periods. Allstate Financial expects to meet the cash flow requirements of the non-extended funding agreements maturing in 2008 and 2009 primarily through a combination of cash received from new product deposits and contractual interest and principal receipts from our investment portfolio. Corporate and Other Fluctuations in the Corporate and Other operating cash flows were primarily due to the timing of intercompany settlements. Investing activities primarily relate to investments in the portfolios of Kennett Capital Holdings, LLC ("Kennett Capital Holdings"). Financing cash flows of the Corporate and Other segment reflect actions such as fluctuations in short-term debt, repayment of debt, proceeds from the issuance of debt, dividends to shareholders of The Allstate Corporation and share repurchases; therefore, financing cash flows are affected when we increase or decrease the level of these activities. Higher cash used in investing activities in 2007, when compared to 2006, was the result of increased dividends from subsidiaries to the holding company. Higher cash used in financing activities in 2007, when compared to 2006, was the result of increased share repurchases. We have established external sources of short-term liquidity that include a commercial paper program, lines-of-credit, dollar rolls and repurchase agreements. In the aggregate, at December 31, 2007, these sources could provide over $3.96 billion of additional liquidity. For additional liquidity, we can also issue new insurance contracts, incur additional debt and sell assets from our investment portfolio. The 129 liquidity of our investment portfolio varies by type of investment. For example, $17.34 billion of privately placed corporate obligations that represent 14.6% of the consolidated investment portfolio, and $10.83 billion of mortgage loans that represent 9.10% of the consolidated investment portfolio, generally are considered to be less liquid than many of our other types of investments, such as our U.S. government and agencies, municipal and public corporate fixed income security portfolios. The sources of liquidity for The Allstate Corporation include but are not limited to dividends from AIC and $2.77 billion of consolidated investments of Kennett Capital Holdings at December 31, 2007. We have access to additional borrowing to support liquidity as follows: A commercial paper program with a borrowing limit of $1.00 billion to cover short-term cash needs. As of December 31, 2007, there were no balances outstanding and therefore the remaining borrowing capacity was $1.00 billion; however, the outstanding balance fluctuates daily. Our primary credit facility covers short-term liquidity requirements. Our $1.00 billion unsecured revolving credit facility, has an initial term of five years expiring in 2012 with two one year extensions that can be exercised in the first or second year of the facility upon approval of existing or replacement lenders providing more than two thirds of the commitments to lend. This facility contains an increase provision that would allow up to an additional $500 million of borrowing provided the increased portion could be fully syndicated at a later date among existing or new lenders. Although the right to borrow under the facility is not subject to a minimum rating requirement, the costs of maintaining the facility and borrowing under it are based on the ratings of our senior, unsecured, nonguaranteed long-term debt. There were no borrowings under this line of credit during 2007. The total amount outstanding at any point in time under the combination of the commercial paper program and the credit facility cannot exceed the amount that can be borrowed under the credit facility. A universal shelf registration statement was filed with the SEC in May 2006. We can use it to issue an unspecified amount of debt securities, common stock (including 337 million shares of treasury stock as of December 31, 2007), preferred stock, depositary shares, warrants, stock purchase contracts, stock purchase units and securities of subsidiaries. The specific terms of any securities we issue under this registration statement will be provided in the applicable prospectus supplements. Our only financial covenant exists with respect to our credit facility and our synthetic lease VIE obligations. The covenant requires that we not exceed a 37.5% debt to capital resources ratio as defined in the agreements. This ratio at December 31, 2007 was 17.0%. For quantification of the synthetic lease VIE obligations, see Note 11 of the consolidated financial statements. We closely monitor and manage our liquidity through long- and short-term planning that is integrated throughout the corporation, the business segments and investments. Allstate Financial manages the duration of assets and related liabilities through its ALM organization, using a dynamic process that addresses liquidity from components of the investment portfolio, as appropriate, and is routinely subjected to stress testing. Allstate Protection's underwriting cash transactions comprise millions of small transactions that make it possible to statistically determine reasonable expectations of patterns of liquidity, which are subject to volatility from unpredictable catastrophe losses. Discontinued Lines and Coverages' liabilities are expected to be paid over many years and do not present a significant liquidity risk. Property-Liability monitors the duration of its assets and liabilities and maintains a portfolio of highly liquid fixed income and equity securities, including short-term investments, exchange-traded common stock, municipal bonds, corporate bonds, and U.S. government and government agency securities in order to address the variability of its cash flows. Allstate Financial and Property-Liability also have access to 130 funds from our commercial paper program through the participation of AIC and ALIC, and Allstate Financial has access to funds from the AIC and ALIC intercompany liquidity agreement. Certain remote events and circumstances could constrain our liquidity. Those events and circumstances include, for example, a catastrophe resulting in extraordinary losses, a downgrade in our long-term debt rating of A1, A+ and a (from Moody's, Standard & Poor's and A.M. Best, respectively) to non-investment grade status of below Baa3/BBB-/bb, a downgrade in AIC's financial strength rating from Aa2, AA and A+ (from Moody's, Standard & Poor's and A.M. Best, respectively) to below Baa/BBB/A-, or a downgrade in ALIC's financial strength ratings from Aa2, AA and A+ (from Moody's, Standard & Poor's and A.M. Best, respectively) to below Aa3/AA-/A-. The rating agencies also consider the interdependence of our individually rated entities, therefore, a rating change in one entity could potentially affect the ratings of other related entities. Contractual Obligations and Commitments Our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2007 and the payments due by period are shown in the following table. (in millions) Total Less than 1 year 1-3 years 4-5 years Over 5 years Liabilities for collateral and repurchase agreements (1) $ 3,461 $ 3,461 $ $ $ Contractholder funds (2) 78,449 14,828 24,173 10,263 29,185 Reserve for life-contingent contract benefits (2) 30,538 1,233 3,535 2,370 23,400 Long-term debt (3) 8,893 344 1,384 959 6,206 Capital lease obligations (3) 74 12 24 10 28 Operating leases (3) 770 208 278 152 132 Unconditional purchase obligations (3) 438 233 158 31 16 Defined benefit pension plans and other postretirement benefit plans (3)(4) 4,646 203 147 155 4,141 Reserve for property-liability insurance claims and claims expense (5) 18,865 8,139 6,061 2,130 2,535 Other liabilities and accrued expenses (6)(7) 4,220 4,056 113 18 33 Net unrecognized tax benefits (8) 76 76 Total Contractual Cash Obligations $ 150,430 $ 32,793 $ 35,873 $ 16,088 $ 65,676 (1) Liabilities for collateral and repurchase agreements are typically fully secured with cash. We manage our short-term liquidity position to ensure the availability of a sufficient amount of liquid assets to extinguish short-term liabilities as they come due in the normal course of business, including utilizing potential sources of liquidity as disclosed previously. (2) Contractholder funds represent interest-bearing liabilities arising from the sale of products such as interest-sensitive life, fixed annuities, including immediate annuities without life contingencies, bank deposits and institutional products. The reserve for life-contingent contract benefits relates primarily to traditional life and immediate annuities with life contingencies. These amounts reflect the present value of estimated cash payments to be made to contractholders and policyholders. Certain of these contracts, such as immediate annuities without life contingencies and institutional products, involve payment obligations where the amount and timing of the payment is essentially fixed and determinable. These amounts relate to (i) policies or contracts where we are currently making payments and will continue to do so and (ii) contracts where the timing of a portion or all of the payments has been determined by the contract. Extendible funding agreements backing medium-term notes outstanding are reflected in the table above at the contractually specified first maturity dates or the maturity date accelerated in accordance with the contractholders' election to not extend the initial maturity date. Other contracts, such as interest-sensitive life, fixed deferred annuities, traditional life and immediate annuities with life contingencies and voluntary accident and health insurance, involve payment obligations where a portion or all of the amount and timing of future payments is uncertain. For these contracts and bank deposits, the Company is not currently making payments and will not make payments until (i) the occurrence of an insurable event such as death or illness or (ii) the occurrence of a payment triggering event such as the surrender of or partial withdrawal on a policy or deposit contract, which is outside of the control of the Company. We have estimated the timing of payments related to these contracts based on historical experience and our expectation of 131 future payment patterns. Uncertainties relating to these liabilities include mortality, morbidity, expenses, customer lapse and withdrawal activity, estimated additional deposits for interest-sensitive life contracts, and renewal premium for life policies, which may significantly impact both the timing and amount of future payments. Such cash outflows reflect adjustments for the estimated timing of mortality, retirement, and other appropriate factors, but are undiscounted with respect to interest. As a result, the sum of the cash outflows shown for all years in the table exceeds the corresponding liabilities of $61.98 billion for contractholder funds and $13.21 billion for reserve for life-contingent contract benefits as included in the Consolidated Statements of Financial Position as of December 31, 2007. The liability amount in the Consolidated Statements of Financial Position reflects the discounting for interest as well as adjustments for the timing of other factors as described above. (3) Our payment obligations relating to long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating leases, unconditional purchase obligations and pension and OPEB contributions are managed within the structure of our intermediate to long-term liquidity management program. Amount differs from the balance presented on the Consolidated Statements of Financial Position as of December 31, 2007 because the long-term debt amount above includes interest. (4) The pension plans' obligations in the next 12 months represent our planned contributions, and the remaining years' contributions are projected based on the average remaining service period using the current underfunded status of the plans. The OPEB plans' obligations are estimated based on the expected benefits to be paid. These liabilities are discounted with respect to interest, and as a result the sum of the cash outflows shown for all years in the table exceeds the corresponding liability amount of $1.08 billion included in other liabilities and accrued expenses on the Consolidated Statements of Financial Position. (5) Reserve for property-liability insurance claims and claims expense are an estimate of amounts necessary to settle all outstanding claims, including claims that have been incurred but not reported as of the balance sheet date. We have estimated the timing of these payments based on our historical experience and our expectation of future payment patterns. However, the timing of these payments may vary significantly from the amounts shown above, especially for IBNR claims. The ultimate cost of losses may vary materially from recorded amounts which are our best estimates. The reserve for property-liability insurance claims and claims expense includes loss reserves related to asbestos and environmental claims as of December 31, 2007, of $2.05 billion and $340 million, respectively. (6) Other liabilities primarily include accrued expenses and certain benefit obligations and claim payments and other checks outstanding. Certain of these long-term liabilities are discounted with respect to interest, as a result the sum of the cash outflows shown for all years in the table exceeds the corresponding liability amount of $4.21 billion. (7) Balance sheet liabilities not included in the table above include unearned and advance premiums of $11.12 billion and deferred tax liabilities netted in the net deferred tax asset of $467 million. These items were excluded as they do not meet the definition of a contractual liability as we are not contractually obligated to pay these amounts to third parties. Rather, they represent an accounting mechanism that allows us to present our financial statements on an accrual basis. In addition, other liabilities of $343 million were not included in the table above because they did not represent a contractual obligation or the amount and timing of their eventual payment was sufficiently uncertain. (8) Net unrecognized tax benefits relates to Financial Accounting Standards Board Interpretation No. 48, "Accounting for Uncertainty in Income Taxes" ("FIN 48"). We believe it is reasonably possible that the FIN 48 liability balance will be reduced by $76 million within the next 12 months with the resolution of an outstanding issue resulting from the Internal Revenue Service examination of the 2003 and 2004 tax years. The resolution of this obligation may be for an amount less than what we have accrued. Our contractual commitments as of December 31, 2007 and the payments due by period are shown in the following table. (in millions) Total Less than 1 year 1-3 years 4-5 years Over 5 years Other Commitments Conditional $ 55 $ 50 $ 4 $ $ 1 Other Commitments- Unconditional 2,312 321 1,235 668 88 Total Commitments $ 2,367 $ 371 $ 1,239 $ 668 $ 89 Contractual commitments represent investment commitments such as private placements, private equities and mortgage loans. We have agreements in place for services we conduct, generally at cost, between subsidiaries relating to insurance, reinsurance, loans and capitalization. All material inter-company transactions have appropriately been eliminated in consolidation. Inter-company transactions among insurance subsidiaries and affiliates have been approved by the appropriate departments of insurance as required. 132 For a more detailed discussion of our off-balance sheet arrangements, see Note 6 of the consolidated financial statements. ENTERPRISE RISK MANAGEMENT Allstate has been working on enterprise risk management ("ERM") for six years, establishing processes and infrastructure to effectively manage risk within our tolerances while optimizing returns. We have a senior management advisory committee called the Enterprise Risk & Return Council ("ERRC") which is responsible for overseeing risks on an integrated basis across subsidiaries and various areas of responsibility within Allstate. Enterprise risk management is a disciplined, holistic, and interactive approach to risk that is conducted under an overall framework which: Provides additional insight when setting strategy across the Allstate enterprise Identifies potential events that could have a significant impact on Allstate Manages risk and proactively optimizes our overall profile consistent with Allstate's risk appetite Provides greater assurance of achieving Allstate's objectives Allows Allstate to pursue a return commensurate with the risks taken Risk management is primarily executed within the business unit where the risk is undertaken. Effective risk management requires an infrastructure that includes appropriate governance policies, stochastic modeling software, tolerances and limits; consistent risk management practices, which include risk identification, evaluation, prioritization, treatment and monitoring; and effective communication and reporting. Managers in the various business units are responsible for managing, measuring, evaluating, and reporting risks as appropriate in their respective areas within the risk appetite of the overall enterprise. This would include items such as establishing risk oversight committees that develop and monitor appropriate tolerances and the measurement of exposure to any catastrophe; managing the impacts to invested assets and liabilities related to changes in interest rates and equity markets through value at risk, duration and convexity metrics; and evaluating risks related to credit exposures through a credit value at risk measurement. As appropriate, consistent enterprise-wide measurement standards and limits are applied to these key risks and are integrated into such processes as strategic and financial planning, capital management, and enterprise risk reporting. Business unit measures and practices are aligned with the overall enterprise standards. For the enterprise, we are utilizing an internally developed enterprise stochastic model as a significant component in our determination of an appropriate level of economic capital needed, given a defined tolerance for risk. The economic capital model accounts for the unique and specific nature and interaction of the risks inherent in our various businesses. Economic capital modeling capabilities enable us to more fully understand and optimize risk/reward tradeoffs across the portfolio of businesses and various risks. These capabilities allow us to view risk and return decisions holistically which may provide opportunities for enhanced returns to shareholders at similar or lower levels of risk than might be achieved if this modeling were to be only applied at the business unit level. Areas we are pursuing that may provide such opportunities include an enterprise strategic asset allocation in our investment portfolio, more emphasis on total return economics in addition to traditional net credit spreads, and the creation of investment subsidiaries to pursue opportunistic investments outside the invested assets typically utilized in our insurance operations. We have established an internal capital support agreement between certain legal entities to more fully capitalize on diversification benefits within the enterprise. 133 REGULATION AND LEGAL PROCEEDINGS We are subject to extensive regulation and we are involved in various legal and regulatory actions, all of which have an effect on specific aspects of our business. For a detailed discussion of the legal and regulatory actions in which we are involved, see Note 13 of the consolidated financial statements. PENDING ACCOUNTING STANDARDS There are several pending accounting standards that we have not implemented either because the standard has not been finalized or the implementation date has not yet occurred. For a discussion of these pending standards, see Note 2 of the consolidated financial statements. The effect of implementing certain accounting standards on our financial results and financial condition is often based in part on market conditions at the time of implementation of the standard and other factors we are unable to determine prior to implementation. For this reason, we are sometimes unable to estimate the effect of certain pending accounting standards until the relevant authoritative body finalizes these standards or until we implement them. 134 
