CIK: 899051
Company Name: ALLSTATE CORP
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2015-02-19


Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Page Overview 29 2014 Highlights 30 Consolidated Net Income 31 Impact of Low Interest Rate Environment 31 Application of Critical Accounting Estimates 33 Property-Liability 2014 Highlights 45 Property-Liability Operations 45 Allstate Protection Segment 48 Discontinued Lines and Coverages Segment 61 Property-Liability Investment Results 62 Property-Liability Claims and Claims Expense Reserves 62 Allstate Financial 2014 Highlights 73 Allstate Financial Segment 73 Investments 2014 Highlights 84 Investments 84 Market Risk 93 Pension Plans 96 Goodwill 99 Capital Resources and Liquidity 2014 Highlights 99 Capital Resources and Liquidity 100 Enterprise Risk and Return Management 106 Regulation and Legal Proceedings 107 Pending Accounting Standards 107 28 Table of Contents OVERVIEW The following discussion highlights significant factors influencing the consolidated financial position and results of operations of The Allstate Corporation (referred to in this document as "we," "our," "us," the "Company" or "Allstate"). It should be read in conjunction with the 5-year summary of selected financial data, consolidated financial statements and related notes found under Part II. Item 6. and Item 8. contained herein. Further analysis of our insurance segments is provided in the Property-Liability Operations (which includes the Allstate Protection and the Discontinued Lines and Coverages segments) and in the Allstate Financial Segment sections of Management's Discussion and Analysis ("MD&A"). The segments are consistent with the way in which we use financial information to evaluate business performance and to determine the allocation of resources. Resources are allocated by the chief operating decision maker and performance is assessed for Allstate Protection, Discontinued Lines and Coverages and Allstate Financial. Allstate Protection and Allstate Financial performance and resources are managed by committees of senior officers of the respective segments. Allstate is focused on the following priorities in 2015: grow insurance policies in force; maintain the underlying combined ratio; proactively manage investments to generate attractive risk adjusted returns; modernize the operating model; and build long-term growth platforms. The most important factors we monitor to evaluate the financial condition and performance of our company include: For Allstate Protection: premium, the number of policies in force ("PIF"), new business sales, retention, price changes, claim frequency (rate of claim occurrence per policy in force) and severity (average cost per claim), catastrophes, loss ratio, expenses, underwriting results, and relative competitive position. For Allstate Financial: benefit and investment spread, asset-liability matching, amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs ("DAC"), expenses, operating income, net income, new business sales, invested assets, and premiums and contract charges. For Investments: exposure to market risk, credit quality/experience, total return, net investment income, cash flows, realized capital gains and losses, unrealized capital gains and losses, stability of long-term returns, and asset and liability duration. For financial condition: liquidity, parent holding company level of deployable assets, financial strength ratings, operating leverage, debt leverage, book value per share, and return on equity. Summary of Results: Consolidated net income available to common shareholders was $2.75 billion in 2014 compared to $2.26 billion in 2013 and $2.31 billion in 2012. The increase in 2014 compared to 2013 was primarily due to lower loss on disposition charges related to the Lincoln Benefit Life Company ("LBL") sale recorded in Allstate Financial and lower loss on extinguishment of debt charges reported in Corporate and Other, partially offset by lower net income available to common shareholders from Property-Liability. The decrease in 2013 compared to 2012 was primarily due to higher net income available to common shareholders from Property-Liability and the curtailment gain reported in Corporate and Other being more than offset by the estimated loss on disposition related to the pending LBL sale recorded in Allstate Financial and the loss on extinguishment of debt and benefit settlement charges reported in Corporate and Other. Net income available to common shareholders per diluted common share was $6.27, $4.81 and $4.68 in 2014, 2013 and 2012, respectively. Allstate Protection had underwriting income of $1.89 billion in 2014 compared to $2.36 billion in 2013 and $1.25 billion in 2012. The decrease in 2014 compared to 2013 was primarily due to decreases in underwriting income in homeowners, auto and other personal lines resulting from increased catastrophe losses. The increase in 2013 compared to 2012 was primarily due to increases in underwriting income in homeowners, other personal lines and auto resulting from decreased catastrophe losses. The Allstate Protection combined ratio was 93.5, 91.5 and 95.3 in 2014, 2013 and 2012, respectively. Underwriting income (loss), a measure not based on accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America ("GAAP"), is defined in the Property-Liability Operations section of the MD&A. Allstate Financial net income available to common shareholders was $631 million in 2014 compared to $95 million in 2013 and $541 million in 2012. The increase in 2014 primarily relates to lower loss on disposition charges related to the LBL sale, partially offset by the reduction in business due to the sale of LBL on April 1, 29 Table of Contents 2014. The decrease in 2013 compared to 2012 was primarily due to the estimated loss on disposition related to the pending LBL sale. 2014 HIGHLIGHTS Consolidated net income available to common shareholders was $2.75 billion in 2014 compared to $2.26 billion in 2013. Net income available to common shareholders per diluted common share was $6.27 in 2014 compared to $4.81 in 2013. 2013 consolidated net income included the impact of an estimated loss on disposition on LBL of $521 million, a postretirement benefits curtailment gain of $118 million, a loss on extinguishment of debt of $319 million, and benefit settlement charges of $150 million due to the level of lump sum pension payments in 2013. Property-Liability net income available to common shareholders was $2.43 billion in 2014 compared to $2.75 billion in 2013. The Property-Liability combined ratio was 93.9 in 2014 compared to 92.0 in 2013. Allstate Financial net income available to common shareholders was $631 million in 2014 compared to $95 million in 2013. On April 1, 2014, we closed the sale of LBL's life insurance business generated through independent master brokerage agencies, and all of LBL's deferred fixed annuity and long-term care insurance business to Resolution Life Holdings, Inc. Total revenues were $35.24 billion in 2014 compared to $34.51 billion in 2013. Property-Liability premiums earned totaled $28.93 billion in 2014, an increase of 4.7% from $27.62 billion in 2013. Investments totaled $81.11 billion as of December 31, 2014, decreasing from $81.16 billion as of December 31, 2013. Net investment income was $3.46 billion in 2014, a decrease of 12.3% from $3.94 billion in 2013. Net realized capital gains were $694 million in 2014 compared to $594 million in 2013. Book value per diluted common share (ratio of common shareholders' equity to total common shares outstanding and dilutive potential common shares outstanding) was $48.24 as of December 31, 2014, an increase of 6.5% from $45.31 as of December 31, 2013. For the twelve months ended December 31, 2014, return on the average of beginning and ending period common shareholders' equity of 13.3% increased by 2.3 points from 11.0% for the twelve months ended December 31, 2013. As of December 31, 2014, shareholders' equity was $22.30 billion. This total included $3.42 billion in deployable assets at the parent holding company level. 30 Table of Contents CONSOLIDATED NET INCOME ($ in millions) 2014 2013 2012 Revenues Property-liability insurance premiums $ 28,929 $ 27,618 $ 26,737 Life and annuity premiums and contract charges 2,157 2,352 2,241 Net investment income 3,459 3,943 4,010 Realized capital gains and losses: Total other-than-temporary impairment ("OTTI") losses (242 ) (207 ) (239 ) OTTI losses reclassified to (from) other comprehensive income (3 ) (8 ) 6 Net OTTI losses recognized in earnings (245 ) (215 ) (233 ) Sales and other realized capital gains and losses 939 809 560 Total realized capital gains and losses 694 594 327 Total revenues 35,239 34,507 33,315 Costs and expenses Property-liability insurance claims and claims expense (19,428 ) (17,911 ) (18,484 ) Life and annuity contract benefits (1,765 ) (1,917 ) (1,818 ) Interest credited to contractholder funds (919 ) (1,278 ) (1,316 ) Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs (4,135 ) (4,002 ) (3,884 ) Operating costs and expenses (4,341 ) (4,387 ) (4,118 ) Restructuring and related charges (18 ) (70 ) (34 ) Loss on extinguishment of debt (1 ) (491 ) Interest expense (322 ) (367 ) (373 ) Total costs and expenses (30,929 ) (30,423 ) (30,027 ) (Loss) gain on disposition of operations (74 ) (688 ) 18 Income tax expense (1,386 ) (1,116 ) (1,000 ) Net income 2,850 2,280 2,306 Preferred stock dividends (104 ) (17 ) Net income available to common shareholders $ 2,746 $ 2,263 $ 2,306 Property-Liability $ 2,427 $ 2,754 $ 1,968 Allstate Financial 631 95 541 Corporate and Other (312 ) (586 ) (203 ) Net income available to common shareholders $ 2,746 $ 2,263 $ 2,306 IMPACT OF LOW INTEREST RATE ENVIRONMENT Long-term U.S. Treasury rates fell in 2014, and our current reinvestment yields are generally lower than the overall portfolio income yield, primarily for our investments in fixed income securities and commercial mortgage loans. At the January 2015 meeting, the Federal Open Market Committee reaffirmed its view that the current 0 to 1 / 4 percent target range for the federal funds rate remains appropriate. In determining how long to maintain this target range, the Committee will assess progress both realized and expected toward its objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation. Additionally, the Committee noted that it can be patient in beginning to normalize the stance of monetary policy. Many market participants anticipate that interest rates, particularly those at the shorter end of the term structure, will begin to rise but remain below historic levels in 2015. We also expect capital markets to experience periods of increased volatility in 2015. Deferred annuity contracts with fixed and guaranteed crediting rates, or floors that limit crediting rate reductions, are adversely impacted by a prolonged low interest rate environment since we may not be able to reduce crediting rates sufficiently to maintain investment spreads. Financial results of long duration products that do not have stated crediting rate guarantees but for which underlying assets may have to be reinvested at interest rates that are lower than portfolio rates, such as structured settlements and term life insurance, may also be adversely impacted. Our investment strategy 31 Table of Contents for structured settlements includes increasing investments in which we have ownership interests and a greater proportion of return is derived from idiosyncratic operating or market performance, including limited partnerships, equities and real estate. We stopped selling new fixed annuity products January 1, 2014. The following table summarizes the weighted average guaranteed crediting rates and weighted average current crediting rates as of December 31, 2014 for certain fixed annuities and interest-sensitive life contracts where management has the ability to change the crediting rate, subject to a contractual minimum. Other products, including equity-indexed, variable and immediate annuities, equity-indexed and variable life, and institutional products totaling $6.22 billion of contractholder funds, have been excluded from the analysis because management does not have the ability to change the crediting rate or the minimum crediting rate is not considered meaningful in this context. ($ in millions) Weighted average guaranteed crediting rates Weighted average current crediting rates Contractholder funds Annuities with annual crediting rate resets 3.03 % 3.04 % $ 6,136 Annuities with multi-year rate guarantees (1) : Resettable in next 12 months 1.24 3.90 690 Resettable after 12 months 1.36 3.24 1,881 Interest-sensitive life insurance 4.05 4.11 7,606 (1) These contracts include interest rate guarantee periods which are typically 5, 7 or 10 years. Investing activity will continue to decrease our portfolio yield as long as market yields remain below the current portfolio yield. In the Allstate Financial segment, the portfolio yield has been less impacted by reinvestment in the current low interest rate environment, as much of the investment cash flows have been used to fund the managed reduction in spread-based liabilities. The declines in both invested assets and portfolio yield are expected to result in lower net investment income in future periods. For the Allstate Financial Segment, we expect approximately 5.6% of the amortized cost of fixed income securities not subject to prepayment and approximately 6.5% of commercial mortgage loans to mature in 2015. Allstate Financial has $24.84 billion of such fixed income securities and $3.82 billion of such commercial mortgage loans as of December 31, 2014. Additionally, for asset-backed securities ("ABS"), residential mortgage-backed securities ("RMBS") and commercial mortgage-backed securities ("CMBS") that have the potential for prepayment and are therefore not categorized by contractual maturity, we received periodic principal payments of $667 million in 2014. To the extent portfolio cash flows are reinvested, the average pre-tax investment yield of 5.6% is expected to decline due to lower market yields. For the Property-Liability segment, we expect approximately 6.9% of the amortized cost of fixed income securities not subject to prepayment to mature in 2015. Property-Liability has $27.05 billion of such assets as of December 31, 2014. Additionally, for ABS, RMBS and CMBS securities that have the potential for prepayment and are therefore not categorized by contractual maturity, we received periodic principal payments of $533 million in 2014. We shortened the maturity profile of the fixed income securities in this segment to make the portfolio less sensitive to a future rise in interest rates. This approach to reducing interest rate risk resulted in realized capital gains in 2013 and 2012, but contributed to lower portfolio yields as sales proceeds were invested at lower market yields. The average pre-tax investment yield of 3.6% may decline to the extent reinvestment is at lower market yields. Additionally, the portfolio yield will respond more quickly to changes in market interest rates as a result of its shorter maturity profile. In order to mitigate the unfavorable impact that the current interest rate environment could have on investment results, we are: Managing our exposure to interest rate risk by maintaining a shorter maturity profile in the Property-Liability portfolio which will also result in the yield responding more quickly to changes in market interest rates as a result of its shorter maturity profile. Shifting the portfolio mix over time to have less reliance on investments whose returns come primarily from interest payments to investments in which we have ownership interests and a greater proportion of return is derived from idiosyncratic operating or market performance, including limited partnerships, equities and real estate. Investing to the specific needs and characteristics of Allstate's businesses. 32 Table of Contents We expect volatility in accumulated other comprehensive income resulting from changes in unrealized net capital gains and losses and unrecognized pension cost. These topics are discussed in more detail in the respective sections of the MD&A. APPLICATION OF CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to adopt accounting policies and make estimates and assumptions that affect amounts reported in the consolidated financial statements. The most critical estimates include those used in determining: Fair value of financial assets Impairment of fixed income and equity securities Deferred policy acquisition costs amortization Reserve for property-liability insurance claims and claims expense estimation Reserve for life-contingent contract benefits estimation In making these determinations, management makes subjective and complex judgments that frequently require estimates about matters that are inherently uncertain. Many of these policies, estimates and related judgments are common in the insurance and financial services industries; others are specific to our businesses and operations. It is reasonably likely that changes in these estimates could occur from period to period and result in a material impact on our consolidated financial statements. A brief summary of each of these critical accounting estimates follows. For a more detailed discussion of the effect of these estimates on our consolidated financial statements, and the judgments and assumptions related to these estimates, see the referenced sections of this document. For a complete summary of our significant accounting policies, see the notes to the consolidated financial statements. Fair value of financial assets Fair value is defined as the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. We are responsible for the determination of fair value of financial assets and the supporting assumptions and methodologies. We use independent third-party valuation service providers, broker quotes and internal pricing methods to determine fair values. We obtain or calculate only one single quote or price for each financial instrument. Valuation service providers typically obtain data about market transactions and other key valuation model inputs from multiple sources and, through the use of proprietary models, produce valuation information in the form of a single fair value for individual fixed income and other securities for which a fair value has been requested under the terms of our agreements. The inputs used by the valuation service providers include, but are not limited to, market prices from recently completed transactions and transactions of comparable securities, interest rate yield curves, credit spreads, liquidity spreads, currency rates, and other information, as applicable. Credit and liquidity spreads are typically implied from completed transactions and transactions of comparable securities. Valuation service providers also use proprietary discounted cash flow models that are widely accepted in the financial services industry and similar to those used by other market participants to value the same financial instruments. The valuation models take into account, among other things, market observable information as of the measurement date, as described above, as well as the specific attributes of the security being valued including its term, interest rate, credit rating, industry sector, and where applicable, collateral quality and other issue or issuer specific information. Executing valuation models effectively requires seasoned professional judgment and experience. For certain equity securities, valuation service providers provide market quotations for completed transactions on the measurement date. In cases where market transactions or other market observable data is limited, the extent to which judgment is applied varies inversely with the availability of market observable information. For certain of our financial assets measured at fair value, where our valuation service providers cannot provide fair value determinations, we obtain a single non-binding price quote from a broker familiar with the security who, similar to our valuation service providers, may consider transactions or activity in similar securities among other information. The brokers providing price quotes are generally from the brokerage divisions of leading financial institutions with market making, underwriting and distribution expertise regarding the security subject to valuation. The fair value of certain financial assets, including privately placed corporate fixed income securities and certain free-standing derivatives, for which our valuation service providers or brokers do not provide fair value determinations, is determined using valuation methods and models widely accepted in the financial services industry. Our internal pricing methods are primarily based on models using discounted cash flow methodologies that develop a single best estimate of fair value. Our models generally incorporate inputs that we believe are representative of inputs other market 33 Table of Contents participants would use to determine fair value of the same instruments, including yield curves, quoted market prices of comparable securities, published credit spreads, and other applicable market data as well as instrument-specific characteristics that include, but are not limited to, coupon rates, expected cash flows, sector of the issuer, and call provisions. Judgment is required in developing these fair values. As a result, the fair value of these financial assets may differ from the amount actually received to sell an asset in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. Moreover, the use of different valuation assumptions may have a material effect on the financial assets' fair values. For most of our financial assets measured at fair value, all significant inputs are based on or corroborated by market observable data and significant management judgment does not affect the periodic determination of fair value. The determination of fair value using discounted cash flow models involves management judgment when significant model inputs are not based on or corroborated by market observable data. However, where market observable data is available, it takes precedence, and as a result, no range of reasonably likely inputs exists from which the basis of a sensitivity analysis could be constructed. We gain assurance that our financial assets are appropriately valued through the execution of various processes and controls designed to ensure the overall reasonableness and consistent application of valuation methodologies, including inputs and assumptions, and compliance with accounting standards. For fair values received from third parties or internally estimated, our processes and controls are designed to ensure that the valuation methodologies are appropriate and consistently applied, the inputs and assumptions are reasonable and consistent with the objective of determining fair value, and the fair values are accurately recorded. For example, on a continuing basis, we assess the reasonableness of individual fair values that have stale security prices or that exceed certain thresholds as compared to previous fair values received from valuation service providers or brokers or derived from internal models. We perform procedures to understand and assess the methodologies, processes and controls of valuation service providers. In addition, we may validate the reasonableness of fair values by comparing information obtained from valuation service providers or brokers to other third party valuation sources for selected securities. We perform ongoing price validation procedures such as back-testing of actual sales, which corroborate the various inputs used in internal models to market observable data. When fair value determinations are expected to be more variable, we validate them through reviews by members of management who have relevant expertise and who are independent of those charged with executing investment transactions. We also perform an analysis to determine whether there has been a significant decrease in the volume and level of activity for the asset when compared to normal market activity, and if so, whether transactions may not be orderly. Among the indicators we consider in determining whether a significant decrease in the volume and level of market activity for a specific asset has occurred include the level of new issuances in the primary market, trading volume in the secondary market, level of credit spreads over historical levels, bid-ask spread, and price consensuses among market participants and sources. If evidence indicates that prices are based on transactions that are not orderly, we place little, if any, weight on the transaction price and will estimate fair value using an internal model. As of December 31, 2014 and 2013, we did not adjust fair values provided by our valuation service providers or brokers or substitute them with an internal model for such securities. The following table identifies fixed income and equity securities and short-term investments as of December 31, 2014 by source of fair value determination: ($ in millions) Fair value Percent to total Fair value based on internal sources $ 3,922 5.7 % Fair value based on external sources (1) 65,162 94.3 Total $ 69,084 100.0 % (1) Includes $2.07 billion that are valued using broker quotes. For additional detail on fair value measurements, see Note 6 of the consolidated financial statements. Impairment of fixed income and equity securities For investments classified as available for sale, the difference between fair value and amortized cost for fixed income securities and cost for equity securities, net of certain other items and deferred income taxes (as disclosed in Note 5), is reported as a component of accumulated other comprehensive income on the Consolidated Statements of Financial Position and is not reflected in the operating results of any period until reclassified to net income upon the consummation of a transaction with an unrelated third party or 34 Table of Contents when a write-down is recorded due to an other-than-temporary decline in fair value. We have a comprehensive portfolio monitoring process to identify and evaluate each fixed income and equity security whose carrying value may be other-than-temporarily impaired. For each fixed income security in an unrealized loss position, we assess whether management with the appropriate authority has made the decision to sell or whether it is more likely than not we will be required to sell the security before recovery of the amortized cost basis for reasons such as liquidity, contractual or regulatory purposes. If a security meets either of these criteria, the security's decline in fair value is considered other than temporary and is recorded in earnings. If we have not made the decision to sell the fixed income security and it is not more likely than not we will be required to sell the fixed income security before recovery of its amortized cost basis, we evaluate whether we expect to receive cash flows sufficient to recover the entire amortized cost basis of the security. We use our best estimate of future cash flows expected to be collected from the fixed income security, discounted at the security's original or current effective rate, as appropriate, to calculate a recovery value and determine whether a credit loss exists. The determination of cash flow estimates is inherently subjective and methodologies may vary depending on facts and circumstances specific to the security. All reasonably available information relevant to the collectability of the security, including past events, current conditions, and reasonable and supportable assumptions and forecasts, are considered when developing the estimate of cash flows expected to be collected. That information generally includes, but is not limited to, the remaining payment terms of the security, prepayment speeds, foreign exchange rates, the financial condition and future earnings potential of the issue or issuer, expected defaults, expected recoveries, the value of underlying collateral, vintage, geographic concentration, available reserves or escrows, current subordination levels, third party guarantees and other credit enhancements. Other information, such as industry analyst reports and forecasts, sector credit ratings, financial condition of the bond insurer for insured fixed income securities, and other market data relevant to the realizability of contractual cash flows, may also be considered. The estimated fair value of collateral will be used to estimate recovery value if we determine that the security is dependent on the liquidation of collateral for ultimate settlement. If the estimated recovery value is less than the amortized cost of the security, a credit loss exists and an other-than-temporary impairment for the difference between the estimated recovery value and amortized cost is recorded in earnings. The portion of the unrealized loss related to factors other than credit remains classified in accumulated other comprehensive income. If we determine that the fixed income security does not have sufficient cash flow or other information to estimate a recovery value for the security, we may conclude that the entire decline in fair value is deemed to be credit related and the loss is recorded in earnings. There are a number of assumptions and estimates inherent in evaluating impairments of equity securities and determining if they are other than temporary, including: 1) our ability and intent to hold the investment for a period of time sufficient to allow for an anticipated recovery in value; 2) the financial condition, near-term and long-term prospects of the issue or issuer, including relevant industry specific market conditions and trends, geographic location and implications of rating agency actions and offering prices; 3) the specific reasons that a security is in an unrealized loss position, including overall market conditions which could affect liquidity; and 4) the length of time and extent to which the fair value has been less than cost. Once assumptions and estimates are made, any number of changes in facts and circumstances could cause us to subsequently determine that a fixed income or equity security is other-than-temporarily impaired, including: 1) general economic conditions that are worse than previously forecasted or that have a greater adverse effect on a particular issuer or industry sector than originally estimated; 2) changes in the facts and circumstances related to a particular issue or issuer's ability to meet all of its contractual obligations; and 3) changes in facts and circumstances that result in management's decision to sell or result in our assessment that it is more likely than not we will be required to sell before recovery of the amortized cost basis of a fixed income security or causes a change in our ability or intent to hold an equity security until it recovers in value. Changes in assumptions, facts and circumstances could result in additional charges to earnings in future periods to the extent that losses are realized. The charge to earnings, while potentially significant to net income, would not have a significant effect on shareholders' equity, since our securities are designated as available for sale and carried at fair value and as a result, any related unrealized loss, net of deferred income taxes and related DAC, deferred sales inducement costs and reserves for life-contingent contract benefits, would already be reflected as a component of accumulated other comprehensive income in shareholders' equity. The determination of the amount of other-than-temporary impairment is an inherently subjective process based on periodic evaluations of the factors described above. Such evaluations and assessments are revised as conditions change and new information becomes available. We update our evaluations regularly and reflect changes in other-than-temporary impairments in results of operations as such evaluations are revised. The use of different 35 Table of Contents methodologies and assumptions in the determination of the amount of other-than-temporary impairments may have a material effect on the amounts presented within the consolidated financial statements. For additional detail on investment impairments, see Note 5 of the consolidated financial statements. Deferred policy acquisition costs amortization We incur significant costs in connection with acquiring insurance policies and investment contracts. In accordance with GAAP, costs that are related directly to the successful acquisition of new or renewal insurance policies and investment contracts are deferred and recorded as an asset on the Consolidated Statements of Financial Position. DAC related to property-liability contracts is amortized into income as premiums are earned, typically over periods of six or twelve months. The amortization methodology for DAC related to Allstate Financial policies and contracts includes significant assumptions and estimates. DAC related to traditional life insurance is amortized over the premium paying period of the related policies in proportion to the estimated revenues on such business. Significant assumptions relating to estimated premiums, investment returns, as well as mortality, persistency and expenses to administer the business are established at the time the policy is issued and are generally not revised during the life of the policy. The assumptions for determining the timing and amount of DAC amortization are consistent with the assumptions used to calculate the reserve for life-contingent contract benefits. Any deviations from projected business in force resulting from actual policy terminations differing from expected levels and any estimated premium deficiencies may result in a change to the rate of amortization in the period such events occur. Generally, the amortization periods for these policies approximates the estimated lives of the policies. The recovery of DAC is dependent upon the future profitability of the business. We periodically review the adequacy of reserves and recoverability of DAC for these policies on an aggregate basis using actual experience. We aggregate all traditional life insurance products and immediate annuities with life contingencies in the analysis. In the event actual experience is significantly adverse compared to the original assumptions and a premium deficiency is determined to exist, any remaining unamortized DAC balance must be expensed to the extent not recoverable and a premium deficiency reserve may be required if the remaining DAC balance is insufficient to absorb the deficiency. In 2014, 2013 and 2012, our reviews concluded that no premium deficiency adjustments were necessary, primarily due to projected profit from traditional life insurance more than offsetting the projected losses in immediate annuities with life contingencies. DAC related to interest-sensitive life, fixed annuities and other investment contracts is amortized in proportion to the incidence of the total present value of gross profits, which includes both actual historical gross profits ("AGP") and estimated future gross profits ("EGP") expected to be earned over the estimated lives of the contracts. The amortization is net of interest on the prior period DAC balance using rates established at the inception of the contracts. Actual amortization periods generally range from 15-30 years; however, incorporating estimates of the rate of customer surrenders, partial withdrawals and deaths generally results in the majority of the DAC being amortized during the surrender charge period, which is typically 10-20 years for interest-sensitive life and 5-10 years for fixed annuities. The cumulative DAC amortization is reestimated and adjusted by a cumulative charge or credit to income when there is a difference between the incidence of actual versus expected gross profits in a reporting period or when there is a change in total EGP. AGP and EGP primarily consist of the following components: contract charges for the cost of insurance less mortality costs and other benefits (benefit margin); investment income and realized capital gains and losses less interest credited (investment margin); and surrender and other contract charges less maintenance expenses (expense margin). The principal assumptions for determining the amount of EGP are persistency, mortality, expenses, investment returns, including capital gains and losses on assets supporting contract liabilities, interest crediting rates to contractholders, and the effects of any hedges, and these assumptions are reasonably likely to have the greatest impact on the amount of DAC amortization. Changes in these assumptions can be offsetting and we are unable to reasonably predict their future movements or offsetting impacts over time. Each reporting period, DAC amortization is recognized in proportion to AGP for that period adjusted for interest on the prior period DAC balance. This amortization process includes an assessment of AGP compared to EGP, the actual amount of business remaining in force and realized capital gains and losses on investments supporting the product liability. The impact of realized capital gains and losses on amortization of DAC depends upon which product liability is supported by the assets that give rise to the gain or loss. If the AGP is greater than EGP in the period, but the total EGP is unchanged, the amount of DAC amortization will generally increase, resulting in a current period decrease to earnings. The opposite result generally occurs when the AGP is less than the EGP in the period, but the total EGP is unchanged. However, when DAC amortization or a component of gross profits for a quarterly period is potentially negative (which 36 Table of Contents would result in an increase of the DAC balance) as a result of negative AGP, the specific facts and circumstances surrounding the potential negative amortization are considered to determine whether it is appropriate for recognition in the consolidated financial statements. Negative amortization is only recorded when the increased DAC balance is determined to be recoverable based on facts and circumstances. Negative amortization was not recorded for certain fixed annuities during 2012 in which capital losses were realized on their related investment portfolio. For products whose supporting investments are exposed to capital losses in excess of our expectations which may cause periodic AGP to become temporarily negative, EGP and AGP utilized in DAC amortization may be modified to exclude the excess capital losses. Annually, we review and update all assumptions underlying the projections of EGP, including persistency, mortality, expenses, investment returns, comprising investment income and realized capital gains and losses, interest crediting rates and the effect of any hedges. At each reporting period, we assess whether any revisions to assumptions used to determine DAC amortization are required. These reviews and updates may result in amortization acceleration or deceleration, which are referred to as "DAC unlocking". If the update of assumptions causes total EGP to increase, the rate of DAC amortization will generally decrease, resulting in a current period increase to earnings. A decrease to earnings generally occurs when the assumption update causes the total EGP to decrease. The following table provides the effect on DAC amortization of changes in assumptions relating to the gross profit components of investment margin, benefit margin and expense margin during the years ended December 31. ($ in millions) 2014 2013 2012 Investment margin $ 11 $ (17 ) $ 3 Benefit margin 35 15 33 Expense margin (54 ) 25 (2 ) Net (deceleration) acceleration $ (8 ) $ 23 $ 34 In 2014, DAC amortization acceleration for changes in the investment margin component of EGP related to interest-sensitive life insurance and fixed annuities and was due to lower projected investment returns. The acceleration related to benefit margin primarily related to interest-sensitive life insurance and was due to an increase in projected mortality. The deceleration related to expense margin primarily related to interest-sensitive life insurance and was due to a decrease in projected expenses. In 2013, DAC amortization deceleration for changes in the investment margin component of EGP primarily related to fixed annuities and interest-sensitive life insurance and was due to increased projected investment margins. The acceleration related to benefit margin was primarily due to interest-sensitive life insurance and was due to an increase in projected mortality. The acceleration related to expense margin related to interest-sensitive life insurance and was due to an increase in projected expenses. In 2012, DAC amortization acceleration for changes in the investment margin component of EGP primarily related to fixed annuities and was due to lower projected investment returns. The acceleration related to benefit margin was primarily due to increased projected mortality on variable life insurance, partially offset by increased projected persistency on interest-sensitive life insurance. The deceleration related to expense margin related to interest-sensitive life insurance and fixed annuities and was due to a decrease in projected expenses. The following table displays the sensitivity of reasonably likely changes in assumptions included in the gross profit components of investment margin or benefit margin to amortization of the DAC balance as of December 31, 2014. ($ in millions) Increase/(reduction) in DAC Increase in future investment margins of 25 basis points $ 52 Decrease in future investment margins of 25 basis points $ (57 ) Decrease in future life mortality by 1% $ 13 Increase in future life mortality by 1% $ (14 ) Any potential changes in assumptions discussed above are measured without consideration of correlation among assumptions. Therefore, it would be inappropriate to add them together in an attempt to estimate overall variability in amortization. For additional detail related to DAC, see the Allstate Financial Segment section of this document. 37 Table of Contents Reserve for property-liability insurance claims and claims expense estimation Reserves are established to provide for the estimated costs of paying claims and claims expenses under insurance policies we have issued. Property-Liability underwriting results are significantly influenced by estimates of property-liability insurance claims and claims expense reserves. These reserves are an estimate of amounts necessary to settle all outstanding claims, including claims that have been incurred but not reported ("IBNR"), as of the financial statement date. Characteristics of reserves Reserves are established independently of business segment management for each business segment and line of business based on estimates of the ultimate cost to settle claims, less losses that have been paid. The significant lines of business are auto, homeowners, and other personal lines for Allstate Protection, and asbestos, environmental, and other discontinued lines for Discontinued Lines and Coverages. Allstate Protection's claims are typically reported promptly with relatively little reporting lag between the date of occurrence and the date the loss is reported. Auto and homeowners liability losses generally take an average of about two years to settle, while auto physical damage, homeowners property and other personal lines have an average settlement time of less than one year. Discontinued Lines and Coverages involve long-tail losses, such as those related to asbestos and environmental claims, which often involve substantial reporting lags and extended times to settle. Reserves are the difference between the estimated ultimate cost of losses incurred and the amount of paid losses as of the reporting date. Reserves are estimated for both reported and unreported claims, and include estimates of all expenses associated with processing and settling all incurred claims. We update most of our reserve estimates quarterly and as new information becomes available or as events emerge that may affect the resolution of unsettled claims. Changes in prior reserve estimates (reserve reestimates), which may be material, are determined by comparing updated estimates of ultimate losses to prior estimates, and the differences are recorded as property-liability insurance claims and claims expense in the Consolidated Statements of Operations in the period such changes are determined. Estimating the ultimate cost of claims and claims expenses is an inherently uncertain and complex process involving a high degree of judgment and is subject to the evaluation of numerous variables. The actuarial methods used to develop reserve estimates Reserve estimates are derived by using several different actuarial estimation methods that are variations on one primary actuarial technique. The actuarial technique is known as a "chain ladder" estimation process in which historical loss patterns are applied to actual paid losses and reported losses (paid losses plus individual case reserves established by claim adjusters) for an accident year or a report year to create an estimate of how losses are likely to develop over time. An accident year refers to classifying claims based on the year in which the claims occurred. A report year refers to classifying claims based on the year in which the claims are reported. Both classifications are used to prepare estimates of required reserves for payments to be made in the future. The key assumptions affecting our reserve estimates comprise data elements including claim counts, paid losses, case reserves, and development factors calculated with this data. In the chain ladder estimation technique, a ratio (development factor) is calculated which compares current period results to results in the prior period for each accident year. A three-year or two-year average development factor, based on historical results, is usually multiplied by the current period experience to estimate the development of losses of each accident year into the next time period. The development factors for the future time periods for each accident year are compounded over the remaining future periods to calculate an estimate of ultimate losses for each accident year. The implicit assumption of this technique is that an average of historical development factors is predictive of future loss development, as the significant size of our experience database achieves a high degree of statistical credibility in actuarial projections of this type. The effects of inflation are implicitly considered in the reserving process, the implicit assumption being that a multi-year average development factor includes an adequate provision. Occasionally, unusual aberrations in loss patterns are caused by external and internal factors such as changes in claim reporting, settlement patterns, unusually large losses, process changes, legal or regulatory changes, and other influences. In these instances, analyses of alternate development factor selections are performed to evaluate the effect of these factors and actuarial judgment is applied to make appropriate development factor assumptions needed to develop a best estimate of ultimate losses. How reserve estimates are established and updated Reserve estimates are developed at a very detailed level, and the results of these numerous micro-level best estimates are aggregated to form a consolidated reserve estimate. For example, over one thousand actuarial estimates of the types described above are prepared each quarter to estimate losses for each line of insurance, major components of losses (such as coverages and perils), major states or groups of states and for reported losses and IBNR. The actuarial methods described above are used to analyze the settlement patterns of claims by determining the development factors for specific data elements that are necessary components of a reserve estimation process. Development factors are calculated quarterly and periodically throughout the year for data elements such as claim counts reported and settled, paid losses, and paid losses combined with case reserves. The calculation of development factors from changes in these data elements also impacts claim severity trends, which is a common industry reference used to explain changes in reserve estimates. The historical development patterns for these data elements are used as the assumptions to calculate reserve estimates. 38 Table of Contents Often, several different estimates are prepared for each detailed component, incorporating alternative analyses of changing claim settlement patterns and other influences on losses, from which we select our best estimate for each component, occasionally incorporating additional analyses and actuarial judgment, as described above. These micro-level estimates are not based on a single set of assumptions. Actuarial judgments that may be applied to these components of certain micro-level estimates generally do not have a material impact on the consolidated level of reserves. Moreover, this detailed micro-level process does not permit or result in a compilation of a company-wide roll up to generate a range of needed loss reserves that would be meaningful. Based on our review of these estimates, our best estimate of required reserves for each state/line/coverage component is recorded for each accident year, and the required reserves for each component are summed to create the reserve balance carried on our Consolidated Statements of Financial Position. Reserves are reestimated quarterly and periodically throughout the year, by combining historical results with current actual results to calculate new development factors. This process incorporates the historic and latest actual trends, and other underlying changes in the data elements used to calculate reserve estimates. New development factors are likely to differ from previous development factors used in prior reserve estimates because actual results (claims reported or settled, losses paid, or changes to case reserves) occur differently than the implied assumptions contained in the previous development factor calculations. If claims reported, paid losses, or case reserve changes are greater or less than the levels estimated by previous development factors, reserve reestimates increase or decrease. When actual development of these data elements is different than the historical development pattern used in a prior period reserve estimate, a new reserve is determined. The difference between indicated reserves based on new reserve estimates and recorded reserves (the previous estimate) is the amount of reserve reestimate and is recognized as an increase or decrease in property-liability insurance claims and claims expense in the Consolidated Statements of Operations. Total Property-Liability net reserve reestimates, after-tax, as a percent of net income available to common shareholders were favorable 2.0%, 3.5%, and 18.7% in 2014, 2013 and 2012, respectively. The 3-year average of net reserve reestimates as a percentage of total reserves was a favorable 1.7% for Property-Liability, a favorable 2.5% for Allstate Protection and an unfavorable 6.2% for Discontinued Lines and Coverages, each of these results being consistent within a reasonable actuarial tolerance for our respective businesses. A more detailed discussion of reserve reestimates is presented in the Property-Liability Claims and Claims Expense Reserves section of this document. The following table shows net claims and claims expense reserves by segment and line of business as of December 31: ($ in millions) 2014 2013 2012 Allstate Protection Auto $ 11,698 $ 11,616 $ 11,383 Homeowners 1,849 1,821 2,008 Other lines 2,070 2,110 2,250 Total Allstate Protection 15,617 15,547 15,641 Discontinued Lines and Coverages Asbestos 1,014 1,017 1,026 Environmental 203 208 193 Other discontinued lines 395 421 418 Total Discontinued Lines and Coverages 1,612 1,646 1,637 Total Property-Liability $ 17,229 $ 17,193 $ 17,278 Allstate Protection reserve estimates Factors affecting reserve estimates Reserve estimates are developed based on the processes and historical development trends described above. These estimates are considered in conjunction with known facts and interpretations of circumstances and factors including our experience with similar cases, actual claims paid, historical trends involving claim payment patterns and pending levels of unpaid claims, loss management programs, product mix and contractual terms, changes in law and regulation, judicial decisions, and economic conditions. When we experience changes of the type previously mentioned, we may need to apply actuarial judgment in the determination and selection of development factors considered more reflective of the new trends, such as combining shorter or longer periods of historical results with current actual results to produce development factors based on two-year, three-year, or longer development periods to reestimate our reserves. For example, if a legal change is expected to have a significant impact on the development of claim severity for a coverage which is part of a particular line of insurance in a specific state, 39 Table of Contents actuarial judgment is applied to determine appropriate development factors that will most accurately reflect the expected impact on that specific estimate. Another example would be when a change in economic conditions is expected to affect the cost of repairs to damaged autos or property for a particular line, coverage, or state, actuarial judgment is applied to determine appropriate development factors to use in the reserve estimate that will most accurately reflect the expected impacts on severity development. As claims are reported, for certain liability claims of sufficient size and complexity, the field adjusting staff establishes case reserve estimates of ultimate cost, based on their assessment of facts and circumstances related to each individual claim. For other claims which occur in large volumes and settle in a relatively short time frame, it is not practical or efficient to set case reserves for each claim, and a statistical case reserve is set for these claims based on estimation techniques described above. In the normal course of business, we may also supplement our claims processes by utilizing third party adjusters, appraisers, engineers, inspectors, and other professionals and information sources to assess and settle catastrophe and non-catastrophe related claims. Historically, the case reserves set by the field adjusting staff have not proven to be an entirely accurate estimate of the ultimate cost of claims. To provide for this, a development reserve is estimated using the processes described above, and allocated to pending claims as a supplement to case reserves. Typically, the case, including statistical case, and supplemental development reserves comprise about 90% of total reserves. Another major component of reserves is incurred but not reported ("IBNR"). Typically, IBNR comprises about 10% of total reserves. Generally, the initial reserves for a new accident year are established based on severity assumptions for different business segments, lines and coverages based on historical relationships to relevant inflation indicators, and reserves for prior accident years are statistically determined using processes described above. Changes in auto current year claim severity are generally influenced by inflation in the medical and auto repair sectors of the economy. We mitigate these effects through various loss management programs. Injury claims are affected largely by medical cost inflation while physical damage claims are affected largely by auto repair cost inflation and used car prices. For auto physical damage coverages, we monitor our rate of increase in average cost per claim against a weighted average of the Maintenance and Repair price index and the Parts and Equipment price index. We believe our claim settlement initiatives, such as improvements to the claim review and settlement process, the use of special investigative units to detect fraud and handle suspect claims, litigation management and defense strategies, as well as various other loss management initiatives underway, contribute to the mitigation of injury and physical damage severity trends. Changes in homeowners current year claim severity are generally influenced by inflation in the cost of building materials, the cost of construction and property repair services, the cost of replacing home furnishings and other contents, the types of claims that qualify for coverage, deductibles and other economic and environmental factors. We employ various loss management programs to mitigate the effect of these factors. As loss experience for the current year develops for each type of loss, it is monitored relative to initial assumptions until it is judged to have sufficient statistical credibility. From that point in time and forward, reserves are reestimated using statistical actuarial processes to reflect the impact actual loss trends have on development factors incorporated into the actuarial estimation processes. Statistical credibility is usually achieved by the end of the first calendar year; however, when trends for the current accident year exceed initial assumptions sooner, they are usually determined to be credible, and reserves are increased accordingly. The very detailed processes for developing reserve estimates, and the lack of a need and existence of a common set of assumptions or development factors, limits aggregate reserve level testing for variability of data elements. However, by applying standard actuarial methods to consolidated historic accident year loss data for major loss types, comprising auto injury losses, auto physical damage losses and homeowner losses, we develop variability analyses consistent with the way we develop reserves by measuring the potential variability of development factors, as described in the section titled "Potential Reserve Estimate Variability" below. Causes of reserve estimate uncertainty Since reserves are estimates of unpaid portions of claims and claims expenses that have occurred, including IBNR losses, the establishment of appropriate reserves, including reserves for catastrophe losses, requires regular reevaluation and refinement of estimates to determine our ultimate loss estimate. At each reporting date, the highest degree of uncertainty in estimates of losses arises from claims remaining to be settled for the current accident year and the most recent preceding accident year. The greatest degree of uncertainty exists in the current accident year because the current accident year contains the greatest proportion of losses that have not been reported or settled but must be estimated as of the current reporting date. Most of these losses relate to 40 Table of Contents damaged property such as automobiles and homes, and medical care for injuries from accidents. During the first year after the end of an accident year, a large portion of the total losses for that accident year are settled. When accident year losses paid through the end of the first year following the initial accident year are incorporated into updated actuarial estimates, the trends inherent in the settlement of claims emerge more clearly. Consequently, this is the point in time at which we tend to make our largest reestimates of losses for an accident year. After the second year, the losses that we pay for an accident year typically relate to claims that are more difficult to settle, such as those involving serious injuries or litigation. Private passenger auto insurance provides a good illustration of the uncertainty of future loss estimates: our typical annual percentage payout of reserves for an accident year is approximately 45% in the first year after the end of the accident year, 20% in the second year, 15% in the third year, 10% in the fourth year, and the remaining 10% thereafter. Reserves for catastrophe losses Property-Liability claims and claims expense reserves also include reserves for catastrophe losses. Catastrophe losses are an inherent risk of the property-liability insurance industry that have contributed, and will continue to contribute, to potentially material year-to-year fluctuations in our results of operations and financial position. We define a "catastrophe" as an event that produces pre-tax losses before reinsurance in excess of $1 million and involves multiple first party policyholders, or an event that produces a number of claims in excess of a preset, per-event threshold of average claims in a specific area, occurring within a certain amount of time following the event. Catastrophes are caused by various natural events including high winds, winter storms, tornadoes, hailstorms, wildfires, tropical storms, hurricanes, earthquakes and volcanoes. We are also exposed to man-made catastrophic events, such as certain types of terrorism or industrial accidents. The nature and level of catastrophes in any period cannot be predicted. The estimation of claims and claims expense reserves for catastrophe losses also comprises estimates of losses from reported claims and IBNR, primarily for damage to property. In general, our estimates for catastrophe reserves are based on claim adjuster inspections and the application of historical loss development factors as described above. However, depending on the nature of the catastrophe, the estimation process can be further complicated. For example, for hurricanes, complications could include the inability of insureds to promptly report losses, limitations placed on claims adjusting staff affecting their ability to inspect losses, determining whether losses are covered by our homeowners policy (generally for damage caused by wind or wind driven rain) or specifically excluded coverage caused by flood, estimating additional living expenses, and assessing the impact of demand surge, exposure to mold damage, and the effects of numerous other considerations, including the timing of a catastrophe in relation to other events, such as at or near the end of a financial reporting period, which can affect the availability of information needed to estimate reserves for that reporting period. In these situations, we may need to adapt our practices to accommodate these circumstances in order to determine a best estimate of our losses from a catastrophe. As an example, in 2005 to complete an estimate for certain areas affected by Hurricane Katrina and not yet inspected by our claims adjusting staff, or where we believed our historical loss development factors were not predictive, we relied on analysis of actual claim notices received compared to total PIF, as well as visual, governmental and third party information, including aerial photos, area observations, and data on wind speed and flood depth to the extent available. Potential reserve estimate variability The aggregation of numerous micro-level estimates for each business segment, line of insurance, major components of losses (such as coverages and perils), and major states or groups of states for reported losses and IBNR forms the reserve liability recorded in the Consolidated Statements of Financial Position. Because of this detailed approach to developing our reserve estimates, there is not a single set of assumptions that determine our reserve estimates at the consolidated level. Given the numerous micro-level estimates for reported losses and IBNR, management does not believe the processes that we follow will produce a statistically credible or reliable actuarial reserve range that would be meaningful. Reserve estimates, by their very nature, are very complex to determine and subject to significant judgment, and do not represent an exact determination for each outstanding claim. Accordingly, as actual claims, paid losses, and/or case reserve results emerge, our estimate of the ultimate cost to settle will be different than previously estimated. To develop a statistical indication of potential reserve variability within reasonably likely possible outcomes, an actuarial technique (stochastic modeling) is applied to the countrywide consolidated data elements for paid losses and paid losses combined with case reserves separately for injury losses, auto physical damage losses, and homeowners losses excluding catastrophe losses. Based on the combined historical variability of the development factors calculated for these data elements, an estimate of the standard error or standard deviation around these reserve estimates is calculated within each accident year for the last twenty years for each type of loss. The variability of these reserve estimates within one standard deviation of the mean (a measure of frequency of dispersion often viewed to be an acceptable level of accuracy) is believed by management to represent a reasonable and statistically probable measure of potential variability. Based on our products and coverages, historical experience, the statistical credibility of our 41 Table of Contents extensive data and stochastic modeling of actuarial chain ladder methodologies used to develop reserve estimates, we estimate that the potential variability of our Allstate Protection reserves, excluding reserves for catastrophe losses, within a reasonable probability of other possible outcomes, may be approximately plus or minus 4%, or plus or minus $500 million in net income available to common shareholders. A lower level of variability exists for auto injury losses, which comprise approximately 80% of reserves, due to their relatively stable development patterns over a longer duration of time required to settle claims. Other types of losses, such as auto physical damage, homeowners losses and other personal lines losses, which comprise about 20% of reserves, tend to have greater variability but are settled in a much shorter period of time. Although this evaluation reflects most reasonably likely outcomes, it is possible the final outcome may fall below or above these amounts. Historical variability of reserve estimates is reported in the Property-Liability Claims and Claims Expense Reserves section of this document. Reserves for Michigan and New Jersey unlimited personal injury protection Property-Liability claims and claims expense reserves include reserves for Michigan unlimited personal injury protection ("PIP") which is a mandatory coverage that provides unlimited personal injury protection to covered insureds involved in certain auto and motorcycle accidents. The administration of this program is through a private, non-profit association created by the state of Michigan, the Michigan Catastrophic Claim Association ("MCCA"). Due to increasing costs of providing healthcare related to serious injuries and advances in medical care extending the duration of treatment, the estimation processes have been enhanced and assumptions for this reserve balance have been contemporized to the current validated conditions. The process that resulted in an increase in MCCA covered losses involved a number of activities that occurred over multiple years and included the comprehensive review and interpretation of MCCA actuarial reports, other MCCA members' reports and our PIP loss trends which have increased in severity over time. To address this exposure, we refined our ultimate claim reserve estimation techniques in 2011 through 2014, including relying more on paid loss development methods and increasing our view of future claim development and longevity of claimants, as a result of conducting comprehensive claim file reviews to develop case reserve type estimates of specific claims and other estimation refinements. In 2014 we completed the multi-year comprehensive review and incorporated the findings into our reserve estimation factors. We report our paid and unpaid claims and case reserves, which include our best estimate of the ultimate claim cost, excluding IBNR to the MCCA based on their requirements. The MCCA does not provide participating companies with its estimate of a company's claim costs. We provide similar PIP coverage in New Jersey for auto policies issued or renewed in New Jersey prior to 1991 that is administered by the New Jersey Unsatisfied Claim and Judgment Fund ("NJUCJF"). In 2013, we adopted similar actuarial estimating techniques as for the MCCA exposures to estimate loss reserves for unlimited PIP coverage for policies covered by the NJUCJF. The NJUCJF was merged into the New Jersey Property Liability Guaranty Association who collects the assessments. Upon completion of our comprehensive review in 2014, we updated our reserve estimation techniques and factors, similar to the processes followed to develop the MCCA reserves, which resulted in an increase in reserves for unlimited PIP coverage for policies covered by the NJUCJF. Reserve estimates by their nature are very complex to determine and subject to significant judgments, and do not represent an exact determination for each outstanding claim. As actual claims, paid losses and/or case reserve results emerge, our estimate of the ultimate cost to settle may be materially greater or less than previously estimated amounts. Adequacy of reserve estimates We believe our net claims and claims expense reserves are appropriately established based on available methodologies, facts, technology, laws and regulations. We calculate and record a single best reserve estimate, in conformance with generally accepted actuarial standards, for each line of insurance, its components (coverages and perils) and state, for reported losses and for IBNR losses, and as a result we believe that no other estimate is better than our recorded amount. Due to the uncertainties involved, the ultimate cost of losses may vary materially from recorded amounts, which are based on our best estimates. Discontinued Lines and Coverages reserve estimates Characteristics of Discontinued Lines exposure Our exposure to asbestos, environmental and other discontinued lines claims arises principally from assumed reinsurance coverage written during the 1960s through the mid-1980s, including reinsurance on primary insurance written on large U.S. companies, and from direct excess insurance written from 1972 through 1985, including substantial excess general liability coverages on large U.S. companies. Additional exposure stems from direct primary commercial insurance written during the 1960s through the mid-1980s. Asbestos claims relate primarily to bodily injuries asserted by people who were exposed to asbestos or products containing asbestos. Environmental claims relate primarily to pollution and related clean-up costs. Other discontinued lines exposures primarily relate to general liability and product liability mass tort claims, such as those for medical devices 42 Table of Contents and other products, workers' compensation claims and claims for various other coverage exposures other than asbestos and environmental. In 1986, the general liability policy form used by us and others in the property-liability industry was amended to introduce an "absolute pollution exclusion," which excluded coverage for environmental damage claims, and to add an asbestos exclusion. Most general liability policies issued prior to 1987 contain annual aggregate limits for product liability coverage. General liability policies issued in 1987 and thereafter contain annual aggregate limits for product liability coverage and annual aggregate limits for all coverages. Our experience to date is that these policy form changes have limited the extent of our exposure to environmental and asbestos claim risks. Our exposure to liability for asbestos, environmental and other discontinued lines losses manifests differently depending on whether it arises from assumed reinsurance coverage, direct excess insurance or direct primary commercial insurance. The direct insurance coverage we provided that covered asbestos, environmental and other discontinued lines was substantially "excess" in nature. Direct excess insurance and reinsurance involve coverage written by us for specific layers of protection above retentions and other insurance plans. The nature of excess coverage and reinsurance provided to other insurers limits our exposure to loss to specific layers of protection in excess of policyholder retention on primary insurance plans. Our exposure is further limited by the significant reinsurance that we had purchased on our direct excess business. Our assumed reinsurance business involved writing generally small participations in other insurers' reinsurance programs. The reinsured losses in which we participate may be a proportion of all eligible losses or eligible losses in excess of defined retentions. The majority of our assumed reinsurance exposure, approximately 85%, is for excess of loss coverage, while the remaining 15% is for pro-rata coverage. Our direct primary commercial insurance business did not include coverage to large asbestos manufacturers. This business comprises a cross section of policyholders engaged in many diverse business sectors located throughout the country. How reserve estimates are established and updated We conduct an annual review in the third quarter to evaluate and establish asbestos, environmental and other discontinued lines reserves. Changes to reserves are recorded in the reporting period in which they are determined. Using established industry and actuarial best practices and assuming no change in the regulatory or economic environment, this detailed and comprehensive methodology determines asbestos reserves based on assessments of the characteristics of exposure (i.e. claim activity, potential liability, jurisdiction, products versus non-products exposure) presented by individual policyholders, and determines environmental reserves based on assessments of the characteristics of exposure (i.e. environmental damages, respective shares of liability of potentially responsible parties, appropriateness and cost of remediation) to pollution and related clean-up costs. The number and cost of these claims is affected by intense advertising by trial lawyers seeking asbestos plaintiffs, and entities with asbestos exposure seeking bankruptcy protection as a result of asbestos liabilities, initially causing a delay in the reporting of claims, often followed by an acceleration and an increase in claims and claims expenses as settlements occur. After evaluating our insureds' probable liabilities for asbestos and/or environmental claims, we evaluate our insureds' coverage programs for such claims. We consider our insureds' total available insurance coverage, including the coverage we issued. We also consider relevant judicial interpretations of policy language and applicable coverage defenses or determinations, if any. Evaluation of both the insureds' estimated liabilities and our exposure to the insureds depends heavily on an analysis of the relevant legal issues and litigation environment. This analysis is conducted by our specialized claims adjusting staff and legal counsel. Based on these evaluations, case reserves are established by claims adjusting staff and actuarial analysis is employed to develop an IBNR reserve, which includes estimated potential reserve development and claims that have occurred but have not been reported. As of December 31, 2014 and 2013, IBNR was 56.9% and 55.4%, respectively, of combined net asbestos and environmental reserves. For both asbestos and environmental reserves, we also evaluate our historical direct net loss and expense paid and incurred experience to assess any emerging trends, fluctuations or characteristics suggested by the aggregate paid and incurred activity. 43 Table of Contents Other Discontinued Lines and Coverages The following table shows reserves for other discontinued lines which provide for remaining loss and loss expense liabilities related to business no longer written by us, other than asbestos and environmental, as of December 31. ($ in millions) 2014 2013 2012 Other mass torts $ 167 $ 183 $ 166 Workers' compensation 94 105 112 Commercial and other 134 133 140 Other discontinued lines $ 395 $ 421 $ 418 Other mass torts describes direct excess and reinsurance general liability coverage provided for cumulative injury losses other than asbestos and environmental. Workers' compensation and commercial and other include run-off from discontinued direct primary, direct excess and reinsurance commercial insurance operations of various coverage exposures other than asbestos and environmental. Reserves are based on considerations similar to those described above, as they relate to the characteristics of specific individual coverage exposures. Potential reserve estimate variability Establishing Discontinued Lines and Coverages net loss reserves for asbestos, environmental and other discontinued lines claims is subject to uncertainties that are much greater than those presented by other types of claims. Among the complications are lack of historical data, long reporting delays, uncertainty as to the number and identity of insureds with potential exposure and unresolved legal issues regarding policy coverage; unresolved legal issues regarding the determination, availability and timing of exhaustion of policy limits; plaintiffs' evolving and expanding theories of liability; availability and collectability of recoveries from reinsurance; retrospectively determined premiums and other contractual agreements; estimates of the extent and timing of any contractual liability; the impact of bankruptcy protection sought by various asbestos producers and other asbestos defendants; and other uncertainties. There are also complex legal issues concerning the interpretation of various insurance policy provisions and whether those losses are covered, or were ever intended to be covered, and could be recoverable through retrospectively determined premium, reinsurance or other contractual agreements. Courts have reached different and sometimes inconsistent conclusions as to when losses are deemed to have occurred and which policies provide coverage; what types of losses are covered; whether there is an insurer obligation to defend; how policy limits are determined; how policy exclusions and conditions are applied and interpreted; and whether clean-up costs represent insured property damage. Our reserves for asbestos and environmental exposures could be affected by tort reform, class action litigation, and other potential legislation and judicial decisions. Environmental exposures could also be affected by a change in the existing federal Superfund law and similar state statutes. There can be no assurance that any reform legislation will be enacted or that any such legislation will provide for a fair, effective and cost-efficient system for settlement of asbestos or environmental claims. We believe these issues are not likely to be resolved in the near future, and the ultimate costs may vary materially from the amounts currently recorded resulting in material changes in loss reserves. Historical variability of reserve estimates is demonstrated in the Property-Liability Claims and Claims Expense Reserves section of this document. Adequacy of reserve estimates Management believes its net loss reserves for environmental, asbestos and other discontinued lines exposures are appropriately established based on available facts, technology, laws, regulations, and assessments of other pertinent factors and characteristics of exposure (i.e. claim activity, potential liability, jurisdiction, products versus non-products exposure) presented by individual policyholders, assuming no change in the legal, legislative or economic environment. Due to the uncertainties and factors described above, management believes it is not practicable to develop a meaningful range for any such additional net loss reserves that may be required. Further discussion of reserve estimates For further discussion of these estimates and quantification of the impact of reserve estimates, reserve reestimates and assumptions, see Notes 8 and 14 to the consolidated financial statements and the Property-Liability Claims and Claims Expense Reserves section of this document. Reserve for life-contingent contract benefits estimation Due to the long term nature of traditional life insurance, life-contingent immediate annuities and voluntary accident and health insurance products, benefits are payable over many years; accordingly, the reserves are calculated as the present value of future expected benefits to be paid, reduced by the present value of future expected net premiums. Long-term actuarial assumptions of future investment yields, mortality, morbidity, policy terminations and expenses are used when establishing the reserve for life-contingent contract benefits payable under these insurance policies. These assumptions, which for traditional life insurance are applied using the net level premium method, include provisions for adverse deviation and generally vary by characteristics such as type of coverage, year of issue and policy duration. Future investment yield assumptions are determined based upon prevailing investment yields as well as estimated reinvestment yields. Mortality, morbidity and 44 Table of Contents policy termination assumptions are based on our experience and industry experience. Expense assumptions include the estimated effects of inflation and expenses to be incurred beyond the premium-paying period. These assumptions are established at the time the policy is issued, are consistent with assumptions for determining DAC amortization for these policies, and are generally not changed during the policy coverage period. However, if actual experience emerges in a manner that is significantly adverse relative to the original assumptions, adjustments to DAC or reserves may be required resulting in a charge to earnings which could have a material effect on our operating results and financial condition. We periodically review the adequacy of reserves and recoverability of DAC for these policies on an aggregate basis using actual experience. In the event actual experience is significantly adverse compared to the original assumptions and a premium deficiency is determined to exist, any remaining unamortized DAC balance must be expensed to the extent not recoverable and the establishment of a premium deficiency reserve may be required. In 2014, 2013 and 2012, our reviews concluded that no premium deficiency adjustments were necessary, primarily due to projected profit from traditional life insurance more than offsetting the projected losses in immediate annuities with life contingencies. We will continue to monitor the experience of our traditional life insurance and immediate annuities. We anticipate that mortality, investment and reinvestment yields, and policy terminations are the factors that would be most likely to require premium deficiency adjustments to these reserves or related DAC. For further detail on the reserve for life-contingent contract benefits, see Note 9 of the consolidated financial statements. PROPERTY-LIABILITY 2014 HIGHLIGHTS Property-Liability net income available to common shareholders was $2.43 billion in 2014 compared to $2.75 billion in 2013. Property-Liability premiums written totaled $29.61 billion in 2014, an increase of 5.1% from $28.16 billion in 2013. The Property-Liability loss ratio was 67.2 in 2014 compared to 64.9 in 2013. Catastrophe losses were $1.99 billion in 2014 compared to $1.25 billion in 2013. Property-Liability prior year reserve reestimates totaled $84 million favorable in 2014 compared to $121 million favorable in 2013. Property-Liability underwriting income was $1.77 billion in 2014 compared to $2.22 billion in 2013. Underwriting income, a measure not based on GAAP, is defined below. Property-Liability investments were $39.08 billion as of December 31, 2014, a decrease of 1.4% from $39.64 billion as of December 31, 2013. Net investment income was $1.30 billion in 2014, a decrease of 5.4% from $1.38 billion in 2013. Net realized capital gains were $549 million in 2014 compared to $519 million in 2013. PROPERTY-LIABILITY OPERATIONS Overview Our Property-Liability operations consist of two reporting segments: Allstate Protection and Discontinued Lines and Coverages. Allstate Protection comprises three brands where we accept underwriting risk: Allstate, Esurance and Encompass. Allstate Protection is principally engaged in the sale of personal property and casualty insurance, primarily private passenger auto and homeowners insurance, to individuals in the United States and Canada. Discontinued Lines and Coverages includes results from property-liability insurance coverage that we no longer write and results for certain commercial and other businesses in run-off. These segments are consistent with the groupings of financial information that management uses to evaluate performance and to determine the allocation of resources. Underwriting income, a measure that is not based on GAAP and is reconciled to net income available to common shareholders below, is calculated as premiums earned, less claims and claims expense ("losses"), amortization of DAC, operating costs and expenses and restructuring and related charges, as determined using GAAP. We use this measure in our evaluation of results of operations to analyze the profitability of the Property-Liability insurance operations separately from investment results. It is also an integral component of incentive compensation. It is useful for investors to evaluate the components of income separately and in the aggregate when reviewing performance. Net income available to common shareholders is the GAAP measure most directly comparable to underwriting income. Underwriting income should not be considered as a substitute for net income available to common shareholders and does not reflect the overall profitability of the business. The table below includes GAAP operating ratios we use to measure our profitability. We believe that they enhance an investor's understanding of our profitability. They are calculated as follows: Claims and claims expense ("loss") ratio the ratio of claims and claims expense to premiums earned. Loss ratios include the impact of catastrophe losses. 45 Table of Contents Expense ratio the ratio of amortization of DAC, operating costs and expenses, and restructuring and related charges to premiums earned. Combined ratio the ratio of claims and claims expense, amortization of DAC, operating costs and expenses, and restructuring and related charges to premiums earned. The combined ratio is the sum of the loss ratio and the expense ratio. The difference between 100% and the combined ratio represents underwriting income as a percentage of premiums earned, or underwriting margin. We have also calculated the following impacts of specific items on the GAAP operating ratios because of the volatility of these items between fiscal periods. Effect of catastrophe losses on combined ratio the percentage of catastrophe losses included in claims and claims expense to premiums earned. This ratio includes prior year reserve reestimates of catastrophe losses. Effect of prior year reserve reestimates on combined ratio the percentage of prior year reserve reestimates included in claims and claims expense to premiums earned. This ratio includes prior year reserve reestimates of catastrophe losses. Effect of amortization of purchased intangible assets on combined and expense ratio the percentage of amortization of purchased intangible assets to premiums earned. Effect of restructuring and related charges on combined ratio the percentage of restructuring and related charges to premiums earned. Effect of Discontinued Lines and Coverages on combined ratio the ratio of claims and claims expense and operating costs and expenses in the Discontinued Lines and Coverages segment to Property-Liability premiums earned. The sum of the effect of Discontinued Lines and Coverages on the combined ratio and the Allstate Protection combined ratio is equal to the Property-Liability combined ratio. 46 Table of Contents Summarized financial data, a reconciliation of underwriting income to net income available to common shareholders, and GAAP operating ratios for our Property-Liability operations are presented in the following table. ($ in millions, except ratios) 2014 2013 2012 Premiums written $ 29,614 $ 28,164 $ 27,027 Revenues Premiums earned $ 28,929 $ 27,618 $ 26,737 Net investment income 1,301 1,375 1,326 Realized capital gains and losses 549 519 335 Total revenues 30,779 29,512 28,398 Costs and expenses Claims and claims expense (19,428 ) (17,911 ) (18,484 ) Amortization of DAC (3,875 ) (3,674 ) (3,483 ) Operating costs and expenses (3,838 ) (3,752 ) (3,536 ) Restructuring and related charges (16 ) (63 ) (34 ) Total costs and expenses (27,157 ) (25,400 ) (25,537 ) Gain (loss) on disposition of operations 16 (1 ) Income tax expense (1,211 ) (1,357 ) (893 ) Net income available to common shareholders $ 2,427 $ 2,754 $ 1,968 Underwriting income $ 1,772 $ 2,218 $ 1,200 Net investment income 1,301 1,375 1,326 Income tax expense on operations (1,040 ) (1,177 ) (779 ) Realized capital gains and losses, after-tax 357 339 221 Gain (loss) on disposition of operations, after-tax 37 (1 ) Net income available to common shareholders $ 2,427 $ 2,754 $ 1,968 Catastrophe losses (1) $ 1,993 $ 1,251 $ 2,345 GAAP operating ratios Claims and claims expense ratio 67.2 64.9 69.1 Expense ratio 26.7 27.1 26.4 Combined ratio 93.9 92.0 95.5 Effect of catastrophe losses on combined ratio (1) 6.9 4.5 8.8 Effect of prior year reserve reestimates on combined ratio (1) (0.3 ) (0.4 ) (2.5 ) Effect of amortization of purchased intangible assets on combined ratio 0.2 0.3 0.5 Effect of restructuring and related charges on combined ratio 0.1 0.2 0.1 Effect of Discontinued Lines and Coverages on combined ratio 0.4 0.5 0.2 (1) Prior year reserve reestimates included in catastrophe losses totaled $43 million unfavorable in 2014, $88 million favorable in 2013 and $410 million favorable in 2012. 47 Table of Contents ALLSTATE PROTECTION SEGMENT Overview and strategy The Allstate Protection segment primarily sells private passenger auto and homeowners insurance to individuals through agencies and directly through contact centers and the internet. These products are marketed under the Allstate , Esurance and Encompass brand names. Our strategy is to position our products and distribution systems to meet the changing needs of the customer in managing the risks they face. This includes customers who want local advice and assistance and those who are self-directed. In addition, there are customers who are brand-sensitive and those who are brand-neutral. Our strategy is to serve all four of these consumer segments with unique products and in innovative ways while leveraging our claims, pricing and operational capabilities. When we do not offer a product our customers need, we may make available non-proprietary products that meet their needs. We utilize specific customer value propositions for each brand to improve our competitive position and performance. Over time, delivering on these customer value propositions may include investments in resources and require significant changes to our products, service, capabilities and processes. Our strategy for the Allstate brand focuses on customers who prefer local personal advice and service and are brand-sensitive. Our customer-focused strategy for the Allstate brand aligns targeted marketing, product innovation, distribution effectiveness, and pricing toward acquiring and retaining an increased share of our target customers. This refers to consumers who want to purchase multiple products from one insurance provider including auto, homeowners and financial products, who potentially present more favorable prospects for profitability over the course of their relationships with us. The Allstate brand utilizes marketing delivered to target customers to promote our strategic priorities, with messaging that communicates the value of our "Good Hands ", the importance of having proper coverage by highlighting our comprehensive product and coverage options, and the ease of doing business with Allstate and Allstate agencies. To better serve customers who prefer local and personalized advice, we are undergoing a focused effort to position agents, licensed sales professionals and financial specialists to serve customers as trusted advisors. This means they know customers and understand the unique needs of their households, help them assess the potential risks they face and provide personalized guidance on how to protect what matters most to them. To ensure agencies have the resources, capacity and support needed to serve customers at this level, we have strategic efforts underway to enhance agency capabilities while simplifying and automating service processes to enable agencies to focus more time in an advisory role and provide appropriate product offerings. The Allstate brand differentiates itself from competitors by offering a comprehensive range of innovative product options and features through a network of agencies that provide local advice and service. Product features include Allstate Your Choice Auto with options such as accident forgiveness, safe driving deductible rewards and a safe driving bonus, and Allstate House and Home that provides options of coverage for roof damage including graduated coverage and pricing based on roof type and age. In addition, we offer a Claim Satisfaction Guarantee sm that promises a return of premium to Allstate brand auto insurance customers dissatisfied with their claims experience. Our Drivewise program, available in 46 states and the District of Columbia as of December 31, 2014, uses an in-car device or a mobile application to capture driving behaviors and reward customers for driving safely. We are also testing additional features which extend the benefits of being connected beyond auto insurance pricing. The recently introduced Star Driver program encourages an ongoing conversation about safe driving through an easy-to-use application to develop teens' confidence behind the wheel. We will continue to focus on developing and introducing products and services that benefit today's consumers and further differentiate Allstate and enhance the customer experience. We plan to deepen customer relationships through value-added customer interactions and expanding our presence in households with multiple products by providing financial protection for customer needs. In certain areas with higher risk of catastrophes, we offer a homeowners product from North Light Specialty Insurance Company ("North Light"), our excess and surplus lines carrier. When an Allstate product is not available, we may make available non-proprietary products for customers through brokering arrangements. For example, in hurricane exposed areas, Allstate agencies sell non-proprietary property insurance products to customers who prefer to use a single agent for all their insurance needs. We are undergoing a focused effort to enhance our effectiveness and efficiency by implementing processes and standards to elevate the level and consistency of our customer experience. We continue to enhance technology to improve customer service, facilitate the introduction of new products and services and reduce infrastructure costs related to supporting agencies and handling claims. These actions and others are designed to optimize the effectiveness of our distribution and service channels by increasing the productivity of the Allstate brand's exclusive agencies. 48 Table of Contents Other personal lines sold under the Allstate brand include renter, condominium, landlord, boat, umbrella and manufactured home insurance policies. Commercial lines include insurance products for small business owners. Other business lines include Allstate Roadside Services that provides roadside assistance products, including Good Hands Roadside ; Allstate Dealer Services that provides service contracts and other products sold in conjunction with auto lending and vehicle sales transactions; and Ivantage that is a general agency for Allstate exclusive agencies. Our strategy for the Esurance brand focuses on self-directed consumers. To best serve these customers, Esurance develops its technology, website and mobile capabilities to continuously improve its hassle-free purchase and claims experience and offer innovative product options and features. Esurance continues to develop additional products to complement its auto line of business and provide a more comprehensive solution to its customers. Esurance also continues to invest in geographic expansion of its products. Esurance expanded its renter product in 2014 from 16 to 19 states, motorcycle from 6 to 11 states, homeowners from 3 to 14 states and auto from 41 to 43 states. Esurance continues to focus on increasing its preferred driver mix, while raising advertising expenditures and marketing effectiveness to support growth. Esurance's DriveSense program, available in 28 states as of December 31, 2014, enables participating customers to be eligible for discounts based on driving performance as measured by a device installed in the vehicle. Esurance's DriveSafe program is designed to help parents coach teens on safe driving by providing customizable driving statistics and the ability to limit cell phone use while the car is in motion, all controlled by a device installed in the vehicle. Our strategy for the Encompass brand centers around a highly differentiated offering which simplifies the insurance experience by packaging a product with broader coverage and higher limits into a single annual household ("package") policy with one premium, one bill, one property deductible, one renewal date and one advisor an independent insurance agent. It especially appeals to the approximately 35 million mass affluent households in the U.S., with their higher average premiums and preference for professional advice regarding coverage needs and risk solutions. Package policies represent over 80% of the Encompass portfolio of business, with concentrations in suburban and urban areas throughout the country. Package policies currently are not offered in Massachusetts, North Carolina and Texas. In pursuit of this strategy and to achieve its financial objectives, Encompass is seeking to diversify through new business writings in states where the risk return opportunities meet its requirements, while aggressively executing pricing, underwriting, and other actions to manage risk and ensure adequate profitability. Answer Financial, an independent personal lines insurance agency, serves self-directed, brand-neutral consumers who want a choice between insurance carriers and offers comparison quotes for auto and homeowners insurance from approximately 25 insurance companies through its website and over the phone. It receives commissions for this service. Our pricing and underwriting strategies and decisions for all of our brands are primarily designed to achieve appropriate returns along with enhancing our competitive position. Our sophisticated pricing methodology allows us to attract and retain multiple risk segments. A combination of underwriting information, pricing and discounts are used to achieve a more competitive position. Our pricing uses a number of risk evaluation factors including insurance scoring, to the extent permissible by applicable law, based on information that is obtained from credit reports, and other factors. Our pricing strategy involves marketplace pricing and underwriting decisions that are based on these risk evaluation models and an evaluation of competitors. We continue to manage our property catastrophe exposure with the goal of providing shareholders an acceptable return on the risks assumed in our property business and to reduce the variability of our earnings. Our property business includes personal homeowners, commercial property and other property insurance lines. As of December 31, 2014, we have less than a 1% likelihood of exceeding average annual aggregate catastrophe losses by $2 billion, net of reinsurance, from hurricanes and earthquakes, based on modeled assumptions and applications currently available. The use of different assumptions and updates to industry models, and updates to our risk transfer program, could materially change the projected loss. Our growth strategies include areas previously restricted where we believe we can earn an appropriate return for the risk and as a result our exposure may increase, but remain lower than $2 billion as noted above. In addition, we have exposure to severe weather events which impact catastrophe losses. Property catastrophe exposure management includes purchasing reinsurance to provide coverage for known exposure to hurricanes, earthquakes, wildfires, fires following earthquakes and other catastrophes. We are also working to promote measures to prevent and mitigate losses and make homes and communities more resilient, including enactment of stronger building codes and effective enforcement of those codes, adoption of sensible land use policies, and development of effective and affordable methods of improving the resilience of existing structures. Pricing of property products is typically intended to establish returns that we deem acceptable over a long-term period. Losses, including losses from catastrophic events and weather-related losses (such as wind, hail, lightning and 49 Table of Contents freeze losses not meeting our criteria to be declared a catastrophe), are accrued on an occurrence basis within the policy period. Therefore, in any reporting period, loss experience from catastrophic events and weather-related losses may contribute to negative or positive underwriting performance relative to the expectations we incorporated into the products' pricing. We pursue rate increases where indicated, taking into consideration potential customer disruption, the impact on our ability to market our auto lines, regulatory limitations, our competitive position and profitability, using a methodology that appropriately addresses the changing costs of losses from catastrophes such as severe weather and the net cost of reinsurance. Allstate Protection outlook Allstate Protection will continue to focus on its strategy of offering differentiated products and services to our customers while maintaining pricing discipline. We expect that volatility in the level of catastrophes we experience will contribute to variation in our underwriting results; however, this volatility will be mitigated due to our catastrophe management actions, including the purchase of reinsurance. We will continue our evolution to a trusted advisor model, enabling agencies to more fully deliver on the Allstate brand customer value proposition. We will continue to modernize our operating model to efficiently deliver our customer value propositions. We will invest in building long-term growth platforms. Premiums written is the amount of premiums charged for policies issued during a fiscal period. Premiums are considered earned and are included in the financial results on a pro-rata basis over the policy period. The portion of premiums written applicable to the unexpired term of the policies is recorded as unearned premiums on our Consolidated Statements of Financial Position. The following table shows the unearned premium balance as of December 31 and the timeframe in which we expect to recognize these premiums as earned. ($ in millions) % earned after 2014 2013 Three months Six months Nine months Twelve months Allstate brand: Auto $ 4,766 $ 4,533 70.7 % 96.2 % 99.1 % 100.0 % Homeowners 3,607 3,496 43.4 % 75.5 % 94.2 % 100.0 % Other personal lines (1) 833 819 43.5 % 75.4 % 94.1 % 100.0 % Commercial lines 254 236 43.8 % 75.1 % 93.9 % 100.0 % Other business lines (2) 642 468 18.9 % 33.3 % 45.4 % 55.3 % Total Allstate brand 10,102 9,552 54.9 % 82.7 % 93.4 % 97.2 % Esurance brand: Auto 371 328 73.7 % 98.5 % 99.6 % 100.0 % Homeowners 6 43.4 % 75.6 % 94.2 % 100.0 % Other personal lines 2 1 43.5 % 75.4 % 94.2 % 100.0 % Total Esurance brand 379 329 73.1 % 98.0 % 99.5 % 100.0 % Encompass brand: Auto 345 335 43.8 % 75.6 % 94.1 % 100.0 % Homeowners 274 253 43.7 % 75.7 % 94.2 % 100.0 % Other personal lines 57 54 43.9 % 75.7 % 94.2 % 100.0 % Total Encompass brand 676 642 43.8 % 75.6 % 94.2 % 100.0 % Allstate Protection unearned premiums $ 11,157 $ 10,523 54.8 % 82.8 % 93.7 % 97.4 % (1) Other personal lines include renter, condominium, landlord and other personal lines. (2) Other business lines include Allstate Roadside Services, Allstate Dealer Services and other business lines. 50 Table of Contents A reconciliation of premiums written to premiums earned is shown in the following table. ($ in millions) 2014 2013 2012 Premiums written: Allstate Protection $ 29,613 $ 28,164 $ 27,026 Discontinued Lines and Coverages 1 1 Property-Liability premiums written 29,614 28,164 27,027 Increase in unearned premiums (723 ) (572 ) (322 ) Other 38 26 32 Property-Liability premiums earned $ 28,929 $ 27,618 $ 26,737 Premiums earned: Allstate Protection $ 28,928 $ 27,618 $ 26,737 Discontinued Lines and Coverages 1 Property-Liability $ 28,929 $ 27,618 $ 26,737 Premiums written by brand are shown in the following table. ($ in millions) Allstate brand Esurance brand Encompass brand Allstate Protection 2014 2013 2012 2014 2013 2012 2014 2013 2012 2014 2013 2012 Auto $ 17,504 $ 16,752 $ 16,398 $ 1,499 $ 1,308 $ 1,024 $ 665 $ 641 $ 618 $ 19,668 $ 18,701 $ 18,040 Homeowners 6,536 6,289 6,060 9 506 461 398 7,051 6,750 6,458 Other personal lines 1,569 1,539 1,515 5 2 109 104 97 1,683 1,645 1,612 Subtotal Personal lines 25,609 24,580 23,973 1,513 1,310 1,024 1,280 1,206 1,113 28,402 27,096 26,110 Commercial lines 494 466 454 494 466 454 Other business lines 717 602 462 717 602 462 Total $ 26,820 $ 25,648 $ 24,889 $ 1,513 $ 1,310 $ 1,024 $ 1,280 $ 1,206 $ 1,113 $ 29,613 $ 28,164 $ 27,026 Premiums earned by brand are shown in the following table. ($ in millions) Allstate brand Esurance brand Encompass brand Allstate Protection 2014 2013 2012 2014 2013 2012 2014 2013 2012 2014 2013 2012 Auto $ 17,234 $ 16,578 $ 16,352 $ 1,455 $ 1,245 $ 967 $ 655 $ 626 $ 609 $ 19,344 $ 18,449 $ 17,928 Homeowners 6,415 6,183 5,980 3 486 430 379 6,904 6,613 6,359 Other personal lines 1,551 1,527 1,501 5 2 106 100 93 1,662 1,629 1,594 Subtotal Personal lines 25,200 24,288 23,833 1,463 1,247 967 1,247 1,156 1,081 27,910 26,691 25,881 Commercial lines 476 456 462 476 456 462 Other business lines 542 471 394 542 471 394 Total $ 26,218 $ 25,215 $ 24,689 $ 1,463 $ 1,247 $ 967 $ 1,247 $ 1,156 $ 1,081 $ 28,928 $ 27,618 $ 26,737 Premium measures and statistics that are used to analyze the business are calculated and described below. PIF: Policy counts are based on items rather than customers. A multi-car customer would generate multiple item (policy) counts, even if all cars were insured under one policy. Average premium-gross written ("average premium"): Gross premiums written divided by issued item count. Gross premiums written include the impacts from discounts, surcharges and ceded reinsurance premiums and exclude the impacts from mid-term premium adjustments and premium refund accruals. Average premiums represent the appropriate policy term for each line. Allstate and Esurance brands are 6 months for auto and 12 months for homeowners. Encompass brand is 12 months for auto and homeowners. Renewal ratio: Renewal policies issued during the period, based on contract effective dates, divided by the total policies issued 6 months prior for auto (12 months prior for Encompass brand) or 12 months prior for homeowners. New issued applications: Item counts of automobiles or homeowners insurance applications for insurance policies that were issued during the period, regardless of whether the customer was previously insured by another Allstate Protection brand. Does not include automobiles that are added by existing customers. 51 Table of Contents Auto premiums written totaled $19.67 billion in 2014, a 5.2% increase from $18.70 billion in 2013, following a 3.7% increase in 2013 from $18.04 billion in 2012. Allstate brand Esurance brand Encompass brand 2014 2013 2012 2014 2013 2012 2014 2013 2012 PIF (thousands) 19,916 19,362 19,084 1,424 1,286 1,029 790 774 731 Average premium (1) $ 479 $ 468 $ 458 $ 499 $ 485 $ 493 $ 895 $ 880 $ 890 Renewal ratio (%) 88.9 88.6 87.9 79.5 80.7 80.5 79.7 78.7 75.8 Approved rate changes (2) : # of locations 46 (6) 39 42 38 31 29 29 29 31 Total brand (%) (3) 2.3 (7) 1.9 3.0 6.0 4.8 4.4 6.6 5.9 4.1 Location specific (%) (4) (5) 3.2 3.2 5.0 6.9 6.5 5.6 7.9 7.0 5.2 (1) Policy term is six months for Allstate and Esurance brands and twelve months for Encompass brand. (2) Rate changes that are indicated based on loss trend analysis to achieve a targeted return will continue to be pursued. Rate changes do not include rating plan enhancements, including the introduction of discounts and surcharges that result in no change in the overall rate level in the state. These rate changes do not reflect initial rates filed for insurance subsidiaries initially writing business in a state. Rate changes for Allstate brand for the 2013 and 2012 periods exclude Canada and specialty auto. (3) Represents the impact in the states and Canadian provinces where rate changes were approved during the period as a percentage of total brand prior year-end premiums written. (4) Represents the impact in the states and Canadian provinces where rate changes were approved during the period as a percentage of its respective total prior year-end premiums written in those same locations. (5) Based on historical premiums written in those states and Canadian provinces, rate changes approved for auto totaled $520 million, $379 million and $539 million in 2014, 2013 and 2012, respectively. (6) 2014 includes 4 Canadian provinces and Washington D.C. (7) Allstate brand (excluding Canada) rate changes in 2014 were 2.9%. Allstate brand auto premiums written totaled $17.50 billion in 2014, a 4.5% increase from $16.75 billion in 2013. Factors impacting premiums written were the following: 2.9% or 554 thousand increase in PIF as of December 31, 2014 compared to December 31, 2013. 10.3% increase in new issued applications to 3,033 thousand in 2014 from 2,749 thousand in 2013. 2.4% increase in average premium in 2014 compared to 2013. 0.3 point increase in the renewal ratio in 2014 compared to 2013. Allstate brand auto premiums written totaled $16.75 billion in 2013, a 2.2% increase from $16.40 billion in 2012. Factors impacting premiums written were the following: 1.5% increase in PIF as of December 31, 2013 compared to December 31, 2012. 12.5% increase in new issued applications to 2,749 thousand in 2013 from 2,443 thousand in 2012. 2.2% increase in average premium in 2013 compared to 2012. 0.7 point increase in the renewal ratio in 2013 compared to 2012. Esurance brand auto premiums written totaled $1.50 billion in 2014, an increase of 14.6% from $1.31 billion in 2013. The increase was primarily due to a 10.7% or 138 thousand increase in PIF as of December 31, 2014 compared to December 31, 2013. New issued applications of 747 thousand in 2014 was comparable to 2013. An increase in quote volume driven by the new advertising program was offset by a decrease in conversion rate (the percentage of completed quotes to actual issued policies) primarily due to rate actions. Rate actions are taken where profit margin targets are not being achieved. The rate changes in 2014 were taken in states and risk categories to improve profit margin while managing customer retention. Average premium increased 2.9% in 2014 compared to 2013. Esurance brand renewal ratio decreased 1.2 points in 2014 compared to 2013. The renewal ratio for the direct to consumer business is generally lower than agency written business consistent with the direct consumer tendency to shop and change providers based on competitive rates. The renewal ratio is also typically lowest at the first renewal date for new business. The decrease in the renewal ratio during 2014 was due to the impact of rate increases and growth in states with lower retention, partially offset by an increase in the amount of business past its first renewal. Retention may continue to be impacted as a result of expansion initiatives that increase the areas in which Esurance writes business. Retention at first renewal was 70.4% during 2014 compared to 72.8% in 2013. The renewal ratio on business subsequent to first renewal was 82.7% during 2014 compared to 84.1% in 2013. Esurance brand auto premiums written totaled $1.31 billion in 2013, a 27.7% increase from $1.02 billion in 2012. The increase was primarily due to a 25.0% increase in PIF as of December 31, 2013 compared to December 31, 2012. New issued applications increased 23.5% to 747 thousand in 2013 from 605 thousand in 2012. Growth in new issued 52 Table of Contents applications was driven by increased advertising, which resulted in an increase in quotes. Our conversion rate was comparable to the prior year. The renewal ratio increased 0.2 points in 2013 compared to 2012. Encompass brand auto premiums written totaled $665 million in 2014, an increase of 3.7% from $641 million in 2013. The increase was primarily due to a 2.1% or 16 thousand increase in PIF as of December 31, 2014 compared to December 31, 2013. New issued applications decreased 12.9% to 135 thousand in 2014 from 155 thousand in 2013 primarily due to profit improvement actions including rate changes, underwriting guideline adjustments, and agency-level actions to manage risks and ensure profitability. Average premium increased 1.7% in 2014 compared to 2013. The renewal ratio increased 1.0 point in 2014 compared to 2013 due to adverse impacts from run-off effects of Florida in the prior year. A higher percentage of package auto policies renewed. Package policies typically have higher retention rates. Encompass brand auto premiums written totaled $641 million in 2013, a 3.7% increase from $618 million in 2012. The increase was primarily due to a 5.9% increase in PIF as of December 31, 2013 compared to December 31, 2012 and actions taken to enhance the package policy. New issued applications increased 9.2% to 155 thousand in 2013 from 142 thousand in 2012. The renewal ratio increased 2.9 points in 2013 compared to 2012. Encompass discontinued writing new auto business in Florida in September 2012 and non-renewals began in February 2013. Homeowners premiums written totaled $7.05 billion in 2014, a 4.5% increase from $6.75 billion in 2013, following a 4.5% increase in 2013 from $6.46 billion in 2012. Excluding the cost of catastrophe reinsurance, premiums written increased 3.7% in 2014 compared to 2013. For a more detailed discussion on reinsurance, see the Property-Liability Claims and Claims Expense Reserves section of the MD&A and Note 10 of the consolidated financial statements. Allstate brand Esurance brand Encompass brand 2014 2013 2012 2014 2014 2013 2012 PIF (thousands) 6,106 6,077 6,213 10 365 356 327 Average premium (12 months) $ 1,140 $ 1,115 $ 1,074 $ 811 $ 1,457 $ 1,374 $ 1,311 Renewal ratio (%) (12 months) 88.4 87.7 87.4 N/A 85.6 86.6 83.3 Approved rate changes (1) : # of locations 37 (3) 41 42 N/A 23 31 33 (4) Total brand (%) 1.7 3.6 6.3 N/A 4.7 7.4 6.0 Location specific (%) (2) 4.7 5.2 8.6 N/A 8.9 8.2 6.4 (1) Includes rate changes approved based on our net cost of reinsurance. Rate changes for Allstate brand for the 2013 and 2012 periods exclude Canada. (2) Based on historical premiums written in those states and Canadian provinces, rate changes approved for homeowners totaled $147 million, $254 million and $412 million, respectively. (3) Includes 4 Canadian provinces. (4) Includes Washington D.C. N/A reflects not applicable. Allstate brand homeowners premiums written totaled $6.54 billion in 2014, a 3.9% increase from $6.29 billion in 2013. Factors impacting premiums written were the following: 0.5% or 29 thousand increase in PIF as of December 31, 2014 compared to December 31, 2013 due to increases in new issued applications and retention. 16.0% increase in new issued applications to 725 thousand in 2014 from 625 thousand in 2013. 2.2% increase in average premium in 2014 compared to 2013 primarily due to rate changes as well as increasing insured home valuations. 0.7 point increase in the renewal ratio in 2014 compared to 2013. $36 million decrease in the cost of our catastrophe reinsurance program to $389 million in 2014 from $425 million in 2013. Reinsurance premiums are recorded as a reduction of premium. 53 Table of Contents Premiums written for Allstate's House and Home product, our redesigned homeowners new business offering currently available in 34 states, totaled $934 million in 2014 compared to $471 million in 2013. Most House and Home policies are issued to customers new to Allstate homeowners policies. Allstate House and Home accounted for 86% of Allstate brand homeowners new issued applications in 2014. Allstate House and Home PIF increased 102.6% as of December 31, 2014 compared to December 31, 2013. In states with severe weather and risk, our excess and surplus lines carrier North Light as well as non-proprietary products will remain a critical component to our overall homeowners strategy to profitably grow and serve our customers. Allstate brand homeowners premiums written totaled $6.29 billion in 2013, a 3.8% increase from $6.06 billion in 2012. Factors impacting premiums written were the following: 2.2% decrease in PIF as of December 31, 2013 compared to December 31, 2012 due to fewer policies available to renew. 31.6% increase in new issued applications to 625 thousand in 2013 from 475 thousand in 2012. 3.8% increase in average premium in 2013 compared to 2012 primarily due to rate changes. 0.3 point increase in the renewal ratio in 2013 compared to 2012. $56 million decrease in the cost of our catastrophe reinsurance program to $425 million in 2013 from $481 million in 2012. Esurance brand homeowners premiums written totaled $9 million in 2014. New issued applications totaled 11 thousand in 2014. As of December 31, 2014, Esurance is writing homeowners insurance in 14 states with lower hurricane risk that have lower average premium. Encompass brand homeowners premiums written totaled $506 million in 2014, a 9.8% increase from $461 million in 2013. The increase was primarily due to rate increases and a 2.5% or 9 thousand increase in PIF as of December 31, 2014 compared to December 31, 2013. New issued applications decreased 11.4% to 70 thousand in 2014 from 79 thousand in 2013 due to profit improvement actions including rate changes, underwriting guideline adjustments, and agency-level actions. Average premium increased 6.0% in 2014 compared to 2013. The renewal ratio decreased 1.0 point in 2014 compared to 2013. Encompass brand homeowners premiums written totaled $461 million in 2013, a 15.8% increase from $398 million in 2012. The increase was primarily due to an 8.9% increase in PIF as of December 31, 2013 compared to December 31, 2012 and actions taken to enhance the package policy. New issued applications increased 12.9% to 79 thousand in 2013 from 70 thousand in 2012. The renewal ratio increased 3.3 points in 2013 compared to 2012. Other personal lines Allstate brand other personal lines premiums written totaled $1.57 billion in 2014, a 1.9% increase from $1.54 billion in 2013, following a 1.6% increase in 2013 from $1.52 billion in 2012. The increases in 2014 and 2013 primarily relate to renter and condominium insurance. Commercial lines premiums written totaled $494 million in 2014, a 6.0% increase from $466 million in 2013, following a 2.6% increase in 2013 from $454 million in 2012. The increase in 2014 was driven by higher renewals and increased new business resulting from a new business owner policy product. Other business lines premiums written totaled $717 million in 2014, a 19.1% increase from $602 million in 2013, following a 30.3% increase in 2013 from $462 million in 2012. The increases in 2014 and 2013 were primarily due to increased sales of vehicle service contracts at Allstate Dealer Services, and new and expanded contracts where Allstate Roadside Services provides roadside assistance to a third party company's customer base. 54 Table of Contents Underwriting results are shown in the following table. ($ in millions) 2014 2013 2012 Premiums written $ 29,613 $ 28,164 $ 27,026 Premiums earned $ 28,928 $ 27,618 $ 26,737 Claims and claims expense (19,315 ) (17,769 ) (18,433 ) Amortization of DAC (3,875 ) (3,674 ) (3,483 ) Other costs and expenses (3,835 ) (3,751 ) (3,534 ) Restructuring and related charges (16 ) (63 ) (34 ) Underwriting income $ 1,887 $ 2,361 $ 1,253 Catastrophe losses $ 1,993 $ 1,251 $ 2,345 Underwriting income (loss) by line of business Auto $ 604 $ 668 $ 469 Homeowners 1,097 1,422 690 Other personal lines 150 198 (10 ) Commercial lines 9 41 51 Other business lines 40 51 77 Answer Financial (13 ) (19 ) (24 ) Underwriting income $ 1,887 $ 2,361 $ 1,253 Underwriting income (loss) by brand Allstate brand $ 2,235 $ 2,551 $ 1,539 Esurance brand (259 ) (218 ) (192 ) Encompass brand (76 ) 47 (70 ) Answer Financial (13 ) (19 ) (24 ) Underwriting income $ 1,887 $ 2,361 $ 1,253 Allstate Protection had underwriting income of $1.89 billion in 2014 compared to $2.36 billion in 2013. Homeowners underwriting income was $1.10 billion in 2014 compared to $1.42 billion in 2013, primarily due to increased catastrophe losses, partially offset by increased premiums earned. Auto underwriting income was $604 million in 2014 compared to $668 million in 2013, primarily due to increased losses excluding catastrophes, increased expenses and increased catastrophe losses, partially offset by increased premiums earned. Other personal lines underwriting income was $150 million in 2014 compared to $198 million in 2013, primarily due to increased catastrophe losses, partially offset by increased premiums earned. Allstate Protection had underwriting income of $2.36 billion in 2013 compared to $1.25 billion in 2012. Homeowners underwriting income was $1.42 billion in 2013 compared to $690 million in 2012, primarily due to decreased catastrophe losses, decreased loss costs excluding catastrophe losses and increased premiums earned, partially offset by lower favorable reserve reestimates and higher expenses. Other personal lines underwriting income was $198 million in 2013 compared to an underwriting loss of $10 million in 2012, primarily due to decreased catastrophe losses, decreased loss costs excluding catastrophe losses, increased premiums earned and lower unfavorable reserve reestimates, partially offset by higher expenses. Auto underwriting income was $668 million in 2013 compared to $469 million in 2012, primarily due to increased premiums earned and decreased catastrophe losses including favorable Sandy reserve reestimates, partially offset by higher incurred losses excluding catastrophe losses, higher expenses and lower favorable reserve reestimates. Catastrophe losses were $1.99 billion in 2014 compared to $1.25 billion in 2013 and $2.35 billion in 2012. We define a "catastrophe" as an event that produces pre-tax losses before reinsurance in excess of $1 million and involves multiple first party policyholders, or an event that produces a number of claims in excess of a preset, per-event threshold of average claims in a specific area, occurring within a certain amount of time following the event. Catastrophes are caused by various natural events including high winds, winter storms, tornadoes, hailstorms, wildfires, tropical storms, hurricanes, earthquakes and volcanoes. We are also exposed to man-made catastrophic events, such as certain types of terrorism or industrial accidents. The nature and level of catastrophes in any period cannot be reliably predicted. 55 Table of Contents Catastrophe losses in 2014 by the size of event are shown in the following table. ($ in millions) Number of events Claims and claims expense Combined ratio impact Average catastrophe loss per event Size of catastrophe loss Greater than $250 million 2 2.3 % $ 548 27.5 % 1.9 $ 274 $101 million to $250 million 2 2.3 235 11.7 0.8 118 $50 million to $100 million 5 5.9 402 20.2 1.4 80 Less than $50 million 76 89.5 765 38.4 2.7 10 Total 85 100.0 % 1,950 97.8 6.8 23 Prior year reserve reestimates 43 2.2 0.1 Total catastrophe losses $ 1,993 100.0 % 6.9 Catastrophe losses by the type of event are shown in the following table. ($ in millions) 2014 2013 2012 Number of events Number of events Number of events Hurricanes/Tropical storms $ 2 1 $ 14 1 $ 1,200 3 Tornadoes 99 2 169 3 297 5 Wind/Hail 1,429 70 1,089 64 1,198 64 Wildfires 19 5 41 5 53 11 Other events 401 7 26 3 7 1 Prior year reserve reestimates 43 (88 ) (410 ) Total catastrophe losses $ 1,993 85 $ 1,251 76 $ 2,345 84 Catastrophe losses, including prior year reserve reestimates, excluding hurricanes named or numbered by the National Weather Service, fires following earthquakes and earthquakes, totaled $2.00 billion, $1.35 billion and $1.32 billion in 2014, 2013 and 2012, respectively. 56 Table of Contents Combined ratio Loss ratios by product, and expense and combined ratios by brand, are shown in the following table. Ratio (1) Effect of catastrophe losses on combined ratio Effect of prior year reserve reestimates on combined ratio Effect of amortization of purchased intangible assets on combined ratio 2014 2013 2012 2014 2013 2012 2014 2013 2012 2014 2013 2012 Allstate brand loss ratio: Auto 69.2 68.5 70.3 1.6 1.0 3.8 (1.2 ) (1.2 ) (2.1 ) Homeowners 58.7 53.4 64.1 21.4 15.6 23.2 0.4 (5.2 ) Other personal lines 61.7 58.6 72.3 8.2 3.5 12.3 2.1 1.8 2.2 Commercial lines 67.0 60.7 60.4 6.1 0.4 0.6 (4.2 ) (7.9 ) (10.4 ) Total Allstate brand loss ratio 65.8 63.6 68.3 6.9 4.7 8.9 (0.7 ) (0.9 ) (2.7 ) Allstate brand expense ratio 25.7 26.3 25.5 Allstate brand combined ratio 91.5 89.9 93.8 6.9 4.7 8.9 (0.7 ) (0.9 ) (2.7 ) Esurance brand loss ratio: Auto 76.8 78.5 77.2 1.3 0.9 1.6 (1.1 ) Homeowners 66.7 Other personal lines 60.0 50.0 Total Esurance brand loss ratio 76.8 78.5 77.2 1.3 0.9 1.6 (1.1 ) Esurance brand expense ratio 40.9 39.0 42.7 3.3 4.9 10.1 Esurance brand combined ratio 117.7 117.5 119.9 1.3 0.9 1.6 (1.1 ) 3.3 4.9 10.1 Encompass brand loss ratio: Auto 77.1 73.5 78.5 3.2 0.3 3.6 (2.0 ) (4.8 ) (3.9 ) Homeowners 74.7 56.3 76.5 28.2 12.6 28.8 0.4 (1.2 ) (3.2 ) Other personal lines 75.5 54.0 67.7 6.6 4.0 5.4 1.9 (8.0 ) (9.7 ) Total Encompass brand loss ratio 76.0 65.4 76.9 13.2 5.2 12.6 (0.7 ) (3.7 ) (4.2 ) Encompass brand expense ratio 30.1 30.5 29.6 Encompass brand combined ratio 106.1 95.9 106.5 13.2 5.2 12.6 (0.7 ) (3.7 ) (4.2 ) Allstate Protection loss ratio 66.8 64.4 68.9 6.9 4.5 8.8 (0.7 ) (1.0 ) (2.7 ) Allstate Protection expense ratio 26.7 27.1 26.4 0.2 0.3 0.5 Allstate Protection combined ratio 93.5 91.5 95.3 6.9 4.5 8.8 (0.7 ) (1.0 ) (2.7 ) 0.2 0.3 0.5 (1) Ratios are calculated using the premiums earned for the respective line of business. Auto loss ratio for the Allstate brand increased 0.7 points in 2014 compared to 2013, primarily due to increased catastrophe losses. Auto loss ratio for the Allstate brand decreased 1.8 points in 2013 compared to 2012, primarily due to lower catastrophe losses, partially offset by lower favorable reserve reestimates. Claim frequency in the bodily injury coverages in 2014 was comparable to 2013. Claim frequency in the property damage coverages increased 0.5% in 2014 compared to 2013. We experienced increased property damage frequency in first quarter 2014 due to severe winter weather experienced in the Midwest and East and in the first two months of fourth quarter 2014 in geographically widespread areas with improved unemployment rates leading to higher miles driven and areas that experienced higher precipitation. Otherwise, frequencies in bodily injury and property damage performed within historical ranges. Bodily injury and property damage coverage paid claim severities increased 2.7% and 4.1%, respectively, in 2014 compared to 2013. Severity results in 2014 increased in line with historical Consumer Price Index trends. Claim frequencies in the bodily injury and property damage coverages decreased 1.1% and increased 0.3%, respectively, in 2013 compared to 2012. Bodily injury and property damage coverage paid claim severities increased 3.8% and 1.8%, respectively, in 2013 compared to 2012. We pursue rate increases when necessary to maintain margins. Esurance brand auto loss ratio decreased 1.7 points in 2014 compared to 2013, primarily due to rate actions and favorable reserve reestimates related to personal injury protection losses. We manage the business so that it is profitable over the life of the business, taking rate increases as appropriate. Esurance brand auto loss ratio increased 1.3 points in 2013 compared to 2012, primarily due to increases in the volume of new business, increased utilization of price discounts and higher unallocated loss adjustment expense, partially offset by lower catastrophe losses. Encompass brand auto loss ratio increased 3.6 points in 2014 compared to 2013, due to increased catastrophe losses and lower favorable reserve reestimates, partially offset by increased premiums earned. Encompass brand auto 57 Table of Contents loss ratio decreased 5.0 points in 2013 compared to 2012, due to lower catastrophe losses, a higher mix of preferred insureds and higher favorable reserve reestimates. Homeowners loss ratio for the Allstate brand increased 5.3 points to 58.7 in 2014 from 53.4 in 2013, primarily due to higher catastrophe losses, partially offset by increased premiums earned. Claim frequency excluding catastrophe losses decreased 0.3% in 2014 compared to 2013. Paid claim severity excluding catastrophe losses increased 7.7% in 2014 compared to 2013. The 2-year average annual increase for paid claim severity is approximately 3.5%. Homeowners loss ratio for the Allstate brand decreased 10.7 points to 53.4 in 2013 from 64.1 in 2012, primarily due to lower catastrophe losses, decreased loss costs excluding catastrophe losses and increased premiums earned. Claim frequency excluding catastrophe losses decreased 0.3% in 2013 compared to 2012. Paid claim severity excluding catastrophe losses decreased 0.2% in 2013 compared to 2012. Encompass brand homeowners loss ratio increased 18.4 points in 2014 compared to 2013, primarily due to higher catastrophe losses. Several catastrophes occurred in areas where Encompass has a concentration of policyholders. Excluding the impact of catastrophe losses, the Encompass brand homeowners loss ratio increased 2.8 points in 2014 compared to 2013, primarily due to the impact of severe weather. Encompass brand homeowners loss ratio decreased 20.2 points in 2013 compared to 2012, primarily due to lower catastrophe losses. Expense ratio for Allstate Protection decreased 0.4 points in 2014 compared to 2013. The impact of specific costs and expenses on the expense ratio are shown in the following table. Allstate brand Esurance brand Encompass brand Allstate Protection 2014 2013 2012 2014 2013 2012 2014 2013 2012 2014 2013 2012 Amortization of DAC 13.7 13.6 13.2 2.7 2.7 2.5 18.8 18.3 17.5 13.4 13.3 12.9 Advertising expenses 2.5 2.8 2.7 17.4 14.8 15.4 0.4 0.4 0.5 3.2 3.2 3.1 Amortization of purchased intangible assets 3.3 4.9 10.1 0.2 0.3 0.5 Other costs and expenses 9.5 9.7 9.5 17.5 16.6 14.7 10.7 11.5 11.6 9.8 10.1 9.8 Restructuring and related charges 0.2 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.1 0.2 0.1 Total expense ratio 25.7 26.3 25.5 40.9 39.0 42.7 30.1 30.5 29.6 26.7 27.1 26.4 Allstate brand expense ratio decreased 0.6 points in 2014 compared to 2013 primarily due to lower advertising expenditures and lower employee related costs, including pension expense, partially offset by higher amortization of DAC. Amortization of DAC primarily includes agent remuneration and premium taxes. Amortization of DAC increased in 2014 compared to 2013 and Allstate agency total incurred base commissions, variable compensation and bonus was higher than 2013. Allstate exclusive agent remuneration comprises a base commission, variable compensation and a bonus. Variable compensation has two components: agency success factors (local presence, Allstate Financial insurance policies sold and licensed staff), which must be achieved in order to qualify for the second component, and customer satisfaction. In addition, a bonus that is a percentage of premiums can be earned by agents who achieve a targeted loss ratio and a defined amount of Allstate Financial sales. The bonus is earned by achieving a targeted percentage of multi-category households and increases in Property-Liability and Allstate Financial policies in force. The Allstate agent commissions and bonus were expensed as a component of DAC amortization at increasing levels during 2013 and continuing in 2014 as more agents met the success factors. In 2014, the bonus success factors were changed from 2013 levels commensurate with performance achieved in 2013, which was in excess of target amounts. Esurance brand expense ratio increased 1.9 points in 2014 compared to 2013. A significant portion of Esurance's expense ratio relates to customer acquisition. Customer acquisition costs include amortization of DAC, advertising expenses and a portion of other costs and expenses and totaled 27.3 points in 2014 and 24.1 points in 2013. Esurance advertising expenses in 2014 were higher than 2013 due to increased spending related to the launch of a new advertising campaign, the homeowners advertising launch in 2014 and additional advertising to achieve short-term growth and long-term brand positioning. The Esurance brand expense ratio also includes purchased intangible assets that are amortized on an accelerated basis with over 80% of the amortization taking place by 2016. The other costs and expenses, related to acquisition include salaries of telephone sales personnel and other underwriting costs, was comparable to the prior year. Esurance uses a direct distribution model, therefore its primary acquisition-related costs are advertising as opposed to commissions. Esurance incurs substantially all of its acquisition costs in the year of policy inception. As a result, the Esurance expense ratio will be higher during periods of increased advertising expenditures. Total acquisition costs in 2014 were in line with other distribution channels when considering the cumulative earned premiums of policies sold 58 Table of Contents and excluding additional advertising to achieve long term brand positioning. Esurance continued to invest in geographic expansion of its products and added additional products and capabilities in 2014. The spending on expansion initiatives, excluding customer acquisition costs which occur prior to premiums being written, contributed approximately 2.7 points to the expense ratio in 2014. Esurance's annual combined ratio is below 100, excluding amortization of purchased intangible assets, after the year of policy inception (in which substantially all acquisition costs are incurred), driven by pricing changes and customer mix. We manage the direct to consumer business based on its profitability over the life-time of the policy. Encompass brand expense ratio decreased 0.4 points in 2014 compared to 2013 primarily due to lower employee related costs, including pension expense, partially offset by higher amortization of DAC. The Encompass brand DAC amortization is higher on average than Allstate brand DAC amortization due to higher commission rates paid to independent agencies. DAC We establish a DAC asset for costs that are related directly to the successful acquisition of new or renewal insurance policies, principally agents' remuneration and premium taxes. For the Allstate Protection business, DAC is amortized to income over the period in which premiums are earned. The DAC balance as of December 31 by brand and product type are shown in the following table. ($ in millions) Allstate brand Esurance brand Encompass brand Allstate Protection 2014 2013 2014 2013 2014 2013 2014 2013 Auto $ 609 $ 582 $ 10 $ 8 $ 62 $ 62 $ 681 $ 652 Homeowners 491 484 43 42 534 526 Other personal lines 109 108 9 9 118 117 Commercial lines 34 31 34 31 Other business lines 453 299 453 299 Total DAC $ 1,696 $ 1,504 $ 10 $ 8 $ 114 $ 113 $ 1,820 $ 1,625 Gain on disposition of $37 million, after-tax, in 2014 primarily relates to the sale of Sterling Collision Centers, Inc. Catastrophe management Historical catastrophe experience For the last ten years, the average annual impact of catastrophes on our Property-Liability loss ratio was 9.2 points. The average annual impact of catastrophes on the homeowners loss ratio for the last ten years was 32.7 points. Over time, we have limited our aggregate insurance exposure to catastrophe losses in certain regions of the country that are subject to high levels of natural catastrophes. Limitations include our participation in various state facilities, such as the California Earthquake Authority ("CEA"), which provides insurance for California earthquake losses; the Florida Hurricane Catastrophe Fund, which provides reimbursements to participating insurers for certain qualifying Florida hurricane losses; and other state facilities, such as wind pools. However, the impact of these actions may be diminished by the growth in insured values, and the effect of state insurance laws and regulations. In addition, in various states we are required to participate in assigned risk plans, reinsurance facilities and joint underwriting associations that provide insurance coverage to individuals or entities that otherwise are unable to purchase such coverage from private insurers. Because of our participation in these and other state facilities such as wind pools, we may be exposed to losses that surpass the capitalization of these facilities and to assessments from these facilities. We have continued to take actions to maintain an appropriate level of exposure to catastrophic events while continuing to meet the needs of our customers, including the following: Continuing to not offer new homeowners business in certain coastal states. Increased capacity in our brokerage platform for customers not offered a renewal. North Light expanded to 9 new states in 2014, bringing the total number of active states to 42. In Texas we have been ceding wind exposure related to insured property located in wind pool eligible areas along the coast including the Galveston Islands. We ceased writing new homeowners business in California in 2007. We continue to renew current policyholders. We ceased writing new homeowners business in Florida in 2011 beyond a modest stance for existing customers who replace their currently-insured home with an acceptable property. The Encompass companies operating in Florida withdrew from the property lines in 2009. 59 Table of Contents Tropical cyclone deductibles are in place for a large portion of coastal insured properties though contract language varies across states and companies, allowing for these higher deductibles to be triggered differently across our customer base. We have additional catastrophe exposure, beyond the property lines, for auto customers who have purchased physical damage coverage. Auto physical damage coverage generally includes coverage for flood-related loss. We manage this additional exposure through inclusion of auto losses in our nationwide reinsurance program (which excludes New Jersey and Florida). New Jersey auto losses are included in our New Jersey reinsurance program. Redesigned our homeowners new business offering, Allstate House and Home , that provides options of coverage for roof damage including graduated coverage and pricing based on roof type and age. Allstate House and Home is currently available in 34 states. Hurricanes We consider the greatest areas of potential catastrophe losses due to hurricanes generally to be major metropolitan centers in counties along the eastern and gulf coasts of the United States. Usually, the average premium on a property policy near these coasts is greater than in other areas. However, average premiums are often not considered commensurate with the inherent risk of loss. In addition and as explained in Note 14 of the consolidated financial statements, in various states Allstate is subject to assessments from assigned risk plans, reinsurance facilities and joint underwriting associations providing insurance for wind related property losses. We have addressed our risk of hurricane loss by, among other actions, purchasing reinsurance for specific states and on a countrywide basis for our personal lines property insurance in areas most exposed to hurricanes, limiting personal homeowners new business writings in coastal areas in southern and eastern states, implementing tropical cyclone deductibles where appropriate, and not offering continuing coverage on certain policies in coastal counties in certain states. We continue to seek appropriate returns for the risks we write. This may require further actions, similar to those already taken, in geographies where we are not getting appropriate returns. However, we may maintain or opportunistically increase our presence in areas where we achieve adequate returns and do not materially increase our hurricane risk. Earthquakes Actions taken to reduce our exposure from earthquake losses are substantially complete. These actions included purchasing reinsurance on a countrywide basis and in the state of Kentucky, no longer offering new optional earthquake coverage in most states, removing optional earthquake coverage upon renewal in most states, and entering into arrangements in many states to make earthquake coverage available through other insurers for new and renewal business. We expect to retain approximately 30,000 PIF with earthquake coverage, primarily in Kentucky, due to regulatory and other reasons. We also will continue to have exposure to earthquake risk on certain policies that do not specifically exclude coverage for earthquake losses, including our auto policies, and to fires following earthquakes. Allstate policyholders in the state of California are offered coverage through the CEA, a privately-financed, publicly-managed state agency created to provide insurance coverage for earthquake damage. Allstate is subject to assessments from the CEA under certain circumstances as explained in Note 14 of the consolidated financial statements. Fires Following Earthquakes Actions taken related to our risk of loss from fires following earthquakes include changing homeowners underwriting requirements in California, purchasing reinsurance for Kentucky personal lines property risks, and purchasing nationwide occurrence reinsurance, excluding Florida and New Jersey. Wildfires Actions we are taking to reduce our risk of loss from wildfires include changing homeowners underwriting requirements in certain states and purchasing nationwide occurrence reinsurance. Reinsurance A description of our current catastrophe reinsurance program appears in Note 10 of the consolidated financial statements. 60 Table of Contents DISCONTINUED LINES AND COVERAGES SEGMENT Overview The Discontinued Lines and Coverages segment includes results from property-liability insurance coverage that we no longer write and results for certain commercial and other businesses in run-off. Our exposure to asbestos, environmental and other discontinued lines claims is reported in this segment. We have assigned management of this segment to a designated group of professionals with expertise in claims handling, policy coverage interpretation, exposure identification and reinsurance collection. As part of its responsibilities, this group may at times be engaged in policy buybacks, settlements and reinsurance assumed and ceded commutations. Summarized underwriting results for the years ended December 31 are presented in the following table. ($ in millions) 2014 2013 2012 Premiums written $ 1 $ $ 1 Premiums earned $ 1 $ $ Claims and claims expense (113 ) (142 ) (51 ) Operating costs and expenses (3 ) (1 ) (2 ) Underwriting loss $ (115 ) $ (143 ) $ (53 ) Underwriting losses of $115 million in 2014 primarily related to our annual review using established industry and actuarial best practices resulting in an $87 million unfavorable reestimate of asbestos reserves, a $15 million unfavorable reestimate of environmental reserves and a $3 million increase in allowance for future uncollectible reinsurance, partially offset by a $3 million favorable reestimate of other exposure reserves. The cost of administering claims settlements totaled $10 million for 2014, $13 million for 2013 and $11 million for 2012. Underwriting losses of $143 million in 2013 related to a $74 million unfavorable reestimate of asbestos reserves, a $30 million unfavorable reestimate of environmental reserves and a $30 million unfavorable reestimate of other exposure reserves, primarily as a result of our annual review using established industry and actuarial best practices, partially offset by a $1 million decrease in our allowance for future uncollectable reinsurance. The underwriting loss of $53 million in 2012 related to a $26 million unfavorable reestimate of asbestos reserves, a $22 million unfavorable reestimate of environmental reserves and a $5 million unfavorable reestimate of other reserves, primarily as a result of our annual review using established industry and actuarial best practices, partially offset by a $14 million decrease in our allowance for future uncollectable reinsurance. See the Property-Liability Claims and Claims Expense Reserves section of the MD&A for a more detailed discussion. Discontinued Lines and Coverages outlook We may continue to experience asbestos and/or environmental losses in the future. These losses could be due to the potential adverse impact of new information relating to new and additional claims or the impact of resolving unsettled claims based on unanticipated events such as litigation or legislative, judicial and regulatory actions. Environmental losses may also increase as the result of additional funding for environmental site cleanup. Because of our annual review, we believe that our reserves are appropriately established based on available information, technology, laws and regulations. We anticipate progress in the resolution of certain bankruptcies related to insureds with asbestos claims, reducing the industry's asbestos related claims exposures. We continue to address challenges related to centralization of insurance and reinsurance industry legacy claims into companies who specialize in the runoff of this business. 61 Table of Contents PROPERTY-LIABILITY INVESTMENT RESULTS Net investment income The following table presents net investment income. ($ in millions) 2014 2013 2012 Fixed income securities $ 860 $ 912 $ 1,073 Equity securities 95 136 118 Mortgage loans 17 20 21 Limited partnership interests 346 365 188 Short-term investments 4 3 4 Other 65 38 14 Investment income, before expense 1,387 1,474 1,418 Investment expense (86 ) (99 ) (92 ) Net investment income $ 1,301 $ 1,375 $ 1,326 The average pre-tax investment yields for the years ended December 31 are presented in the following table. Pre-tax yield is calculated as investment income before investment expense (including dividend income in the case of equity securities) divided by the average of the investment balances at the end of each quarter during the year. Investment balances, for purposes of the pre-tax yield calculation, exclude unrealized capital gains and losses. 2014 2013 2012 Fixed income securities: tax-exempt 2.6 % 3.4 % 4.3 % Fixed income securities: tax-exempt equivalent 3.8 5.0 6.3 Fixed income securities: taxable 2.9 3.2 3.7 Equity securities 2.9 3.8 3.5 Mortgage loans 4.3 4.2 4.3 Limited partnership interests 13.1 12.2 6.3 Total portfolio 3.6 4.0 3.9 Net investment income decreased 5.4% or $74 million to $1.30 billion in 2014 from $1.38 billion in 2013, after increasing 3.7% in 2013 compared to 2012. The 2014 decrease was primarily due to lower fixed income yields and equity dividends. The decrease in fixed income yields is primarily due to reinvestment at yields lower than the overall portfolio yield. The 2013 increase was primarily due to higher limited partnership income, average investment balances and equity dividends, as well as prepayment fee income and litigation proceeds which together increased income by a total of $18 million in 2013, partially offset by lower fixed income yields. Net realized capital gains and losses are presented in the following table. ($ in millions) 2014 2013 2012 Impairment write-downs $ (21 ) $ (39 ) $ (134 ) Change in intent write-downs (169 ) (124 ) (31 ) Net other-than-temporary impairment losses recognized in earnings (190 ) (163 ) (165 ) Sales 789 706 511 Valuation and settlements of derivative instruments (50 ) (24 ) (11 ) Realized capital gains and losses, pre-tax 549 519 335 Income tax expense (192 ) (180 ) (114 ) Realized capital gains and losses, after-tax $ 357 $ 339 $ 221 For a further discussion of net realized capital gains and losses, see the Investments section of the MD&A. PROPERTY-LIABILITY CLAIMS AND CLAIMS EXPENSE RESERVES Property-Liability underwriting results are significantly influenced by estimates of property-liability claims and claims expense reserves. For a description of our reserve process, see Note 8 of the consolidated financial statements and for a further description of our reserving policies and the potential variability in our reserve estimates, see the 62 Table of Contents Application of Critical Accounting Estimates section of the MD&A. These reserves are an estimate of amounts necessary to settle all outstanding claims, including IBNR claims, as of the reporting date. The facts and circumstances leading to our reestimates of reserves relate to revisions to the development factors used to predict how losses are likely to develop from the end of a reporting period until all claims have been paid. Reestimates occur because actual losses are likely different than those predicted by the estimated development factors used in prior reserve estimates. As of December 31, 2014, the impact of a reserve reestimation corresponding to a one percent increase or decrease in net reserves would be a decrease or increase of approximately $112 million in net income available to common shareholders. We believe the net loss reserves for Allstate Protection exposures are appropriately established based on available facts, technology, laws and regulations. The table below shows total net reserves as of December 31 by line of business. ($ in millions) 2014 2013 2012 Allstate brand $ 14,214 $ 14,225 $ 14,364 Esurance brand 649 575 470 Encompass brand 754 747 807 Total Allstate Protection 15,617 15,547 15,641 Discontinued Lines and Coverages 1,612 1,646 1,637 Total Property-Liability $ 17,229 $ 17,193 $ 17,278 The tables below show reserves, net of reinsurance, representing the estimated cost of outstanding claims as they were recorded at the beginning of years 2014, 2013 and 2012 and the effect of reestimates in each year. ($ in millions) January 1 reserves 2014 2013 2012 Allstate brand $ 14,225 $ 14,364 $ 14,792 Esurance brand 575 470 429 Encompass brand 747 807 859 Total Allstate Protection 15,547 15,641 16,080 Discontinued Lines and Coverages 1,646 1,637 1,707 Total Property-Liability $ 17,193 $ 17,278 $ 17,787 63 Table of Contents ($ in millions, except ratios) 2014 2013 2012 Reserve reestimate (1) Effect on combined ratio (2) Reserve reestimate (1) Effect on combined ratio (2) Reserve reestimate (1) Effect on combined ratio (2) Allstate brand $ (171 ) (0.6 ) $ (220 ) (0.8 ) $ (671 ) (2.5 ) Esurance brand (16 ) (0.1 ) Encompass brand (9 ) (43 ) (0.2 ) (45 ) (0.2 ) Total Allstate Protection (196 ) (0.7 ) (263 ) (1.0 ) (716 ) (2.7 ) Discontinued Lines and Coverages 112 0.4 142 0.6 51 0.2 Total Property-Liability (3) $ (84 ) (0.3 ) $ (121 ) (0.4 ) $ (665 ) (2.5 ) Reserve reestimates, after-tax $ (55 ) $ (79 ) $ (432 ) Consolidated net income available to common shareholders $ 2,746 $ 2,263 $ 2,306 Reserve reestimates as a % of consolidated net income available to common shareholders 2.0 % 3.5 % 18.7 % (1) Favorable reserve reestimates are shown in parentheses. (2) Ratios are calculated using Property-Liability premiums earned. (3) Prior year reserve reestimates included in catastrophe losses totaled $43 unfavorable in 2014, $88 million favorable in 2013 and $410 million favorable in 2012. The effect of catastrophe losses included in prior year reserve reestimates on the combined ratio totaled 0.1 unfavorable, 0.3 favorable and 1.5 favorable in 2014, 2013, and 2012, respectively. The following tables reflect the accident years to which the reestimates shown above are applicable by line of business. Favorable reserve reestimates are shown in parentheses. 2014 Prior year reserve reestimates ($ in millions) 2004 & prior 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 Total Allstate brand $ (38 ) $ (10 ) $ (11 ) $ 2 $ (20 ) $ 37 $ (86 ) $ (35 ) $ (99 ) $ 89 $ (171 ) Esurance brand (9 ) 6 (13 ) (16 ) Encompass brand 2 1 1 (1 ) (2 ) (2 ) (5 ) (6 ) 3 (9 ) Total Allstate Protection (36 ) (9 ) (11 ) 3 (21 ) 35 (88 ) (49 ) (99 ) 79 (196 ) Discontinued Lines and Coverages 112 112 Total Property- Liability $ 76 $ (9 ) $ (11 ) $ 3 $ (21 ) $ 35 $ (88 ) $ (49 ) $ (99 ) $ 79 $ (84 ) 2013 Prior year reserve reestimates ($ in millions) 2003 & prior 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 Total Allstate brand $ 56 $ 5 $ (33 ) $ (44 ) $ (45 ) $ (32 ) $ (59 ) $ (16 ) $ (70 ) $ 18 $ (220 ) Esurance brand Encompass brand 2 1 1 (1 ) (1 ) (5 ) (4 ) (4 ) (14 ) (18 ) (43 ) Total Allstate Protection 58 6 (32 ) (45 ) (46 ) (37 ) (63 ) (20 ) (84 ) (263 ) Discontinued Lines and Coverages 142 142 Total Property- Liability $ 200 $ 6 $ (32 ) $ (45 ) $ (46 ) $ (37 ) $ (63 ) $ (20 ) $ (84 ) $ $ (121 ) 64 Table of Contents 2012 Prior year reserve reestimates ($ in millions) 2002 & prior 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 Total Allstate brand $ 102 $ (9 ) $ (10 ) $ (36 ) $ 11 $ (11 ) $ (36 ) $ (33 ) $ (147 ) $ (502 ) $ (671 ) Esurance brand Encompass brand (1 ) (12 ) (1 ) (5 ) (4 ) (14 ) (8 ) (45 ) Total Allstate Protection 102 (10 ) (10 ) (48 ) 10 (11 ) (41 ) (37 ) (161 ) (510 ) (716 ) Discontinued Lines and Coverages 51 51 Total Property- Liability $ 153 $ (10 ) $ (10 ) $ (48 ) $ 10 $ (11 ) $ (41 ) $ (37 ) $ (161 ) $ (510 ) $ (665 ) Allstate brand prior year reserve reestimates were $171 million favorable in 2014, $220 million favorable in 2013, and $671 million favorable in 2012. In 2014, this was primarily due to severity development that was better than expected. In 2013, this was primarily due to severity development that was better than expected and catastrophe reserve reestimates. In 2012, this was primarily due to favorable catastrophe reserve reestimates and severity development that was better than expected. The increased reserves in accident years 2002 & prior is due to a reclassification of injury reserves to older years and reserve strengthening. These trends are primarily responsible for revisions to loss development factors, as described above, used to predict how losses are likely to develop from the end of a reporting period until all claims have been paid. Because these trends cause actual losses to differ from those predicted by the estimated development factors used in prior reserve estimates, reserves are revised as actuarial studies validate new trends based on the indications of updated development factor calculations. The impact of these reestimates on the Allstate brand underwriting income is shown in the table below. ($ in millions) 2014 2013 2012 Reserve reestimates $ (171 ) $ (220 ) $ (671 ) Allstate brand underwriting income 2,235 2,551 1,539 Reserve reestimates as a % of underwriting income 7.7 % 8.6 % 43.6 % Esurance brand prior year reserve reestimates were $16 million favorable in 2014. In 2014, this was primarily due to severity development that was better than expected. There were no prior year reserve reestimates for Esurance in 2013 or 2012. However, the Esurance opening balance sheet reserves were reestimated in 2012 resulting in a $13 million reduction in reserves due to lower severity. The adjustment was recorded as a reduction in goodwill and an increase in payables to the seller under the terms of the purchase agreement and therefore had no impact on claims expense or the loss ratio. The impact of these reestimates on the Esurance brand underwriting loss is shown in the table below. ($ in millions) 2014 Reserve reestimates $ (16 ) Esurance brand underwriting loss (259 ) Reserve reestimates as a % of underwriting loss 6.2 % Encompass brand prior year reserve reestimates were $9 million favorable in 2014, $43 million favorable in 2013, and $45 million favorable in 2012. In 2014, this was primarily due to severity development that was better than expected. In 2013 and 2012, this was related to lower than anticipated claim settlement costs and favorable catastrophe reserve reestimates. The impact of these reestimates on the Encompass brand underwriting (loss) income is shown in the table below. ($ in millions) 2014 2013 2012 Reserve reestimates $ (9 ) $ (43 ) $ (45 ) Encompass brand underwriting (loss) income (76 ) 47 (70 ) Reserve reestimates as a % of underwriting (loss) income 11.8 % 91.5 % 64.3 % 65 Table of Contents Allstate Protection The tables below show Allstate Protection net reserves representing the estimated cost of outstanding claims as they were recorded at the beginning of years 2014, 2013, and 2012, and the effect of reestimates in each year. ($ in millions) January 1 reserves 2014 2013 2012 Auto $ 11,616 $ 11,383 $ 11,404 Homeowners 1,821 2,008 2,439 Other personal lines 1,512 1,596 1,531 Commercial lines 576 627 678 Other business lines 22 27 28 Total Allstate Protection $ 15,547 $ 15,641 $ 16,080 ($ in millions, except ratios) 2014 2013 2012 Reserve reestimate Effect on combined ratio Reserve reestimate Effect on combined ratio Reserve reestimate Effect on combined ratio Auto $ (238 ) (0.8 ) $ (237 ) (0.9 ) $ (365 ) (1.4 ) Homeowners 29 0.1 (5 ) (321 ) (1.2 ) Other personal lines 34 0.1 19 24 0.1 Commercial lines (20 ) (0.1 ) (36 ) (0.1 ) (48 ) (0.2 ) Other business lines (1 ) (4 ) (6 ) Total Allstate Protection $ (196 ) (0.7 ) $ (263 ) (1.0 ) $ (716 ) (2.7 ) Underwriting income $ 1,887 $ 2,361 $ 1,253 Reserve reestimates as a % of underwriting income 10.4 % 11.1 % 57.1 % Auto reserve reestimates in 2014, 2013, and 2012 were primarily due to claim severity development that was better than expected. Unfavorable homeowners reserve reestimates in 2014 were primarily due to unfavorable catastrophe reserve reestimates. Favorable homeowners reserve reestimates in 2013 were primarily due to favorable non-catastrophe reserve reestimates. Favorable homeowners reserve reestimates in 2012 were primarily due to favorable catastrophe reserve reestimates. Other personal lines reserve reestimates in 2014, 2013 and 2012 were primarily the result of non-catastrophe loss development higher than anticipated in previous estimates. Commercial lines reserve reestimates in 2014, 2013 and 2012 were primarily due to favorable non-catastrophe reserve reestimates. Pending, new and closed claims for Allstate Protection are summarized in the following table for the years ended December 31. The increase in pending claims as of December 31, 2014 compared to December 31, 2013 relates to 66 Table of Contents growth and auto frequency. The decrease in pending claims as of December 31, 2013 compared to December 31, 2012 relates to catastrophes. Number of claims 2014 2013 2012 Auto Pending, beginning of year 473,703 472,078 436,972 New 6,330,940 5,902,746 5,807,557 Total closed (6,317,416 ) (5,901,121 ) (5,772,451 ) Pending, end of year 487,227 473,703 472,078 Homeowners Pending, beginning of year 37,420 48,418 44,134 New 759,794 711,883 1,003,493 Total closed (763,566 ) (722,881 ) (999,209 ) Pending, end of year 33,648 37,420 48,418 Other personal lines Pending, beginning of year 17,004 42,969 19,866 New 204,549 197,424 282,625 Total closed (206,059 ) (223,389 ) (259,522 ) Pending, end of year 15,494 17,004 42,969 Commercial lines Pending, beginning of year 10,422 10,242 11,998 New 65,970 58,697 54,616 Total closed (64,556 ) (58,517 ) (56,372 ) Pending, end of year 11,836 10,422 10,242 Other business lines Pending, beginning of year 7 New 2 27 16 Total closed (2 ) (27 ) (23 ) Pending, end of year Total Allstate Protection Pending, beginning of year 538,549 573,707 512,977 New 7,361,255 6,870,777 7,148,307 Total closed (7,351,599 ) (6,905,935 ) (7,087,577 ) Pending, end of year 548,205 538,549 573,707 Discontinued Lines and Coverages We conduct an annual review in the third quarter of each year to evaluate and establish asbestos, environmental and other discontinued lines reserves. Reserves are recorded in the reporting period in which they are determined. Using established industry and actuarial best practices and assuming no change in the regulatory or economic environment, this detailed and comprehensive methodology determines reserves based on assessments of the characteristics of exposure (e.g. claim activity, potential liability, jurisdiction, products versus non-products exposure) presented by policyholders. 67 Table of Contents Reserve reestimates for the Discontinued Lines and Coverages are shown in the table below. ($ in millions) 2014 2013 2012 January 1 reserves Reserve reestimate January 1 reserves Reserve reestimate January 1 reserves Reserve reestimate Asbestos claims $ 1,017 $ 87 $ 1,026 $ 74 $ 1,078 $ 26 Environmental claims 208 15 193 30 185 22 Other discontinued lines 421 10 418 38 444 3 Total Discontinued Lines and Coverages $ 1,646 $ 112 $ 1,637 $ 142 $ 1,707 $ 51 Underwriting loss $ (115 ) $ (143 ) $ (53 ) Reserve reestimates as a % of underwriting loss (97.4 )% (99.3 )% (96.2 )% Reserve additions for asbestos in 2014 were primarily related to more reported claims than expected and increased severity including claims from certain large insurance programs. Reserve additions for asbestos in 2013 were primarily related to a cedent's settlement with a bankrupt insured of asbestos claims in excess of a previously advised amount and loss trends from other claims. Reserve additions for asbestos in 2012 were primarily for products related coverage due to increases for the assumed reinsurance portion of discontinued lines where we are reliant on our ceding companies to report claims. Reserve additions for environmental in 2014 were primarily related to greater reported loss activity than expected. Reserve additions for environmental in 2013 were primarily related to an adverse court ruling for site-specific disputed coverage. Reserve additions for environmental in 2012 were primarily related to site-specific remediations where the clean-up cost estimates and responsibility for the clean-up were more fully determined. The table below summarizes reserves and claim activity for asbestos and environmental claims before (Gross) and after (Net) the effects of reinsurance for the past three years. ($ in millions, except ratios) 2014 2013 2012 Gross Net Gross Net Gross Net Asbestos claims Beginning reserves $ 1,495 $ 1,017 $ 1,522 $ 1,026 $ 1,607 $ 1,078 Incurred claims and claims expense 124 87 84 74 34 26 Claims and claims expense paid (127 ) (90 ) (111 ) (83 ) (119 ) (78 ) Ending reserves $ 1,492 $ 1,014 $ 1,495 $ 1,017 $ 1,522 $ 1,026 Annual survival ratio 11.7 11.3 13.5 12.3 12.8 13.2 3-year survival ratio 12.5 12.1 14.2 14.5 14.1 14.7 Environmental claims Beginning reserves $ 268 $ 208 $ 241 $ 193 $ 225 $ 185 Incurred claims and claims expense 22 15 44 30 32 22 Claims and claims expense paid (23 ) (20 ) (17 ) (15 ) (16 ) (14 ) Ending reserves $ 267 $ 203 $ 268 $ 208 $ 241 $ 193 Annual survival ratio 11.6 10.2 15.8 13.9 15.1 13.8 3-year survival ratio 14.1 12.7 14.9 13.9 13.4 12.9 Combined environmental and asbestos claims Annual survival ratio 11.7 11.1 13.8 12.5 13.1 13.3 3-year survival ratio 12.7 12.2 14.3 14.4 14.0 14.3 Percentage of IBNR in ending reserves 56.9 % 55.4 % 57.8 % 68 Table of Contents The survival ratio is calculated by taking our ending reserves divided by payments made during the year. This is a commonly used but extremely simplistic and imprecise approach to measuring the adequacy of asbestos and environmental reserve levels. Many factors, such as mix of business, level of coverage provided and settlement procedures have significant impacts on the amount of environmental and asbestos claims and claims expense reserves, claim payments and the resultant ratio. As payments result in corresponding reserve reductions, survival ratios can be expected to vary over time. In 2014 and 2013, the asbestos net 3-year survival ratio decreased due to increased claim payments. The environmental net 3-year survival ratio decreased in 2014 due to increased claim payments and increased in 2013 due to reserve additions. Our net asbestos reserves by type of exposure and total reserve additions are shown in the following table. ($ in millions) December 31, 2014 December 31, 2013 December 31, 2012 Active policy- holders Net reserves % of reserves Active policy- holders Net reserves % of reserves Active policy- holders Net reserves % of reserves Direct policyholders: Primary 44 $ 8 1 % 53 $ 7 1 % 54 $ 12 1 % Excess 296 265 26 301 267 26 299 276 27 Total 340 273 27 354 274 27 353 288 28 Assumed reinsurance 166 16 171 17 150 15 IBNR 575 57 572 56 588 57 Total net reserves $ 1,014 100 % $ 1,017 100 % $ 1,026 100 % Total reserve additions $ 87 $ 74 $ 26 During the last three years, 40 direct primary and excess policyholders reported new claims, and claims of 66 policyholders were closed, decreasing the number of active policyholders by 26 during the period. There was a net decrease of 14 in 2014, including 13 new policyholders reporting new claims and the closing of 27 policyholders' claims. There was a net increase of 1 in 2013, including 12 new policyholders reporting new claims and the closing of 11 policyholders' claims. There was a net decrease of 13 in 2012 including 15 new policyholders reporting new claims and the closing of 28 policyholders' claims. IBNR net reserves increased $3 million as of December 31, 2014 compared to December 31, 2013. As of December 31, 2014 IBNR represented 57% of total net asbestos reserves, compared to 56% as of December 31, 2013. IBNR provides for reserve development of known claims and future reporting of additional unknown claims from current policyholders and ceding companies. Pending, new, total closed and closed without payment claims for asbestos and environmental exposures for the years ended December 31 are summarized in the following table. Number of claims 2014 2013 2012 Asbestos Pending, beginning of year 7,444 7,447 8,072 New 727 736 492 Total closed (865 ) (739 ) (1,117 ) Pending, end of year 7,306 7,444 7,447 Closed without payment 433 451 728 Environmental Pending, beginning of year 3,717 3,676 4,176 New 381 464 402 Total closed (546 ) (423 ) (902 ) Pending, end of year 3,552 3,717 3,676 Closed without payment 369 299 511 69 Table of Contents Property-Liability reinsurance ceded For Allstate Protection, we utilize reinsurance to reduce exposure to catastrophe risk and manage capital, and to support the required statutory surplus and the insurance financial strength ratings of certain subsidiaries such as Castle Key Insurance Company and Allstate New Jersey Insurance Company. We purchase significant reinsurance to manage our aggregate countrywide exposure to an acceptable level. The price and terms of reinsurance and the credit quality of the reinsurer are considered in the purchase process, along with whether the price can be appropriately reflected in the costs that are considered in setting future rates charged to policyholders. We also participate in various reinsurance mechanisms, including industry pools and facilities, which are backed by the financial resources of the property-liability insurance company market participants, and have historically purchased reinsurance to mitigate long-tail liability lines, including environmental, asbestos and other discontinued lines exposures. We retain primary liability as a direct insurer for all risks ceded to reinsurers. The Michigan Catastrophic Claim Association provides indemnification for losses over a retention level and under the National Flood Insurance Program the Federal Government pays all covered claims. Our reinsurance recoverable balances are shown in the following table as of December 31, net of the allowance we have established for uncollectible amounts. Standard & Poor's financial strength rating (1) Reinsurance recoverable on paid and unpaid claims, net ($ in millions) 2014 2013 Industry pools and facilities Michigan Catastrophic Claim Association ("MCCA") N/A $ 4,419 (2) $ 3,462 (2) New Jersey Unsatisfied Claim and Judgment Fund ("NJUCJF") N/A 508 378 North Carolina Reinsurance Facility N/A 60 58 National Flood Insurance Program N/A 7 32 Other 2 2 Subtotal 4,996 3,932 Lloyd's of London ("Lloyd's") A+ 202 191 Westport Insurance Corporation (formerly Employers Reinsurance Corporation) AA- 65 85 New England Reinsurance Corporation N/A 33 33 R&Q Reinsurance Company N/A 28 29 Clearwater Insurance Company N/A 27 28 One Beacon Insurance Company N/A 23 24 Swiss Reinsurance America Corporation AA- 23 29 Other, including allowance for future uncollectible reinsurance recoverables 386 398 Subtotal 787 817 Total Property-Liability $ 5,783 $ 4,749 (1) N/A reflects no rating available. (2) As of December 31, 2014 and 2013, MCCA includes $32 million and $29 million of reinsurance recoverable on paid claims, respectively, and $4.39 billion and $3.43 billion of reinsurance recoverable on unpaid claims, respectively. Reinsurance recoverables include an estimate of the amount of property-liability insurance claims and claims expense reserves that are ceded under the terms of the reinsurance agreements, including incurred but not reported unpaid losses. We calculate our ceded reinsurance estimate based on the terms of each applicable reinsurance agreement, including an estimate of how IBNR losses will ultimately be ceded under the agreement. We also consider other limitations and coverage exclusions under our reinsurance agreements. Accordingly, our estimate of reinsurance recoverables is subject to similar risks and uncertainties as our estimate of reserves for property-liability claims and claims expense. We believe the recoverables are appropriately established; however, as our underlying reserves continue to develop, the amount ultimately recoverable may vary from amounts currently recorded. We regularly evaluate the reinsurers and the respective amounts recoverable, and a provision for uncollectible reinsurance is recorded 70 Table of Contents if needed. The establishment of reinsurance recoverables and the related allowance for uncollectible reinsurance is also an inherently uncertain process involving estimates. Changes in estimates could result in additional changes to the Consolidated Statements of Operations. The allowance for uncollectible reinsurance primarily relates to Discontinued Lines and Coverages reinsurance recoverables and was $95 million and $92 million as of December 31, 2014 and 2013, respectively. The allowance for Discontinued Lines and Coverages represents 12.9% and 12.6% of the related reinsurance recoverable balances as of December 31, 2014 and 2013, respectively. The allowance is based upon our ongoing review of amounts outstanding, length of collection periods, changes in reinsurer credit standing, and other relevant factors. In addition, in the ordinary course of business, we may become involved in coverage disputes with certain of our reinsurers which may ultimately result in lawsuits and arbitrations brought by or against such reinsurers to determine the parties' rights and obligations under the various reinsurance agreements. We employ dedicated specialists to manage reinsurance collections and disputes. We also consider recent developments in commutation activity between reinsurers and cedants, and recent trends in arbitration and litigation outcomes in disputes between cedants and reinsurers in seeking to maximize our reinsurance recoveries. Adverse developments in the insurance industry have led to a decline in the financial strength of some of our reinsurance carriers, causing amounts recoverable from them and future claims ceded to them to be considered a higher risk. There has also been consolidation activity in the industry, which causes reinsurance risk across the industry to be concentrated among fewer companies. In addition, some companies have segregated asbestos, environmental, and other discontinued lines exposures into separate legal entities with dedicated capital. Regulatory bodies in certain cases have supported these actions. We are unable to determine the impact, if any, that these developments will have on the collectability of reinsurance recoverables in the future. For a detailed description of the MCCA, NJUCJF and Lloyd's, see Note 10 of the consolidated financial statements. As of December 31, 2014, other than the recoverable balances listed in the table above, no other amount due or estimated to be due from any single Property-Liability reinsurer was in excess of $21 million. The effects of reinsurance ceded on our property-liability premiums earned and claims and claims expense for the years ended December 31 are summarized in the following table. ($ in millions) 2014 2013 2012 Ceded property-liability premiums earned $ 1,030 $ 1,069 $ 1,090 Ceded property-liability claims and claims expense Industry pool and facilities MCCA $ 1,042 $ 954 $ 962 National Flood Insurance Program 38 289 758 NJUCJF 158 356 5 Other 69 63 65 Subtotal industry pools and facilities 1,307 1,662 1,790 Other 86 55 261 Ceded property-liability claims and claims expense $ 1,393 $ 1,717 $ 2,051 In 2014, ceded property-liability premiums earned decreased $39 million compared to 2013, primarily due to decreased reinsurance premium rates and acquiring additional reinsurance in the capital markets. In 2013, ceded property-liability premiums earned decreased $21 million compared to 2012, primarily due to decreased premium rates, acquiring reinsurance in the capital markets and lower limits placed in our catastrophe reinsurance program, partially offset by higher MCCA reinsurance premiums due to an increase in policies written in Michigan. MCCA ceded premiums were $99 million, $101 million and $78 million in 2014, 2013 and 2012, respectively. Ceded property-liability claims and claims expense decreased in 2014 primarily due to lower amounts ceded to the national Flood Insurance Program and lower reserve increases for the NJUCJF program. Ceded property-liability claims and claims expense decreased in 2013 primarily due to lower amounts ceded to the National Flood Insurance Program, partially offset by reserve increases for the NJUCJF program. 71 Table of Contents Our claim reserve development experience is similar to the MCCA with reported and pending claims increasing in recent years. Moreover, the MCCA has reported severity increasing with nearly 60% of reimbursements for attendant and residential care services. Michigan's unique no-fault auto insurance law provides unlimited lifetime coverage for medical expenses resulting from vehicle accidents. The reserve increases in the MCCA program are attributable to an increased recognition of longer term paid loss trends. The paid loss trends are rising due to increased costs in medical and attendant care and increased longevity of claimants. The table below summarizes reserves and claim activity for Michigan personal injury protection claims before (Gross) and after (Net) the effects of MCCA reinsurance for the years ended December 31. ($ in millions) 2014 2013 2012 Gross Net Gross Net Gross Net Beginning reserves $ 3,798 $ 365 $ 2,866 $ 299 $ 1,957 $ 267 Incurred claims and claims expense-current year 420 178 417 181 272 114 Incurred claims and claims expense-prior years 819 19 731 13 832 27 Claims and claims expense paid-current year (2) (46 ) (45 ) (44 ) (42 ) (36 ) (35 ) Claims and claims expense paid-prior years (2) (187 ) (100 ) (172 ) (86 ) (159 ) (74 ) Ending reserves $ 4,804 (1) $ 417 $ 3,798 (1) $ 365 $ 2,866 $ 299 (1) Reserves for the year ended December 31, 2014 comprise 86% case reserves (claims with a file review conducted) and 14% IBNR. Reserves for the year ended December 31, 2013 comprise 66% case reserves and 34% IBNR. (2) Paid claims and claims expenses, reported in the table for the current and prior year, recovered from the MCCA totaled $88 million, $88 million and $86 million in 2014, 2013 and 2012, respectively. Pending MCCA claims differ from most personal lines insurance pending claims as other personal lines policies have coverage limits and incurred claims settle in shorter periods. Claims are considered pending as long as payments are continuing pursuant to an outstanding MCCA claim, which can be for a claimant's lifetime. Claims that occurred more than 5 years ago and continuing to be paid often include lifetime benefits. Pending, new and closed claims for Michigan personal injury protection exposures, including those covered and not covered by the MCCA reinsurance, for the years ended December 31 are summarized in the following table. Number of claims 2014 2013 2012 Pending, beginning of year 4,684 4,029 3,844 New 8,620 8,531 7,629 Total closed 8,368 7,876 7,444 Pending, end of year 4,936 4,684 4,029 As of December 31, 2014, approximately 1,100 of our pending claims have been reported to the MCCA, of which approximately 75% represents claims that occurred more than 5 years ago. There are 68 Allstate brand claims with reserves in excess of $15 million as of December 31, 2014 which comprise approximately 40% of the gross ending reserves in the table above. The reserve increases in the NJUCJF program in 2014 and 2013 are attributable to unlimited personal injury protection coverage on policies written prior to 1991. The ceded claims reflects increased longer term paid loss trends due to increased costs of medical care and increased longevity of claimants. New claims for this cohort of policies are unlikely and pending claims are expected to decline. We enter into certain intercompany insurance and reinsurance transactions for the Property-Liability operations in order to maintain underwriting control and manage insurance risk among various legal entities. These reinsurance agreements have been approved by the appropriate regulatory authorities. All significant intercompany transactions have been eliminated in consolidation. Catastrophe reinsurance Our catastrophe reinsurance program is designed, utilizing our risk management methodology, to address our exposure to catastrophes nationwide. Our program is designed to provide reinsurance protection for catastrophes including hurricanes, windstorms, hail, tornados, fires following earthquakes, earthquakes and wildfires. These 72 Table of Contents reinsurance agreements are part of our catastrophe management strategy, which is intended to provide our shareholders an acceptable return on the risks assumed in our property business, and to reduce variability of earnings, while providing protection to our customers. We anticipate completing the placement of our 2015 catastrophe reinsurance program in the second quarter of 2015. We expect the program will be similar to our 2014 catastrophe reinsurance program. For further details of the existing 2014 program, see Note 10 of the consolidated financial statements. ALLSTATE FINANCIAL 2014 HIGHLIGHTS Net income available to common shareholders was $631 million in 2014 compared to $95 million in 2013. Premiums and contract charges on underwritten products, including traditional life, interest-sensitive life and accident and health insurance, totaled $2.13 billion in 2014, a decrease of 7.1% from $2.30 billion in 2013. Investments totaled $38.81 billion as of December 31, 2014, reflecting a decrease of $296 million from $39.11 billion as of December 31, 2013. Investments as of December 31, 2013 excluded LBL investments classified as held for sale. Net investment income decreased 16.0% to $2.13 billion in 2014 from $2.54 billion in 2013. Net realized capital gains totaled $144 million in 2014 compared to $74 million in 2013. Contractholder funds totaled $22.53 billion as of December 31, 2014, reflecting a decrease of $1.77 billion from $24.30 billion as of December 31, 2013. Contractholder funds as of December 31, 2013 excluded LBL amounts classified as held for sale. On April 1, 2014, we sold LBL's life insurance business generated through independent master brokerage agencies, and all of LBL's deferred fixed annuity and long-term care insurance business to Resolution Life Holdings, Inc. The loss on disposition increased by $60 million, after-tax in 2014. Most of the amount in 2014 represents non-cash charges. ALLSTATE FINANCIAL SEGMENT Overview and strategy The Allstate Financial segment sells traditional, interest-sensitive and variable life insurance and voluntary accident and health insurance products. We serve our customers through Allstate exclusive agencies and exclusive financial specialists, and workplace enrolling independent agents. We previously offered and continue to have in force fixed annuities such as deferred and immediate annuities, and institutional products consisting of funding agreements sold to unaffiliated trusts that use them to back medium-term notes. Allstate exclusive agencies and exclusive financial specialists have a portfolio of non-proprietary products to sell, including mutual funds, fixed and variable annuities, disability insurance and long-term care insurance, to help meet customer needs. Allstate Financial brings value to The Allstate Corporation in three principal ways: through profitable growth, by bringing new customers to Allstate, and by improving the economics of the Protection business through increased customer loyalty and stronger customer relationships based on cross selling Allstate Financial products to existing customers. Allstate Financial's strategy is focused on expanding Allstate customer relationships, growing the number of products delivered to customers through Allstate exclusive agencies and Allstate Benefits (our workplace distribution business), managing the run-off of our in-force annuity products while taking actions to improve returns, and emphasizing capital efficiency and shareholder returns. Our strategy for our life insurance business centers on the continuation of our efforts to fully integrate the business into the Allstate brand customer value proposition and modernizing our operating model. The life insurance product portfolio and sales process are being redesigned with a focus on clear and distinct positioning to meet the varied needs of Allstate customers. Our product positioning will provide solutions to help meet customer needs during various life stages ranging from basic mortality protection to more complex mortality and financial planning solutions. Basic mortality protection solutions will be provided through less complex products, such as term and whole life insurance, sold through exclusive agents and licensed sales professionals to deepen customer relationships. More advanced mortality and financial planning solutions will be provided primarily through exclusive financial specialists with an emphasis on our more complex offerings, such as universal life insurance products. Sales producer education and technology improvements are being made to ensure agencies have the tools and information needed to help customers meet their needs and build personal relationships as trusted advisors. Additionally, tools will be made available to consumers to help them understand their needs and encourage interaction with their local agencies. Our employer relationships through Allstate Benefits also afford opportunities to offer Allstate products to more customers and grow our business. Allstate Benefits is an industry leader in the voluntary benefits market, offering a broad range of products, including critical illness, accident, cancer, hospital indemnity, disability and universal life. Allstate Benefits differentiates itself by offering a broad product portfolio, flexible enrollment solutions and technology 73 Table of Contents (including significant presence on private exchanges), and its strong national accounts team, as well as the well-recognized Allstate brand. Market trends for voluntary benefits are favorable as the market has nearly doubled in size since 2006, driven by the ability of voluntary benefits to fill gaps from employers seeking to contain rising health care costs, by providing lower cost benefits, and shifting costs to employees. Allstate Benefits has introduced new products and enhanced existing products to address these gaps by providing protection for catastrophic events such as a critical illness, accident or hospital stay. Originally a provider of voluntary benefits to small and mid-sized businesses, Allstate Benefits now provides benefit solutions to companies of all sizes and industries including the large account voluntary benefits marketplace. Allstate Benefits's strategy for growth includes expansion in the national accounts market by increasing the number of sales, enrollment technology and account management personnel and expanding independent agent distribution in targeted geographic locations for increased new sales. Additionally, we are increasing Allstate exclusive agency engagement to drive cross selling of voluntary benefits products, and developing opportunities for revenue growth through new product and fee income offerings. Allstate Benefits new business written premiums increased 5.0% and 9.4% in 2014 and 2013, respectively. Allstate Benefits also plans to expand into the Canadian market in 2015. Our in-force deferred and immediate annuity business has been adversely impacted by the credit cycle and historically low interest rate environment. Our immediate annuity business has also been impacted by medical advancements that have resulted in annuitants living longer than anticipated when many of these contracts were originated. We focus on the distinct risk and return profiles of the specific products outstanding when developing investment and liability management strategies. We have significantly reduced the level of legacy deferred annuities in force and proactively manage the investment portfolio and annuity crediting rates to improve the profitability of the business. We are managing the investment portfolio supporting our immediate annuities to ensure the assets match the characteristics of the liabilities and provide the long-term returns needed to support this business. We continue to increase investments in which we have ownership interests and a greater proportion of return is derived from idiosyncratic operating or market performance, including limited partnerships, equities and real estate, to more appropriately match the long-term nature of our immediate annuities. To transition our annuity business to a more efficient variable cost structure, we plan to outsource the administration of the business to a third party administration company in 2015. Allstate Financial outlook Our growth initiatives continue to focus on increasing the number of customers served through our proprietary Allstate agency and Allstate Benefits channels. We expect lower investment spread due to the continuing managed reduction in contractholder funds and the low interest rate environment. We will continue to focus on improving returns on our in-force annuity products and managing the impacts of historically low interest rates. We anticipate a continuation of our asset allocation strategy for long-term immediate annuities to have less reliance on investments whose returns come primarily from interest payments to investments in which we have ownership interests and a greater proportion of return is derived from idiosyncratic operating or market performance, including limited partnerships, equities and real estate. This shift could result in lower and more volatile investment income; however, we anticipate that this strategy will lead to higher long-term total returns on attributed equity. Allstate Financial has limitations on the amount of dividends Allstate Financial companies can pay without prior insurance department approval. Accordingly, the level of distributions in 2015 may be lower than 2014. We continue to review our strategic options to reduce our exposure and improve returns of the spread-based businesses. As a result, we may take additional operational and financial actions that offer return improvement and risk reduction opportunities. 74 Table of Contents Summary analysis Summarized financial data for the years ended December 31 is presented in the following table. ($ in millions) 2014 2013 2012 Revenues Life and annuity premiums and contract charges $ 2,157 $ 2,352 $ 2,241 Net investment income 2,131 2,538 2,647 Realized capital gains and losses 144 74 (13 ) Total revenues 4,432 4,964 4,875 Costs and expenses Life and annuity contract benefits (1,765 ) (1,917 ) (1,818 ) Interest credited to contractholder funds (919 ) (1,278 ) (1,316 ) Amortization of DAC (260 ) (328 ) (401 ) Operating costs and expenses (466 ) (565 ) (576 ) Restructuring and related charges (2 ) (7 ) Total costs and expenses (3,412 ) (4,095 ) (4,111 ) (Loss) gain on disposition of operations (90 ) (687 ) 18 Income tax expense (299 ) (87 ) (241 ) Net income available to common shareholders $ 631 $ 95 $ 541 Life insurance $ 242 $ 15 $ 226 Accident and health insurance 105 87 81 Annuities and institutional products 284 (7 ) 234 Net income available to common shareholders $ 631 $ 95 $ 541 Allstate Life $ 232 $ 2 $ 224 Allstate Benefits 115 100 83 Allstate Annuities 284 (7 ) 234 Net income available to common shareholders $ 631 $ 95 $ 541 Investments as of December 31 $ 38,809 $ 39,105 $ 56,999 Investments classified as held for sale as of December 31 11,983 Net income available to common shareholders was $631 million in 2014 compared to $95 million in 2013. The increase primarily relates to lower loss on disposition charges related to the LBL sale, partially offset by the reduction in business due to the sale of LBL on April 1, 2014. Net income available to common shareholders in 2014 and 2013 included an after-tax loss on disposition of LBL totaling $60 million and $521 million, respectively. Excluding the loss on disposition as well as the net income of the LBL business for second through fourth quarter 2013 of $116 million, net income available to common shareholders increased $191 million in 2014 compared to 2013, primarily due to lower interest credited to contractholder funds, higher net realized capital gains, lower operating costs and expenses, lower amortization of DAC, and higher life and annuity premiums and contract charges, partially offset by higher life and annuity contract benefits and lower net investment income. Net income available to common shareholders was $95 million in 2013 compared to $541 million in 2012. The decrease was primarily due to the estimated loss on disposition related to the pending LBL sale, lower net investment income and higher life and annuity contract benefits, partially offset by higher life and annuity premiums and contract charges, net realized capital gains in 2013 compared to net realized capital losses in 2012 and decreased amortization of DAC. Analysis of revenues Total revenues decreased 10.7% or $532 million in 2014 compared to 2013. Excluding results of the LBL business for second through fourth quarter 2013 of $651 million, total revenues increased 2.8% or $119 million in 2014 compared to 2013, due to higher net realized capital gains and higher life and annuity premiums and contract charges, partially offset by lower net investment income. Total revenues increased 1.8% or $89 million in 2013 compared to 2012, primarily due to higher life and annuity premiums and contract charges and net realized capital gains in 2013 compared to net realized capital losses in 2012, partially offset by lower net investment income. Life and annuity premiums and contract charges Premiums represent revenues generated from traditional life insurance, immediate annuities with life contingencies, and accident and health insurance products that have significant 75 Table of Contents mortality or morbidity risk. Contract charges are revenues generated from interest-sensitive and variable life insurance and fixed annuities for which deposits are classified as contractholder funds or separate account liabilities. Contract charges are assessed against the contractholder account values for maintenance, administration, cost of insurance and surrender prior to contractually specified dates. The following table summarizes life and annuity premiums and contract charges by product for the years ended December 31. ($ in millions) 2014 2013 2012 Underwritten products Traditional life insurance premiums $ 476 $ 455 $ 434 Accident and health insurance premiums 8 26 26 Interest-sensitive life insurance contract charges 781 991 969 Subtotal Allstate Life 1,265 1,472 1,429 Traditional life insurance premiums 35 36 36 Accident and health insurance premiums 736 694 627 Interest-sensitive life insurance contract charges 98 95 86 Subtotal Allstate Benefits 869 825 749 Total underwritten products 2,134 2,297 2,178 Annuities Immediate annuities with life contingencies premiums 4 37 45 Other fixed annuity contract charges 19 18 18 Total Allstate Annuities 23 55 63 Life and annuity premiums and contract charges (1) $ 2,157 $ 2,352 $ 2,241 (1) Contract charges related to the cost of insurance totaled $593 million, $725 million and $696 million in 2014, 2013 and 2012, respectively. Total premiums and contract charges decreased 8.3% or $195 million in 2014 compared to 2013. Excluding results of the LBL business for second through fourth quarter 2013 of $254 million, premiums and contract charges increased $59 million in 2014 compared to 2013, primarily due to growth in Allstate Benefits accident and health insurance business and increased traditional life insurance premiums due to higher renewals and sales through Allstate agencies, partially offset by lower premiums on immediate annuities with life contingencies due to discontinuing new sales January 1, 2014. The growth at Allstate Benefits primarily relates to accident and critical illness products and an increase in the number of employer groups. Total premiums and contract charges increased 5.0% in 2013 compared to 2012, primarily due to growth in Allstate Benefits accident and health insurance business, higher contract charges on interest-sensitive life insurance products primarily resulting from the aging of our policyholders and growth of insurance in force, and increased traditional life insurance premiums due to lower reinsurance premiums ceded and higher sales and renewals through Allstate agencies, partially offset by lower sales of immediate annuities with life contingencies. Allstate agencies and exclusive financial specialists continue to sell LBL life products until Allstate Financial transitions these products to Allstate Assurance Company beginning first quarter 2015. LBL life business sold through the Allstate agency channel and all LBL payout annuity business continues to be reinsured and serviced by Allstate Life Insurance Company ("ALIC"). Following the closing of the sale, LBL was rated A- from A.M. Best and BBB+ from Standard & Poor's ("S&P"). ALIC is rated A+ by A.M. Best, A+ by S&P and A1 by Moody's. Allstate Assurance Company is rated A by A.M. Best and A1 by Moody's. As of December 31, 2014, ALIC assumed from LBL $3.82 billion of reserves for life-contingent contract benefits and contractholder funds. In 2014, life and annuity premiums and contract charges of $784 million, contract benefits of $487 million, and interest credited to contractholder funds of $166 million were assumed from LBL. Allstate will continue to service the LBL business that was sold until the servicing transitions to third party administration companies, which have experienced delays and are expected to be completed in 2015. Contractholder funds represent interest-bearing liabilities arising from the sale of products such as interest-sensitive life insurance, fixed annuities and funding agreements. The balance of contractholder funds is equal to the cumulative deposits received and interest credited to the contractholder less cumulative contract benefits, surrenders, withdrawals, 76 Table of Contents maturities and contract charges for mortality or administrative expenses. The following table shows the changes in contractholder funds for the years ended December 31. ($ in millions) 2014 2013 2012 Contractholder funds, beginning balance $ 24,304 $ 39,319 $ 42,332 Contractholder funds classified as held for sale, beginning balance 10,945 Total contractholder funds, including those classified as held for sale 35,249 39,319 42,332 Deposits Interest-sensitive life insurance 1,059 1,378 1,347 Fixed annuities 274 1,062 928 Total deposits 1,333 2,440 2,275 Interest credited 919 1,295 1,323 Benefits, withdrawals, maturities and other adjustments Benefits (1,197 ) (1,535 ) (1,463 ) Surrenders and partial withdrawals (2,273 ) (3,299 ) (3,990 ) Maturities of and interest payments on institutional products (2 ) (1,799 ) (138 ) Contract charges (881 ) (1,112 ) (1,066 ) Net transfers from separate accounts 7 12 11 Other adjustments (1) 36 (72 ) 35 Total benefits, withdrawals, maturities and other adjustments (4,310 ) (7,805 ) (6,611 ) Contractholder funds sold in LBL disposition (10,662 ) Contractholder funds classified as held for sale, ending balance (10,945 ) Contractholder funds, ending balance $ 22,529 $ 24,304 $ 39,319 (1) The table above illustrates the changes in contractholder funds, which are presented gross of reinsurance recoverables on the Consolidated Statements of Financial Position. The table above is intended to supplement our discussion and analysis of revenues, which are presented net of reinsurance on the Consolidated Statements of Operations. As a result, the net change in contractholder funds associated with products reinsured to third parties is reflected as a component of the other adjustments line. Contractholder funds decreased 7.3% in 2014 due to no longer offering fixed annuity products beginning January 1, 2014. Contractholder funds decreased 38.2% in 2013 reflecting the reclassification of contractholder funds held for sale relating to the LBL sale. Contractholder funds, including those classified as held for sale, decreased 10.4% in 2013, reflecting a large institutional product maturity in 2013 and our continuing strategy to reduce our concentration in spread-based products. Contractholder deposits decreased 45.4% in 2014 compared to 2013, primarily due to no longer offering fixed annuity products beginning January 1, 2014, as well as lower deposits on interest-sensitive life insurance due to the LBL sale. Contractholder deposits increased 7.3% in 2013 compared to 2012, primarily due to increased fixed annuity deposits driven by the new equity-indexed annuity products and higher deposits on immediate annuities, as well as higher deposits on interest-sensitive life insurance. Surrenders and partial withdrawals on deferred fixed annuities and interest-sensitive life insurance products decreased 31.1% to $2.27 billion in 2014 from $3.30 billion in 2013, primarily due to the LBL sale. Surrenders and partial withdrawals on deferred fixed annuities and interest-sensitive life insurance products decreased 17.3% to $3.30 billion in 2013 from $3.99 billion in 2012. The surrender and partial withdrawal rate on deferred fixed annuities and interest-sensitive life insurance products, based on the beginning of year contractholder funds, was 9.9% in 2014 compared to 10.2% in 2013 and 11.3% in 2012. Maturities of and interest payments on institutional products included a $1.75 billion maturity in 2013. There are $85 million of institutional products outstanding as of December 31, 2014. Net investment income decreased 16.0% or $407 million to $2.13 billion in 2014 from $2.54 billion in 2013. Excluding results of the LBL business for second through fourth quarter 2013 of $397 million, net investment income decreased 77 Table of Contents $10 million in 2014 compared to 2013, primarily due to lower average investment balances, partially offset by higher limited partnership income. Net investment income decreased 4.1% or $109 million to $2.54 billion in 2013 from $2.65 billion in 2012, primarily due to lower average investment balances, partially offset by higher prepayment fee income and litigation proceeds which together increased income by a total of $50 million in 2013 and higher limited partnership income. The average pre-tax investment yields were 5.6% for 2014 and 5.1% for both 2013 and 2012. Net realized capital gains and losses for the years ended December 31 are presented in the following table. ($ in millions) 2014 2013 2012 Impairment write-downs $ (11 ) $ (33 ) $ (51 ) Change in intent write-downs (44 ) (19 ) (17 ) Net other-than-temporary impairment losses recognized in earnings (55 ) (52 ) (68 ) Sales 185 112 20 Valuation and settlements of derivative instruments 14 14 35 Realized capital gains and losses, pre-tax 144 74 (13 ) Income tax (expense) benefit (50 ) (28 ) 5 Realized capital gains and losses, after-tax $ 94 $ 46 $ (8 ) For further discussion of realized capital gains and losses, see the Investments section of the MD&A. Analysis of costs and expenses Total costs and expenses decreased 16.7% or $683 million in 2014 compared to 2013. Excluding results of the LBL business for second through fourth quarter 2013 of $475 million, total costs and expenses decreased $208 million in 2014 compared to 2013, primarily due to lower interest credited to contractholder funds, lower operating costs and expenses and lower amortization of DAC, partially offset by higher life and annuity contract benefits. Total costs and expenses decreased 0.4% or $16 million in 2013 compared to 2012, primarily due to lower amortization of DAC and interest credited to contractholder funds, partially offset by higher life and annuity contract benefits. Life and annuity contract benefits decreased 7.9% or $152 million in 2014 compared to 2013. Excluding results of the LBL business for second through fourth quarter 2013 of $173 million, life and annuity contract benefits increased $21 million in 2014 compared to 2013, primarily due to worse mortality experience on life insurance and growth at Allstate Benefits. Our 2014 annual review of assumptions resulted in an $11 million increase in reserves primarily for secondary guarantees on interest-sensitive life insurance due to increased projected exposure to secondary guarantees. Life and annuity contract benefits increased 5.4% or $99 million in 2013 compared to 2012, primarily due to an increase in reserves for secondary guarantees on interest-sensitive life insurance, growth at Allstate Benefits and worse mortality experience on life insurance. Our 2013 annual review of assumptions resulted in a $37 million increase in reserves primarily for secondary guarantees on interest-sensitive life insurance due to higher concentration of and increased projected exposure to secondary guarantees. We analyze our mortality and morbidity results using the difference between premiums and contract charges earned for the cost of insurance and life and annuity contract benefits excluding the portion related to the implied interest on immediate annuities with life contingencies ("benefit spread"). This implied interest totaled $521 million, $527 million and $538 million in 2014, 2013 and 2012, respectively. 78 Table of Contents The benefit spread by product group for the years ended December 31 is disclosed in the following table. ($ in millions) 2014 2013 2012 Life insurance $ 287 $ 301 $ 330 Accident and health insurance (8 ) (18 ) (9 ) Subtotal Allstate Life 279 283 321 Life insurance 17 21 17 Accident and health insurance 397 356 312 Subtotal Allstate Benefits 414 377 329 Allstate Annuities (85 ) (77 ) (66 ) Total benefit spread $ 608 $ 583 $ 584 Benefit spread increased 4.3% or $25 million in 2014 compared to 2013. Excluding results of the LBL business for second through fourth quarter 2013 of $11 million, benefit spread increased $36 million in 2014 compared to 2013, primarily due to growth in Allstate Benefits accident and health insurance and higher premiums and cost of insurance contract charges on life insurance, partially offset by worse mortality experience on life insurance and immediate annuities. Benefit spread decreased 0.2% or $1 million in 2013 compared to 2012, primarily due to the increase in reserves for secondary guarantees on interest-sensitive life insurance and worse mortality experience on life insurance and annuities, partially offset by premium growth in Allstate Benefits accident and health insurance and higher cost of insurance contract charges on interest-sensitive life insurance. Interest credited to contractholder funds decreased 28.1% or $359 million in 2014 compared to 2013. Excluding results of the LBL business for second through fourth quarter 2013 of $270 million, interest credited to contractholder funds decreased $89 million in 2014 compared to 2013, primarily due to lower average contractholder funds and lower interest crediting rates. Interest credited to contractholder funds decreased 2.9% or $38 million in 2013 compared to 2012, primarily due to lower average contractholder funds and lower interest crediting rates, partially offset by the valuation change on derivatives embedded in equity-indexed annuity contracts that reduced interest credited expense in 2012. Valuation changes on derivatives embedded in equity-indexed annuity contracts that are not hedged increased interest credited to contractholder funds by $22 million in 2014 compared to a $24 million increase in 2013 and a $126 million decrease in 2012. During third quarter 2012, we reviewed the significant valuation inputs for these embedded derivatives and reduced the projected option cost to reflect management's current and anticipated crediting rate setting actions, which were informed by the existing and projected low interest rate environment and are consistent with our strategy to reduce exposure to spread-based business. The reduction in projected interest rates resulted in a reduction of contractholder funds and interest credited expense by $169 million in 2012. In order to analyze the impact of net investment income and interest credited to contractholders on net income, we monitor the difference between net investment income and the sum of interest credited to contractholder funds and the implied interest on immediate annuities with life contingencies, which is included as a component of life and annuity contract benefits on the Consolidated Statements of Operations ("investment spread"). 79 Table of Contents The investment spread by product group for the years ended December 31 is shown in the following table. ($ in millions) 2014 2013 2012 Life insurance $ 93 $ 93 $ 72 Accident and health insurance 8 14 13 Net investment income on investments supporting capital 110 113 101 Subtotal Allstate Life 211 220 186 Life insurance 10 12 10 Accident and health insurance 11 11 12 Net investment income on investments supporting capital 15 14 15 Subtotal Allstate Benefits 36 37 37 Annuities and institutional products 320 342 292 Net investment income on investments supporting capital 146 158 152 Subtotal Allstate Annuities 466 500 444 Investment spread before valuation changes on embedded derivatives that are not hedged 713 757 667 Valuation changes on derivatives embedded in equity-indexed annuity contracts that are not hedged (22 ) (24 ) 126 Total investment spread $ 691 $ 733 $ 793 Investment spread before valuation changes on embedded derivatives that are not hedged decreased 5.8% or $44 million in 2014 compared to 2013. Excluding results of the LBL business for the second through fourth quarter of 2013 of $149 million, investment spread before valuation changes on embedded derivatives that are not hedged increased $105 million in 2014 compared to 2013, primarily due to higher limited partnership income, higher fixed income yields and lower crediting rates, partially offset by the continued managed reduction in our spread-based business in force. Investment spread before valuation changes on embedded derivatives that are not hedged increased 13.5% or $90 million in 2013 compared to 2012, primarily due to lower crediting rates, higher prepayment fee income and litigation proceeds and higher limited partnership income, partially offset by the continued managed reduction in our spread-based business in force. To further analyze investment spreads, the following table summarizes the weighted average investment yield on assets supporting product liabilities and capital, interest crediting rates and investment spreads. For purposes of these calculations, investments, reserves and contractholder funds classified as held for sale were included for periods prior to April 1, 2014. Weighted average investment yield Weighted average interest crediting rate Weighted average investment spreads 2014 2013 2012 2014 2013 2012 2014 2013 2012 Interest-sensitive life insurance 5.3 % 5.1 % 5.2 % 3.9 % 3.8 % 4.0 % 1.4 % 1.3 % 1.2 % Deferred fixed annuities and institutional products 4.5 4.5 4.6 2.9 2.9 3.2 1.6 1.6 1.4 Immediate fixed annuities with and without life contingencies 7.3 6.9 6.9 6.0 6.0 6.1 1.3 0.9 0.8 Investments supporting capital, traditional life and other products 4.4 4.0 4.0 n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 80 Table of Contents The following table summarizes our product liabilities as of December 31 and indicates the account value of those contracts and policies in which an investment spread is generated. ($ in millions) 2014 2013 2012 Immediate fixed annuities with life contingencies $ 8,904 $ 8,928 $ 8,889 Other life contingent contracts and other 3,476 3,458 6,006 Reserve for life-contingent contract benefits $ 12,380 $ 12,386 $ 14,895 Interest-sensitive life insurance $ 7,880 $ 7,777 $ 11,011 Deferred fixed annuities 10,860 12,524 22,066 Immediate fixed annuities without life contingencies 3,450 3,675 3,815 Institutional products 85 85 1,851 Other 254 243 576 Contractholder funds $ 22,529 $ 24,304 $ 39,319 Traditional life insurance $ $ 570 $ Accident and health insurance 1,324 Interest-sensitive life insurance 3,529 Deferred fixed annuities 7,416 Liabilities held for sale $ $ 12,839 $ Amortization of DAC The components of amortization of DAC for the years ended December 31 are summarized in the following table. ($ in millions) 2014 2013 2012 Amortization of DAC before amortization relating to realized capital gains and losses, valuation changes on embedded derivatives that are not hedged and changes in assumptions $ 263 $ 298 $ 310 Amortization relating to realized capital gains and losses (1) and valuation changes on embedded derivatives that are not hedged 5 7 57 Amortization (deceleration) acceleration for changes in assumptions ("DAC unlocking") (8 ) 23 34 Total amortization of DAC $ 260 $ 328 $ 401 (1) The impact of realized capital gains and losses on amortization of DAC is dependent upon the relationship between the assets that give rise to the gain or loss and the product liability supported by the assets. Fluctuations result from changes in the impact of realized capital gains and losses on actual and expected gross profits. Amortization of DAC decreased 20.7% or $68 million in 2014 compared to 2013. Excluding results of the LBL business for second through fourth quarter 2013 of $1 million, amortization of DAC decreased $67 million in 2014 compared to 2013, primarily due to amortization deceleration for changes in assumptions in 2014 compared to amortization acceleration in 2013, partially offset by higher amortization on accident and health insurance resulting from growth. Amortization of DAC decreased 18.2% or $73 million in 2013 compared to 2012, primarily due to the absence of amortization on a large fixed annuity block that became fully amortized in 2012, lower amortization relating to valuation changes on derivatives embedded in equity-indexed annuity contracts due to a large valuation change in 2012, lower amortization on interest-sensitive life insurance resulting from decreased benefit spread, and lower amortization acceleration for changes in assumptions. Our annual comprehensive review of assumptions underlying estimated future gross profits for our interest-sensitive life, fixed annuities and other investment contracts covers assumptions for persistency, mortality, expenses, investment returns, including capital gains and losses, interest crediting rates to policyholders, and the effect of any hedges in all product lines. In 2014, the review resulted in a deceleration of DAC amortization (credit to income) of $8 million. Amortization deceleration of $10 million related to interest-sensitive life insurance and was primarily due to a 81 Table of Contents decrease in projected expenses, partially offset by increased projected mortality. Amortization acceleration of $2 million related to fixed annuities and was primarily due to a decrease in projected gross profits. In 2013, the review resulted in an acceleration of DAC amortization (charge to income) of $23 million. Amortization acceleration of $38 million related to interest-sensitive life insurance and was primarily due to an increase in projected mortality and expenses, partially offset by increased projected investment margins. Amortization deceleration of $12 million related to fixed annuities and was primarily due to an increase in projected investment margins. Amortization deceleration of $3 million related to variable life insurance. In 2012, the review resulted in an acceleration of DAC amortization of $34 million. Amortization acceleration of $38 million related to variable life insurance and was primarily due to an increase in projected mortality. Amortization acceleration of $4 million related to fixed annuities and was primarily due to lower projected investment returns. Amortization deceleration of $8 million related to interest-sensitive life insurance and was primarily due to an increase in projected persistency. The changes in DAC for the years ended December 31 are detailed in the following table. ($ in millions) Traditional life and accident and health Interest-sensitive life insurance Fixed annuities Total 2014 2013 2014 2013 2014 2013 2014 2013 Balance, beginning of year $ 711 $ 671 $ 991 $ 1,529 $ 45 $ 25 $ 1,747 $ 2,225 Classified as held for sale, beginning balance 13 700 30 743 Total, including those classified as held for sale 724 671 1,691 1,529 75 25 2,490 2,225 Acquisition costs deferred 167 164 113 176 24 280 364 Amortization of DAC before amortization relating to realized capital gains and losses, valuation changes on embedded derivatives that are not hedged and changes in assumptions (1) (125 ) (111 ) (130 ) (174 ) (8 ) (13 ) (263 ) (298 ) Amortization relating to realized capital gains and losses and valuation changes on embedded derivatives that are not hedged (1) (8 ) (6 ) 3 (1 ) (5 ) (7 ) Amortization deceleration (acceleration) for changes in assumptions ("DAC unlocking") (1) 10 (35 ) (2 ) 12 8 (23 ) Effect of unrealized capital gains and losses (2) (97 ) 201 (1 ) 28 (98 ) 229 Sold in LBL disposition (13 ) (674 ) (20 ) (707 ) DAC classified as held for sale (13 ) (700 ) (30 ) (743 ) Ending balance $ 753 $ 711 $ 905 $ 991 $ 47 $ 45 $ 1,705 $ 1,747 (1) Included as a component of amortization of DAC on the Consolidated Statements of Operations. (2) Represents the change in the DAC adjustment for unrealized capital gains and losses. The DAC adjustment represents the amount by which the amortization of DAC would increase or decrease if the unrealized gains and losses in the respective product portfolios were realized. Operating costs and expenses decreased 17.5% or $99 million in 2014 compared to 2013. Excluding results of the LBL business for second through fourth quarter 2013 of $31 million, operating costs and expenses decreased $68 million in 2014 compared to 2013. Operating costs and expenses decreased 1.9% or $11 million in 2013 compared to 2012. The following table summarizes operating costs and expenses for the years ended December 31. ($ in millions) 2014 2013 2012 Non-deferrable commissions $ 99 $ 103 $ 103 General and administrative expenses 314 398 421 Taxes and licenses 53 64 52 Total operating costs and expenses $ 466 $ 565 $ 576 Restructuring and related charges $ 2 $ 7 $ Allstate Life $ 232 $ 282 $ 285 Allstate Benefits 206 199 187 Allstate Annuities 28 84 104 Total operating costs and expenses $ 466 $ 565 $ 576 General and administrative expenses decreased 21.1% or $84 million in 2014 compared to 2013, primarily due to actions to improve strategic focus and modernize the operating model. This included the sale of LBL, exiting the master 82 Table of Contents brokerage agency distribution channel, discontinuing sales of proprietary annuity products, and other rightsizing and profitability actions. General and administrative expenses decreased 5.5% or $23 million in 2013 compared to 2012, primarily due to lower employee related expenses and proceeds received from a litigation settlement. Loss on disposition of $90 million in 2014 and $687 million in 2013 include $101 million and $698 million of losses relating to the LBL sale, respectively. Gain on disposition of $18 million in 2012 related to the amortization of the deferred gain from the disposition through reinsurance of substantially all of our variable annuity business in 2006, and the sale of Surety Life Insurance Company, which was not used for new business, in third quarter 2012. Reinsurance ceded We enter into reinsurance agreements with unaffiliated reinsurers to limit our risk of mortality and morbidity losses. In addition, Allstate Financial has used reinsurance to effect the disposition of certain blocks of business. We retain primary liability as a direct insurer for all risks ceded to reinsurers. As of December 31, 2014 and 2013, 23% and 36%, respectively, of our face amount of life insurance in force was reinsured. Additionally, we ceded substantially all of the risk associated with our variable annuity business. Our reinsurance recoverables, summarized by reinsurer as of December 31, are shown in the following table. ($ in millions) Reinsurance recoverable on paid and unpaid benefits Standard & Poor's financial strength rating (4) 2014 2013 Prudential Insurance Company of America AA- $ 1,461 $ 1,510 RGA Reinsurance Company AA- 262 305 Swiss Re Life and Health America, Inc. (1) AA- 160 186 Paul Revere Life Insurance Company A 116 121 Munich American Reassurance AA- 98 109 Mutual of Omaha Insurance A+ 92 92 Transamerica Life Group AA- 84 88 Security Life of Denver A- 84 48 Scottish Re Group N/A 82 104 Manulife Insurance Company AA- 57 59 Triton Insurance Company N/A 53 54 Lincoln National Life Insurance AA- 37 39 General Re Life Corporation AA+ 26 25 American Health & Life Insurance Co. N/A 22 44 SCOR Global Life A+ 17 21 Other (2) 56 67 Total (3) $ 2,707 $ 2,872 (1) The Company has extensive reinsurance contracts directly with Swiss Re and its affiliates and indirectly through Swiss Re's acquisition of other companies with whom we had reinsurance or retrocession contracts. (2) As of December 31, 2014 and 2013, the other category includes $44 million and $58 million, respectively, of recoverables due from reinsurers with an investment grade credit rating from Standard & Poor's ("S&P"). (3) Reinsurance recoverables classified as held for sale were $1.66 billion as of December 31, 2013. (4) N/A reflects no rating available. We continuously monitor the creditworthiness of reinsurers in order to determine our risk of recoverability on an individual and aggregate basis, and a provision for uncollectible reinsurance is recorded if needed. No amounts have been deemed unrecoverable in the three-years ended December 31, 2014. We enter into certain intercompany reinsurance transactions for the Allstate Financial operations in order to maintain underwriting control and manage insurance risk among various legal entities. These reinsurance agreements have been approved by the appropriate regulatory authorities. All significant intercompany transactions have been eliminated in consolidation. 83 Table of Contents INVESTMENTS 2014 HIGHLIGHTS Investments totaled $81.11 billion as of December 31, 2014, decreasing from $81.16 billion as of December 31, 2013. Unrealized net capital gains totaled $3.17 billion as of December 31, 2014, increasing from $2.70 billion as of December 31, 2013. Net investment income was $3.46 billion in 2014, a decrease of 12.3% from $3.94 billion in 2013. Net realized capital gains were $694 million in 2014 compared to $594 million in 2013. INVESTMENTS Overview and strategy The return on our investment portfolios is an important component of our financial results. Investment portfolios are segmented between the Property-Liability, Allstate Financial and Corporate and Other operations. While taking into consideration the investment portfolio in aggregate, we manage the underlying portfolios based upon the nature of each respective business and its corresponding liability structure. We employ a strategic asset allocation approach which considers the nature of the liabilities and risk tolerances, as well as the risk and return parameters of the various asset classes in which we invest. This asset allocation is informed by our global economic and market outlook, as well as other inputs and constraints, including diversification effects, duration, liquidity and capital considerations. Within the ranges set by the strategic asset allocation, tactical investment decisions are made in consideration of prevailing market conditions. We manage risks associated with interest rates, credit spreads, equity markets, real estate and currency exchange rates. Our continuing focus is to manage risks and returns and to position our portfolio to take advantage of market opportunities while attempting to mitigate adverse effects. We expect to more actively manage the portfolio and are developing strategies focused on the intermediate 3 to 5 year investment horizon. Intermediate strategies may include opportunities arising from market dislocations, event driven changes in valuation, and distressed credit. We expect these strategies to perform well across market conditions, including periods of increased market volatility. We are continuing to build our capabilities and investments in private equity, real estate and limited partnerships which have returns less correlated to the public markets. These investments typically have a longer term return horizon, generally five to twelve years. The Property-Liability portfolio's investment strategy emphasizes protection of principal and consistent income generation, within a total return framework. This approach, which has produced competitive returns over the long term, is designed to ensure financial strength and stability for paying claims, while maximizing economic value and surplus growth. The Allstate Financial portfolio's investment strategy focuses on the total return of assets needed to support the underlying liabilities, asset-liability management and achieving an appropriate return on capital. The Corporate and Other portfolio's investment strategy balances the unique liquidity needs of the portfolio in relation to the overall corporate capital structure with the pursuit of returns. Investments outlook Interest rates diverged in 2014: U.S. Treasury rates shorter than one year were largely unchanged, rates between 1 year and 3 years increased slightly, and rates 7 years and longer declined and experienced the most significant change during the year. We anticipate that interest rates may remain below historic averages for an extended period of time and that financial markets will continue to have periods of high volatility. Invested assets and income are expected to decline in line with reductions in contractholder funds for the Allstate Financial segment. Additionally, income will decline as we continue to invest and reinvest proceeds at market yields that are below the current portfolio yield. We plan to focus on the following priorities: Managing our exposure to interest rate risk by maintaining a shorter maturity profile in the Property-Liability portfolio which will also result in the yield responding more quickly to changes in market interest rates as a result of its shorter maturity profile. Shifting the portfolio mix over time to have less reliance on investments whose returns come primarily from interest payments to investments in which we have ownership interests and a greater proportion of return is derived from idiosyncratic operating or market performance, including limited partnerships, equities and real estate. While we anticipate higher returns on these investments over time, the investment income will be more volatile than interest-bearing investments. Investing to the specific needs and characteristics of Allstate's businesses. 84 Table of Contents Portfolio composition The composition of the investment portfolios as of December 31, 2014 is presented in the following table. Property-Liability (5) Allstate Financial (5) Corporate and Other (5) Total Percent to total Percent to total Percent to total Percent to total ($ in millions) Fixed income securities (1) $ 30,834 78.9 % $ 29,082 74.9 % $ 2,524 78.4 % $ 62,440 77.0 % Equity securities (2) 3,076 7.9 1,028 2.7 4,104 5.0 Mortgage loans 370 0.9 3,818 9.8 4,188 5.2 Limited partnership interests (3) 2,498 6.4 2,024 5.2 5 0.1 4,527 5.6 Short-term investments (4) 822 2.1 1,026 2.7 692 21.5 2,540 3.1 Other 1,483 3.8 1,831 4.7 3,314 4.1 Total $ 39,083 100.0 % $ 38,809 100.0 % $ 3,221 100.0 % $ 81,113 100.0 % (1) Fixed income securities are carried at fair value. Amortized cost basis for these securities was $30.43 billion, $26.74 billion, $2.50 billion and $59.67 billion for Property-Liability, Allstate Financial, Corporate and Other, and in Total, respectively. (2) Equity securities are carried at fair value. Cost basis for these securities was $2.72 billion, $969 million and $3.69 billion for Property-Liability, Allstate Financial and in Total, respectively. (3) We have commitments to invest in additional limited partnership interests totaling $1.21 billion, $1.22 billion and $2.43 billion for Property-Liability, Allstate Financial and in Total, respectively. (4) Short-term investments are carried at fair value. Amortized cost basis for these investments was $822 million, $1.03 billion, $692 million and $2.54 billion for Property-Liability, Allstate Financial, Corporate and Other, and in Total, respectively. (5) Balances reflect the elimination of related party investments between segments. Total investments decreased to $81.11 billion as of December 31, 2014, from $81.16 billion as of December 31, 2013, primarily due to common share repurchases, debt repayments and the reclassification of tax credit funds from limited partnership interests to other assets, partially offset by positive operating cash flows, proceeds from the issuance of preferred stock and favorable fixed income valuations resulting from a decrease in risk-free interest rates. The Property-Liability investment portfolio decreased to $39.08 billion as of December 31, 2014, from $39.64 billion as of December 31, 2013, primarily due to dividends and stock repurchase paid by Allstate Insurance Company ("AIC") to The Allstate Corporation (the "Corporation") and the reclassification of tax credit funds from limited partnership interests to other assets, partially offset by positive operating cash flows and a $700 million return of capital paid by ALIC to AIC. The Allstate Financial investment portfolio decreased to $38.81 billion as of December 31, 2014, from $39.11 billion as of December 31, 2013, primarily due to net reductions in contractholder funds, a $700 million return of capital paid by ALIC to AIC and the reclassification of tax credit funds from limited partnership interests to other assets, partially offset by higher fixed income valuations. The Corporate and Other investment portfolio increased to $3.22 billion as of December 31, 2014, from $2.41 billion as of December 31, 2013, primarily due to dividends and stock repurchase paid by AIC and other affiliates to the Corporation and proceeds from the issuance of preferred stock, partially offset by common share repurchases, debt repayments and dividends paid to shareholders. During 2014, strategic actions focused on optimizing portfolio yield, return and risk in the low interest rate environment. In the Property-Liability portfolio, we maintained the shorter duration profile of our fixed income securities established in 2013. This positioning has reduced our exposure to rising interest rates. We are increasing our real estate and limited partnership investments in both the Property-Liability and Allstate Financial portfolios, consistent with our ongoing strategy to have a greater proportion of ownership of assets and equity investments. In Allstate Financial's portfolio, limited partnerships and other equity investments will continue to be allocated primarily to the longer-duration immediate annuity liabilities to improve returns on those products. Shorter-duration annuity and life insurance liabilities will continue to be invested primarily in interest-bearing investments, such as fixed income securities and commercial mortgage loans. 85 Table of Contents Fixed income securities by type are listed in the following table. ($ in millions) Fair value as of December 31, 2014 Percent to total investments Fair value as of December 31, 2013 Percent to total investments U.S. government and agencies $ 4,328 5.3 % $ 2,913 3.6 % Municipal 8,497 10.5 8,723 10.8 Corporate 42,144 52.0 40,603 50.0 Foreign government 1,645 2.0 1,824 2.2 ABS 3,978 4.9 4,518 5.6 RMBS 1,207 1.5 1,474 1.8 CMBS 615 0.8 829 1.0 Redeemable preferred stock 26 26 0.1 Total fixed income securities $ 62,440 77.0 % $ 60,910 75.1 % As of December 31, 2014, 89.3% of the consolidated fixed income securities portfolio was rated investment grade, which is defined as a security having a rating of Aaa, Aa, A or Baa from Moody's, a rating of AAA, AA, A or BBB from S&P, Fitch, Dominion, Kroll or Realpoint, a rating of aaa, aa, a or bbb from A.M. Best, or a comparable internal rating if an externally provided rating is not available. All of our fixed income securities are rated by third party credit rating agencies, the National Association of Insurance Commissioners, and/or are internally rated. Our initial investment decisions and ongoing monitoring procedures for fixed income securities are based on a thorough due diligence process which includes, but is not limited to, an assessment of the credit quality, sector, structure, and liquidity risks of each issue. The following table summarizes the fair value and unrealized net capital gains and losses for fixed income securities by credit rating as of December 31, 2014. ($ in millions) Investment grade Below investment grade Total Fair value Unrealized gain/(loss) Fair value Unrealized gain/(loss) Fair value Unrealized gain/(loss) U.S. government and agencies $ 4,328 $ 136 $ $ $ 4,328 $ 136 Municipal Tax exempt 4,686 109 91 (3 ) 4,777 106 Taxable 3,637 507 83 7 3,720 514 Corporate Public 27,678 1,272 3,876 12 31,554 1,284 Privately placed 9,190 485 1,400 (11 ) 10,590 474 Foreign government 1,645 102 1,645 102 ABS Collateralized debt obligations ("CDO") 1,002 (6 ) 146 (10 ) 1,148 (16 ) Consumer and other asset-backed securities ("Consumer and other ABS") 2,808 23 22 2,830 23 RMBS U.S. government sponsored entities ("U.S. Agency") 283 12 283 12 Prime residential mortgage-backed securities ("Prime") 85 1 290 33 375 34 Alt-A residential mortgage-backed securities ("Alt-A") 12 311 34 323 34 Subprime residential mortgage-backed securities ("Subprime") 5 221 19 226 19 CMBS 367 16 248 26 615 42 Redeemable preferred stock 26 4 26 4 Total fixed income securities $ 55,752 $ 2,661 $ 6,688 $ 107 $ 62,440 $ 2,768 Municipal bonds , including tax exempt and taxable securities, totaled $8.50 billion as of December 31, 2014 with an unrealized net capital gain of $620 million. The municipal bond portfolio includes general obligations of state and local 86 Table of Contents issuers and revenue bonds (including pre-refunded bonds, which are bonds for which an irrevocable trust has been established to fund the remaining payments of principal and interest). The following table summarizes by state the fair value, amortized cost and credit rating of our municipal bonds, excluding $384 million of pre-refunded bonds, as of December 31, 2014. State general obligation Local general obligation Fair value Amortized cost Average credit rating ($ in millions) Revenue (1) State Texas $ 18 $ 382 $ 339 $ 739 $ 659 Aa California 108 250 381 739 645 A New York 20 97 428 545 517 Aa Florida 89 89 297 475 452 Aa Washington 173 9 162 344 329 Aa Oregon 63 178 81 322 285 Aa Illinois 17 81 221 319 285 A Ohio 82 43 161 286 263 Aa Pennsylvania 86 63 133 282 269 Aa Michigan 141 8 100 249 232 Aa All others 858 800 2,155 3,813 3,583 Aa Total $ 1,655 $ 2,000 $ 4,458 $ 8,113 $ 7,519 Aa (1) The nature of the activities supporting revenue bonds is diversified and includes transportation, health care, industrial development, housing, higher education, utilities, recreation/convention centers and other activities. Our practice for acquiring and monitoring municipal bonds is predominantly based on the underlying credit quality of the primary obligor. We currently rely on the primary obligor to pay all contractual cash flows and are not relying on bond insurers for payments. As a result of downgrades in the insurers' credit ratings, the ratings of the insured municipal bonds generally reflect the underlying ratings of the primary obligor. As of December 31, 2014, 99.7% of our insured municipal bond portfolio is rated investment grade. Corporate bonds , including publicly traded and privately placed, totaled $42.14 billion as of December 31, 2014, with an unrealized net capital gain of $1.76 billion. Privately placed securities primarily consist of corporate issued senior debt securities that are directly negotiated with the borrower or are in unregistered form. Our $10.59 billion portfolio of privately placed securities is diversified by issuer, industry sector and country. The portfolio is made up of 431 issuers. Privately placed corporate obligations contain structural security features such as financial covenants and call protections that provide investors greater protection against credit deterioration, reinvestment risk or fluctuations in interest rates than those typically found in publicly registered debt securities. Additionally, investments in these securities are made after due diligence of the issuer, typically including direct discussions with senior management and on-site visits to company facilities. Ongoing monitoring includes direct periodic dialog with senior management of the issuer and continuous monitoring of operating performance and financial position. Every issue not rated by an independent rating agency is internally rated with a formal rating affirmation at least once a year. Foreign government securities totaled $1.65 billion as of December 31, 2014, with 100% rated investment grade and an unrealized net capital gain of $102 million. Of these securities, 52.0% are in Canadian governmental and provincial securities (41.3% of which are held by our Canadian companies), 23.8% are backed by the U.S. government and the remaining 24.2% are highly diversified in other foreign governments. ABS, RMBS and CMBS are structured securities that are primarily collateralized by consumer or corporate borrowings and residential and commercial real estate loans. The cash flows from the underlying collateral paid to the securitization trust are generally applied in a pre-determined order and are designed so that each security issued by the trust, typically referred to as a "class", qualifies for a specific original rating. For example, the "senior" portion or "top" of the capital structure, or rating class, which would originally qualify for a rating of Aaa typically has priority in receiving principal repayments on the underlying collateral and retains this priority until the class is paid in full. In a sequential structure, underlying collateral principal repayments are directed to the most senior rated Aaa class in the structure until paid in full, after which principal repayments are directed to the next most senior Aaa class in the structure until it is paid in full. Senior Aaa classes generally share any losses from the underlying collateral on a pro-rata basis after losses are absorbed by classes with lower original ratings. The payment priority and class subordination included in these 87 Table of Contents securities serves as credit enhancement for holders of the senior or top portions of the structures. These securities continue to retain the payment priority features that existed at the origination of the securitization trust. Other forms of credit enhancement may include structural features embedded in the securitization trust, such as overcollateralization, excess spread and bond insurance. The underlying collateral can have fixed interest rates, variable interest rates (such as adjustable rate mortgages) or may contain features of both fixed and variable rate mortgages. ABS , including CDO and Consumer and other ABS, totaled $3.98 billion as of December 31, 2014, with 95.8% rated investment grade and an unrealized net capital gain of $7 million. Credit risk is managed by monitoring the performance of the underlying collateral. Many of the securities in the ABS portfolio have credit enhancement with features such as overcollateralization, subordinated structures, reserve funds, guarantees and/or insurance. CDO totaled $1.15 billion as of December 31, 2014, with 87.3% rated investment grade and an unrealized net capital loss of $16 million. CDO consist of obligations collateralized by cash flow CDO, which are structures collateralized primarily by below investment grade senior secured corporate loans. Consumer and other ABS totaled $2.83 billion as of December 31, 2014, with 99.2% rated investment grade. Consumer and other ABS consists of $1.28 billion of consumer auto, $678 million of credit card and $870 million of other ABS with unrealized net capital gains of $1 million, $2 million and $20 million, respectively. RMBS totaled $1.21 billion as of December 31, 2014, with 31.9% rated investment grade and an unrealized net capital gain of $99 million. The RMBS portfolio is subject to interest rate risk, but unlike other fixed income securities, is additionally subject to prepayment risk from the underlying residential mortgage loans. RMBS consists of a U.S. Agency portfolio having collateral issued or guaranteed by U.S. government agencies and a non-agency portfolio consisting of securities collateralized by Prime, Alt-A and Subprime loans. The non-agency portfolio totaled $924 million as of December 31, 2014, with 11.0% rated investment grade and an unrealized net capital gain of $87 million. CMBS totaled $615 million as of December 31, 2014, with 59.7% rated investment grade and an unrealized net capital gain of $42 million. The CMBS portfolio is subject to credit risk and has a sequential paydown structure. Of the CMBS investments, 96.4% are traditional conduit transactions collateralized by commercial mortgage loans, broadly diversified across property types and geographical area. The remainder consists of non-traditional CMBS such as small balance transactions, large loan pools and single borrower transactions. Equity securities primarily include common stocks, exchange traded and mutual funds, non-redeemable preferred stocks and real estate investment trust equity investments. The equity securities portfolio was $4.10 billion as of December 31, 2014, with an unrealized net capital gain of $412 million. Mortgage loans , which are primarily held in the Allstate Financial portfolio, totaled $4.19 billion as of December 31, 2014 and primarily comprise loans secured by first mortgages on developed commercial real estate. Key considerations used to manage our exposure include property type and geographic diversification. For further detail on our mortgage loan portfolio, see Note 5 of the consolidated financial statements. Limited partnership interests consist of investments in private equity/debt, real estate and other funds. The limited partnership interests portfolio is diversified across a number of characteristics including fund managers, vintage years, strategies, geography (including international), and company/property types. Tax credit funds were reclassified from limited partnership interests to other assets during 2014 since their return is in the form of tax credits rather than investment income. These tax credit funds totaled $560 million as of December 31, 2014. The following table presents information about our limited partnership interests as of December 31, 2014. ($ in millions) Private equity/debt funds (1) Real estate funds Other funds Total Cost method of accounting ("Cost") $ 894 $ 228 $ $ 1,122 Equity method of accounting ("EMA") 1,862 1,185 358 3,405 Total $ 2,756 $ 1,413 $ 358 $ 4,527 Number of managers 99 37 13 149 Number of individual funds 178 80 19 277 Largest exposure to single fund $ 102 $ 144 $ 145 $ 145 (1) Includes $562 million of infrastructure and real asset funds. 88 Table of Contents The following tables show the earnings from our limited partnership interests by fund type and accounting classification for the years ended December 31. ($ in millions) 2014 2013 Cost EMA Total income Impairment write-downs Cost EMA Total income Impairment write-downs Private equity/debt funds $ 139 $ 252 $ 391 $ (19 ) $ 162 $ 172 $ 334 $ (14 ) Real estate funds 60 151 211 12 37 184 221 (4 ) Other funds 2 10 12 (14 ) (14 ) Total $ 201 $ 413 $ 614 $ (7 ) $ 199 $ 342 $ 541 $ (18 ) Limited partnership interests produced income, excluding impairment write-downs, of $614 million in 2014 compared to $541 million in 2013. Higher EMA limited partnership income resulted from favorable equity and real estate valuations which increased the carrying value of the partnerships. Income on EMA limited partnerships is recognized on a delay due to the availability of the related financial statements. The recognition of income on private equity/debt funds and real estate funds are generally on a three month delay and the income recognition on other funds is primarily on a one month delay. Income on cost method limited partnerships is recognized only upon receipt of amounts distributed by the partnerships. Short-term investments totaled $2.54 billion as of December 31, 2014. Other investments primarily comprise $1.66 billion of bank loans, $909 million of policy loans, $368 million of agent loans (loans issued to exclusive Allstate agents) and $92 million of derivatives as of December 31, 2014. For further detail on our use of derivatives, see Note 7 of the consolidated financial statements. Unrealized net capital gains totaled $3.17 billion as of December 31, 2014 compared to $2.70 billion as of December 31, 2013. The increase for fixed income securities was primarily due to a decrease in risk-free interest rates, partially offset by the realization of unrealized net capital gains through sales. The decrease for equity securities was primarily due to the realization of unrealized net capital gains through sales, partially offset by positive equity market performance. The following table presents unrealized net capital gains and losses as of December 31. ($ in millions) 2014 2013 U.S. government and agencies $ 136 $ 122 Municipal 620 277 Corporate 1,758 1,272 Foreign government 102 88 ABS 7 27 RMBS 99 71 CMBS 42 41 Redeemable preferred stock 4 4 Fixed income securities 2,768 1,902 Equity securities 412 624 Derivatives (2 ) (18 ) EMA limited partnerships (5 ) (3 ) Investments classified as held for sale 190 Unrealized net capital gains and losses, pre-tax $ 3,173 $ 2,695 The unrealized net capital gain for the fixed income portfolio totaled $2.77 billion and comprised $3.08 billion of gross unrealized gains and $314 million of gross unrealized losses as of December 31, 2014. This is compared to an unrealized net capital gain for the fixed income portfolio totaling $1.90 billion, comprised of $2.48 billion of gross unrealized gains and $573 million of gross unrealized losses as of December 31, 2013. 89 Table of Contents Gross unrealized gains and losses on fixed income securities by type and sector as of December 31, 2014 are provided in the following table. Gross unrealized Amortized cost ($ in millions) Gains Losses Fair value Corporate: Energy $ 4,815 $ 178 $ (75 ) $ 4,918 Banking 3,597 67 (35 ) 3,629 Consumer goods (cyclical and non-cyclical) 10,412 393 (34 ) 10,771 Basic industry 2,264 78 (29 ) 2,313 Capital goods 3,934 214 (16 ) 4,132 Utilities 4,985 548 (14 ) 5,519 Communications 2,885 143 (11 ) 3,017 Technology 2,249 73 (10 ) 2,312 Transportation 1,614 132 (9 ) 1,737 Financial services 3,051 130 (5 ) 3,176 Other 580 42 (2 ) 620 Total corporate fixed income portfolio 40,386 1,998 (240 ) 42,144 U.S. government and agencies 4,192 139 (3 ) 4,328 Municipal 7,877 645 (25 ) 8,497 Foreign government 1,543 102 1,645 ABS 3,971 38 (31 ) 3,978 RMBS 1,108 112 (13 ) 1,207 CMBS 573 44 (2 ) 615 Redeemable preferred stock 22 4 26 Total fixed income securities $ 59,672 $ 3,082 $ (314 ) $ 62,440 The energy, banking, consumer goods and basic industry sectors had the highest concentration of gross unrealized losses in our corporate fixed income securities portfolio as of December 31, 2014. In general, the gross unrealized losses are related to increasing risk-free interest rates or widening credit spreads since the time of initial purchase. The unrealized net capital gain for the equity portfolio totaled $412 million and comprised $467 million of gross unrealized gains and $55 million of gross unrealized losses as of December 31, 2014. This is compared to an unrealized net capital gain for the equity portfolio totaling $624 million, comprised of $658 million of gross unrealized gains and $34 million of gross unrealized losses as of December 31, 2013. Gross unrealized gains and losses on equity securities by sector as of December 31, 2014 are provided in the table below. Gross unrealized ($ in millions) Cost Gains Losses Fair value Energy $ 265 $ 24 $ (16 ) $ 273 Financial services 485 44 (9 ) 520 Consumer goods (cyclical and non-cyclical) 834 107 (8 ) 933 Banking 332 66 (6 ) 392 Basic industry 152 12 (5 ) 159 Capital goods 287 31 (4 ) 314 Technology 370 50 (2 ) 418 Communications 218 15 (2 ) 231 Utilities 103 15 (1 ) 117 Transportation 65 23 (1 ) 87 Real estate 71 4 (1 ) 74 Index-based funds 343 75 418 Emerging market fixed income funds 152 152 Emerging market equity funds 15 1 16 Total equity securities $ 3,692 $ 467 $ (55 ) $ 4,104 90 Table of Contents Within the equity portfolio, the losses were primarily concentrated in the energy, financial services and consumer goods sectors. The unrealized losses were company and sector specific. As of December 31, 2014, we have the intent and ability to hold our equity securities with unrealized losses until recovery. Global oil prices have declined significantly in recent months. Within the energy sector outlined above, we continue to monitor the impact to our investment portfolio for those companies that may be adversely affected, both directly and indirectly. If oil prices continue to decline or remain at depressed levels for an extended period, certain issuers and investments may come under pressure. Net investment income The following table presents net investment income for the years ended December 31. ($ in millions) 2014 2013 2012 Fixed income securities $ 2,447 $ 2,921 $ 3,234 Equity securities 117 149 127 Mortgage loans 265 372 374 Limited partnership interests 614 541 348 Short-term investments 7 5 6 Other 170 161 132 Investment income, before expense 3,620 4,149 4,221 Investment expense (161 ) (206 ) (211 ) Net investment income $ 3,459 $ 3,943 $ 4,010 Net investment income decreased 12.3% or $484 million in 2014 compared to 2013, after decreasing 1.7% or $67 million in 2013 compared to 2012. The 2014 decrease was primarily due to lower average investment balances relating to the sale of LBL on April 1, 2014, lower fixed income yields and equity dividends, partially offset by higher limited partnership income. Net investment income in 2014 includes $114 million related to prepayment fee income and litigation proceeds compared to $139 million in 2013. These items may vary significantly from period to period and may not recur. Higher EMA limited partnership income resulted from favorable equity and real estate valuations which increased the carrying value of the partnerships. The 2013 decrease was primarily due to lower average investment balances and lower fixed income yields, partially offset by higher limited partnership income and equity dividends, as well as prepayment fee income and litigation proceeds which together increased 2013 income by a total of $68 million. Realized capital gains and losses The following table presents the components of realized capital gains and losses and the related tax effect for the years ended December 31. ($ in millions) 2014 2013 2012 Impairment write-downs $ (32 ) $ (72 ) $ (185 ) Change in intent write-downs (213 ) (143 ) (48 ) Net other-than-temporary impairment losses recognized in earnings (245 ) (215 ) (233 ) Sales 975 819 536 Valuation and settlements of derivative instruments (36 ) (10 ) 24 Realized capital gains and losses, pre-tax 694 594 327 Income tax expense (243 ) (209 ) (111 ) Realized capital gains and losses, after-tax $ 451 $ 385 $ 216 91 Table of Contents Impairment write-downs , which include changes in the mortgage loan valuation allowance, for the years ended December 31 are presented in the following table. ($ in millions) 2014 2013 2012 Fixed income securities $ (24 ) $ (49 ) $ (108 ) Equity securities (6 ) (12 ) (63 ) Mortgage loans 5 11 5 Limited partnership interests (7 ) (18 ) (8 ) Other investments (4 ) (11 ) Impairment write-downs $ (32 ) $ (72 ) $ (185 ) Impairment write-downs on fixed income securities in 2014 were primarily driven by collateralized loan obligations that experienced deterioration in expected cash flows and municipal and corporate fixed income securities impacted by issuer specific circumstances. Limited partnership write-downs primarily related to cost method limited partnerships that experienced declines in portfolio valuations deemed to be other than temporary. Equity securities were written down primarily due to the length of time and extent to which fair value was below cost, considering our assessment of the financial condition and near-term and long-term prospects of the issuer, including relevant industry conditions and trends. The valuation allowance on mortgage loans as of December 31, 2014 decreased compared to December 31, 2013 primarily due to reversals related to impaired loan payoffs. Impairment write-downs on fixed income securities in 2013 were primarily driven by CMBS that experienced deterioration in expected cash flows and municipal bonds impacted by issuer specific circumstances. Limited partnership write-downs primarily related to cost method limited partnerships that experienced declines in portfolio valuations deemed to be other than temporary. Equity securities were written down primarily due to the length of time and extent to which fair value was below cost, considering our assessment of the financial condition and near-term and long-term prospects of the issuer, including relevant industry conditions and trends. The valuation allowance on mortgage loans as of December 31, 2013 decreased compared to December 31, 2012 primarily due to reversals related to loans no longer deemed impaired. Impairment write-downs on fixed income securities in 2012 were primarily driven by RMBS and CMBS that experienced deterioration in expected cash flows and municipal and corporate fixed income securities impacted by issuer specific circumstances. Equity securities were written down primarily due to the length of time and extent to which fair value was below cost, considering our assessment of the financial condition and near-term and long-term prospects of the issuer, including relevant industry conditions and trends. Change in intent write-downs were $213 million, $143 million and $48 million in 2014, 2013 and 2012, respectively. The change in intent write-downs in 2014 and 2013 were primarily related to the repositioning and ongoing portfolio management of our equity securities. For certain equity securities managed by third parties, we do not retain decision making authority as it pertains to selling securities that are in an unrealized loss position and therefore we recognize any unrealized loss at the end of the period through a charge to earnings. The change in intent write-downs in 2012 were primarily a result of ongoing comprehensive reviews of our portfolios resulting in write-downs of individually identified investments, primarily RMBS and equity securities. Sales generated $975 million, $819 million and $536 million of net realized capital gains in 2014, 2013 and 2012, respectively. The sales in 2014 primarily related to equity and fixed income securities in connection with ongoing portfolio management. The sales in 2013 primarily related to equity securities in connection with portfolio repositioning and ongoing portfolio management and municipal and corporate fixed income securities in conjunction with reducing our exposure to interest rate risk in the Property-Liability portfolio. The sales in 2012 primarily related to corporate, municipal and U.S. government and agencies fixed income securities and equity securities in connection with portfolio repositioning. Valuation and settlements of derivative instruments generated net realized capital losses of $36 million in 2014, net realized capital losses of $10 million in 2013 and net realized capital gains of $24 million in 2012. The net realized capital losses in 2014 primarily comprised losses on equity futures used for risk management due to increases in equity indices and losses on foreign currency contracts due to the weakening of the Canadian dollar. The net realized capital losses in 2013 primarily comprised losses on equity futures used for risk management due to increases in equity indices and losses on credit default swaps due to the tightening of credit spreads on the underlying credit names. The net realized capital gains in 2012 primarily included gains on credit default swaps due to the tightening of credit spreads on the underlying credit names. 92 Table of Contents MARKET RISK Market risk is the risk that we will incur losses due to adverse changes in interest rates, credit spreads, equity prices or currency exchange rates. Adverse changes to these rates and prices may occur due to changes in fiscal policy, the economic climate, the liquidity of a market or market segment, insolvency or financial distress of key market makers or participants or changes in market perceptions of credit worthiness and/or risk tolerance. Our primary market risk exposures are to changes in interest rates, credit spreads and equity prices. The active management of market risk is integral to our results of operations. We may use the following approaches to manage exposure to market risk within defined tolerance ranges: 1) rebalancing existing asset or liability portfolios, 2) changing the type of investments purchased in the future and 3) using derivative instruments to modify the market risk characteristics of existing assets and liabilities or assets expected to be purchased. For a more detailed discussion of our use of derivative financial instruments, see Note 7 of the consolidated financial statements. Overview In formulating and implementing guidelines for investing funds, we seek to earn returns that enhance our ability to offer competitive rates and prices to customers while contributing to attractive and stable profits and long-term capital growth. Accordingly, our investment decisions and objectives are a function of the underlying risks and product profiles of each business. Investment policies define the overall framework for managing market and other investment risks, including accountability and controls over risk management activities. Subsidiaries that conduct investment activities follow policies that have been approved by their respective boards of directors. These investment policies specify the investment limits and strategies that are appropriate given the liquidity, surplus, product profile and regulatory requirements of the subsidiary. Executive oversight of investment activities is conducted primarily through subsidiaries' boards of directors and investment committees. For Allstate Financial, its asset-liability management ("ALM") policies further define the overall framework for managing market and investment risks. ALM focuses on strategies to enhance yields, mitigate market risks and optimize capital to improve profitability and returns for Allstate Financial while factoring in future expected cash requirements to repay liabilities. Allstate Financial ALM activities follow asset-liability policies that have been approved by their respective boards of directors. These ALM policies specify limits, ranges and/or targets for investments that best meet Allstate Financial's business objectives in light of its product liabilities. We use quantitative and qualitative market-based approaches to measure, monitor and manage market risk. We evaluate our exposure to market risk through the use of multiple measures including but not limited to duration, value-at-risk, scenario analysis and sensitivity analysis. Duration measures the price sensitivity of assets and liabilities to changes in interest rates. For example, if interest rates increase 100 basis points, the fair value of an asset with a duration of 5 is expected to decrease in value by 5%. Value-at-risk is a statistical estimate of the probability that the change in fair value of a portfolio will exceed a certain amount over a given time horizon. Scenario analysis estimates the potential changes in the fair value of a portfolio that could occur under different hypothetical market conditions defined by changes to multiple market risk factors: interest rates, credit spreads, equity prices or currency exchange rates. Sensitivity analysis estimates the potential changes in the fair value of a portfolio that could occur under different hypothetical shocks to a market risk factor. In general, we establish investment portfolio asset allocation and market risk limits for the Property-Liability and Allstate Financial businesses based upon a combination of duration, value-at-risk, scenario analysis and sensitivity analysis. The asset allocation limits place restrictions on the total funds that may be invested within an asset class. Comprehensive day-to-day management of market risk within defined tolerance ranges occurs as portfolio managers buy and sell within their respective markets based upon the acceptable boundaries established by investment policies. For Allstate Financial, this day-to-day management is integrated with and informed by the activities of the ALM organization. This integration is intended to result in a prudent, methodical and effective adjudication of market risk and return, conditioned by the unique demands and dynamics of Allstate Financial's product liabilities and supported by the continuous application of advanced risk technology and analytics. Although we apply a similar overall philosophy to market risk, the underlying business frameworks and the accounting and regulatory environments differ considerably between the Property-Liability and Allstate Financial businesses affecting investment decisions and risk parameters. Interest rate risk is the risk that we will incur a loss due to adverse changes in interest rates relative to the characteristics of our interest bearing assets and liabilities. This risk arises from many of our primary activities, as we invest substantial funds in interest-sensitive assets and issue interest-sensitive liabilities. Interest rate risk includes risks related to changes in U.S. Treasury yields and other key risk-free reference yields. We manage the interest rate risk in our assets relative to the interest rate risk in our liabilities and our assessment of overall economic and capital risk. One of the measures used to quantify this exposure is duration. The difference in the 93 Table of Contents duration of our assets relative to our liabilities is our duration gap. To calculate the duration gap between assets and liabilities, we project asset and liability cash flows and calculate their net present value using a risk-free market interest rate adjusted for credit quality, sector attributes, liquidity and other specific risks. Duration is calculated by revaluing these cash flows at alternative interest rates and determining the percentage change in aggregate fair value. The cash flows used in this calculation include the expected maturity and repricing characteristics of our derivative financial instruments, all other financial instruments, and certain other items including unearned premiums, property-liability insurance claims and claims expense reserves, annuity liabilities and other interest-sensitive liabilities. The projections include assumptions (based upon historical market experience and our experience) that reflect the effect of changing interest rates on the prepayment, lapse, leverage and/or option features of instruments, where applicable. The preceding assumptions relate primarily to callable municipal and corporate bonds, fixed rate single and flexible premium deferred annuities, mortgage-backed securities and municipal housing bonds. Additionally, the calculations include assumptions regarding the renewal of property-liability policies. As of December 31, 2014, the difference between our asset and liability duration was a (1.26) gap compared to a (0.95) gap as of December 31, 2013. A negative duration gap indicates that the fair value of our liabilities is more sensitive to interest rate movements than the fair value of our assets, while a positive duration gap indicates that the fair value of our assets is more sensitive to interest rate movements than the fair value of our liabilities. The Property-Liability segment generally maintains a positive duration gap between its assets and liabilities due to the relatively short duration of auto and homeowners claims, which are its primary liabilities. The Allstate Financial segment may have a positive or negative duration gap, as the duration of its assets and liabilities vary with its product mix and investing activity. As of December 31, 2014, Property-Liability had a positive duration gap while Allstate Financial had a negative duration gap. In the management of investments supporting the Property-Liability business, we adhere to an objective of emphasizing safety of principal and consistency of income within a total return framework. This approach is designed to ensure our financial strength and stability for paying claims, while maximizing economic value and surplus growth. For the Allstate Financial business, we seek to invest premiums, contract charges and deposits to generate future cash flows that will fund future claims, benefits and expenses, and that will earn stable returns across a wide variety of interest rate and economic scenarios. To achieve this objective and limit interest rate risk for Allstate Financial, we adhere to a philosophy of managing the duration of assets and related liabilities within predetermined tolerance levels. This philosophy is executed using duration targets for fixed income investments and may also include interest rate swaps, futures, forwards, caps, floors and swaptions to reduce the interest rate risk resulting from mismatches between existing assets and liabilities, and financial futures and other derivative instruments to hedge the interest rate risk of anticipated purchases and sales of investments. Based upon the information and assumptions used in the duration calculation, and interest rates in effect as of December 31, 2014, we estimate that a 100 basis point immediate, parallel increase in interest rates ("rate shock") would increase the net fair value of the assets and liabilities by $991 million, compared to an increase of $826 million as of December 31, 2013, reflecting year to year changes in duration. The selection of a 100 basis point immediate, parallel change in interest rates should not be construed as our prediction of future market events, but only as an illustration of the potential effect of such an event. The estimate excludes the traditional and interest-sensitive life insurance products that are not considered financial instruments and the $9.91 billion of assets supporting them and the associated liabilities. The $9.91 billion of assets excluded from the calculation decreased from $13.13 billion as of December 31, 2013, primarily due to the LBL sale. Based on assumptions described above, in the event of a 100 basis point immediate increase in interest rates, the assets supporting life insurance products would decrease in value by $583 million, compared to a decrease of $753 million as of December 31, 2013. To the extent that conditions differ from the assumptions we used in these calculations, duration and rate shock measures could be significantly impacted. Additionally, our calculations assume that the current relationship between short-term and long-term interest rates (the term structure of interest rates) will remain constant over time. As a result, these calculations may not fully capture the effect of non-parallel changes in the term structure of interest rates and/or large changes in interest rates. Credit spread risk is the risk that we will incur a loss due to adverse changes in credit spreads ("spreads"). Credit spread is the additional yield on fixed income securities and loans above the risk-free rate (typically referenced as the yield on U.S. Treasury securities) that market participants require to compensate them for assuming credit, liquidity and/or prepayment risks. The magnitude of the spread will depend on the likelihood that a particular issuer will default ("credit risk"). This risk arises from many of our primary activities, as we invest substantial funds in spread-sensitive fixed income assets. 94 Table of Contents We manage the spread risk in our assets. One of the measures used to quantify this exposure is spread duration. Spread duration measures the price sensitivity of the assets to changes in spreads. For example, if spreads increase 100 basis points, the fair value of an asset exhibiting a spread duration of 5 is expected to decrease in value by 5%. Spread duration is calculated similarly to interest rate duration. As of December 31, 2014, the spread duration of Property-Liability assets was 3.24, compared to 3.28 as of December 31, 2013, and the spread duration of Allstate Financial assets was 5.81, compared to 5.35 as of December 31, 2013. Based upon the information and assumptions we use in this spread duration calculation, and spreads in effect as of December 31, 2014, we estimate that a 100 basis point immediate, parallel increase in spreads across all asset classes, industry sectors and credit ratings ("spread shock") would decrease the net fair value of the assets by $2.91 billion compared to $3.46 billion as of December 31, 2013. Reflected in the duration calculation are the effects of our tactical actions that use credit default swaps to manage spread risk. The selection of a 100 basis point immediate parallel change in spreads should not be construed as our prediction of future market events, but only as an illustration of the potential effect of such an event. Equity price risk is the risk that we will incur losses due to adverse changes in the general levels of the equity markets. As of December 31, 2014, we held $3.99 billion in common stocks and exchange traded and mutual funds and $4.64 billion in other securities with equity risk (including primarily limited partnership interests and non-redeemable preferred securities), compared to $5.04 billion and $5.02 billion, respectively, as of December 31, 2013. 74.8% of the common stocks and exchange traded and mutual funds and 55.8% of the other securities with equity risk related to Property-Liability as of December 31, 2014, compared to 86.1% and 58.8%, respectively, as of December 31, 2013. As of December 31, 2014, our portfolio of common stocks and other securities with equity risk had a cash market portfolio beta of 1.21, compared to a beta of 1.10 as of December 31, 2013. Beta represents a widely used methodology to describe, quantitatively, an investment's market risk characteristics relative to an index such as the Standard & Poor's 500 Composite Price Index ("S&P 500"). Based on the beta analysis, we estimate that if the S&P 500 increases or decreases by 10%, the fair value of our equity investments will increase or decrease by 12.1%, respectively. Based upon the information and assumptions we used to calculate beta as of December 31, 2014, we estimate that an immediate decrease in the S&P 500 of 10% would decrease the net fair value of our equity investments by $1.05 billion, compared to $1.10 billion as of December 31, 2013, and an immediate increase in the S&P 500 of 10% would increase the net fair value by $1.05 billion compared to $1.10 billion as of December 31, 2013. The selection of a 10% immediate decrease or increase in the S&P 500 should not be construed as our prediction of future market events, but only as an illustration of the potential effect of such an event. The beta of our common stocks and other securities with equity risk was determined by calculating the change in the fair value of the portfolio resulting from stressing the equity market up and down 10%. The illustrations noted above may not reflect our actual experience if the future composition of the portfolio (hence its beta) and correlation relationships differ from the historical relationships. As of December 31, 2014 and 2013, we had separate account assets related to variable annuity and variable life contracts with account values totaling $4.40 billion and $6.74 billion, respectively. The December 31, 2013 balance included amounts classified as held for sale. Equity risk exists for contract charges based on separate account balances and guarantees for death and/or income benefits provided by our variable products. In 2006, we disposed of substantially all of the variable annuity business through reinsurance agreements with The Prudential Insurance Company of America, a subsidiary of Prudential Financial Inc. and therefore mitigated this aspect of our risk. Equity risk for our variable life business relates to contract charges and policyholder benefits. Total variable life contract charges for 2014 and 2013 were $47 million and $67 million, respectively. Separate account liabilities related to variable life contracts were $77 million and $900 million as of December 31, 2014 and 2013, respectively. The decline in separate accounts was the result of the LBL sale. As of December 31, 2014 and 2013 we had $1.49 billion and $3.71 billion, respectively, in equity-indexed annuity liabilities that provide customers with interest crediting rates based on the performance of the S&P 500. We hedge the majority of the risk associated with these liabilities using equity-indexed options and futures and eurodollar futures, maintaining risk within specified value-at-risk limits. $2.26 billion of the December 31, 2013 balance was a component of the LBL sale during 2014. Foreign currency exchange rate risk is the risk that we will incur economic losses due to adverse changes in foreign currency exchange rates. This risk primarily arises from our foreign equity investments, including common stocks, real estate funds and private equity funds, and our Canadian, Northern Ireland and Indian operations. We also have investments in certain fixed income securities and emerging market fixed income funds that are denominated in foreign currencies; however, derivatives are used to hedge approximately 12% of this foreign currency risk. 95 Table of Contents As of December 31, 2014, we had $1.35 billion in foreign currency denominated equity investments, $843 million net investment in our foreign subsidiaries, primarily related to our Canadian operations, and $283 million in unhedged non-dollar pay fixed income securities. These amounts were $1.10 billion, $878 million, and $330 million, respectively, as of December 31, 2013. 68.0% of the foreign currency exposure is in the Property-Liability business. Based upon the information and assumptions used as of December 31, 2014, we estimate that a 10% immediate unfavorable change in each of the foreign currency exchange rates to which we are exposed would decrease the value of our foreign currency denominated instruments by $235 million, compared with an estimated $254 million decrease as of December 31, 2013. The selection of a 10% immediate decrease in all currency exchange rates should not be construed as our prediction of future market events, but only as an illustration of the potential effect of such an event. The modeling technique we use to report our currency exposure does not take into account correlation among foreign currency exchange rates. Even though we believe it is very unlikely that all of the foreign currency exchange rates that we are exposed to would simultaneously decrease by 10%, we nonetheless stress test our portfolio under this and other hypothetical extreme adverse market scenarios. Our actual experience may differ from these results because of assumptions we have used or because significant liquidity and market events could occur that we did not foresee. PENSION PLANS We have defined benefit pension plans, which cover most full-time, certain part-time employees and employee-agents. Benefits are based primarily on a cash balance formula, however certain participants have a significant portion of their benefits attributable to a former final average pay formula. 91% of the projected benefit obligation of our primary qualified employee plan is related to the former final average pay formula. See Note 17 of the consolidated financial statements for a complete discussion of these plans and their effect on the consolidated financial statements. The pension and other postretirement plans may be amended or terminated at any time. Any revisions could result in significant changes to our obligations and our obligation to fund the plans. We report unrecognized pension and other postretirement benefit cost in the Consolidated Statements of Financial Position as a component of accumulated other comprehensive income in shareholders' equity. It represents the after-tax differences between the fair value of plan assets and the projected benefit obligation ("PBO") for pension plans and the accumulated postretirement benefit obligation for other postretirement plans that have not yet been recognized as a component of net periodic cost. As of December 31, 2014, unrecognized pension and other postretirement benefit cost totaled $1.36 billion comprising $1.49 billion related to pension benefits and $(122) million related to other postretirement benefits. The unrecognized pension and other postretirement benefit cost increased by $725 million as of December 31, 2014 from $638 million as of December 31, 2013. The measurement of the unrecognized pension and other postretirement benefit cost can vary based upon the fluctuations in the fair value of plan assets and the actuarial assumptions used for the plans as discussed below. The increase in the unrecognized pension and other postretirement benefit cost primarily related to actuarial assumption and census data updates, including decreases in the discount rate assumptions, the adoption of new Society of Actuaries mortality assumptions and lump sum payments at discount rates lower than actuarial assumptions. During 2014, we offered certain vested terminated employees the opportunity to receive lump sum payments. As a result, $75 million of benefit payments resulted in a reduction of the pension benefit obligation of approximately $90 million. The components of net periodic pension cost for all pension plans for the years ended December 31 are as follows: ($ in millions) 2014 2013 2012 Service cost $ 96 $ 140 $ 152 Interest cost 262 265 298 Expected return on plan assets (398 ) (394 ) (393 ) Amortization of: Prior service credit (58 ) (28 ) (2 ) Net actuarial loss 127 235 178 Settlement loss 54 277 33 Net periodic cost $ 83 $ 495 $ 266 The service cost component is the actuarial present value of the benefits attributed by the plans benefit formula to services rendered by the employees during the period. Interest cost is the increase in the PBO in the period due to the passage of time at the discount rate. Interest cost fluctuates as the discount rate changes and is also impacted by the related change in the size of the PBO. The decrease or increase in the PBO due to an increase or decrease in the discount rate is deferred and decreases or increases the net actuarial loss. It is recorded in accumulated other comprehensive income as unrecognized pension benefit cost and may be amortized. 96 Table of Contents The expected return on plan assets is determined as the product of the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets and the adjusted fair value of plan assets, referred to as the market-related value of plan assets. To determine the market-related value, the fair value of plan assets is adjusted annually so that differences between changes in the fair value of equity securities and hedge fund limited partnerships and the expected long-term rate of return on these securities are recognized into the market-related value of plan assets over a five year period. We believe this is consistent with the long-term nature of pension obligations. When the actual return on plan assets exceeds the expected return on plan assets it reduces the net actuarial loss; when the expected return exceeds the actual return it increases the net actuarial loss. It is recorded in accumulated other comprehensive income as unrecognized pension benefit cost and may be amortized. The market-related value adjustment represents the current difference between actual returns and expected returns on equity securities and hedge fund limited partnerships recognized over a five year period. The market-related value adjustment is a deferred net loss of $104 million as of December 31, 2014. The expected return on plan assets fluctuates when the market-related value of plan assets changes and when the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets assumption changes. Amortization of net actuarial loss in pension cost is recorded when the net actuarial loss including the unamortized market-related value adjustment exceeds 10% of the greater of the PBO or the market-related value of plan assets. The amount of amortization is equal to the excess divided by the average remaining service period for active employees for each plan, which approximates 9 years for Allstate's largest plan. As a result, the effect of changes in the PBO due to changes in the discount rate and changes in the fair value of plan assets may be experienced in our net periodic pension cost in periods subsequent to those in which the fluctuations actually occur. Net actuarial loss fluctuates as the discount rate fluctuates, as the actual return on plan assets differ from the expected long-term rate of return on plans assets, and as actual plan experience differs from other actuarial assumptions. Net actuarial loss related to changes in the discount rate will change when interest rates change and from amortization of net actuarial loss when there is an excess sufficient to qualify for amortization. Net actuarial loss related to changes in the fair value of plan assets will change when plan assets change in fair value and when there is an excess sufficient to qualify for amortization. Other net actuarial loss will change over time due to changes in other valuation assumptions and the plan participants or when there is an excess sufficient to qualify for amortization. A decrease in the discount rate increased the net actuarial loss by $576 million in 2014, an increase in the discount rate decreased the net actuarial loss by $593 million in 2013, and a decrease in the discount rate increased the net actuarial loss by $806 million in 2012. The difference between actual and expected returns on plan assets decreased the net actuarial loss by $144 million, $172 million, and $201 million in 2014, 2013, and 2012, respectively. Settlement charges are non-cash charges that accelerate the recognition of unrecognized pension benefit cost, that would have been incurred in subsequent periods, when plan payments primarily lump sums from qualified pension plans, exceed a threshold of service and interest cost for the period. The value of lump sums paid in 2014 were lower as fewer employees retired than in 2013. The value of lump sums paid to employees electing retirement in 2013 was elevated due to historically low interest rates. Voluntary retirement activity during the fourth quarter of 2013 was almost five times the typical level. Net periodic pension cost in 2015 is estimated to be $112 million including expected settlement charges of $25 million primarily for agent lump sum payments. Expected returns on plan assets and amortization of prior service credits offset the other components of pension cost. The increase is due to higher amortization of net actuarial loss offset by a higher expected return on assets. Pension expense is reported consistent with other types of employee compensation and as a result is included in claims expense, operating costs and expenses and investment expense. Net periodic pension cost decreased in 2014 to $83 million compared to $495 million in 2013 due to a decrease in service cost from the new benefit formula, a decrease in the amortization expense for the prior year's net actuarial losses which decreased due to a higher discount rate used to value the pension plan and lower settlements from fewer lump sum payments. Net periodic pension cost increased in 2013 compared to $266 million in 2012 due to an increase in the amortization expense for prior year's net actuarial losses (gain) which increased due to a lower discount rate used to value the pension plans. In 2014, 2013 and 2012, net pension cost included non-cash settlement charges resulting from lump sum distributions. Settlement charges are likely to continue for some period in the future as we settle our remaining agent pension obligations by making lump sum distributions to agents. The settlement charge threshold for our primary employee plan is lower beginning in 2014 due to the new benefit formula and low interest rates and as a result a lower amount of lump sum benefits may trigger settlement charges in the future. If interest rates increase in 2015, there may be an increase in employees electing retirement, which could trigger settlement charges in 2015. 97 Table of Contents We anticipate that the net actuarial loss for our pension plans will exceed 10% of the greater of the PBO or the market-related value of assets in 2015 and into the foreseeable future, resulting in additional amortization and net periodic pension cost. The net actuarial loss will be amortized over the remaining service life of active employees (approximately 9 years) or will reverse with increases in the discount rate or better than expected returns on plan assets. Amounts recorded for net periodic pension cost and accumulated other comprehensive income are significantly affected by changes in the assumptions used to determine the discount rate and the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets. The discount rate is based on rates at which expected pension benefits attributable to past employee service could effectively be settled on a present value basis at the measurement date. We develop the assumed discount rate by utilizing the weighted average yield of a theoretical dedicated portfolio derived from non-callable bonds and bonds with a make-whole provision available in the Bloomberg corporate bond universe having ratings of at least "AA" by S&P or at least "Aa" by Moody's on the measurement date with cash flows that match expected plan benefit requirements. Significant changes in discount rates, such as those caused by changes in the credit spreads, yield curve, the mix of bonds available in the market, the duration of selected bonds and expected benefit payments, may result in volatility in pension cost and accumulated other comprehensive income. Holding other assumptions constant, a hypothetical decrease of 100 basis points in the discount rate would result in an increase of $31 million, pre-tax, in net periodic pension cost and a $444 million, after-tax, increase in the unrecognized pension cost liability recorded as accumulated other comprehensive income as of December 31, 2014, compared to an increase of $39 million, pre-tax, in net periodic pension cost and a $379 million, after-tax, increase in the unrecognized pension cost liability as of December 31, 2013. A hypothetical increase of 100 basis points in the discount rate would decrease net periodic pension cost by $29 million, pre-tax, and would decrease the unrecognized pension cost liability recorded as accumulated other comprehensive income by $377 million, after-tax, as of December 31, 2014, compared to a decrease in net periodic pension cost of $35 million, pre-tax, and a $322 million, after-tax, decrease in the unrecognized pension cost liability recorded as accumulated other comprehensive income as of December 31, 2013. This non-symmetrical range results from the non-linear relationship between discount rates and pension obligations, and changes in the amortization of unrealized net actuarial gains and losses. The expected long-term rate of return on plan assets reflects the average rate of earnings expected on plan assets. While this rate reflects long-term assumptions and is consistent with long-term historical returns, sustained changes in the market or changes in the mix of plan assets may lead to revisions in the assumed long-term rate of return on plan assets that may result in variability of pension cost. Differences between the actual return on plan assets and the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets are a component of net actuarial loss and are recorded in accumulated other comprehensive income. Holding other assumptions constant, a hypothetical decrease of 100 basis points in the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets would result in an increase of $57 million in pension cost as of December 31, 2014, compared to $55 million as of December 31, 2013. A hypothetical increase of 100 basis points in the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets would result in a decrease in net periodic pension cost of $57 million as of December 31, 2014, compared to $55 million as of December 31, 2013. The primary qualified plans have unrealized gains as of December 31, 2014 of $510 million, an increase of $80 million from the prior year. 81% of unrealized gains are related to equity securities as of December 31, 2014 compared to 100% as of December 31, 2013. During 2014, the two primary qualified plans realized capital gains of $315 million. Given the Plan's exposure to an increase in interest rates, the plans shortened the duration of the plan assets in the fixed income portfolio. We target funding levels in accordance with regulations under the Internal Revenue Code ("IRC") and generally accepted actuarial principles. Our funding levels were within our targeted range as of December 31, 2014. In 2014, we contributed $49 million to our pension plans. We expect to contribute $127 million for the 2015 fiscal year to maintain the plans' funded status. This estimate could change significantly following either an improvement or decline in investment markets. Participating subsidiaries fund the Plans' contributions under our master services cost sharing agreement. In addition, as a result of joint and several pension liability rules under the Internal Revenue Code and the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, as amended, many liabilities that arise in connection with pension plans are joint and several across all members of a controlled group of entities. 98 Table of Contents GOODWILL Goodwill represents the excess of amounts paid for acquiring businesses over the fair value of the net assets acquired. The goodwill balances were $823 million and $396 million as of December 31, 2014 for the Allstate Protection segment and the Allstate Financial segment, respectively. Our reporting units are equivalent to our reporting segments, Allstate Protection and Allstate Financial. Goodwill is allocated to reporting units based on which unit is expected to benefit from the synergies of the business combination. Goodwill is not amortized but is tested for impairment at least annually. We perform our annual goodwill impairment testing during the fourth quarter of each year based upon data as of the close of the third quarter. We also review goodwill for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances, such as deteriorating or adverse market conditions, indicate that it is more likely than not that the carrying amount of goodwill may exceed its implied fair value. Impairment testing requires the use of estimates and judgments. For purposes of goodwill impairment testing, if the carrying value of a reporting unit exceeds its estimated fair value, the second step of the goodwill test is required. In such instances, the implied fair value of the goodwill is determined in the same manner as the amount of goodwill that would be determined in a business acquisition. The excess of the carrying value of goodwill over the implied fair value of goodwill would be recognized as an impairment and recorded as a charge against net income. To estimate the fair value of our reporting units for our annual impairment test, we initially utilize a stock price and market capitalization analysis and apportion the value between our reporting units using peer company price to book multiples. If the stock price and market capitalization analysis does not result in the fair value of the reporting unit exceeding its carrying value, we may also utilize a peer company price to earnings multiples analysis and/or a discounted cash flow analysis to supplement the stock price and market capitalization analysis. If a combination of valuation techniques are utilized, the analyses would be weighted based on management's judgment of their relevance given current facts and circumstances. The stock price and market capitalization analysis takes into consideration the quoted market price of our outstanding common stock and includes a control premium, derived from historical insurance industry acquisition activity, in determining the estimated fair value of the consolidated entity before allocating that fair value to individual reporting units. The total market capitalization of the consolidated entity is allocated to the individual reporting units using book value multiples derived from peer company data for the respective reporting units. The peer company price to earnings multiples analysis takes into consideration the price earnings multiples of peer companies for each reporting unit and estimated income from our strategic plan. The discounted cash flow analysis utilizes long term assumptions for revenue growth, capital growth, earnings projections including those used in our strategic plan, and an appropriate discount rate. We apply significant judgment when determining the fair value of our reporting units and when assessing the relationship of market capitalization to the estimated fair value of our reporting units. The valuation analyses described above are subject to critical judgments and assumptions and may be potentially sensitive to variability. Estimates of fair value are inherently uncertain and represent management's reasonable expectation regarding future developments. These estimates and the judgments and assumptions utilized may differ from future actual results. Declines in the estimated fair value of our reporting units could result in goodwill impairments in future periods which may be material to our results of operations but not our financial position. During fourth quarter 2014, we completed our annual goodwill impairment test using information as of September 30, 2014. The stock price and market capitalization analysis resulted in the fair value of our reporting units exceeding their respective carrying values. The results of this analysis are supported by the operating performance of the individual reporting units as well as their respective industry sector's performance. Goodwill impairment evaluations indicated no impairment as of December 31, 2014 and no reporting unit was at risk of having its carrying value including goodwill exceed its fair value. CAPITAL RESOURCES AND LIQUIDITY 2014 HIGHLIGHTS Shareholders' equity as of December 31, 2014 was $22.30 billion, an increase of 3.8% from $21.48 billion as of December 31, 2013. On January 2, 2014, April 1, 2014, July 1, 2014 and October 1, 2014, we paid common shareholder dividends of $0.25, $0.28, $0.28 and $0.28, respectively. On November 18, 2014, we declared a common shareholder dividend of $0.28 to be payable on January 2, 2015. On February 4, 2015, we declared a common shareholder dividend of $0.30 to be payable on April 1, 2015. During 2014, we repurchased 39.0 million common shares for $2.31 billion. As of December 31, 2014, there was $336 million remaining on our $2.5 billion common share repurchase program. On February 4, 2015, a new $3 billion common share repurchase program was authorized and is expected to be completed by July 2016. 99 Table of Contents CAPITAL RESOURCES AND LIQUIDITY Capital resources consist of shareholders' equity and debt, representing funds deployed or available to be deployed to support business operations or for general corporate purposes. The following table summarizes our capital resources as of December 31. ($ in millions) 2014 2013 2012 Preferred stock, common stock, retained income and other shareholders' equity items $ 21,743 $ 20,434 $ 19,405 Accumulated other comprehensive income 561 1,046 1,175 Total shareholders' equity 22,304 21,480 20,580 Debt 5,194 6,201 6,057 Total capital resources $ 27,498 $ 27,681 $ 26,637 Ratio of debt to shareholders' equity 23.3% 28.9% 29.4% Ratio of debt to capital resources 18.9% 22.4% 22.7% Shareholders' equity increased in 2014, primarily due to net income, the issuance of preferred stock and increased unrealized net capital gains on investments, partially offset by common share repurchases, an increase in the unrecognized pension and other postretirement benefit cost and dividends paid to shareholders. In 2014, we paid dividends of $477 million and $87 million related to our common and preferred shares, respectively. Shareholders' equity increased in 2013, primarily due to net income, decreased unrecognized pension and other postretirement benefit cost, and the issuance of preferred stock, partially offset by common share repurchases, decreased unrealized net capital gains on investments and dividends paid to shareholders. Preferred stock In March 2014, we issued 29,900 shares of 6.625% Noncumulative Perpetual Preferred Stock for gross proceeds of $747.5 million. In June 2014, we issued 10,000 shares of 6.25% Noncumulative Perpetual Preferred Stock for gross proceeds of $250 million. The proceeds of both issuances were used for general corporate purposes. Debt $300 million of 6.20% Senior Notes were paid at maturity in May 2014 and $650 million of 5.00% Senior Notes were paid at maturity in August 2014. These Notes were paid from available funds. We have no debt maturities until 2018. As of December 31, 2014 and 2013, there were no outstanding commercial paper borrowings. For further information on outstanding debt, see Note 12 of the consolidated financial statements. Capital resources comprise an increased mix of preferred stock and subordinated debt due to issuances in 2013 and 2014 and the completion of a tender offer to repurchase debt in 2013. As of December 31, 2014, capital resources includes $1.75 billion or 6.3% of preferred stock and $2.05 billion or 7.5% of subordinated debt, a total of 13.8% compared to 10.2% as of December 31, 2013 and 3.8% as of December 31, 2012. This increases our strategic flexibility by decreasing our debt to shareholders' equity ratio, which is one determinant of borrowing capacity. Common share repurchases As of December 31, 2014, our $2.5 billion common share repurchase program that commenced in February 2014 had $336 million remaining and is expected to be completed in first quarter 2015. On February 4, 2015, a new $3 billion common share repurchase program was authorized and is expected to be completed by July 2016. During 2014, we repurchased 39.0 million common shares for $2.31 billion. In addition to open market transactions, we entered into two accelerated share repurchase agreements each for the purchase of $750 million of our outstanding common stock. The first settled on July 29, 2014 and the second settled on December 18, 2014. Since 1995, we have acquired 601 million shares of our common stock at a cost of $25.38 billion, primarily as part of various stock repurchase programs. We have reissued 121 million common shares since 1995, primarily associated with our equity incentive plans, the 1999 acquisition of American Heritage Life Investment Corporation and the 2001 redemption of certain mandatorily redeemable preferred securities. Since 1995, total common shares outstanding has decreased by 480 million shares or 53.4%, primarily due to our repurchase programs. 100 Table of Contents Financial ratings and strength The following table summarizes our senior long-term debt, commercial paper and insurance financial strength ratings as of December 31, 2014. Moody's Standard & Poor's A.M. Best The Allstate Corporation (senior long-term debt) A3 A- a- The Allstate Corporation (commercial paper) P-2 A-2 AMB-1 Allstate Insurance Company (insurance financial strength) Aa3 AA- A+ Allstate Life Insurance Company (insurance financial strength) A1 A+ A+ Our ratings are influenced by many factors including our operating and financial performance, asset quality, liquidity, asset/liability management, overall portfolio mix, financial leverage (i.e., debt), exposure to risks such as catastrophes and the current level of operating leverage. Rating agencies continue to give favorable treatment in capitalization to preferred stock and subordinated debt, of which Allstate had $3.80 billion as of December 31, 2014 compared to $2.83 billion as of December 31, 2013 and $1.00 billion as of December 31, 2012. In February 2015, A.M. Best affirmed The Allstate Corporation's debt and commercial paper ratings of a- and AMB-1, respectively, and our insurance financial strength ratings of A+ for AIC and ALIC. The outlook for the ratings remained stable. In June 2014, S&P affirmed The Allstate Corporation's debt and commercial paper ratings of A- and A-2, respectively, and our insurance financial strength ratings of AA- for AIC and A+ for ALIC. The outlook for the ratings remained stable. In December 2014, Moody's affirmed ALIC's insurance financial strength rating of A1. The outlook for the rating remained stable. There have been no changes to our debt, commercial paper and insurance financial strength rating for AIC from Moody's since December 31, 2013. We have distinct and separately capitalized groups of subsidiaries licensed to sell property and casualty insurance in New Jersey and Florida that maintain separate group ratings. The ratings of these groups are influenced by the risks that relate specifically to each group. Many mortgage companies require property owners to have insurance from an insurance carrier with a secure financial strength rating from an accredited rating agency. In February 2014, A.M. Best affirmed the Allstate New Jersey Insurance Company, which writes auto and homeowners insurance, rating of A-. The outlook for this rating is stable. Allstate New Jersey Insurance Company also has a Financial Stability Rating of A" from Demotech, which was affirmed in November 2014. In August 2014, A.M. Best affirmed the Castle Key Insurance Company, which underwrites personal lines property insurance in Florida, rating of B-. The outlook for the rating is negative. Castle Key Insurance Company also has a Financial Stability Rating of A' from Demotech, which was affirmed in November 2014. Beginning in 2015, Allstate Financial will use a separately capitalized subsidiary, Allstate Assurance Company, to write life insurance business sold by Allstate exclusive agencies and exclusive financial specialists that is currently written by LBL. As Allstate Assurance Company launches its products throughout the nation, LBL will cease writing that type of new business for Allstate Financial. LBL life business sold through the Allstate agency channel and all LBL payout annuity business will continue to be reinsured and serviced by ALIC. Allstate Assurance Company has a financial strength rating of A from A.M. Best and A1 by Moody's. ALIC, AIC and The Allstate Corporation are party to an Amended and Restated Intercompany Liquidity Agreement ("Liquidity Agreement") which allows for short-term advances of funds to be made between parties for liquidity and other general corporate purposes. The Liquidity Agreement does not establish a commitment to advance funds on the part of any party. ALIC and AIC each serve as a lender and borrower and the Corporation serves only as a lender. AIC also has a capital support agreement with ALIC. Under the capital support agreement, AIC is committed to provide capital to ALIC to maintain an adequate capital level. The maximum amount of potential funding under each of these agreements is $1.00 billion. In addition to the Liquidity Agreement, the Corporation also has an intercompany loan agreement with certain of its subsidiaries, which include, but are not limited to, AIC and ALIC. The amount of intercompany loans available to the Corporation's subsidiaries is at the discretion of the Corporation. The maximum amount of loans the Corporation will have outstanding to all its eligible subsidiaries at any given point in time is limited to $1.00 billion. The Corporation may use commercial paper borrowings, bank lines of credit and securities lending to fund intercompany borrowings. Allstate's domestic property-liability and life insurance subsidiaries prepare their statutory-basis financial statements in conformity with accounting practices prescribed or permitted by the insurance department of the applicable state of domicile. Statutory surplus is a measure that is often used as a basis for determining dividend paying capacity, operating leverage and premium growth capacity, and it is also reviewed by rating agencies in determining 101 Table of Contents their ratings. As of December 31, 2014, total statutory surplus is $17.32 billion compared to $18.28 billion as of December 31, 2013. Property-Liability surplus was $14.41 billion as of December 31, 2014, compared to $15.26 billion as of December 31, 2013. Allstate Financial surplus was $2.91 billion as of December 31, 2014, compared to $3.02 billion as of December 31, 2013. Additionally, Allstate Financial has short-term investments and cash of $98 million at Allstate Financial Insurance Holdings Corporation intended to capitalize Allstate Assurance Company in early 2015. The ratio of net premiums written to statutory surplus is a common measure of operating leverage used in the property-casualty insurance industry and serves as an indicator of a company's premium growth capacity. Ratios in excess of 3 to 1 are typically considered outside the usual range by insurance regulators and rating agencies, and for homeowners and related coverages that have significant net exposure to natural catastrophes a ratio of 1 to 1 is considered appropriate by the Company. AIC's combined premium to surplus ratio was 1.7x as of December 31, 2014 compared to 1.5x as of December 31, 2013. The National Association of Insurance Commissioners ("NAIC") has also developed a set of financial relationships or tests known as the Insurance Regulatory Information System to assist state insurance regulators in monitoring the financial condition of insurance companies and identifying companies that require special attention or actions by state insurance regulators. The NAIC analyzes financial data provided by insurance companies using prescribed ratios, each with defined "usual ranges". Additional regulatory scrutiny may occur if a company's ratios fall outside the usual ranges for four or more of the ratios. Our domestic insurance companies have no significant departure from these ranges. Liquidity sources and uses Our potential sources of funds principally include activities shown in the following table. Property- Liability Allstate Financial Corporate and Other Receipt of insurance premiums X X Contractholder fund deposits X Reinsurance recoveries X X Receipts of principal, interest and dividends on investments X X X Sales of investments X X X Funds from securities lending, commercial paper and line of credit agreements X X X Intercompany loans X X X Capital contributions from parent X X Dividends or return of capital from subsidiaries X X Tax refunds/settlements X X X Funds from periodic issuance of additional securities X Receipt of intercompany settlements related to employee benefit plans X Our potential uses of funds principally include activities shown in the following table. Property- Liability Allstate Financial Corporate and Other Payment of claims and related expenses X Payment of contract benefits, maturities, surrenders and withdrawals X Reinsurance cessions and payments X X Operating costs and expenses X X X Purchase of investments X X X Repayment of securities lending, commercial paper and line of credit agreements X X X Payment or repayment of intercompany loans X X X Capital contributions to subsidiaries X X Dividends or return of capital to shareholders/parent company X X X Tax payments/settlements X X Common share repurchases X Debt service expenses and repayment X X X Payments related to employee and agent benefit plans X X X 102 Table of Contents We actively manage our financial position and liquidity levels in light of changing market, economic, and business conditions. Liquidity is managed at both the entity and enterprise level across the Company, and is assessed on both base and stressed level liquidity needs. We believe we have sufficient liquidity to meet these needs. Additionally, we have existing intercompany agreements in place that facilitate liquidity management across the Company to enhance flexibility. Parent company capital capacity At the parent holding company level, we have deployable assets totaling $3.42 billion as of December 31, 2014 comprising cash and investments that are generally saleable within one quarter. The substantial earnings capacity of the operating subsidiaries is the primary source of capital generation for the Corporation. In 2015, AIC will have the capacity to pay dividends currently estimated at $2.31 billion without prior regulatory approval. This provides funds for the parent company's fixed charges and other corporate purposes. In addition, we have access to $1.00 billion of funds from either commercial paper issuance or an unsecured revolving credit facility. In 2014, AIC paid dividends totaling $2.47 billion to its parent, Allstate Insurance Holdings, LLC ("AIH"), who then paid $2.46 billion of dividends to the Corporation. In December 2014, AIC repurchased 2,967 common shares held by its parent, AIH, for an aggregate cash price of $1.20 billion, pursuant to the Stock Repurchase Agreement between AIC and AIH entered into as of December 9, 2014. A subsequent dividend totaling $1.20 billion was paid by AIH to the Corporation in December 2014. In 2013, AIC paid dividends totaling $1.95 billion to its parent, AIH who then paid the same amount of dividends to the Corporation. In 2012, AIC paid dividends totaling $1.51 billion. These dividends comprised $1.06 billion in cash paid to AIH, of which $1.04 billion were paid by AIH to the Corporation, and the transfer of ownership (valued at $450 million) to AIH of three insurance companies that were formerly subsidiaries of AIC (Allstate Indemnity Company, Allstate Fire and Casualty Insurance Company and Allstate Property and Casualty Insurance Company). In 2014, 2013 and 2012, Allstate Financial paid $742 million, $774 million and $357 million, respectively, of returns of capital, repayments of surplus notes and dividends to AIC or the Corporation. There were no capital contributions paid by the Corporation to AIC in 2014, 2013 or 2012. There were no capital contributions by AIC to ALIC in 2014, 2013 or 2012. Dividends may not be paid or declared on our common stock and shares of common stock may not be repurchased unless the full dividends for the latest completed dividend period on our preferred stock have been declared and paid or provided for. We are prohibited from declaring or paying dividends on our preferred stock if we fail to meet specified capital adequacy, net income or shareholders' equity levels, except out of the net proceeds of common stock issued during the 90 days prior to the date of declaration. As of December 31, 2014, we satisfied all of the tests with no current restrictions on the payment of preferred stock dividends. The terms of our outstanding subordinated debentures also prohibit us from declaring or paying any dividends or distributions on our common or preferred stock or redeeming, purchasing, acquiring, or making liquidation payments on our common stock or preferred stock if we have elected to defer interest payments on the subordinated debentures, subject to certain limited exceptions. In 2014, we did not defer interest payments on the subordinated debentures. The Corporation has access to additional borrowing to support liquidity as follows: A commercial paper facility with a borrowing limit of $1.00 billion to cover short-term cash needs. As of December 31, 2014, there were no balances outstanding and therefore the remaining borrowing capacity was $1.00 billion; however, the outstanding balance can fluctuate daily. Our $1.00 billion unsecured revolving credit facility is available for short-term liquidity requirements and backs our commercial paper facility. In April 2014, we amended the maturity date of this facility to April 2019 and also amended our option to extend the expiration by one year at the first and second anniversary of the amendment, upon approval of existing or replacement lenders. The facility is fully subscribed among 12 lenders with the largest commitment being $115 million. The commitments of the lenders are several and no lender is responsible for any other lender's commitment if such lender fails to make a loan under the facility. This facility contains an increase provision that would allow up to an additional $500 million of borrowing. This facility has a financial covenant requiring that we not exceed a 37.5% debt to capitalization ratio as defined in the agreement. This ratio was 11.6% as of December 31, 2014. Although the right to borrow under the facility is not subject to a minimum rating requirement, the costs of maintaining the facility and borrowing under it are based on the ratings of our senior unsecured, unguaranteed long-term debt. There were no borrowings under the credit facility during 2014. The total amount outstanding at any point in time under the combination of the commercial paper program and the credit facility cannot exceed the amount that can be borrowed under the credit facility. A universal shelf registration statement was filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on April 30, 2012. We can use this shelf registration to issue an unspecified amount of debt securities, common stock (including 482 million shares of treasury stock as of December 31, 2014), preferred stock, depositary shares, warrants, stock purchase contracts, stock purchase units and securities of trust subsidiaries. The specific terms of any securities we issue under this registration statement will be provided in the applicable prospectus supplements. 103 Table of Contents Liquidity exposure Contractholder funds were $22.53 billion as of December 31, 2014. The following table summarizes contractholder funds by their contractual withdrawal provisions as of December 31, 2014. ($ in millions) Percent to total Not subject to discretionary withdrawal $ 3,653 16.2 % Subject to discretionary withdrawal with adjustments: Specified surrender charges (1) 6,244 27.7 Market value adjustments (2) 2,348 10.4 Subject to discretionary withdrawal without adjustments (3) 10,284 45.7 Total contractholder funds (4) $ 22,529 100.0 % (1) Includes $2.53 billion of liabilities with a contractual surrender charge of less than 5% of the account balance. (2) $1.67 billion of the contracts with market value adjusted surrenders have a 30-45 day period at the end of their initial and subsequent interest rate guarantee periods (which are typically 5, 7 or 10 years) during which there is no surrender charge or market value adjustment. (3) 86% of these contracts have a minimum interest crediting rate guarantee of 3% or higher. (4) Includes $844 million of contractholder funds on variable annuities reinsured to The Prudential Insurance Company of America, a subsidiary of Prudential Financial Inc., in 2006. Retail life and annuity products may be surrendered by customers for a variety of reasons. Reasons unique to individual customers include a current or unexpected need for cash or a change in life insurance coverage needs. Other key factors that may impact the likelihood of customer surrender include the level of the contract surrender charge, the length of time the contract has been in force, distribution channel, market interest rates, equity market conditions and potential tax implications. In addition, the propensity for retail life insurance policies to lapse is lower than it is for fixed annuities because of the need for the insured to be re-underwritten upon policy replacement. The surrender and partial withdrawal rate on deferred fixed annuities and interest-sensitive life insurance products, based on the beginning of year contractholder funds, was 9.9% and 10.2% in 2014 and 2013, respectively. Allstate Financial strives to promptly pay customers who request cash surrenders; however, statutory regulations generally provide up to six months in most states to fulfill surrender requests. Our asset-liability management practices enable us to manage the differences between the cash flows generated by our investment portfolio and the expected cash flow requirements of our life insurance and annuity product obligations. Certain remote events and circumstances could constrain our liquidity. Those events and circumstances include, for example, a catastrophe resulting in extraordinary losses, a downgrade in our senior long-term debt rating of A3, A- and a- (from Moody's, S&P and A.M. Best, respectively) to non-investment grade status of below Baa3/BBB-/bb, a downgrade in AIC's financial strength rating from Aa3, AA- and A+ (from Moody's, S&P and A.M. Best, respectively) to below Baa2/BBB/A-, or a downgrade in ALIC's financial strength ratings from A1, A+ and A+ (from Moody's, S&P and A.M. Best, respectively) to below A3/A-/A-. The rating agencies also consider the interdependence of our individually rated entities; therefore, a rating change in one entity could potentially affect the ratings of other related entities. The following table summarizes consolidated cash flow activities by segment. ($ in millions) Property-Liability (1) Allstate Financial (1) Corporate and Other (1) Consolidated 2014 2013 2012 2014 2013 2012 2014 2013 2012 2014 2013 2012 Net cash provided by (used in): Operating activities $ 2,765 $ 3,058 $ 2,023 $ 720 $ 1,068 $ 1,165 $ (249 ) $ 116 $ (134 ) $ 3,236 $ 4,242 $ 3,054 Investing activities 99 (1,858 ) (1,081 ) 2,315 3,833 2,497 (793 ) (395 ) 165 1,621 1,580 1,581 Financing activities (3 ) 38 (18 ) (2,274 ) (4,393 ) (3,363 ) (2,598 ) (1,598 ) (1,224 ) (4,875 ) (5,953 ) (4,605 ) Net (decrease) increase in consolidated cash $ (18 ) $ (131 ) $ 30 (1) Business unit cash flows reflect the elimination of intersegment dividends, contributions and borrowings. Property-Liability Lower cash provided by operating activities in 2014 compared to 2013 was primarily due to higher claim payments, the proceeds received in 2013 from the surrender of company owned life insurance and higher 104 Table of Contents income tax payments, partially offset by increased premiums and lower contributions to benefit plans. Higher cash provided by operating activities in 2013 compared to 2012 was primarily due to lower claim payments, increased premiums and the surrender of company owned life insurance, partially offset by higher expenses and tax payments. Cash provided by investing activities in 2014 compared to cash used in investing activities in 2013 was primarily the result of increased sales of securities and short-term investments, partially offset by increased purchases of securities. Increased sales and purchases of securities resulted from more active portfolio management. Higher cash used in investing activities in 2013 compared to 2012 was primarily related to 2013 operating cash flows being invested. Allstate Financial Lower cash provided by operating activities in 2014 compared to 2013 was primarily due to lower net investment income and higher income tax payments, partially offset by higher premiums on accident and health and traditional life insurance products. Lower cash provided by operating cash flows in 2013 compared to 2012 was primarily due to lower net investment income, partially offset by lower contract benefits paid and higher premiums. Lower cash was provided by investing activities in 2014 compared to 2013 as proceeds from the sale of LBL and higher sales of investments were more than offset by lower collections and higher purchases of investments. Lower collections resulted from funding a large institutional product maturity in 2013 from the portfolio. Higher cash provided by investing activities in 2013 compared to 2012 was due to higher investment collections and higher financing needs to fund institutional product maturities. Lower cash used in financing activities in 2014 compared to 2013 was primarily due to a $1.75 billion institutional product maturity in 2013 and lower contractholder benefits and withdrawals on fixed annuities and interest-sensitive life insurance, partially offset by lower deposits. Higher cash used in financing activities in 2013 compared to 2012 was primarily due to a $1.75 billion institutional product maturity. For quantification of the changes in contractholder funds, see the Allstate Financial Segment section of the MD&A. Corporate and Other Fluctuations in the Corporate and Other operating cash flows were primarily due to the timing of intercompany settlements. Investing activities primarily relate to investments in the parent company portfolio. Financing cash flows of the Corporate and Other segment reflect actions such as fluctuations in short-term debt, repayment of debt, proceeds from the issuance of debt and preferred stock, dividends to shareholders of The Allstate Corporation and common share repurchases; therefore, financing cash flows are affected when we increase or decrease the level of these activities. Contractual obligations and commitments Our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2014 and the payments due by period are shown in the following table. ($ in millions) Total Less than 1 year 1-3 years 4-5 years Over 5 years Liabilities for collateral (1) $ 782 $ 782 $ $ $ Contractholder funds (2) 37,270 2,983 5,159 4,376 24,752 Reserve for life-contingent contract benefits (2) 35,976 1,272 2,421 2,299 29,984 Long-term debt (3) 12,585 288 577 1,048 10,672 Capital lease obligations (4) 11 6 5 Operating leases (4) 606 131 192 114 169 Unconditional purchase obligations (4) 818 286 331 135 66 Defined benefit pension plans and other postretirement benefit plans (4)(5) 1,394 51 125 132 1,086 Reserve for property-liability insurance claims and claims expense (6) 22,923 9,653 7,457 2,727 3,086 Other liabilities and accrued expenses (7)(8) 4,176 4,090 49 17 20 Total contractual cash obligations $ 116,541 $ 19,542 $ 16,316 $ 10,848 $ 69,835 (1) Liabilities for collateral are typically fully secured with cash or short-term investments. We manage our short-term liquidity position to ensure the availability of a sufficient amount of liquid assets to extinguish short-term liabilities as they come due in the normal course of business, including utilizing potential sources of liquidity as disclosed previously. (2) Contractholder funds represent interest-bearing liabilities arising from the sale of products such as interest-sensitive life, fixed annuities, including immediate annuities without life contingencies and institutional products. The reserve for life-contingent contract benefits relates primarily to traditional life insurance, immediate annuities with life contingencies and voluntary accident and health insurance. These amounts reflect the present value of estimated cash payments to be made to contractholders and policyholders. Certain of these contracts, such as immediate 105 Table of Contents annuities without life contingencies and institutional products, involve payment obligations where the amount and timing of the payment is essentially fixed and determinable. These amounts relate to (i) policies or contracts where we are currently making payments and will continue to do so and (ii) contracts where the timing of a portion or all of the payments has been determined by the contract. Other contracts, such as interest-sensitive life, fixed deferred annuities, traditional life insurance, immediate annuities with life contingencies and voluntary accident and health insurance, involve payment obligations where a portion or all of the amount and timing of future payments is uncertain. For these contracts, we are not currently making payments and will not make payments until (i) the occurrence of an insurable event such as death or illness or (ii) the occurrence of a payment triggering event such as the surrender or partial withdrawal on a policy or deposit contract, which is outside of our control. We have estimated the timing of payments related to these contracts based on historical experience and our expectation of future payment patterns. Uncertainties relating to these liabilities include mortality, morbidity, expenses, customer lapse and withdrawal activity, estimated additional deposits for interest-sensitive life contracts, and renewal premium for life policies, which may significantly impact both the timing and amount of future payments. Such cash outflows reflect adjustments for the estimated timing of mortality, retirement, and other appropriate factors, but are undiscounted with respect to interest. As a result, the sum of the cash outflows shown for all years in the table exceeds the corresponding liabilities of $22.53 billion for contractholder funds and $12.38 billion for reserve for life-contingent contract benefits as included in the Consolidated Statements of Financial Position as of December 31, 2014. The liability amount in the Consolidated Statements of Financial Position reflects the discounting for interest as well as adjustments for the timing of other factors as described above. (3) Amount differs from the balance presented on the Consolidated Statements of Financial Position as of December 31, 2014 because the long-term debt amount above includes interest. (4) Our payment obligations relating to capital lease obligations, operating leases, unconditional purchase obligations and pension and other postretirement benefits ("OPEB") contributions are managed within the structure of our intermediate to long-term liquidity management program. (5) The pension plans' obligations in the next 12 months represent our planned contributions where the benefit obligation exceeds the assets, and the remaining years' contributions are projected based on the average remaining service period using the current underfunded status of the plans. The OPEB plans' obligations are estimated based on the expected benefits to be paid. These liabilities are discounted with respect to interest, and as a result the sum of the cash outflows shown for all years in the table exceeds the corresponding liability amount of $722 million included in other liabilities and accrued expenses on the Consolidated Statements of Financial Position. (6) Reserve for property-liability insurance claims and claims expense is an estimate of amounts necessary to settle all outstanding claims, including claims that have been IBNR as of the balance sheet date. We have estimated the timing of these payments based on our historical experience and our expectation of future payment patterns. However, the timing of these payments may vary significantly from the amounts shown above, especially for IBNR claims. The ultimate cost of losses may vary materially from recorded amounts which are our best estimates. The reserve for property-liability insurance claims and claims expense includes loss reserves related to asbestos and environmental claims as of December 31, 2014, of $1.49 billion and $267 million, respectively. (7) Other liabilities primarily include accrued expenses and certain benefit obligations and claim payments and other checks outstanding. Certain of these long-term liabilities are discounted with respect to interest, as a result the sum of the cash outflows shown for all years in the table exceeds the corresponding liability amount of $4.17 billion. (8) Balance sheet liabilities not included in the table above include unearned and advance premiums of $12.45 billion and gross deferred tax liabilities of $2.49 billion. These items were excluded as they do not meet the definition of a contractual liability as we are not contractually obligated to pay these amounts to third parties. Rather, they represent an accounting mechanism that allows us to present our financial statements on an accrual basis. In addition, other liabilities of $271 million were not included in the table above because they did not represent a contractual obligation or the amount and timing of their eventual payment was sufficiently uncertain. Our contractual commitments as of December 31, 2014 and the periods in which the commitments expire are shown in the following table. ($ in millions) Total Less than 1 year 1-3 years 4-5 years Over 5 years Other commitments conditional $ 193 $ 98 $ $ 48 $ 47 Other commitments unconditional 2,429 80 142 164 2,043 Total commitments $ 2,622 $ 178 $ 142 $ 212 $ 2,090 Contractual commitments represent investment commitments such as private placements, limited partnership interests and other loans. Limited partnership interests are typically funded over the commitment period which is shorter than the contractual expiration date of the partnership and as a result, the actual timing of the funding may vary. We have agreements in place for services we conduct, generally at cost, between subsidiaries relating to insurance, reinsurance, loans and capitalization. All material intercompany transactions have appropriately been eliminated in consolidation. Intercompany transactions among insurance subsidiaries and affiliates have been approved by the appropriate departments of insurance as required. For a more detailed discussion of our off-balance sheet arrangements, see Note 7 of the consolidated financial statements. ENTERPRISE RISK AND RETURN MANAGEMENT In addition to the normal risks of business, Allstate is subject to significant risks as an insurer and a provider of other products and financial services. These risks are discussed in more detail in the Risk Factors section of this document. Allstate manages enterprise risk under an integrated Enterprise Risk and Return Management ("ERRM") framework 106 Table of Contents with risk-return principles, governance, modeling and analytics, and importantly, transparent management dialogue. This framework provides a comprehensive view of risks and opportunities and is used by senior leaders and business managers to provide risk and return insight and drive strategic and business decisions. Allstate's risk management strategies adapt to changes in business and market environments and seek to optimize returns. Allstate continually validates and improves its ERRM practices by benchmarking and securing external perspectives for our processes. Our qualitative risk-return principles define how we operate and guide decision-making around risk and return. These principles state that, first and foremost, our priority is to protect solvency, comply with laws and act with integrity. Building upon this foundation, we strive to build strategic value and optimize risks and returns. ERRM governance includes an executive management committee structure, Board oversight and chief risk officers ("CROs"). The Enterprise Risk & Return Council ("ERRC") is Allstate's senior risk management committee that directs ERRM by establishing risk-return targets, determining economic capital levels and directing integrated strategies and actions from an enterprise perspective. The ERRC consists of Allstate's chief executive officer, president, business unit presidents, enterprise and business unit chief risk officers and chief financial officers, general counsel and treasurer. Allstate's Board of Directors, Risk and Return Committee and Audit Committee provide ERRM oversight by reviewing enterprise principles, guidelines and limits for Allstate's significant risks and by monitoring strategies and actions management has taken to control these risks. Allstate's Board of Directors has overall responsibility for oversight of management's design and implementation of ERRM. Risk and Return Committee oversight focuses on the risk and return position of the company and Audit Committee oversight focuses on risk assessment and risk management policies, including the effectiveness of management's control environment. CROs are appointed for the enterprise and for Allstate Protection, Allstate Financial, Allstate Investments, and Allstate's technology organization. Collectively, the CROs create an integrated approach to risk and return management to ensure risk management practices and strategies are aligned with Allstate's overall enterprise objectives. The shared ERRM framework establishes a basis for transparency and dialogue across the organization and for continuous learning by embedding the risk and return management culture of identifying, measuring, managing, monitoring and reporting risks. Our ERRM governance is supported with an analytic framework to manage significant insurance, investment, financial, strategic, and operational risk exposures and optimize returns on risk-adjusted capital. Management and the ERRC use enterprise stochastic modeling, risk expertise and judgment to determine an appropriate level of targeted enterprise economic capital to hold considering a broad range of risk objectives and external constraints. These include limiting risks of financial stress, insolvency, likelihood of capital stress and volatility, maintaining stakeholder value and financial strength ratings and satisfying regulatory and rating agency risk-based capital requirements. We generally assess solvency on a statutory accounting basis, but also consider GAAP volatility. Enterprise economic capital approximates a combination of statutory surplus and deployable invested assets at the parent holding company level. Using our governance and analytic framework, Allstate designs business and enterprise strategies that seek to optimize returns on risk-adjusted capital. Examples include reducing exposure to rising interest rates and spread-based products through the divestiture of LBL; executing customer-focused growth strategies; improving profitability; increasing investments in which we have ownership interests and a greater proportion of return is derived from idiosyncratic operating or market performance, including limited partnerships, equities and real estate; and growing homeowners insurance in areas previously restricted where we believe we can earn an appropriate return for the risk. REGULATION AND LEGAL PROCEEDINGS We are subject to extensive regulation and we are involved in various legal and regulatory actions, all of which have an effect on specific aspects of our business. For a detailed discussion of the legal and regulatory actions in which we are involved, see Note 14 of the consolidated financial statements. PENDING ACCOUNTING STANDARDS There are several pending accounting standards that we have not implemented because the implementation date has not yet occurred. For a discussion of these pending standards, see Note 2 of the consolidated financial statements. The effect of implementing certain accounting standards on our financial results and financial condition is often based in part on market conditions at the time of implementation of the standard and other factors we are unable to determine prior to implementation. For this reason, we are sometimes unable to estimate the effect of certain pending accounting standards until the relevant authoritative body finalizes these standards or until we implement them. 107 Table of Contents 
