CIK: 900075
Company Name: COPART INC
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2006-10-31


Item 7. Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations SPECIAL NOTE REGARDING FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS This report, including the information incorporated by reference herein, contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933 and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. In some cases, you can identify forward-looking statements by terms such as may, will, should, expect, plan, intend, forecast, anticipate, believe, estimate, predict, potential, continue or the negative of these terms or other comparable terminology. The forward-looking statements contained in this report involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties and situations that may cause our or our industry actual results, level of activity, performance or achievements to be materially different from any future results, levels of activity, performance or achievements expressed or implied by these statements. These factors include those listed in Item 1A. Business under the caption entitled Risk Factors beginning on page 15 of this report and those discussed elsewhere in this report. We encourage investors to review these factors carefully. Although we believe that, based on information currently available to Copart and its management, the expectations reflected in the forward-looking statements are reasonable, we cannot guarantee future results, levels of activity, performance or achievements. You should not place undue reliance on these forward-looking statements. Overview We provide vehicle suppliers, primarily insurance companies, with a full range of services to process and sell salvage vehicles over the Internet through our Virtual Bidding Second Generation ( VB 2 ) Internet auction-style sales technology. We sell principally to licensed vehicle dismantlers, rebuilders, repair licensees, used vehicle dealers and exporters. Salvage vehicles are either damaged vehicles deemed a total loss for insurance or business purposes or are recovered stolen vehicles for which an insurance settlement with the vehicle owner has already been made. We offer vehicle suppliers a full range of services that expedite each stage of the salvage vehicle sales process and minimize administrative and processing costs. We generate revenues primarily from fees paid by vehicle suppliers and vehicle buyers as well as related fees for services such as towing and storage. At the election of the vehicle supplier, we sell vehicles pursuant to our Percentage Incentive Program ( PIP ) consignment basis or on a fixed fee consignment basis. Under the PIP program, we agree to sell all of the salvage vehicles of a vehicle supplier in a specified market usually for a predetermined percentage of the vehicle sales price. Under our fixed fee consignment program, we sell vehicles for a fixed consignment fee. Although sometimes included in the consignment fee, we may also charge additional fees for the cost of transporting the vehicle to our facility, storage of the vehicle, and other incidental costs. Using either consignment method, only the fees associated with vehicle processing are recorded in revenue, not the actual sales price ( gross proceeds ). Our revenues consist of salvage fees charged to vehicle suppliers and vehicle buyers, transportation revenue and purchased vehicle revenues. Salvage fees from vehicle suppliers include sales fees under PIP agreements and fixed fee programs where we charge for title processing, special preparation, storage and selling. Salvage fees also include fees charged to vehicle buyers for purchasing vehicles, storage and annual registration. Transportation revenue includes charges to suppliers for towing vehicles under certain contracts. Transportation revenue also includes towing charges assessed to buyers for delivering vehicles. Purchased vehicle revenues are comprised of the price that buyers paid for vehicles that we own. Costs attributable to yard operations consist primarily of operating personnel (which includes yard management, clerical and yard employees), rent, contract vehicle towing, insurance, fuel, equipment maintenance and repair, and costs of vehicles we sold 28 under purchase contracts. Costs associated with general and administrative expenses consist primarily of executive management, accounting, data processing, sales personnel, human resources, professional fees, research and development and marketing expenses. During fiscal 2004, we converted all of our salvage vehicle auction facilities to an Internet-based auction-style model using our VB 2 Internet sales technology. This process employs a two-step bidding process. The first step, called the preliminary bid, allows buyers to submit bids up to one hour before a real time virtual action begins. The second step allows buyers to bid against each other, and the high bidder from the preliminary bidding process, in a real-time process over the Internet. During the second quarter of fiscal 2006, we adopted a formal plan to discontinue the operations of our public auction business Motors Auction Group ( MAG ) and dispose of or convert the related assets. The MAG yards converted into salvage facilities will continue to be included in the results of continuing operations on the income statements. The period-to-period comparability of our operating results and financial condition is substantially affected by business acquisitions, new openings, weather and product introductions during such periods. Acquisitions and New Operations We have experienced significant growth as we have acquired twelve vehicle storage facilities and established thirteen new facilities since the beginning of fiscal 2004. All of these acquisitions have been accounted for using the purchase method of accounting. As part of our overall expansion strategy of offering integrated services to vehicle suppliers, we anticipate acquiring and developing facilities in new regions, as well as the regions currently served by our facilities. As part of this strategy, in fiscal 2006 we acquired new facilities in or near Greenwood, Nebraska; Grand Island, Nebraska; York Haven, Pennsylvania; Chambersburg, Pennsylvania; Altoona, Pennsylvania; Fruitland, Maryland; Billings, Montana and opened new facilities in or near Honolulu, Hawaii; Lansing, Michigan; Dover, Florida and Jacksonville, Florida. In fiscal 2005 we acquired new facilities in or near Lexington, Kentucky and Columbia, Missouri and opened new facilities in Strongsville, Ohio; Ocala, Florida; Knoxville, Tennessee; Loganville, Georgia; Spokane, Washington; Tallahassee, Florida and Hialeah, Florida. In fiscal 2004 we acquired new facilities in or near Eugene, Oregon; Cleveland, Ohio and Anchorage, Alaska and opened new facilities in or near Toronto, Canada and Helena, Montana. We believe that these acquisitions and openings strengthen our coverage as we have 122 facilities located in North America and are able to provide national coverage for our suppliers. We seek to increase revenues and profitability by, among other things, (i) acquiring and developing new salvage vehicle storage facilities in key markets, (ii) pursuing national and regional vehicle supply agreements, (iii) expanding our service offerings to suppliers and buyers, and (iv) expanding the application of VB 2 into new markets. In addition, we implement our pricing structure and merchandising procedures and attempt to effect cost efficiencies at each of our acquired facilities by implementing our operational procedures, integrating our management information systems and redeploying personnel, when necessary. Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates The preparation of consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and the related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates, including those related to vehicle pooling costs, allowance for doubtful accounts, goodwill, income taxes, long-lived assets and self insured liabilities. We base our estimates on historical experience and on 29 various other assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. Management has discussed the selection of critical accounting policies and estimates with the Audit Committee of the Board of Directors and the Audit Committee has reviewed our disclosure relating to critical accounting policies and estimates in this annual report on Form 10-K. Our significant accounting policies are described in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements for fiscal 2006. The following is a summary of the more significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements: Revenue Recognition We provide a portfolio of services to our sellers and buyers that facilitate the sale and delivery of a vehicle from seller to buyer. These services include the ability to use our Internet sales technology and vehicle delivery, loading, title processing, preparation and storage. We evaluate multiple-element arrangements relative to our buyer and seller agreements in accordance with Emerging Issues Task Force Issue No. 00-21, Revenue Arrangements with Multiple Deliverables ( EITF 00-21 ), which addresses accounting for multiple-element arrangements, and Staff Accounting Bulletin No. 104, Revenue Recognition ( SAB104 ), which addresses revenue recognition for units of accounting. The services we provide to the seller of a vehicle involve disposing of a vehicle on the seller behalf and under most of our current contracts, collecting the proceeds from the buyer. We are not entitled to any such seller fees until we have collected the sales proceeds from the buyer for the seller and, accordingly, we recognize revenue for seller services after service delivery and cash collection. In certain cases, seller fees are not contingent upon collection of the seller proceeds from the buyer. However, we determined that we are not able to separate the services into separate units of accounting because we do not have fair value for undelivered items. As a result, we do not recognize seller fees until the final seller service has been delivered, which generally occurs upon collection of the sales proceeds from the buyer for the seller. We provide a number of services to the buyer of the vehicle, charging a separate fee for each service. Each of these services has been assessed under the criteria of EITF 00-21 to determine whether we have met the requirements to separate them into units of accounting within a multi-element arrangement. We have concluded that the auction service and the post-auction services are separate units of accounting. The fees for the auction service are recognized upon completion of the auction, and the fees for the post-auction services are recognized upon successful completion of those services using the residual method. We also charge buyers an annual registration fee for the right to participate in our vehicle sales program, which is recognized ratably over the term of the arrangement, and relist and late-payment fees, which are recognized upon receipt of payment by the buyer. No provision for returns has been established, as all sales are final with no right of return, although we provide for bad debt expense in the case of non-performance by our buyers and sellers. Vehicle Pooling Costs We defer, in vehicle pooling costs, certain yard operation expenses associated with vehicles consigned to and received by us but not sold as of the balance sheet date. We quantify the deferred costs using a calculation that includes the number of vehicles at our facilities at the beginning and end of the period, the number of vehicles sold during the period and an allocation of certain yard operation expenses of the period. The primary expenses allocated and deferred are certain facility costs, labor, 30 transportation, and vehicle processing. If our allocation factors change, then yard operation expenses could increase or decrease correspondingly in the future. These costs are expensed as vehicles are sold in the subsequent periods on an average cost basis. We apply the provisions of Statement of Financial Accounting Standards ( SFAS ), No. 151, Inventory Costs ( SFAS 151 ) to our vehicle pooling costs. SFAS 151 requires that items such as idle facility expense, excessive spoilage, double freight and rehandling costs be recognized as current-period charges regardless of whether they meet the criteria of so abnormal as provided in Accounting Research Bulletin No. 43, Chapter 4, Inventory Pricing. In addition, SFAS 151 requires that the allocation of fixed production overheads to the costs of conversion be based on the normal capacity of production facilities. The adoption of SFAS 151 increased yard expenses during fiscal 2006, as the Company incurred additional subhauling, payroll, equipment and facilities costs associated with hurricanes Katrina and Rita. Allowance for Doubtful Accounts We maintain an allowance for doubtful accounts in order to provide for estimated losses resulting from disputed amounts billed to suppliers or buyers and the inability of our suppliers or buyers to make required payments. If billing disputes exceed expectations and/or if the financial condition of our suppliers or buyers were to deteriorate, additional allowances may be required. Valuation of Goodwill and Intangibles We evaluate the impairment of goodwill of our salvage sales operating segment, annually (or on an interim basis if certain indicators are present) by comparing the fair value of the operating segment to its carrying value. Future adverse changes in market conditions or poor operating results of the operating segment could result in an inability to recover the carrying value of the investment, thereby requiring impairment charges in the future. Income Taxes and Deferred Tax Assets We are also required to estimate income tax provisions and amounts ultimately payable or recoverable in numerous jurisdictions. Such estimates involve significant interpretations of regulations and are inherently very complex. Resolution of income tax treatments in individual jurisdictions may not be known for many years after completion of any fiscal year. We also evaluate the realizability of our deferred tax assets on an ongoing basis. Generally accepted accounting principles require the assessment of the Company performance and other relevant factors when determining the need for a valuation allowance with respect to these deferred tax assets. The Company ability to realize deferred tax assets is dependent on its ability to generate future taxable income. Accordingly, the Company has established a valuation allowance when, in certain taxable jurisdictions, the utilization of the tax asset is uncertain. Additional timing differences, future earning trends and/or tax strategies may occur which could warrant a need for establishing an additional valuation allowance or a reserve. Long-lived Asset Valuation We evaluate long-lived assets and certain identifiable intangibles for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. Recoverability of assets is measured by a comparison of the carrying amount of an asset to estimated undiscounted future cash flows expected to be generated by the asset. If the estimated undiscounted cash flows change in the future, we may be required to reduce the carrying amount of an asset. 31 Stock-Based Compensation We account for our stock-based awards to employees and non-employees using the fair value method as required by SFAS No. 123(R), share-based payment. SFAS No. 123(R) requires that the compensation cost related to share-based payment transactions, measured based on the fair value of the equity or liability instruments issued, be recognized in the financial statements. Determining the fair value of options using the Black-Scholes model, or other currently accepted option valuation models, requires highly subjective assumptions, including future stock price volatility and expected time until exercise, which greatly affect the calculated fair value on the grant date. If actual results are not consistent with the Company assumptions and judgments used in estimating the key assumptions, the Company may be required to record additional compensation or income tax expense, which could have a material impact on financial position and results of operations. Retained Insurance Liabilities We are partially self-insured for certain losses related to medical, general liability, workers compensation and auto liability. Our liability represents an estimate of the ultimate cost of claims incurred as of the balance sheet date. The estimated liability is not discounted and is established based upon analysis of historical data and actuarial estimates. While we believe these estimates are reasonable based on the information currently available, if actual trends, including the severity of claims and medical cost inflation, differ from our estimates, our financial position, results of operations or cash flows could be impacted. Results of Operations The following table sets forth for the periods indicated below, certain information derived from our consolidated statements of income expressed as a percentage of revenues. There can be no assurance that any trend in operating results will continue in the future. Fiscal Years Ended July 31, 2006 2005 2004 Revenues 100.0 % 100.0 % 100.0 % Operating expenses: Yard operations 56.4 54.9 58.2 General and administrative 11.2 10.2 10.0 Total operating expenses 67.6 65.1 68.2 Operating income 32.4 34.9 31.8 Other income, net 0.6 1.8 1.4 Income from continuing operations before income taxes 33.0 36.7 33.2 Income taxes 11.7 14.0 13.0 Income from continuing operations 21.3 22.7 20.2 Income (loss) from discontinued operations, net of income tax effects (3.0 ) 0.1 0.1 Net income 18.3 % 22.8 % 20.3 % Fiscal 2006 Compared to Fiscal 2005 Revenues from continuing operations were approximately $528.6 million during fiscal 2006, an increase of approximately $80.8 million, or 18.1%, over fiscal 2005. The increase was due to increased vehicle sales volume and increased revenue per transaction driven by increased auction proceeds per vehicle. The increase in unit volume was driven by the additional salvage vehicles associated with hurricanes Katrina and Rita, growth in vehicles processed at existing yards and vehicles processed from new yards opened or acquired in fiscal 2006. The increase in gross proceeds per vehicle (the gross sales price of the vehicle at auction) yields higher revenue per car as buyer fees and certain seller fees, including those sold under the PIP program, are based on the gross proceeds per vehicle and generally increase as gross proceeds per vehicle grow. We believe the increase in recent 32 periods in proceeds per vehicle has been largely attributable to VB 2 , which allows more buyers to participate in the auctions. Given that VB 2 has now been implemented across all of our yards for approximately two years, we do not expect to continue to experience the same incremental favorable impact from VB 2 that we have experienced in prior periods. Existing facilities contributed approximately $71.3 million of the revenue growth and new facilities in or near Honolulu, Hawaii; Greenwood, Nebraska; Grand Island, Nebraska; York Haven, Pennsylvania; Chambersburg, Pennsylvania; Altoona, Pennsylvania; Fruitland, Maryland; Lansing, Michigan and Billings, Montana contributed approximately $9.5 million of new revenue growth. Yard operation expenses from continuing operations were approximately $298.0 million during fiscal 2006, an increase of approximately $52.4 million, or 21.3%, over fiscal 2005. Included in yard expenses is depreciation expense of $26.9 million, an increase of $0.3 million over fiscal 2005. Yard operation expenses increased to 56.4% of revenues during fiscal 2006, as compared to 54.9% of revenues during fiscal 2005. The increases in yard expenses were primarily attributable to the cost of handling increased volume, a general increase in subhauling costs and the incremental abnormal costs incurred as a result of hurricanes Katrina and Rita. These additional inventory-type costs were approximately $14.1 million in fiscal 2006 and were charged to yard operations in accordance with SFAS 151. These costs include the additional subhauling, payroll, equipment and facilities expenses directly related to the operating conditions created by the hurricanes. These costs do not include normal expenses associated with the increased unit volume created by the hurricanes, which are deferred until the sale of the units and are recognized as vehicle pooling costs on the balance sheet. At the end of the year, approximately 28% of the incremental salvage vehicles received as a result of the hurricanes remained unsold and in inventory. We expect the majority of these vehicles to be disposed primarily in the next two quarters. If the Gulf Coast region were to experience additional hurricanes or adverse weather conditions during the recently commenced hurricane season, we may be unable to sell the existing vehicles within the currently anticipated time frame, which may have an adverse effect on our operating results. The processing of the hurricane vehicles has had and may continue to have a negative impact on gross and operating margin percentages. General and administrative expenses from continuing operations were approximately $59.0 million during fiscal 2006, an increase of approximately $13.4 million, or 29.3%, over fiscal 2005. The increase was primarily due to increases in telecommunication costs, information technology payroll costs, costs relating to Sarbanes-Oxley compliance, SFAS 123(R) stock compensation costs and outside legal expense associated with a patent litigation matter that was settled during fiscal 2006 and other pending litigation and general corporate expansion. General and administrative expenses increased to 11.2% of revenues during fiscal 2006, as compared to 10.2% of revenues during fiscal 2005. The increase in general and administrative expenses as a percentage of total revenues reflects in part changes in the nature of our business. In particular, the introduction of VB 2 resulted in a reduction in certain yard operation expenses relating to conducting live auctions but increased our general and administrative expenses as we continue to make technology infrastructure investments and hire additional personnel to enhance and maintain VB 2 and other products for use in our auctions. Total other income was approximately $3.0 million during fiscal 2006, a decrease of approximately $5.2 million, from fiscal 2005. The decrease was due primarily to a $6.8 million loss recognized from an equity investment in an unconsolidated privately-held entity. We expect to recognize additional losses on this investment as the entity incurs development stage operating losses. Our aggregate losses are limited to the amount of our investment. This loss was offset by an increase in interest income of approximately $3.3 million due to higher interest rates and a higher average cash and investments balance. Other income, which consists primarily of rental income and gain on the sales of non-fleet assets, decreased approximately $1.7 million, resulting from losses on disposals of fixed assets. Our effective combined federal, state and local income tax rates for fiscal 2006 and 2005 was approximately 35.4% and 38.1%, respectively. The decrease in effective tax rate is primarily the result of recording a $1.8 million out-of-period reduction to 33 deferred tax liabilities and income tax expense originating primarily in 2001 and adjustments to our state tax reserves based on the favorable outcome of an audit. During the second quarter of fiscal 2006 we adopted a formal plan to discontinue the operations of our public auction business Motors Auction Group ( MAG ) and dispose of or convert the related assets. The MAG yards to be converted into salvage facilities will continue to be included in the results of continuing operations on the income statements. Under Statement of Financial Accounting Standard (SFAS) No 142, Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets, goodwill is subject to at least an annual assessment for impairment by applying a fair value-based test or on an interim basis if certain indicators are present. The discontinuation of an operating segment is one of those indicators. Accordingly, goodwill was tested for impairment in accordance with the provisions of SFAS No. 142 as of the second quarter of 2006. We used a combination of valuation techniques, which included consideration of market-based approaches and an income approach, in determining the fair value of our applicable reporting unit in the interim impairment test of goodwill. The impairment test indicated that the carrying value of the MAG goodwill exceeded its implied fair value. The corresponding write-down of goodwill of $21.8 million to its fair value was reported as a component of discontinued operations in the accompanying consolidated statements of income. We also determined that the value of the remaining MAG covenants not to compete were impaired and recorded an impairment expense in the amount of $0.5 million. This write-down of covenants not to compete is also reported as a component of discontinued operations in the accompanying consolidated statements of income. During the second quarter of fiscal 2006, we sold the business and related assets of one of the MAG locations for approximately $0.1 million. During the third quarter of fiscal 2006, we sold the business and related assets including the real estate of one of the MAG locations. We received a $12 million promissory note from the buyer as purchase consideration. The promissory note bears interest at 7% per annum. Interest only payments on the note are due monthly until maturity on May 28, 2011, at which time the balance of the note is due in full. The note receivable is collateralized by the real estate and is personally guaranteed by the buyer. The consideration was allocated to the real estate, based on an appraisal, and to the business in proportion to their estimated fair values. The portion of the consideration allocated to the real estate sale totaled $7.1 million. We deferred a gain on the sale of the real estate of approximately $2.5 million that will be recognized upon payment of the principal balance of the note receivable. The remaining consideration of $4.9 million is allocated to the sale of the business. We recognized a gain on the sale of the business of approximately $3.0 million, which is included in the results of the discontinued operations. During the fourth quarter of fiscal 2006, we sold the business and related assets excluding the real estate of another MAG location. We received a $1.2 million promissory note and $0.2 million in cash from the buyer as purchase consideration. We recognized a gain on the sale of the business of approximately $1.3 million which is included in the results of discontinued operations. As of July 31, 2006, no MAG locations remain. Three of the original six MAG locations were sold and three are being converted into salvage facilities. Due to the foregoing factors, we realized net income of approximately $96.9 million for fiscal 2006, compared to net income of approximately $102.1 million for fiscal 2005. Fiscal 2005 Compared to Fiscal 2004 Revenues from continuing operations were approximately $447.7 million during fiscal 2005, an increase of approximately $56.7 million, or 14.5%, over fiscal 2004. The increase was due primarily to increased vehicle sales volume, on which fees are generated and higher fees resulting from increased sales proceeds per vehicle. The increase in gross proceeds per vehicle (the gross sales price of the vehicle) yields higher revenue per car as buyer fees and certain fees, including those sold under the PIP 34 program, are based on the gross proceeds per vehicle and generally increase as gross proceeds per vehicle grow. We believe the increase in proceeds per vehicle was the result of the introduction of Virtual Bidding Second Generation VB 2 as more buyers are able to participate in the sales. Existing facilities contributed approximately $52.1 million of the revenue growth and new facilities in or near Strongsville, Ohio; Ocala, Florida; Knoxville, Tennessee; Lexington, Kentucky; Loganville, Georgia; Spokane, Washington; Tallahassee, Florida; Hialeah, Florida and Columbia, Missouri contributed approximately $4.6 million of new revenue. Historically, we recorded revenue for most seller and buyer fees upon completion of a sale. During the fourth quarter of fiscal 2005, we recorded a correction of an error to account for our services in accordance with the policy above; the effect of which was to reduce revenue from continuing operations, net income and diluted earnings per share by $4.4 million, $1.5 million and $0.01, respectively for the fourth quarter and fiscal year ended July 31, 2005. Yard operation expenses from continuing operations were approximately $245.7 million during fiscal 2005, an increase of approximately $18.0 million, or 7.9%, over fiscal 2004. Included in yard operation expenses is depreciation expense of $26.6 million, an increase of $0.7 million over fiscal 2004. The increase in yard operation expenses was due principally to the cost of handling increased volume at existing operations and the costs of new facilities. Approximately $4.4 million of the increase was the result of the acquisition and opening of new facilities. Yard operation expenses from existing facilities grew by approximately $13.1 million, or 6%. Yard operation expenses decreased to 55% of revenues during fiscal 2005, as compared to 58% of revenues during fiscal 2004, due in part to the fixed cost nature of our business and the reduction or elimination of certain yard costs resulting from the implementation of VB 2 . Yard operation expenses in fiscal 2004 included a net adjustment to insurance reserves and sales taxes that decreased this expense by $3.6 million. General and administrative expenses from continuing operations were approximately $45.6 million during fiscal 2005, an increase of approximately $6.7 million, or 17.2%, over fiscal 2004. The increase was primarily due to increases in software development cost, technology hardware leasing cost, and IT payroll costs, all directly associated with the development and deployment of VB 2 . In addition, the Company saw increases in the cost of professional services, impacted by Sarbanes-Oxley compliance and increased payroll and benefit costs associated with expanded support headcount. General and administrative expenses remained relatively flat as a percentage of revenues during fiscal 2005 and 2004. Total other income was approximately $8.2 million during fiscal 2005, an increase of approximately $2.7 million, or 49.4%, from fiscal 2004. The increase was due primarily to an increase in interest income of approximately $3.4 million due to higher interest rates and a higher cash balance. Gain on the sale of fleet equipment decreased approximately $1.4 million as we sold the majority of the fleet in fiscal 2004 in connection with our decision to subcontract towing services. Other income, which consists primarily of rental income, increased approximately $0.7 million as we continued the rental of primarily unutilized areas within our facilities. Our effective combined federal, state and local income tax rate from continuing operations for fiscal 2005 and fiscal 2004 was approximately 38.1% and 39.2%, respectively . The decrease in rate is attributable to an overall lower state tax rate, as we made certain revisions to our transfer pricing methodology and the beneficial impact of the growth in interest income which is predominantly federal tax exempt. Due to the foregoing factors, we realized net income of approximately $102.1 million for fiscal 2005, compared to net income of approximately $79.2 million for fiscal 2004. 35 Liquidity and Capital Resources Historically, we have financed our growth through cash generated from operations, public offerings of common stock, the equity issued in conjunction with certain acquisitions and debt financing. Cash and cash equivalents, combined with short-term investments increased by approximately $22.8 million from July 31, 2005 to July 31, 2006, as a result of cash generated from continuing operations which was reduced by cash used for acquisitions, purchases of property and equipment, an equity investment in an unconsolidated privately-held entity and repurchases of common stock. During the winter months, most of our facilities process 10% to 30% more vehicles than at other times of the year. This increased seasonal volume requires the increased use of our cash to pay out advances and handling costs of the additional business. Our primary source of cash generated by operations is from the collection of sellers fees, buyers fees and reimbursable advances from the proceeds of auctioned salvage vehicles. As of July 31, 2006, we had working capital of approximately $328.0 million, including cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments of approximately $275.3 million. During the course of the year, we invest substantially all of our cash balances in AAA rated auction rate securities and typically convert a portion of these securities to cash and cash equivalents prior to the end of each quarter. Auction rate securities are principally variable rate securities tied to short-term interest rates with maturities on the face of the securities in excess of 90 days. Auction rate securities have interest rate resets through a modified Dutch auction, at predetermined short-term intervals, usually every 7, 28 or 35 days. They trade at par and are callable at par on any interest payment date at the option of the issuer. Interest paid during a given period is based upon the interest rate determined during the prior auction. Although these instruments are issued and rated as long-term securities, they are priced and traded as short-term securities because of the liquidity provided through the interest rate reset. We believe that our currently available cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments and cash generated from operations will be sufficient to satisfy our operating and working capital requirements for at least the next 12 months. However, if we experience significant growth in the future, we may be required to raise additional cash through the issuance of new debt or additional equity. Operating Activities Net cash provided by operating activities increased by approximately $6.0 million to $141.9 million during fiscal 2006 when compared to fiscal 2005. During the year we consumed cash through the growth in accounts receivable and vehicle pooling costs and we generated cash through the growth in deferred revenue. The movements in these accounts are driven primarily by the significant growth in vehicles held for sale which was impacted by hurricanes Katrina and Rita. The decrease in net income is primarily a result of the loss on discontinued operations in the amount of $17.9 million, which was offset by increased revenue due to growth in vehicle sales volume and higher fees resulting from increased auction proceeds per vehicle. Investing Activities During the fiscal year ended July 31, 2006, we purchased approximately $717.1 million in short-term investments. These purchases were partially offset by the sale of $568.4 million of short-term investments. We typically invest our cash in auction rate notes with ratings of AAA. Capital expenditures related to continuing operations (excluding those associated with fixed assets attributable to acquisitions) were approximately $97.0 million, $66.2 million and $61.8 million for fiscal 2006, 2005 and 2004, respectively. Our capital expenditures are related primarily to opening and improving facilities and acquiring yard equipment. We continue to 36 expand and invest in new and existing facilities in order to handle increased volume and standardize the appearance of existing locations. During the fiscal year ended July 31, 2006, we used cash for the acquisition of facilities in or near Billings, Montana; Fruitland, Maryland; Altoona, Pennsylvania; Chambersburg , Pennsylvania; York Haven, Pennsylvania; Greenwood, Nebraska and Grand Island, Nebraska, which had an aggregate cash cost of approximately $23.0 million. During the fiscal year ended July 31, 2005, we used cash for the acquisition of operations in Lexington, Kentucky and Columbia, Missouri, which had an aggregate cash cost of approximately $4.5 million. During the fiscal year ended July 31, 2004, we used cash for the acquisition of operations in Eugene, Oregon; Cleveland, Ohio and Anchorage, Alaska, which had an aggregate cash cost of approximately $4.7 million. During the fiscal year ended July 31, 2006, we invested approximately $8.9 million for a 50% equity interest in a limited liability corporation (the LLC ). We are not committed to provide any additional funding to this entity. Financing Activities In fiscal 2006, 2005 and 2004, we generated approximately $5.4 million, $1.8 million and $5.1 million, respectively, through the exercise of stock options. In fiscal 2006, 2005 and 2004, we generated approximately $1.6 million, $1.4 million and $1.3 million, respectively, through the issuance of shares under the employee stock purchase program. In February 2003, our Board of Directors authorized us to repurchase up to 9.0 million shares of our common stock. The repurchases may be effected through solicited or unsolicited transactions in the open market or in privately negotiated transactions. No time limit has been placed on the duration of the share repurchase program. The repurchases will be made at such times and in such amounts as we deem appropriate and may be discontinued at any time. For the year ended July 31, 2006, we repurchased 366,000 shares at a weighted average price of $24.24. We accounted for the repurchase of our common stock by reducing common stock for $8.9 million. During the period from February 2003 through July 31, 2006, we repurchased a total of 4,038,300 shares at a weighted average price of $9.92. No shares were repurchased in fiscal 2005. For the year ended July 31, 2004, we repurchased a total of 977,100 shares at a weighted average price of $10.97 per share. We accounted for the repurchases of our common stock by decreasing common stock by $31.2 million. For the period from August 1, 2006 through October 30, 2006, we have not repurchased any shares of our common stock. Lease, Purchase and Other Contractual Obligations The following table summarizes our significant contractual obligations and commercial commitments as of July 31, 2006 (in thousands): Payments Due By Period Contractual Obligations(1) Total Less than 1 Year 1-3 Years 3-5 Years More than 5 Years Operating Leases $ 119,625 $ 22,281 $ 34,604 $ 26,039 $ 36,701 Amount of Commitment Expiration Per Period Commercial Commitments(2) Total Less than 1 Year 1-3 Years 3-5 Years More than 5 Years Letters of Credit $ 10,550 $ 10,550 (1) Contractual obligations consist of future non-cancelable minimum lease payments under operating leases, used in the normal course of business. 37 (2) Commercial commitments include primarily letters of credit provided for insurance programs and certain business transactions. Credit Facilities On February 23, 2001, we entered into a credit facility with our existing banking syndicate. The facility provided by Wells Fargo Bank, Fleet National Bank and U.S. Bank National Association consists of an unsecured revolving reducing line of credit in the amount of approximately $10.6 million. On May 8, 2006, the line of credit was reduced to zero and the line of credit was terminated in accordance with its terms. Recently Issued Accounting Standards For a description of the new accounting standards that affect us, see Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Form 10-K. 
