CIK: 900075
Company Name: COPART INC
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2009-09-29


Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations SPECIAL NOTE REGARDING FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS This Annual Report on Form 10-K, including the information incorporated by reference herein, contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act, and Section 21E of the Exchange Act. All statements other than statements of historical facts are statements that could be deemed forward-looking statements. In some cases, you can identify forward-looking statements by terms such as "may," "will," "should," "expect," "plan," "intend," "forecast," "anticipate," "believe," "estimate," "predict," "potential," "continue" or the negative of these terms or other comparable terminology. The forward-looking statements contained in this Form 10-K involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties and situations that may cause our or our industry's actual results, level of activity, performance or achievements to be materially different from any future results, levels of activity, performance or achievements expressed or implied by these statements. These forward-looking statements are made in reliance upon the safe harbor provision of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. These factors include those listed in Part I, Item 1A. "Risk Factors" of this Form 10-K and those discussed elsewhere in this Form 10-K. We encourage investors to review these factors carefully together with the other matters referred to herein, as well as in the other documents we file with the SEC. The Company may from time to time make additional written and oral forward-looking statements, including statements contained in the Company's filings with the SEC. The Company does not undertake to update any forward-looking statement that may be made from time to time by or on behalf of the Company. Although we believe that, based on information currently available to the Company and its management, the expectations reflected in the forward-looking statements are reasonable, we cannot guarantee future results, levels of activity, performance or achievements. You should not place undue reliance on these forward-looking statements. Overview We provide vehicle sellers with a full range of services to process and sell vehicles primarily over the Internet through our Virtual Bidding Second Generation Internet auction-style sales technology, which we refer to as VB 2 . Sellers are primarily insurance companies but also include banks and financial institutions, charities, car dealerships, fleet operators, vehicle rental companies and the general public. We sell principally to licensed vehicle dismantlers, rebuilders, repair licensees, used vehicle dealers and exporters; however at certain locations, we sell directly to the general public. The majority of the vehicles sold on behalf of the insurance companies are either damaged vehicles deemed a total loss or not economically repairable by the insurance companies or are recovered stolen vehicles for which an insurance settlement with the vehicle owner has already been made. We offer vehicle sellers a full range of services that expedite each stage of the salvage vehicle sales process and minimize administrative and processing costs. In the United States and Canada, or North America, we sell vehicles primarily as an agent and derive revenue primarily from fees paid by vehicle sellers and vehicle buyers as well as related fees for services such as towing and storage. In the United Kingdom, or UK, we operate primarily on a principal basis, purchasing salvage vehicles outright from insurance companies and reselling the vehicles for our own account. Our revenues consist of sales transaction fees charged to vehicle sellers and vehicle buyers, transportation revenue, purchased vehicle revenues, and other remarketing services. Revenues from sellers are generally generated either on a fixed fee contract basis where we collect a fixed amount for selling each vehicle regardless of the selling price of the vehicle or, under our Percentage Incentive Program, or PIP program, where our fees are generally based on a predetermined percentage of the vehicle sales price. Under the fixed fee program, we generally charge an 33 Table of Contents additional fee for title processing and special preparation. Although sometimes included in the consignment fee, we may also charge additional fees for the cost of transporting the vehicle to our facility, storage of the vehicle, and other incidental costs. Under the consignment programs, only the fees associated with vehicle processing are recorded in revenue, not the actual sales price (gross proceeds). Sales transaction fees also include fees charged to vehicle buyers for purchasing vehicles, storage, loading and annual registration. Transportation revenue includes charges to sellers for towing vehicles under certain contracts. Transportation revenue also includes towing charges assessed to buyers for delivering vehicles. Purchased vehicle revenue includes the gross sales price of the vehicle which we have purchased or are otherwise considered to own and is primarily generated in the UK. Operating costs consist primarily of operating personnel (which includes yard management, clerical and yard employees), rent, contract vehicle towing, insurance, fuel, equipment maintenance and repair, and costs of vehicles we sold under purchase contracts. Costs associated with general and administrative expenses consist primarily of executive management, accounting, data processing, sales personnel, human resources, professional fees, research and development and marketing expenses. During fiscal 2004 and fiscal 2008, we converted all of our North American and UK sales, respectively, to an Internet-based auction-style model using our VB 2 Internet sales technology. This process employs a two-step bidding process. The first step, called the preliminary bid, allows buyers to submit bids up to one hour before a real time virtual auction begins. The second step allows buyers to bid against each other, and the high bidder from the preliminary bidding process, in a real-time process over the Internet. Acquisitions and New Operations We have experienced significant growth in facilities as we have acquired twenty three facilities and established thirteen new facilities since the beginning of fiscal 2006. All of these acquisitions have been accounted for using the purchase method of accounting. As part of our overall expansion strategy of offering integrated services to vehicle sellers, we anticipate acquiring and developing facilities in new regions, as well as the regions currently served by our facilities. We believe that these acquisitions and openings strengthen our coverage as we have 147 facilities located in North America and the UK and are able to provide national coverage for our sellers. 34 Table of Contents The following table sets forth facilities that we have acquired or opened from August 1, 2006 through July 31, 2009: Locations Acquisition or Greenfield Date Geographic Service Area Baltimore Maryland Greenfield November 2006 Central Maryland Woodburn, Oregon Greenfield January 2007 Central Oregon Sandy, England Acquisition June 2007 East England and Midlands Sandtoft, England Acquisition June 2007 Northern England Sandwich, England Acquisition June 2007 London and South East England Westbury, England Acquisition June 2007 South Wales and South West England Chester, England Acquisition June 2007 North Wales and North West England Denny, Scotland Acquisition *June 2007 Scotland Wootton, England Acquisition June 2007 Central England Punta Gorda, Florida Greenfield July 2007 Southwest Florida Peterlee, England Acquisition August 2007 Northern England Wisbech, England Acquisition August 2007 Eastern England Rochford, England Acquisition August 2007 Southeast England London, Canada Greenfield September 2007 Southern Ontario Windsor, New Jersey Greenfield November 2007 Central New Jersey Walton, Kentucky Greenfield January 2008 Northern Kentucky Birmingham, Alabama Greenfield February 2008 Central Alabama Inverkeithing, Scotland Acquisition March 2008 Central Scotland Whitburn, Scotland Acquisition March 2008 Central Scotland Featherstone, England Acquisition *March 2008 Northeast England Doncaster, England Acquisition *March 2008 Northeast England Minneapolis, Minnesota Greenfield March 2008 Central Minnesota and Wisconsin Sikeston, Missouri Acquisition March 2008 Southeast Missouri York, England Acquisition April 2008 Northern England Prairie Grove, Arkansas Greenfield July 2008 Northwest Arkansas Louisville, Kentucky Greenfield September 2008 Northwest Kentucky and Southern Indiana Richmond, Virginia Greenfield **October 2008 Central Virginia Montgomery, Alabama Greenfield February 2009 Central Alabama Greer, South Carolina Greenfield February 2009 Northwest South Carolina Warren, Massachusetts Greenfield June 2009 Central Massachusetts * Closed in fiscal 2008 ** Former MAG facility In April 2008, we completed the acquisition of Simpson Bros. (York) Holdings Limited, a UK limited liability company (Simpson), which operates one location in York, England. Simpson's primary business activity was the dismantling of automobiles and the sales of salvaged auto parts. In the same month, we also completed the acquisition of Bob Lowe Salvage Pool, Inc., which operates one location in Sikeston, Missouri. In February 2008, we completed the purchase of the assets and business of AG Watson Auto Salvage & Motors Spares (Scotland) Limited (AG Watson) which operates two salvage locations in Scotland and two salvage locations in northern England. In August 2007, we completed the acquisition of Century Salvage Sales Limited (Century), a vehicle salvage disposal company with three facilities located in the UK. The total consideration paid for these acquisitions consisted of approximately $38.2 million in cash, net of cash acquired. 35 Table of Contents On June 14, 2007, we acquired all the issued share capital of Universal Salvage plc, or Universal, for 2.00 per share (approximately $3.94 based on currency exchange rates on June 14, 2007). Universal, based in the UK and operating exclusively within the UK, is a service provider to the motor insurance and automotive industries. The aggregate acquisition consideration paid by us totaled approximately 60.7 million (approximately $120.0 million based on currency exchange rates on June 14, 2007) and was funded from our available cash resources. We also assumed outstanding indebtedness of Universal totaling approximately 2.3 million ($4.5 million as of June 14, 2007). The acquisition was our first acquisition outside North America and included the seven facilities discussed above. The period-to-period comparability of our operating results and financial condition is substantially affected by business acquisitions, new openings, weather and product introductions during such periods. In particular, we have certain contracts inherited through our UK acquisitions that require us to act as a principal, purchasing vehicles from the insurance companies and reselling them for our own account. It is our intention, where possible, to migrate these contracts to the agency model in future periods. Changes in the amount of revenue derived in a period from principal transactions relative to total revenue will impact revenue growth and margin percentages. In addition to growth through acquisitions, we seek to increase revenues and profitability by, among other things, (i) acquiring and developing additional vehicle storage facilities in key markets, (ii) pursuing national and regional vehicle seller agreements, (iii) expanding our service offerings to sellers and buyers, and (iv) expanding the application of VB 2 into new markets. In addition, we implement our pricing structure and merchandising procedures and attempt to effect cost efficiencies at each of our acquired facilities by implementing our operational procedures, integrating our management information systems and redeploying personnel, when necessary. Results of Operations The following table sets forth for the periods indicated below, certain information derived from our consolidated statements of income presented in absolute dollars and as a percentage of revenues. There can be no assurance that any trend in operating results will continue in the future. Fiscal 2009 Compared to Fiscal 2008 Revenues The following sets forth information on revenue by class (in thousands, except percentages): 2009 Percentage of Revenue 2008 Percentage of Revenue Service revenues $ 615,352 83 % $ 619,728 79 % Vehicle sales 127,730 17 % 165,120 21 % $ 743,082 100 % $ 784,848 100 % Service Revenues. Service revenues were approximately $615.4 million during fiscal 2009 compared to $619.7 million for fiscal 2008, a decline of $4.4, million or 0.7%,below fiscal 2008. The decline in service revenue was due to the negative impact on recorded service revenues due to the change in the GBP to USD exchange rate and was offset by growth in unit volume and a marginal growth in revenue per transaction. The average dollar to pound exchange rate was 1.59 dollars to the pound and 2.00 dollars to the pound for fiscal 2009 and fiscal 2008, respectively, and lead to a reduction in service revenue of $9.5 million. Growth in unit volume was driven primarily by an increase in the units sold on behalf of insurance companies and units sold on behalf of franchise and independent car dealerships. The growth resulted from market wins and, with respect to insurance company cars, from what we believe to be an increase in salvage frequency. 36 Table of Contents Salvage frequency is the percentage of cars involved in accidents that are deemed total economic losses by the insurance company. We believe the increased availability of such cars was as a result of lower average used car pricing. The growth in unit volume generated $4.9 million in additional revenue relative to last year. Revenue yield per transaction was marginally higher as the decline in the average selling price was offset by higher yield on services provided and generated $0.2 million in additional revenue compared to last year. Over 50% of our service revenue is tied in some manner to the ultimate selling price of the vehicles. We believe the decline in the average selling price was primarily due to: (i) the recent declines in commodity and used car pricing as we believe that commodity pricing, particularly the per ton price for crushed car bodies, has an impact on the ultimate selling price of vehicles sold for scrap and vehicles sold for dismantling; (ii) the decline in used car pricing because we believe used car pricing has an impact on the ultimate selling price of vehicles sold to rebuilders and retailers; and (iii) the strengthening of the dollar as we believe a stronger dollar increases the purchase price of US vehicles paid for in our international buyers' local currencies. However, we do not have sufficient information to determine which vehicles are sold for scrap, dismantling, retailing or export and, accordingly, cannot quantify the impact that commodity pricing, used car pricing and foreign currency exchange rates had on the selling price of vehicles. Vehicle Sales. We have assumed certain contracts through our UK acquisitions that require us to act as a principal, purchasing vehicles from the insurance companies and reselling them for our own account. Vehicle sales revenues were approximately $127.7 million during fiscal 2009 compared to $165.1 million for fiscal 2008, a decline of $37.4 million, or 22.6%, below fiscal 2008. The decline in vehicle sales revenue was due to the negative impact on recorded vehicle sales revenue due to the change in the GBP to USD exchange rate, the decline in unit volume, and the decline in revenue per transaction. The decline in the average USD to GBP exchange rate lead to a reduction in vehicle sales revenue of $29.7 million. The decline in unit volume lead to a reduction in revenue of $5.3 million and was due primarily to the migration of certain contracts in the UK from a principal basis to a fee basis. The decline in the average revenue per transaction lead to a reduction of revenue of $2.3 million. We believe the decline in the average selling price was primarily due to: (i) the declines in commodity pricing as we believe that commodity pricing, particularly the price per ton for crushed car bodies, has an impact on the ultimate selling price of vehicles sold for scrap and vehicles sold for dismantling; (ii) the decline in used car pricing because we believe used car pricing has an impact on the ultimate selling price of vehicles sold to rebuilders and retailers; and (iii) the strengthening of the dollar as we believe a stronger dollar increases the purchase price of US vehicles paid for in our international buyers' local currencies. However, we do not have sufficient information to determine which vehicles are sold for scrap, dismantling, retailing or export and, accordingly, cannot quantify the impact that commodity pricing, used car pricing and foreign currency exchange rates had on the selling price of vehicles. Yard Operation Expenses. Yard operation expenses were approximately $324.8 million during fiscal 2009 compared to $328.9 million for fiscal 2008, a decline of approximately $4.1 million, or 1.3%, below fiscal 2008. The beneficial impact on yard operating expenses due to the change in GBP to USD exchange rate was $10.6 million and was offset by an increase in the cost to process each car which was driven primarily by an increase in subhauling costs in the US and the additional costs associated with five new facilities. Included in yard operation costs were depreciation and amortization expenses which were $32.8 million and $32.2 million for the fiscal years ended July 31, 2009 and 2008, respectively. Cost of Vehicle Sales. The cost of vehicles sold was approximately $106.0 million during fiscal 2009 compared to $133.7 million for fiscal 2008, a decline of approximately $27.6 million, or 20.7%. The beneficial impact on the cost of sales due to the change in the GBP to USD exchange rate was $23.8 million. Unit volume decline was responsible for $4.3 million of the total decline and was due primarily to the migration of certain contracts in the UK from a principal basis to a fee 37 Table of Contents basis. Cost per unit sold was up marginally and represented a $0.4 million increase relative to last year. General and Administrative Expenses. General and administrative expenses were approximately $86.9 million for fiscal 2009 compared to $84.3 million for fiscal 2008, an increase of approximately $2.6 million, or 3.1%. The beneficial impact on general and administrative expenses due to the change in GBP to USD exchange rate was approximately $3.0 million. The growth in general and administrative costs was due primarily to: i) increased IT payroll and technology costs as we expanded our development and network departments, ii) increased advertising costs as we invested in events and media promotions to generate public awareness, and iii) the additional costs associated with the CEO and President's non cash compensation package approved by the shareholders in April 2009. Also included in general and administrative expenses were depreciation and amortization expenses which were $9.0 million and $10.6 million for the years ended July 31, 2009 and 2008, respectively. Other Income (Expense). Total other income was approximately $2.4 million during fiscal 2009 compared to $11.7 million for fiscal 2008, a decline of approximately $9.3 million, or 79.5%. Net interest income declined $6.1 million due to reductions in both the average cash balances and the interest yield. Other income, net, declined $3.2 million primarily due to the impairment of a note receivable relating to the sale of assets of the public auction business which we exited in 2006 and the loss on the sale of an airplane in the UK, together totaling $2.2 million, currency exchange losses on certain intercompany obligations and losses on the disposition of other certain assets. Income Taxes. Our effective income tax rates for fiscal 2009 and 2008 were approximately 38.7% and 37.1%, respectively. The increase was driven primarily by the decline in tax exempt interest income. Discontinued Operations. During fiscal 2009 we received a $12 million payment for a note receivable resulting from the sale of certain MAG business assets and real estate. We exited the MAG business in our 2006 fiscal year. The gain on the sale of the real estate was deferred until payment on the note receivable was received. The $1.6 million of income from discontinued operations represents that gain, net of taxes. Net Income. Due to the foregoing factors, we realized net income of approximately $141.1 million for fiscal 2009, compared to net income of approximately $156.9 million for fiscal 2008. Fiscal 2008 Compared to Fiscal 2007 Revenues The following sets forth information on customer revenue by geographic region based on the location of the selling entity (in thousands, except percentages): 2008 Percentage of Revenue 2007 Percentage of Revenue Service revenues $ 619,728 79 % $ 535,794 96 % Vehicle sales 165,120 21 % 24,886 4 % $ 784,848 100 % $ 560,680 100 % Service Revenues. Service revenues were approximately $619.7 million during fiscal 2008 compared to $535.8 million for fiscal 2007, an increase of $83.9 million, or 15.7%, over fiscal 2007. The growth in revenue came from an increase in units sold and an increase in revenue per transaction. The growth in units sold came from acquisitions, primarily in the UK, market share wins and the development of non-insurance markets and represented $59.7 million of the increase and 38 Table of Contents service revenue yield represented $24.2 million of the total increase. Growth in revenue yield per transaction was primarily due to an increase in the average selling price of the vehicles. Over 50% of our service revenue is tied in some manner to the ultimate selling price of the vehicles. We believe the increase in the average selling price was due primarily to: (i) the increases in commodity pricing, as we believe that commodity pricing, particularly the per ton price for crushed car bodies, has an impact on the ultimate selling price of vehicles sold for scrap and vehicles sold for dismantling; (ii) the increase in used car pricing, as we believe used car pricing has an impact on the ultimate selling price of vehicles sold to rebuilders and retailers; (iii) the weakening of the dollar, as we believe a weaker dollar decreases the purchase price of US vehicles paid for in our international buyers' local currencies; and (iv) the decline in salvaged cars sold as a percentage of total cars sold as salvaged cars generally sell for less than non-salvaged cars. However, we do not have sufficient information to determine which vehicles are sold for scrap, dismantling, retailing or export and, accordingly, cannot quantify the impact that commodity pricing, used car pricing and foreign currency exchange rates had on the selling price of vehicles. Vehicle Sales. Vehicle sales revenues were approximately $165.1 million during fiscal 2008 compared to $24.9 million for fiscal 2007, an increase of $140.2 million, or 563.5% over fiscal 2007. The increase was due almost entirely to the UK acquisitions in which we assumed certain contracts that required us to act as a principal, purchasing vehicles from the insurance companies and reselling them for our own account. In North America we have no contracts in which we are required to purchase the vehicle from the seller. Yard Operation Expenses. Yard operation expenses from continuing operations were approximately $328.9 million during fiscal 2008 compared to $271.5 million for fiscal 2007, an increase of $57.4 million, or 21.1%, over fiscal 2007. Yard operating expenses in the UK, excluding depreciation, increased by $49.6 million as we made our first acquisition in our fourth quarter of fiscal 2007 and, accordingly, had a full year of expenses in fiscal 2008. In North America, excluding depreciation, yard operating expenses grew by $6.3 million due primarily to increased volume. Included in yard operation costs were depreciation and amortization expenses which grew by $1.5 million to $32.2 million due primarily to increased amortization associated with intangible assets acquired in the UK. Cost of Vehicles Sales. The cost of vehicles sold was approximately $133.7 million during fiscal 2008 compared to $22.4 million for fiscal 2007, an increase of $111.3 million, or 497.4%, over fiscal 2007. The increase was due primarily to the UK acquisitions in which we assume certain contracts that require us to act as a principal, purchasing vehicles from the insurance companies and reselling them for our own account. General and Administrative. General and administrative expenses from continuing operations were approximately $84.3 million for fiscal 2008, compared to $63.6 million for fiscal 2007, an increase of approximately $20.7 million, or 32.5%, over fiscal 2007. The increase came primarily from the additional management, finance, technology, systems and administrative resources required to support international operations, increased resources required to accelerate the development and deployment of the enhancements to VB 2 and to our seller support software and interfaces, and the incremental costs associated with the UK integration. Included in general and administrative expenses is depreciation and amortization of $10.6 million, an increase of $4.9 million over fiscal 2007 and includes amortization expenses relating to intangible assets acquired as part of the UK acquisitions. Other Income. Total other income was approximately $11.7 million during fiscal 2008, compared to $14.3 million for fiscal 2007, a decline of approximately $2.5 million, or 17.8%, over fiscal 2007. Interest income declined $6.0 million due to lower interest rates and a lower average cash and investment balance. Net other income increased approximately $1.3 million. Equity in loss 39 Table of Contents of unconsolidated entity reflected a $2.2 million write down, in fiscal 2007, to the carrying value of our investment in Lanelogic Corporation (Lanelogic). Income Taxes. Our effective income tax rates for fiscal 2008 and 2007 were approximately 37.1% and 37.3%, respectively. Net Income. Due to the foregoing factors, we realized net income of approximately $156.9 million for fiscal 2008, compared to net income of approximately $136.3 million for fiscal 2007. Liquidity and Capital Resources Our primary source of working capital is cash generated though operations. Potential internal sources of additional working capital are the sale of assets or the issuance of equity through option exercises and shares issued under our Employee Stock Purchase Plan. A potential external source of additional working capital is the issuance of debt and equity. However, with respect to the issuance of equity or debt, we cannot predict if these sources will be available in the future and, if available, if they can be issued under terms commercially acceptable to us. Historically, we have financed our growth through cash generated from operations, public offerings of common stock, the equity issued in conjunction with certain acquisitions and debt financing. Our primary source of cash generated by operations is from the collection on sellers' fees, buyers' fees and reimbursable advances from the proceeds of auctioned salvage vehicles. Our business is seasonal as inclement weather during the winter months increases the frequency of accidents and, consequently, the number of cars totaled by the insurance companies. During the winter months, most of our facilities process 10% to 30% more vehicles than at other times of the year. This increased volume requires the increased use of our cash to pay out advances and handling costs of the additional business. Because our primary source of working capital is net income, factors affecting net income are the principal factors affecting the generation of working capital. Those primary factors: (i) seasonality, (ii) market wins and losses, (iii) supplier mix, (iv) accident frequency, (v) salvage frequency, (vi) change in market share of our existing suppliers, (vii) commodity pricing, (viii) used car pricing, (ix) foreign currency exchanges rates, (x) product mix, and (xi) contract mix to the extent appropriate, are discussed in the Results of Operations and Risk Factors sections in this Form 10-K. As of July 31, 2009, we had working capital of approximately $212.3 million, including cash, and cash equivalents of approximately $162.7 million. Cash and cash equivalents consisted primarily of funds invested in money market accounts, which bear interest at a variable rate. Cash and cash equivalents increased by approximately $123.7 million from fiscal 2008 to fiscal 2009. We believe that our currently available cash and cash equivalents and cash generated from operations will be sufficient to satisfy our operating and working capital requirements for at least the next 12 months. However, if we experience significant growth in the future, we may be required to raise additional cash through the issuance of new debt or additional equity. Operating Activities Net cash provided by operating activities increased by approximately $9.3 million to $203.3 million during fiscal 2009 when compared to fiscal 2008. The increase was driven primarily by a reduction in income taxes receivable of $18.0 million which was offset by a decrease in net income of $15.8 million. The remaining increase of $7.1 million is due to routine changes in working capital items. Net cash provided by operating activities increased by approximately $12.0 million to $194.1 million during fiscal 2008 when compared to fiscal 2007, due to the increase in net income which was offset in part by the timing of routine changes in working capital items. The increase in net income is primarily the result of increased revenue in fiscal 2008. 40 Table of Contents Net cash provided by operating activities increased by approximately $40.8 million to $182.1 million during fiscal 2007 when compared to fiscal 2006, due to the increase in net income which was offset in part to the timing of routine changes in working capital items. The increase in net income is primarily the result of increased revenue in fiscal 2007 and the loss on discontinued operations in the amount of $17.9 million in fiscal 2006, which did not recur in fiscal 2007. Investing Activities During the fiscal years ended July 31, 2008 and 2007, we purchased approximately $154.4 million and $921.8 million, respectively, of short-term investments, which were offset by the sale of $257.0 million and $967.9 million, respectively, of short-term investments. We historically invested our cash in auction rate notes with ratings of AAA. By the end of the first quarter of fiscal 2008, we converted our entire balance of short-term investments to cash and cash equivalents. Capital expenditures related to continuing operations (excluding those associated with fixed assets attributable to acquisitions) were approximately $79.0 million, $113.4 million and $76.8 million for fiscal 2009, 2008 and 2007, respectively. Our capital expenditures are primarily related to opening and improving facilities and acquiring yard equipment. We continue to expand and invest in new and existing facilities and standardize the appearance of existing locations. We have no material commitments for future capital expenditures as of July 31, 2009. During the fiscal year ended July 31, 2008, we used approximately $38.2 million in cash for the acquisitions of Century Salvage Sales Limited; Simpson Bros. (York), Ltd; AG Watson Auto Salvage and Motor Spares (Scotland) Limited; and Bob Lowe's Salvage Pool. During the fiscal year ended July 31, 2007, we used approximately $120.0 million in cash for the acquisition of Universal which includes the following seven locations in the UK: Sandy, Sandtoft, Sandwich, Westbury, Chester, Denny, and Wootton. Financing Activities In fiscal 2009, 2008 and 2007, we generated approximately $3.1 million, $12.7 million and $10.9 million, respectively, through the exercise of stock options. In fiscal 2009, 2008 and 2007, we generated approximately $1.9 million, $1.7 million and $1.5 million, respectively, through the issuance of shares under the Employee Stock Purchase Plan. In fiscal 2009, we used approximately $17.5 million and in 2008 and 2007, we generated approximately $8.2 million and $4.7 million, respectively, through changes in our book overdraft. In February 2003, our Board of Directors authorized us to repurchase up to 9.0 million shares of our common stock. In October 2007, our Board of Directors approved a 20 million share increase in our stock repurchase program bringing the total current number of shares authorized for repurchase to 29 million shares. The repurchases may be effected through solicited or unsolicited transactions in the open market or in privately negotiated transactions. No time limit has been placed on the duration of the share repurchase program. Subject to applicable securities laws, such repurchases will be made at such times and in such amounts as we deem appropriate and may be discontinued at any time. For the year ended July 31, 2009, we did not repurchase any shares under our stock repurchase program. For the year ended July 31, 2008, we repurchased 6,615,764 shares at a weighted average price of $40.70. For the year ended July 31, 2007, we repurchased 2,995,405 shares at a weighted average price of $29.91. From February 2003 through July 31, 2009, we repurchased a total of 13,649,469 shares at a weighted average price of $29.21. In December 2008, our President exercised 600,000 options at an exercise price of $4.47 per share. In a cashless exercise, 96,929 shares of the 600,000 options exercised were net settled in satisfaction of the exercise price for the portion of options that were classified as non-qualified stock options. Additionally, 222,817 shares were withheld at a per share price of $26.93, totaling 41 Table of Contents approximately $6.0 million, based on the closing price of our common stock on the date of exercise, in lieu of the federal and state minimum statutory tax withholding requirements. In June 2009, our President exercised 361,035 options at an exercise price of $11.12 per share. In a cashless exercise, 116,741 shares of the 361,035 shares exercised were net settled in satisfaction of the exercise price for the portion of options that were classified as non-qualified stock options. Additionally, 109,595 shares were withheld at a per share price of $34.39, totaling approximately $3.8 million, based on the closing price of our common stock on the date of exercise, in lieu of the federal and state minimum statutory tax withholding requirements. We remitted approximately $9.8 million to the proper taxing authorities in satisfaction of the employee's minimum statutory withholding requirements. The tax withholding amounts paid by us have been accounted for as a repurchase of shares in the shareholders' equity section in the accompanying consolidated balance sheet. However, these deemed share repurchases are not included as part of our stock repurchase program described in the preceding paragraph. Contractual Obligations We lease certain domestic and foreign facilities, and certain equipment under non-cancelable operating leases. In addition to the minimum future lease commitments presented, the leases generally require the company to pay property taxes, insurance, maintenance and repair costs which are not included in the table because we have determined these items are not material. The following table summarizes our significant contractual obligations and commercial commitments as of July 31, 2009 (in thousands): Payments Due By Period Contractual Obligations Total Less than 1 Year 1-3 Years 3-5 Years More than 5 Years Other Operating leases(1) $ 93,755 $ 20,378 $ 33,737 $ 18,185 $ 21,455 $ Capital leases(1) 1,334 507 587 240 Tax liabilities(2) 20,266 20,266 Total contractual obligations $ 115,355 $ 20,885 $ 34,324 $ 18,425 $ 21,455 $ 20,266 Amount of Commitment Expiration Per Period Commercial Commitments(3) Total Less than 1 Year 1-3 Years 3-5 Years More than 5 Years Other Letters of credit $ 8,273 $ 8,273 $ $ $ $ (1) Contractual obligations consist of future non-cancelable minimum lease payments under capital and operating leases, used in the normal course of business. (2) Tax liabilities include the long-term liabilities in the consolidated balance sheet for unrecognized tax positions. At this time we are unable to make a reasonably reliable estimate of the timing of payments in individual years beyond 12 months due to uncertainties in the timing of tax audit outcomes. (3) Commercial commitments consist primarily of letters of credit provided for insurance programs and certain business transactions. Credit Facilities On March 6, 2008, we entered into an unsecured credit agreement with Bank of America, N.A. (the Credit Agreement) providing for a $175 million (reduced from $200 million pursuant to the terms of the Credit Agreement) revolving credit facility (the Credit Facility), including a $100 million foreign currency borrowing sublimit and a $50 million letter of credit sublimit. Amounts borrowed under the Credit Facility may be used for repurchases of stock, capital expenditures, working capital 42 Table of Contents and other general corporate purposes. The Credit Facility matures, and all outstanding borrowings are due, on the fifth anniversary of the Credit Agreement, with annual reductions in availability of $25 million on each of the first three anniversaries of the Credit Agreement. Amounts borrowed under the Credit Facility may be repaid and re-borrowed until the maturity date and bear interest, at our option, at either Eurocurrency Rate plus 0.5% to 0.875%, depending of the leverage ratio, as defined in the Credit Agreement, at the end of the previous quarter or at the prime rate. A default interest rate applies on all obligations during an event of default under the Credit Facility at a rate per annum equal to 2.0% above the otherwise applicable interest rate. The Credit Facility requires us to pay a commitment fee on the unused portion of the Credit Facility. The commitment fee ranges from 0.075% to 0.15% depending on the leverage ratio as of the end on the previous quarter. The Credit Facility contains customary representations and warranties and places certain business operating restrictions on us relating to, among other things, indebtedness, liens and other encumbrances, investments, mergers and acquisitions, asset sales, and dividends, distributions and redemptions of capital stock. In addition, the Credit Agreement provides for a maximum total leverage ratio and a minimum interest coverage ratio. The Credit Facility contains events of default that include, among others, non-payment of principal, interest or fees, violation of covenants, inaccuracy of representations and warranties, cross-defaults to certain other indebtedness, bankruptcy and insolvency defaults, material judgments, invalidity of the loan documents and events constituting a change of control. The Credit Facility is guaranteed by our material domestic subsidiaries. The Credit Facility contains restrictions with respect to investments, mergers and acquisitions, dividends and distributions and redemptions of capital stock, these restrictions become effective only after the Company's debt to EBITDA ratio exceeds 1.0:1.0. At July 31, 2009, the debt to EBITDA ratio was less than 1.0:1.0. As of July 31, 2009, we did not have an outstanding balance under the Credit Facility. Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements As of July 31, 2009, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements (as defined in item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K). Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates The preparation of consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and the related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates, including those related to vehicle pooling costs, self-insured reserves, allowance for doubtful accounts, income taxes, revenue recognition, share-based compensation, long-lived asset impairment calculations and contingencies. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. Management has discussed the selection of critical accounting policies and estimates with the Audit Committee of the Board of Directors and the Audit Committee has reviewed our disclosure relating to critical accounting policies and estimates in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Our significant accounting policies are described in Note 1 to our consolidated financial statements for fiscal 2009. The following is a summary of the more significant judgments and estimates included in our critical accounting policies used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements. Where appropriate, we discuss sensitivity to change based on other outcomes reasonably likely to occur. 43 Table of Contents Revenue Recognition We provide a portfolio of services to our sellers and buyers that facilitate the sale and delivery of a vehicle from seller to buyer. These services include the ability to use our Internet sales technology and vehicle delivery, loading, title processing, preparation and storage. We evaluate multiple-element arrangements relative to our buyer and seller agreements in accordance with Emerging Issues Task Force Issue No. 00-21, Revenue Arrangements with Multiple Deliverables (EITF 00-21), which addresses accounting for multiple-element arrangements, and Staff Accounting Bulletin No. 104, Revenue Recognition (SAB 104), which addresses revenue recognition for units of accounting. The services we provide to the seller of a vehicle involve disposing of a vehicle on the seller's behalf and, under most of our current North American contracts, collecting the proceeds from the buyer. We are not entitled to any such seller fees until we have collected the sales proceeds from the buyer for the seller and, accordingly, we recognize revenue for seller services after service delivery and cash collection. Vehicle sales, where we purchase and remarket vehicles on our own behalf, are recognized in accordance with SAB 104 on the sale date, which is typically the point of high bid acceptance. Upon high bid acceptance, a legal binding contract is formed with the buyer, and we record the gross sales price as revenue. In certain cases, seller fees are not contingent upon collection of the seller proceeds from the buyer. However, we determined that we are not able to separate the services into separate units of accounting because we do not have fair value for undelivered items. As a result, we do not recognize seller fees until the final seller service has been delivered, which generally occurs upon collection of the sales proceeds from the buyer for the seller. We provide a number of services to the buyer of the vehicle, charging a separate fee for each service. Each of these services has been assessed under the criteria of EITF 00-21 to determine whether we have met the requirements to separate them into units of accounting within a multi-element arrangement. We have concluded that the sale and the post-sale services are separate units of accounting. The fees for sale services are recognized upon completion of the sale, and the fees for the post-sale services are recognized upon successful completion of those services using the residual method. We also charge buyers an annual registration fee for the right to participate in our vehicle sales program, which is recognized ratably over the term of the arrangement, and relist and late-payment fees, which are recognized upon receipt of payment by the buyer. No provision for returns has been established, as all sales are final with no right of return, although we provide for bad debt expense in the case of non-performance by our buyers or sellers. Vehicle Pooling Costs We defer in vehicle pooling costs certain yard operation expenses associated with vehicles consigned to and received by us, but not sold as of the balance sheet date. We quantify the deferred costs using a calculation that includes the number of vehicles at our facilities at the beginning and end of the period, the number of vehicles sold during the period and an allocation of certain yard operation expenses of the period. The primary expenses allocated and deferred are certain facility costs, labor, transportation, and vehicle processing. If our allocation factors change, then yard operation expenses could increase or decrease correspondingly in the future. These costs are expensed as vehicles are sold in the subsequent periods on an average cost basis. Given the fixed cost nature of our business there is not a direct correlation in an increase in expenses or units processed on vehicle pooling costs. 44 Table of Contents We apply the provisions of Statement of Financial Accounting Standards (SFAS), No. 151, Inventory Costs (SFAS 151), to our vehicle pooling costs. SFAS 151 requires that items such as idle facility expense, excessive spoilage, double freight and rehandling costs be recognized as current-period charges regardless of whether they meet the criteria of "so abnormal" as provided in Accounting Research Bulletin No. 43, Chapter 4, Inventory Pricing . In addition, SFAS 151 requires that the allocation of fixed production overhead to the costs of conversion be based on the normal capacity of production facilities. Allowance for Doubtful Accounts We maintain an allowance for doubtful accounts in order to provide for estimated losses resulting from disputed amounts billed to sellers or buyers and the inability of our sellers or buyers to make required payments. If billing disputes exceed expectations and/or if the financial condition of our sellers or buyers were to deteriorate, additional allowances may be required. The allowance is calculated by taking both seller and buyer accounts receivables written off during the previous 12 month period as a percentage of the total accounts receivable balance, i.e. total write-offs/total accounts receivable (write-off percentage). We note that a one percentage-point deviation in the write-off percentage would have resulted in an increase or decrease to the allowance for doubtful accounts balance of less than $0.1 million. Valuation of Goodwill We evaluate the impairment of goodwill of our North America and UK operating segments annually (or on an interim basis if certain indicators are present) by comparing the fair value of the operating segment to its carrying value. Future adverse changes in market conditions or poor operating results of the operating segments could result in an inability to recover the carrying value of the investment, thereby requiring impairment charges in the future. Income Taxes and Deferred Tax Assets We account for income taxes in accordance with SFAS No.109, Accounting for Income Taxes . We are subject to income taxes in the US, Canada and UK. In arriving at a provision of income taxes, we first calculate taxes payable in accordance with the prevailing tax laws in the jurisdictions in which we operate; we then analyze the timing differences between the financial reporting and tax basis of our assets and liabilities, such as various accruals, depreciation and amortization. The tax effects of the timing difference are presented as deferred tax assets and liabilities in the consolidated balance sheet. We assess the probability that the deferred tax assets will be realized based on our ability to generate future taxable income. In the event that it is more likely than not the full benefit would not be realized from the deferred tax assets we carry on our consolidated balance sheet, we record a valuation allowance to reduce the carrying value of the deferred tax assets to the amount expected to be realized. As of July 31, 2009, we had approximately $0.3 million of valuation allowance arising from the net operating losses in states where we had discontinued certain operations in prior years. To the extent we establish a valuation allowance or change the amount of valuation allowance in a period, we reflect the change with a corresponding increase or decrease in our income tax provision in the consolidated income statement. Historically, our income taxes have been sufficiently provided to cover our actual income tax liabilities among the jurisdictions in which we operate. Nonetheless, our future effective tax rate could still be adversely affected by the following factors, including (i) the geographical allocation of our future earnings, (ii) the change in tax laws or our interpretation of tax laws, (iii) the changes in governing regulations and accounting principles, (iv) the changes in the valuation of our deferred tax assets and liabilities and (v) the outcome of the income tax examinations. As a result, we routinely 45 Table of Contents assess the possibilities of material changes resulting from the aforementioned factors to determine the adequacy of our income tax provision. Based on our results for the twelve months ended July 31, 2009, a one percentage-point change in our provision for income taxes as a percentage of income before taxes would have resulted in an increase or decrease in the provision of approximately $2.2 million. Effective August 1, 2007, we adopted Financial Interpretation No. 48, Accounting for Uncertainty in Income Taxes an interpretation of FASB Statement No. 109 (FIN 48). FIN 48 contains a two-step approach to recognizing and measuring uncertain tax positions accounted for in accordance with SFAS No. 109, Accounting for Income Taxes . The first step is to evaluate the tax position for recognition by determining if the weight of available evidence indicates that it is more likely than not that the position will be sustained on audit, including resolution of related appeals or litigation processes, if any. The second step is to measure the tax benefit as the largest amount that is more than 50% likely of being realized upon settlement. Although we believe we have adequately reserved for our uncertain tax positions, no assurance can be given that the final tax outcome of these matters will not be different. We adjust these reserves in light of changing facts and circumstances, such as the closing of a tax audit or the refinement of an estimate. To the extent that the final tax outcome of these matters is different than the amounts recorded, such differences will impact the provision for income taxes in the period in which such determination is made. The provision for income taxes includes the impact of reserve provisions and changes to reserves that are considered appropriate, as well as the related net interest settlement of any particular position, could require the use of cash. In addition, we are subject to the continuous examination of our income tax returns by various taxing authorities, including the Internal Revenue Service and US states. We regularly assess the likelihood of adverse outcomes resulting from these examinations to determine the adequacy of our provision for income taxes. Long-lived Asset Valuation, Including Intangible Assets We evaluate long-lived assets, including property and equipment and certain identifiable intangibles for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. Recoverability of assets is measured by comparing the carrying amount of an asset to the estimated undiscounted future cash flows expected to be generated by the use of the asset. If the estimated undiscounted cash flows change in the future, we may be required to reduce the carrying amount of an asset. Stock-Based Compensation We account for our stock-based awards to employees and non-employees using the fair value method as required by SFAS No. 123(R), Share-Based Payment . SFAS No. 123(R) requires that the compensation cost related to share-based payment transactions, measured based on the fair value of the equity or liability instruments issued, be recognized in the financial statements. Determining the fair value of options using the Black-Scholes model, or other currently accepted option valuation models, requires highly subjective assumptions, including future stock price volatility and expected time until exercise, which greatly affect the calculated fair value on the grant date. If actual results are not consistent with our assumptions and judgments used in estimating the key assumptions, we may be required to record additional compensation or income tax expense, which could have a material impact on our consolidated financial position and results of operations. 46 Table of Contents Retained Insurance Liabilities We are partially self-insured for certain losses related to medical, general liability, workers' compensation and auto liability. Our insurance policies are subject to a $250,000 deductible per claim, with the exception of our medical policy which is $150,000 per claim. In addition, each of our policies contains an aggregate stop loss which limits our ultimate exposure. Our liability represents an estimate of the ultimate cost of claims incurred as of the balance sheet date. The estimated liability is not discounted and is established based upon analysis of historical data and actuarial estimates. The primary estimates used in the actuarial analysis include total payroll and revenue. Our estimates have not materially fluctuated from actual results. While we believe these estimates are reasonable based on the information currently available, if actual trends, including the severity of claims and medical cost inflation, differ from our estimates, our consolidated financial position, results of operations or cash flows could be impacted. The process of determining our insurance reserves requires estimates with various assumptions, each of which can positively or negatively impact those balances. The total amount reserved for all policies is approximately $5.8 million as of July 31, 2009. If the total number of participants in the medical plan changed by 10% we estimate that our medical expense would change by approximately $1.0 million and our medical accrual would change by approximately $200,000. If our total payroll changed by 10% we estimate that our workers' compensation expense would change by approximately $100,000 and our accrual for workers' compensation expenses would change by $100,000. A 10% change in revenue would change our insurance premium for the general liability and umbrella policy by less than $25,000. Segment Reporting Our North American and UK regions are considered two separate operating segments, which have been aggregated into one reportable segment because they share similar economic characteristics. Recently Issued Accounting Standards For a description of the new accounting standards that affect us, refer to Note 1 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. 
