CIK: 900075
Company Name: COPART INC
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2007-10-01


Item 7. Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations SPECIAL NOTE REGARDING FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS This annual report on Form 10-K, including the information incorporated by reference herein, contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the Securities Act ), and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, (the Exchange Act ). All statements other than statements of historical facts are statements that could be deemed forward-looking statements. In some cases, you can identify forward-looking statements by terms such as may, will, should, expect, plan, intend, forecast, anticipate, believe, estimate, predict, potential, continue or the negative of these terms or other comparable terminology. The forward-looking statements contained in this report involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties and situations that may cause our or our industry actual results, level of activity, performance or achievements to be materially different from any future results, levels of activity, performance or achievements expressed or implied by these statements. These factors include those listed in Part I, Item 1A. Risk Factors beginning on page 19 of this annual report on Form 10-K and those discussed elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K. We encourage investors to review these factors carefully together with the other matters referred to herein, as well as in the other documents we file with the Securities and Exchange Commission (the SEC ). The Company may from time to time make additional written and oral forward-looking statements, including statements contained in the Company filings with the SEC. The Company does not undertake to update any forward-looking statement that may be made from time to time by or on behalf of the Company. Although we believe that, based on information currently available to the Company and its management, the expectations reflected in the forward-looking statements are reasonable, we cannot guarantee future results, levels of activity, performance or achievements. You should not place undue reliance on these forward-looking statements. Overview We provide vehicle suppliers, primarily insurance companies, with a full range of remarketing services to process and sell vehicles primarily over the Internet through our Virtual Bidding Second Generation, or VB 2 , Internet auction-style sales technology. In the United Kingdom, or UK, we sell salvage vehicles through a combination of live auctions and Internet bidding. We sell principally to licensed vehicle dismantlers, rebuilders, repair licensees, used vehicle dealers and exporters. Salvage vehicles are either damaged vehicles deemed a total loss or not economically repairable by the insurance companies or are recovered stolen vehicles for which an insurance settlement with the vehicle owner has already been made. We offer vehicle suppliers a full range of remarketing services that expedite each stage of the salvage vehicle sales process and minimize administrative and processing costs. In the United States, or US, we sell vehicles primarily as an agent and derive revenue primarily from fees paid by vehicle suppliers and vehicle buyers as well as related fees for services such as towing and storage. In the United Kingdom, we operate primarily on a principal basis, 38 purchasing the salvage vehicle outright from the insurance companies and reselling the vehicle for our own account to buyers through a combination of live auctions and Internet sales. Our revenues consist of salvage fees charged to vehicle suppliers and vehicle buyers, transportation revenue and purchased vehicle revenues. Consignment revenues from suppliers are generally generated either on a fixed fee contract basis where we collect a fixed amount for selling the vehicles regardless of the selling price of the vehicle or, under our Percentage Incentive Program, or PIP program, our fees are generally based on a predetermined percentage of the vehicle sales price. Under the fixed fee program, we generally charge an additional fee for title processing and special preparation. Although sometimes included in the consignment fee, we may also charge additional fees for the cost of transporting the vehicle to our facility, storage of the vehicle, and other incidental costs. Under the consignment programs, only the fees associated with vehicle processing are recorded in revenue, not the actual sales price (gross proceeds). Salvage fees also include fees charged to vehicle buyers for purchasing vehicles, storage and annual registration. Transportation revenue includes charges to suppliers for towing vehicles under certain contracts. Transportation revenue also includes towing charges assessed to buyers for delivering vehicles. Purchased vehicle revenue, includes the gross sales price of the vehicle which we have purchased or are otherwise considered to own and primarily generated in the UK. Operating costs consist primarily of operating personnel (which includes yard management, clerical and yard employees), rent, contract vehicle towing, insurance, fuel, equipment maintenance and repair, and costs of vehicles we sold under purchase contracts. Because we operate as a principal in the UK, purchasing and reselling salvaged vehicles for our own account, we expect operating costs to increase as a percentage of revenue in future periods. Costs associated with general and administrative expenses consist primarily of executive management, accounting, data processing, sales personnel, human resources, professional fees, research and development and marketing expenses. During fiscal 2004, we converted all of our North American vehicle remarketing facilities to an Internet-based auction-style model using our VB 2 Internet sales technology. This process employs a two-step bidding process. The first step, called the preliminary bid, allows buyers to submit bids up to one hour before a real time virtual action begins. The second step allows buyers to bid against each other, and the high bidder from the preliminary bidding process, in a real-time process over the Internet. During the second quarter of fiscal 2006, we adopted a formal plan to discontinue the operations of our public auction business Motors Auction Group, or MAG, and dispose of or convert the related assets. The MAG yards converted into salvage facilities will continue to be included in the results of continuing operations on the income statements. 39 Acquisitions and New Operations We have experienced significant growth as we have acquired sixteen vehicle storage facilities and established fourteen new facilities since the beginning of fiscal 2005. All of these acquisitions have been accounted for using the purchase method of accounting. As part of our overall expansion strategy of offering integrated services to vehicle suppliers, we anticipate acquiring and developing facilities in new regions, as well as the regions currently served by our facilities. As part of this strategy, in fiscal 2007 we acquired seven new facilities in the UK located in Sandy; Sandtoft, Sandwich, Westbury, Chester, Denny; and Wootton and in North America we opened new facilities in Baltimore, Maryland, Woodburn, Oregon and Punta Gorda, Florida. In fiscal 2006 we acquired new facilities in or near Greenwood, Nebraska; Grand Island, Nebraska; York Haven, Pennsylvania; Chambersburg, Pennsylvania; Altoona, Pennsylvania; Fruitland, Maryland; Billings, Montana and opened new facilities in or near Honolulu, Hawaii; Lansing, Michigan; Dover, Florida and Jacksonville, Florida. In fiscal 2005 we acquired new facilities in or near Lexington, Kentucky and Columbia, Missouri and opened new facilities in Strongsville, Ohio; Ocala, Florida; Knoxville, Tennessee; Loganville, Georgia; Spokane, Washington; Tallahassee, Florida and Hialeah, Florida. We believe that these acquisitions and openings strengthen our coverage as we have 131 facilities located in North America and the United Kingdom and are able to provide national coverage for our suppliers. On June 14, 2007, we acquired all the issued share capital of Universal Salvage plc, or Universal, for 2.00 per share (approximately $3.94 based on currency exchange rates on June 14, 2007). Universal, based in the UK and operating exclusively within the UK, is a service provider to the motor insurance and automotive industries. The aggregate acquisition consideration paid by us totaled approximately 60.7 million (approximately $120.0 million based on currency exchange rates on June 14, 2007) and was funded from our available cash resources. We also assumed outstanding indebtedness of Universal totaling approximately 2.3 million ($4.5 million as of June 14, 2007). The acquisition marks our first acquisition outside North America and includes the seven facilities discussed above. The period-to-period comparability of our operating results and financial condition is substantially affected by business acquisitions, new openings, weather and product introductions during such periods. In particular, the UK acquisition, because of its size and, also, because the UK operates primarily on the principal model versus the agency model employed in the United States, will have a significant impact on the comparability of revenues and gross margin percentages in future periods. In addition to growth through acquisitions, we seek to increase revenues and profitability by, among other things, (i) acquiring and developing new salvage vehicle storage facilities in key markets, (ii) pursuing national and regional vehicle supply agreements, (iii) expanding our service offerings to suppliers and buyers, and (iv) expanding the application of VB 2 into new markets. In addition, we implement our pricing structure and merchandising procedures and attempt to effect cost efficiencies at each of our acquired facilities by implementing our operational procedures, integrating our management information systems and redeploying personnel, when necessary. 40 Results of Operations The following table sets forth for the periods indicated below, certain information derived from our consolidated statements of income presented in absolute dollars and as a percentage of revenues. There can be no assurance that any trend in operating results will continue in the future. Fiscal 2007 Compared to Fiscal 2006 Revenues The following sets forth information on customer revenue by geographic region based on the location of the selling entity (in thousands, except percentages): Percentage of Percentage of 2007 Revenue 2006 Revenue North America $ 545,861 97 % $ 528,571 100 % United Kingdom 14,819 3 % $ 560,680 100 % $ 528,571 100 % Revenues from continuing operations were approximately $560,680 million during fiscal 2007, an increase of approximately $32.1 million, or 6% over fiscal 2006. Revenue growth from same store sales in North America, those opened before August 1, 2006, was approximately $15.1 million. Revenue growth from new facilities, those opened after August 1, 2006, including facilities in or near Baltimore, Maryland; Woodburn, Oregon; and Punta Gorda, Florida was approximately $2.2 million. Of the increase in revenues in fiscal 2007 as compared to fiscal 2006, $14.8 million was attributable to revenues generated in the UK from June 14, 2007, the date of acquisition. Yard Operation Expenses. Yard operation expenses from continuing operations were approximately $293.9 million during fiscal 2007, a decrease of approximately $4.1 million, or 1.4%, over fiscal 2006. Included in yard expenses is depreciation expense of $30.7 million, an increase of $3.8 million over fiscal 2006. Yard operation expenses decreased to 52.4% of revenues during fiscal 2007, as compared to 56.4% of revenues during fiscal 2006. The decreases in yard expenses, excluding depreciation, were primarily attributable to the decrease in incremental abnormal costs incurred as a result of Hurricanes Katrina and Rita during fiscal 2006. These additional inventory-type costs were approximately $14.1 million during fiscal 2006 as compared to $0.5 million during the fiscal 2007, and were charged to yard operations in accordance with Statement of Financial Accounting Standards (SFAS) No. 151. These costs include the additional subhauling, payroll, equipment and facilities expenses directly related to the operating conditions created by the hurricanes. These costs do not include normal expenses associated with the increased unit volume created by the hurricanes, which are deferred until the sale of the units and are recognized as vehicle pooling costs on the balance sheet. As of July 31, 2007, all of the incremental salvage vehicles received as a result of the hurricanes Katrina and Rita have 41 been sold. In addition, yard operation expenses include costs attributable to the UK of $10.4 million. The UK operates primarily on a principal basis and, accordingly has a lower gross margin percentage. The following sets forth information on gross margin, defined as revenue less yard operation expenses, and gross margin percentage by geographic region (in thousands, except percentages): 2007 2006 North America $ 262,402 48.1 % $ 230,548 43.6 % United Kingdom 4,380 29.6 % $ 266,782 47.6 % $ 230,548 43.6 % General and Administrative. General and administrative expenses from continuing operations were approximately $63.6 million for fiscal 2007, an increase of approximately $4.7 million, or 7.9%, over fiscal 2006. Included in general and administrative expenses is depreciation of $5.7 million an increase of $1.2 million over fiscal 2006. Also included are $2.2 million in general and administrative costs, other than depreciation attributable to the UK operations. Finally the remaining increase was due to increased payroll costs, professional services, and general corporate expansion. These increases were offset by decreased operating lease costs on computer equipment leases, which were bought out during the year and a reduction in legal costs. General and administrative expenses increased slightly to 11.3% of revenues during fiscal 2007, as compared to 11.2% of revenues during fiscal 2006. Of the increase in general and administrative expense, $3.0 million was attributable to general and administrative expenses incurred in the UK. General and administrative expenses in the UK include amortization expense relating to the Universal acquisition. The following sets forth information on general and administrative expenses and shown as a percentage of revenue by geographic region (in thousands except percentages): Percentage of Percentage of 2007 Revenue 2006 Revenue North America $ 60,645 11.1 % $ 58,986 11.2 % United Kingdom 2,992 20.2 % $ 63,637 11.3 % $ 58,986 11.2 % Other Income. Total other income was approximately $14.3 million during fiscal 2007, an increase of approximately $11.3 million from fiscal 2006. The increase is due primarily to a $5.5 million increase in interest income due to higher interest rates and a higher average cash and investments balance and a decrease of $4.6 million in losses from an equity investment in Lanelogic Corporation ( Lanelogic ). Other income, which consists primarily of rental income and gain on the sales of assets, increased approximately $1.2 million. 42 Income Taxes. Our effective income tax rates for fiscal 2007 and 2006 were approximately 37.3% and 35.4%, respectively. The increase in the effective tax rate is primarily the result of fiscal 2006 including a non-recurring $1.8 million out-of-period reduction, to deferred tax liabilities and income tax expense originating primarily in 2001 and prior years. Discontinued Operations. Discontinued operations declined $15.7 million from fiscal 2007 to fiscal 2006 as we discontinued our MAG operations and disposed of or converted all the related assets during fiscal 2006. There were no such disposals in fiscal 2007. Net Income. Due to the foregoing factors, we realized net income of approximately $136.3 million for fiscal 2007, compared to net income of approximately $96.9 million for fiscal 2006. Fiscal 2006 Compared to Fiscal 2005 Revenues. Revenues from continuing operations were approximately $528.6 million during fiscal 2006, an increase of approximately $80.8 million, or 18.1%, over fiscal 2005. The increase was due primarily to increased vehicle unit volume driven by the additional salvage vehicles associated with hurricanes Katrina and Rita, growth in vehicles processed at existing yards and vehicles processed from new yards opened or acquired in fiscal 2006. Existing facilities contributed approximately $71.3 million of the revenue growth and new facilities in or near Honolulu, Hawaii; Greenwood, Nebraska; Grand Island, Nebraska; York Haven, Pennsylvania; Chambersburg, Pennsylvania; Altoona, Pennsylvania; Fruitland, Maryland; Lansing, Michigan and Billings, Montana contributed approximately $9.5 million of new revenue growth. Yard Operation Expenses. Yard operation expenses from continuing operations were approximately $298.0 million during fiscal 2006, an increase of approximately $52.4 million, or 21.3%, over fiscal 2005. Included in yard expenses is depreciation expense of $26.9 million, an increase of $0.3 million over fiscal 2005. Yard operation expenses increased to 56.4% of revenues during fiscal 2006, as compared to 54.9% of revenues during fiscal 2005. The increases in yard expenses were primarily attributable to the cost of handling increased volume, a general increase in subhauling costs and the incremental abnormal costs incurred as a result of hurricanes Katrina and Rita. These additional inventory-type costs were approximately $14.1 million in fiscal 2006 and were charged to yard operations in accordance with SFAS 151. These costs include the additional subhauling, payroll, equipment and facilities expenses directly related to the operating conditions created by the hurricanes. These costs do not include normal expenses associated with the increased unit volume created by the hurricanes, which are deferred until the sale of the units and are recognized as vehicle pooling costs on the balance sheet. At the end of fiscal 2006, approximately 28% of the incremental salvage vehicles received as a result of the hurricanes remained unsold and in inventory and were subsequently disposed of in fiscal 2007. The processing of the hurricane vehicles has had and may continue to have a negative impact on gross and operating margin percentages. General and Administrative. General and administrative expenses from continuing operations were approximately $59.0 million during fiscal 2006, an increase of approximately $13.4 million, or 29.3%, over 43 fiscal 2005. The increase was primarily due to increases in telecommunication costs, information technology payroll costs, costs relating to Sarbanes-Oxley compliance, SFAS 123(R) stock compensation costs and outside legal expense associated with a patent litigation matter that was settled during fiscal 2006 and other pending litigation and general corporate expansion. General and administrative expenses increased to 11.2% of revenues during fiscal 2006, as compared to 10.2% of revenues during fiscal 2005. The increase in general and administrative expenses as a percentage of total revenues reflects in part changes in the nature of our business. In particular, the introduction of VB 2 resulted in a reduction in certain yard operation expenses relating to conducting live auctions but increased our general and administrative expenses as we continued to make technology infrastructure investments and hire additional personnel to enhance and maintain VB 2 and other products for use in our auctions. Other income. Total other income was approximately $3.0 million during fiscal 2006, a decrease of approximately $5.2 million, from fiscal 2005. The decrease was due primarily to a $6.8 million loss recognized from an equity investment in an unconsolidated privately-held entity. This loss was offset by an increase in interest income of approximately $3.3 million due to higher interest rates and a higher average cash and investments balance. Other income, which consists primarily of rental income and gain on the sales of non-fleet assets, decreased approximately $1.7 million, resulting from losses on disposals of fixed assets. Income Taxes. Our effective combined federal, state and local income tax rates for fiscal 2006 and 2005 was approximately 35.4% and 38.1%, respectively. The decrease in effective tax rate is primarily the result of recording a non-recurring $1.8 million out-of-period reduction to deferred tax liabilities and income tax expense originating primarily in 2001 and adjustments to our state tax reserves based on the favorable outcome of an audit. Discontinued Operations. During the second quarter of fiscal 2006, we adopted a formal plan to discontinue the operations of our public auction business Motors Auction Group, MAG, and dispose of or convert the related assets. The MAG yards to be converted into salvage facilities will continue to be included in the results of continuing operations on the income statements. Under SFAS No 142, Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets, goodwill is subject to at least an annual assessment for impairment by applying a fair value-based test or on an interim basis if certain indicators are present. The discontinuation of an operating segment is one of those indicators. Accordingly, goodwill was tested for impairment in accordance with the provisions of SFAS No. 142 as of the second quarter of 2006. We used a combination of valuation techniques, which included consideration of market-based approaches and an income approach, in determining the fair value of our applicable reporting unit in the interim impairment test of goodwill. In fiscal 2006, the impairment test indicated that the carrying value of the MAG goodwill exceeded its implied fair value. The corresponding write-down of goodwill of $21.8 million to its fair value was reported as a component of discontinued operations in the accompanying consolidated statements of income. We also determined that the value of the remaining MAG covenants not to compete were impaired and recorded an 44 impairment expense in the amount of $0.5 million. This write-down of covenants not to compete is also reported as a component of discontinued operations in the accompanying consolidated statements of income. During the second quarter of fiscal 2006, we sold the business and related assets of one of the MAG locations for approximately $0.1 million. During the third quarter of fiscal 2006, we sold the business and related assets including the real estate of one of the MAG locations. We received a $12 million promissory note from the buyer as purchase consideration. The promissory note bears interest at 7% per annum. Interest only payments on the note are due monthly until maturity on May 28, 2011, at which time the balance of the note is due in full. The note receivable is collateralized by the real estate and is personally guaranteed by the buyer. The consideration was allocated to the real estate, based on an appraisal, and to the business in proportion to their estimated fair values. The portion of the consideration allocated to the real estate sale totaled $7.1 million. We deferred a gain on the sale of the real estate of approximately $2.5 million that will be recognized upon payment of the principal balance of the note receivable. The remaining consideration of $4.9 million is allocated to the sale of the business. We recognized a gain on the sale of the business of approximately $3.0 million, which is included in the results of the discontinued operations. During the fourth quarter of fiscal 2006, we sold the business and related assets excluding the real estate of another MAG location. We received a $1.2 million promissory note and $0.2 million in cash from the buyer as purchase consideration. We recognized a gain on the sale of the business of approximately $1.3 million which is included in the results of discontinued operations. As of July 31, 2006, no MAG locations remained. Three of the original six MAG locations were sold and three were converted into salvage facilities. Net Income. Due to the foregoing factors, we realized net income of approximately $96.9 million for fiscal 2006, compared to net income of approximately $102.1 million for fiscal 2005. Liquidity and Capital Resources Historically, we have financed our growth through cash generated from operations, public offerings of common stock, the equity issued in conjunction with certain acquisitions and debt financing. Cash and cash equivalents, combined with short-term investments decreased by approximately $74.3 million from July 31, 2006 to July 31, 2007, primarily as a result of cash used for the acquisition of Universal, purchases of property and equipment and repurchases of common stock which was offset by cash generated from continuing operations. During the winter months, most of our facilities process 10% to 30% more vehicles than at other times of the year. This increased seasonal volume requires the increased use of our cash to pay out advances and handling costs of the additional business. Our primary source of cash generated by operations is from the collection of sellers fees, buyers fees and reimbursable advances from the proceeds of sold vehicles. As of July 31, 2007, we had working capital of approximately $247.9 million, including cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments of approximately $201.0 million. During the course of the year, we invest substantially all of our cash balances in AAA rated auction rate securities. Auction rate securities are principally variable rate securities tied to short-term interest rates with maturities on the face of the securities in excess of 90 days. Auction rate securities have interest rate resets through a modified Dutch auction, at 45 predetermined short-term intervals, usually every 7, 28 or 35 days. They trade at par and are callable at par on any interest payment date at the option of the issuer. Interest paid during a given period is based upon the interest rate determined during the prior auction. Although these instruments are issued and rated as long-term securities, they are priced and traded as short-term securities because of the liquidity provided through the interest rate reset. We believe that our currently available cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments and cash generated from operations will be sufficient to satisfy our operating and working capital requirements for at least the next 12 months. However, if we experience significant growth in the future, we may be required to raise additional cash through the issuance of new debt or additional equity. Operating Activities Net cash provided by operating activities increased by approximately $40.1 million to $182.1 million during fiscal 2007 when compared to fiscal 2006, due to the increase in net income which was offset in part to the timing of routine changes in working capital items. The increase in net income is primarily the result of increased revenue in fiscal 2007 and the loss on discontinued operations in the amount of $17.9 million in fiscal 2006, which did not recur in fiscal 2007. Net cash provided by operating activities increased by approximately $6.0 million to $141.9 million during fiscal 2006 when compared to fiscal 2005. During fiscal 2006 we consumed cash through the growth in accounts receivable and vehicle pooling costs and we generated cash through the growth in deferred revenue. The movements in these accounts are driven primarily by the significant growth in vehicles held for sale which was impacted by hurricanes Katrina and Rita. The decrease in net income is primarily a result of the loss on discontinued operations in the amount of $17.9 million, which was offset in part by increased revenue. Net cash provided by operating activities increased by approximately $20.9 million to $136.0 million during fiscal 2005 when compared to fiscal 2004, primarily due to the increase in net income, which was offset in part to the timing of routine changes in working capital items. Investing Activities During the fiscal years ended July 31, 2007, 2006 and 2005, we purchased approximately $921.8 million, $717.1 million and $755.4 million, respectively of short-term investments, which were offset by the sale of $967.9 million, $568.4 million, $928.0 million, respectively of short-term investments. We typically invest our cash in auction rate notes with ratings of AAA. Capital expenditures related to continuing operations (excluding those associated with property and equipment attributable to acquisitions) were approximately $76.8 million, $97.0 million and $66.2 million for fiscal 2007, 2006 and 2005, respectively. Our capital expenditures are primarily related to opening and improving facilities and acquiring yard equipment. 46 During the fiscal year ended July 31, 2007, we used approximately $120.0 million in cash for the acquisition of Universal which includes the following seven locations in the UK: Sandy, Sandtoft, Sandwich, Westbury, Chester, Denny, and Wootton. During the fiscal year ended July 31, 2006, we used cash for the acquisition of facilities in or near Billings, Montana; Fruitland, Maryland; Altoona, Pennsylvania; Chambersburg, Pennsylvania; York Haven, Pennsylvania; Greenwood, Nebraska and Grand Island, Nebraska, which had an aggregate cash cost of approximately $23.0 million. During the fiscal year ended July 31, 2005, we used cash for the acquisition of operations in Lexington, Kentucky and Columbia, Missouri, which had an aggregate cash cost of approximately $4.5 million. During the year ended July 31, 2006, we invested approximately $9.0 million for a 50% equity interest in Lanelogic, a Delaware limited liability corporation ( Lanelogic ). We have no further contractual funding commitment. Based on our evaluation of Lanelogic and the related agreements, management believes that Lanelogic does not constitute a Variable Interest Entity as defined in FIN No. 46, Consolidation of Variable Interest Entities . As a result, our investment has been accounted for under the equity method prescribed by APB No. 18, The Equity Method of Accounting for Investments in Common Stock . During the second quarter of fiscal 2007, our Chairman and CEO, made a personal unsecured loan to Lanelogic to prevent a restriction of working capital from disrupting its business as Lanelogic sought additional equity financing. The loan was repaid during the second quarter ended January 31, 2007. We have concluded that the personal unsecured loan did not cause a change in the accounting of Lanelogic as an equity method investment. During the second quarter ended January 31, 2007, Lanelogic received a strategic equity investment totaling approximately $10 million from two new investment groups as well as Lanelogic founder. We did not participate in this additional equity financing into Lanelogic. In addition, Lanelogic converted from a limited liability company to a Delaware Corporation, of which we are now a stockholder. On August 15, 2007, subsequent to the end of our fiscal year, our Chairman and CEO provided a personal guaranty in favor of Dealer Services Corporation as a condition for providing a credit facility to Lanelogic, Inc. a Corporation in which we have a less than controlling interest. The guaranty was approved by our Audit Committee. We have concluded that the personal guaranty does not cause a change in the accounting of Lanelogic as an equity method investment. Financing Activities In fiscal 2007, 2006 and 2005, we generated approximately $10.9 million, $5.4 million and $1.8 million, respectively, through the exercise of stock options. In fiscal 2007, 2006 and 2005, we generated approximately $1.5 million, $1.6 million and $1.4 million, respectively, through the issuance of shares under the employee stock purchase program. In February 2003, our Board of Directors authorized us to repurchase up to 9.0 million shares of our common stock. The repurchases may be effected through solicited or unsolicited transactions in the open market or in privately negotiated transactions. No time limit has been placed on the duration of the share 47 repurchase program. The repurchases will be made at such times and in such amounts as we deem appropriate and may be discontinued at any time. For the year ended July 31, 2007, we repurchased 2,995,405 shares at a weighted average price of $29.91. For the year ended July 31, 2006, we repurchased 366,000 shares at a weighted average price of $24.24. No shares were repurchased in fiscal 2005. We accounted for the repurchase of our common stock in the years ended July 31, 2007 and 2006 by reducing common stock by $89.6 million and $8.9 million, respectively. During the period from February 2003 through July 31, 2007, we repurchased a total of 7,033,705 shares at a weighted average price of $18.41. Contractual Obligations The following table summarizes our significant contractual obligations and commercial commitments as of July 31, 2007 (in thousands): Payments Due By Period Contractual Obligations Total Less than 1 Year 1-3 Years 3-5 Years More than 5 Years Operating leases(1) $ 118,365 $ 20,330 $ 34,206 $ 25,931 $ 37,898 Capital leases(1) 3,588 635 1,270 898 785 Pending acquisition of Century Salvage(2) 9,148 9,148 Total contractual obligations $ 131,101 $ 30,113 $ 35,476 $ 26,829 $ 38,683 Amount of Commitment Expiration Per Period Commercial Commitments(3) Total Less than 1 Year 1-3 Years 3-5 Years More than 5 Years Letters of credit $ 11,763 $ 11,559 $ 204 (1) Contractual obligations consist of future non-cancelable minimum lease payments under capital and operating leases, used in the normal course of business. (2) On July 20, 2007, we entered into a definitive agreement to acquire Century Salvage Sales Limited, a vehicle salvage disposal company with three facilities located in the United Kingdom. The transaction closed on August 1, 2007. (3) Commercial commitments include primarily letters of credit provided for insurance programs and certain business transactions. 48 Credit Facilities On February 23, 2001, we entered into a credit facility with our existing banking syndicate. The facility provided by Wells Fargo Bank, Fleet National Bank and U.S. Bank National Association consists of an unsecured revolving reducing line of credit in the amount of approximately $10.6 million. On May 8, 2006, the line of credit was reduced to zero and the line of credit was terminated in accordance with its terms. On November 13, 2006, Universal Salvage, our wholly owned subsidiary purchased on June 14, 2007, entered into three credit facilities with National Westminster Bank Plc. The first facility provides approximately $8.0 million in overdraft protection and working capital. The second and third facilities of approximately $6.0 and $10.0 million, respectively, provide liquidity for acquisitions and investments. Each of these facilities carries an interest rate of the bank index, which was 5.75% at July 31, 2007, plus .75% and is collateralize by real property. At July 31, 2007 there were no amounts borrowed under these facilities. Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements As of July 31, 2007, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements (as defined in item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K). Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates The preparation of consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and the related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates, including those related to vehicle pooling costs, allowance for doubtful accounts, goodwill, income taxes, long-lived assets and self insured liabilities. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. Management has discussed the selection of critical accounting policies and estimates with the Audit Committee of the Board of Directors and the Audit Committee has reviewed our disclosure relating to critical accounting policies and estimates in this annual report on Form 10-K. Our significant accounting policies are described in Note 1 to our consolidated financial statements for fiscal 2007. The following is a summary of the more significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements: Revenue Recognition We provide a portfolio of services to our sellers and buyers that facilitate the sale and delivery of a vehicle from seller to buyer. These services include the ability to use our Internet sales technology and vehicle delivery, loading, title processing, preparation and storage. We evaluate multiple-element arrangements relative to our buyer and seller agreements in accordance with Emerging Issues Task Force Issue No. 00-21, Revenue 49 Arrangements with Multiple Deliverables ( EITF 00-21 ), which addresses accounting for multiple-element arrangements, and Staff Accounting Bulletin No. 104, Revenue Recognition ( SAB 104 ), which addresses revenue recognition for units of accounting. The services we provide to the seller of a vehicle involve disposing of a vehicle on the seller behalf and under most of our current North American contracts, collecting the proceeds from the buyer. We are not entitled to any such seller fees until we have collected the sales proceeds from the buyer for the seller and, accordingly, we recognize revenue for seller services after service delivery and cash collection. Vehicle sales, where we purchase and remarket vehicles on our own behalf are recognized in accordance with SAB 104 on the sale date, which is typically the point of high bid acceptance. Upon high bid acceptance, a legal binding contract is formed with the buyer, and we record the gross sales price as revenue. In certain cases, seller fees are not contingent upon collection of the seller proceeds from the buyer. However, we determined that we are not able to separate the services into separate units of accounting because we do not have fair value for undelivered items. As a result, we do not recognize seller fees until the final seller service has been delivered, which generally occurs upon collection of the sales proceeds from the buyer for the seller. We provide a number of services to the buyer of the vehicle, charging a separate fee for each service. Each of these services has been assessed under the criteria of EITF 00-21 to determine whether we have met the requirements to separate them into units of accounting within a multi-element arrangement. We have concluded that the sale and the post-sale services are separate units of accounting. The fees for sale services are recognized upon completion of the sale, and the fees for the post-sale services are recognized upon successful completion of those services using the residual method. We also charge buyers an annual registration fee for the right to participate in our vehicle sales program, which is recognized ratably over the term of the arrangement, and relist and late-payment fees, which are recognized upon receipt of payment by the buyer. No provision for returns has been established, as all sales are final with no right of return, although we provide for bad debt expense in the case of non-performance by our buyers and sellers. Vehicle Pooling Costs We defer in vehicle pooling costs certain yard operation expenses associated with vehicles consigned to and received by us, but not sold as of the balance sheet date. We quantify the deferred costs using a calculation that includes the number of vehicles at our facilities at the beginning and end of the period, the number of vehicles sold during the period and an allocation of certain yard operation expenses of the period. The primary expenses allocated and deferred are certain facility costs, labor, transportation, and vehicle processing. If our allocation factors change, then yard operation expenses could increase or decrease correspondingly in the future. These costs are expensed as vehicles are sold in the subsequent periods on an average cost basis. 50 We apply the provisions of Statement of Financial Accounting Standards ( SFAS ), No. 151, Inventory Costs ( SFAS 151 ) to our vehicle pooling costs. SFAS 151 requires that items such as idle facility expense, excessive spoilage, double freight and rehandling costs be recognized as current-period charges regardless of whether they meet the criteria of so abnormal as provided in Accounting Research Bulletin No. 43, Chapter 4, Inventory Pricing . In addition, SFAS 151 requires that the allocation of fixed production overheads to the costs of conversion be based on the normal capacity of production facilities. Allowance for Doubtful Accounts We maintain an allowance for doubtful accounts in order to provide for estimated losses resulting from disputed amounts billed to suppliers or buyers and the inability of our suppliers or buyers to make required payments. If billing disputes exceed expectations and/or if the financial condition of our suppliers or buyers were to deteriorate, additional allowances may be required. Valuation of Goodwill We evaluate the impairment of goodwill of our salvage sales operating segment, annually (or on an interim basis if certain indicators are present) by comparing the fair value of the operating segment to its carrying value. Future adverse changes in market conditions or poor operating results of the operating segment could result in an inability to recover the carrying value of the investment, thereby requiring impairment charges in the future. Income Taxes and Deferred Tax Assets We are required to estimate income tax provisions and amounts ultimately payable or recoverable in numerous jurisdictions. Such estimates involve significant interpretations of regulations and are inherently very complex. Resolution of income tax treatments in individual jurisdictions may not be known for many years after completion of any fiscal year. We evaluate the realizability of our deferred tax assets on an ongoing basis. U.S. generally accepted accounting principles require the assessment of our performance and other relevant factors when determining the need for a valuation allowance with respect to these deferred tax assets. Our ability to realize deferred tax assets is dependent on the Company ability to generate future taxable income. Accordingly, we have established a valuation allowance when, in certain taxable jurisdictions, the utilization of the tax asset is uncertain. Additional timing differences, future earning trends and/or tax strategies may occur which could warrant a need for establishing an additional valuation allowance or a reserve. Long-lived Asset Valuation, including Intangible Assets We evaluate long-lived assets, including property and equipment and certain identifiable intangibles for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. Recoverability of assets is measured by a comparing the carrying amount of an asset to the 51 estimated undiscounted future cash flows expected to be generated by the use of the asset. If the estimated undiscounted cash flows change in the future, we may be required to reduce the carrying amount of an asset. Stock-Based Compensation We account for our stock-based awards to employees and non-employees using the fair value method as required by SFAS No. 123(R), Share-Based Payment . SFAS No. 123(R) requires that the compensation cost related to share-based payment transactions, measured based on the fair value of the equity or liability instruments issued, be recognized in the financial statements. Determining the fair value of options using the Black-Scholes model, or other currently accepted option valuation models, requires highly subjective assumptions, including future stock price volatility and expected time until exercise, which greatly affect the calculated fair value on the grant date. If actual results are not consistent with our assumptions and judgments used in estimating the key assumptions, we may be required to record additional compensation or income tax expense, which could have a material impact on financial position and results of operations. Retained Insurance Liabilities We are partially self-insured for certain losses related to medical, general liability, workers compensation and auto liability. Our liability represents an estimate of the ultimate cost of claims incurred as of the balance sheet date. The estimated liability is not discounted and is established based upon analysis of historical data and actuarial estimates. While we believe these estimates are reasonable based on the information currently available, if actual trends, including the severity of claims and medical cost inflation, differ from our estimates, our financial position, results of operations or cash flows could be impacted. Recently Issued Accounting Standards For a description of the new accounting standards that affect us, refer to Note 1 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Form 10-K. 
