CIK: 900075
Company Name: COPART INC
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2005-10-14


Item 7. Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations SPECIAL NOTE REGARDING FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS This report, including the information incorporated by reference herein, contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933 and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. In some cases, you can identify forward-looking statements by terms such as may, will, should, expect, plan, intend, forecast, anticipate, believe, estimate, predict, potential, continue or the negative of these terms or other comparable terminology. The forward-looking statements contained in this report involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties and situations that may cause our or our industry actual results, level of activity, performance or achievements to be materially different from any future results, levels of activity, performance or achievements expressed or implied by these statements. These factors include those listed under the caption Factors That May Affect Future Results beginning on page 15 of this report and those discussed elsewhere in this report. We encourage investors to review these factors carefully. Although we believe that, based on information currently available to Copart and its management, the expectations reflected in the forward-looking statements are reasonable, we cannot guarantee future results, levels of activity, performance or achievements. You should not place undue reliance on these forward-looking statements. Overview We provide vehicle suppliers, primarily insurance companies, with a full range of services to process and sell salvage vehicles over the Internet through our Virtual Bidding Second Generation ( VB 2 ) Internet auction-style sales technology. We sell principally to licensed vehicle dismantlers, rebuilders, repair licensees, used vehicle dealers and exporters. Salvage vehicles are either damaged vehicles deemed a total loss for insurance or business purposes or are recovered stolen vehicles for which an insurance settlement with the vehicle owner has already been made. We offer vehicle suppliers a full range of services that expedite each stage of the salvage vehicle sales process and minimize administrative and processing costs. We generate revenues primarily from fees paid by vehicle suppliers and vehicle buyers as well as related fees for services such as towing and storage. We process salvage vehicles principally on a consignment method, on either the Percentage Incentive Program ( PIP ) or on a fixed fee consignment basis. Using either consignment method, only the fees associated with vehicle processing are recorded in revenue. For the fiscal years ended July 31, 2005, 2004 and 2003, approximately 68%, 65% and 67% of the vehicles we sold, respectively, were processed under PIP. We attempt to convert vehicle supplier agreements at acquired operations to PIP, which typically results in higher net returns to vehicle suppliers and higher fees to us than standard fixed fee consignment programs. Those vehicles not sold under the PIP program were processed under fixed fee agreements. Due to a number of factors, including the timing and size of new acquisitions, market conditions, and acceptance of PIP by vehicle suppliers, the percentage of vehicles processed under these programs in future periods may vary. Our revenues consist of salvage fees charged to vehicle suppliers and vehicle buyers, transportation revenue and purchased vehicle revenues. Salvage fees from vehicle suppliers include sales fees under PIP agreements and fixed fee programs where we charge for title processing, special preparation, storage and selling. Salvage fees also include fees charged to vehicle buyers for purchasing vehicles, storage and annual registration. Transportation revenue includes charges to suppliers for towing vehicles under fixed fee contracts. Transportation revenue also includes towing charges assessed to buyers for delivering vehicles. 27 Purchased vehicle revenues are comprised of the price that buyers paid at our sales for vehicles processed that we own. Costs attributable to yard and fleet expenses consist primarily of operating personnel (which includes yard management, clerical and yard employees), rent, contract vehicle towing, insurance, fuel, fleet maintenance and repair, and costs of vehicles we sold under purchase contracts. Costs associated with general and administrative expenses consist primarily of executive management, accounting, data processing, sales personnel, human resources, professional fees, research and development and marketing expenses. During fiscal 2004, we converted all of our salvage vehicle storage and sales facilities to an Internet based auction-style model using our VB 2 Internet sales technology. This second generation technology combines two bidding processes. An open Preliminary Bidding feature allows a buyer to enter bids either at a bidding station at the storage facility during the three preview days or over the Internet. To improve the effectiveness of bidding, the VB 2 system lets a buyer see the current high bid on the vehicle they want to purchase. The preliminary bidding phase is an open sales format. Buyers enter the maximum price they are willing to pay for a vehicle and BID4U will incrementally bid the vehicle on their behalf. Preliminary bidding ends one hour prior to the start of an Internet-only virtual sale. BID4U will represent the high preliminary bidder at the Internet-only virtual sale. This feature allows bidders the opportunity to bid against each other and the high preliminary bidder. The bidders enter bids via the Internet in a real time format. BID4U submits bids for the high preliminary bidder, up to their maximum bid. When bidding stops, a countdown is initiated. If no bids are received during the countdown, the vehicle sells to the highest bidder. VB 2 opens our sales process to registered buyers anywhere in the world who have Internet access. We believe the implementation of VB 2 across our salvage operations has increased the pool of available buyers for each sale and the added competition has increased the amount buyers are willing to pay for salvage from us. It has also improved the efficiency of our operations. For fiscal 2005, sales of vehicles to buyers outside the state where the vehicle is located accounted for 46% of total vehicles sold; 25% of salvage vehicles were sold to out of state buyers and 21% were sold to buyers out of country. The period-to-period comparability of our operating results and financial condition is substantially affected by business acquisitions, new openings, weather and product introductions during such periods. Acquisitions and New Operations We have experienced significant growth as we have acquired twelve vehicle storage facilities and established eleven new facilities since the beginning of fiscal 2003. All of these acquisitions have been accounted for using the purchase method of accounting. As part of our overall expansion strategy of offering integrated service to vehicle suppliers, we anticipate acquiring and developing facilities in new regions, as well as the regions currently served by our facilities. As part of this strategy, in fiscal 2005 we acquired new facilities in or near Lexington, Kentucky and Columbia, Missouri and opened new facilities in Strongsville, Ohio; Ocala, Florida; Knoxville, Tennessee; Loganville, Georgia; Spokane, Washington; Tallahassee, Florida and Hialeah, Florida. In fiscal 2004 we acquired new facilities in or near Eugene, Oregon; Cleveland, Ohio and Anchorage, Alaska and opened new facilities in or near Toronto, Canada and Helena, Montana. In fiscal 2003, we acquired new facilities in or near Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania; Reno, Nevada and Richmond, Virginia and opened new facilities in or near Springfield, Missouri; Corpus Christi, Texas; Ft. Pierce, Florida; Rancho Cucamonga, California; Richmond, Virginia and Albany, New York. We believe that these acquisitions and openings strengthen our coverage as we have 117 facilities located in North America and are able to provide national coverage for our suppliers. 28 We seek to increase revenues and profitability by, among other things, (i) acquiring and developing new salvage vehicle storage facilities in key markets, (ii) pursuing national and regional vehicle supply agreements, (iii) expanding our service offerings to suppliers and buyers, (iv) increasing revenue and profitability at our public automobile sales facilities and (v) expanding the application of VB 2 into new markets. In addition, we implement our pricing structure and merchandising procedures and attempt to effect cost efficiencies at each of our acquired facilities by implementing our operational procedures, integrating our management information systems and redeploying personnel, when necessary. Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates The preparation of consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and the related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates, including those related to vehicle pooling costs, allowance for doubtful accounts, goodwill, income taxes, long-lived assets and self insured liabilities. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. Management has discussed the selection of critical accounting policies and estimates with the Audit Committee of the Board of Directors and the Audit Committee has reviewed our disclosure relating to critical accounting policies and estimates in this annual report on Form 10-K. Our significant accounting policies are described in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements for fiscal 2005. The following is a summary of the more significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements: Revenue Recognition We provide a portfolio of services to our sellers and buyers that facilitate the sale and delivery of a vehicle from seller to buyer. These services include the ability to use our internet sales technology and vehicle delivery, loading, title processing, preparation and storage. We evaluate multiple-element arrangements relative to our buyer and seller agreements in accordance with Emerging Issues Task Force Issue No. 00-21, Revenue Arrangements with Multiple Deliverables (EITF 00-21), which addresses accounting for multiple-element arrangements, and Staff Accounting Bulletin No. 104 Revenue Recognition (SAB104), which addresses revenue recognition for units of accounting. The services we provide to the seller of a vehicle involve disposing of a vehicle on the seller's behalf and under most of our current contracts, collecting the proceeds from the buyer. We are not entitled to any such seller fees until we have collected the sales proceeds from the buyer for the seller and, accordingly, we recognize revenue for seller services after service delivery and cash collection. In certain cases, seller fees are not contingent upon collection of the seller proceeds from the buyer. However, we determined that we are not able to separate the services into separate units of accounting because we do not have fair value for undelivered items. As a result, we do not recognize seller fees until the final seller service has been delivered, which occurs upon collection of the sales proceeds from the buyer for the seller. We provide a number of services to the buyer of the vehicle, charging a separate fee for each service. Each of these services has been assessed under the criteria of EITF 00-21 to determine whether we have met the requirements to separate them into units of accounting within a multi-element arrangement. We have concluded that the auction service and the post-auction services are separate units of accounting. The fees for the auction service are recognized upon completion of the auction, and the fees for the post-auction services are recognized upon successful completion of those services using the residual method. 29 We also charge buyers an annual registration fee for the right to participate in our vehicle sales program, which is recognized ratably over the term of the arrangement, and relist and late-payment fees which are recognized upon receipt of payment by the buyer. No provision for returns has been established, as all sales are final with no right of return, although we provide for bad debt expense in the case of non-performance by our sellers. Vehicle Pooling Costs We defer, in vehicle pooling costs, certain yard and fleet expenses associated with vehicles consigned to and received by us but not sold as of the balance sheet date. We quantify the deferred costs using a calculation that includes the number of vehicles at our facilities at the beginning and end of the period, the number of vehicles sold during the period and an allocation of certain yard and fleet expenses of the period. The primary expenses allocated and deferred are certain facility costs, labor, transportation, and vehicle processing. If our allocation factors change, then yard and fleet expenses could increase or decrease correspondingly in the future. These costs are expensed as vehicles are sold in the subsequent periods on an average cost basis. Allowance for Doubtful Accounts We maintain an allowance for doubtful accounts in order to provide for estimated losses resulting from disputed amounts billed to suppliers or buyers and the inability of our suppliers or buyers to make required payments. If billing disputes exceed expectations and/or if the financial condition of our suppliers or buyers were to deteriorate, additional allowances may be required. Valuation of Goodwill and Intangibles We evaluate separately the impairment of goodwill of our salvage and our public sales operating segments, annually by comparing the fair value of the operating segment to its carrying value. In prior years, we evaluated impairment of goodwill at the facility level by comparing the fair value of the reporting unit to its carrying value. During fiscal 2004, when we centralized the sales process with the implementation of VB 2 , we determined the appropriate level for testing for impairment was at the salvage and public sales levels. Under this accounting policy, we have not recognized any charges for the impairment of goodwill in previous years or the current year. Future adverse changes in market conditions or poor operating results of an operating segment could result in an inability to recover the carrying value of the investment, thereby requiring further impairment charges in the future. Deferred Tax Assets We evaluate the realizability of our deferred tax assets on an ongoing basis. Generally accepted accounting principles require the assessment of our performance and other relevant factors when determining the need for a valuation allowance with respect to these deferred tax assets. Our ability to realize deferred tax assets is dependent on its ability to generate future taxable income. Accordingly, we have established a valuation allowance when, in certain taxable jurisdictions, the utilization of the tax asset is uncertain. Additional timing differences and future tax losses may occur which could warrant a need for establishing additional valuation allowances or reserves against certain deferred tax assets. We are also required to estimate income tax provisions and amounts ultimately payable or recoverable in numerous jurisdictions. Such estimates involve significant interpretations of regulations and are inherently very complex. Resolution of income tax treatments in individual jurisdictions may not be known for many years after completion of any fiscal year. 30 Long-lived Asset Valuation We evaluate long-lived assets and certain identifiable intangibles for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. Recoverability of assets is measured by a comparison of the carrying amount of an asset to estimated undiscounted future cash flows expected to be generated by the asset. If the estimated undiscounted cash flows change in the future, we may be required to reduce the carrying amount of an asset. Retained Insurance Liabilities We are partially self-insured for certain losses related to general liability, workers compensation and auto liability. Our liability represents an estimate of the ultimate cost of claims incurred as of the balance sheet date. The estimated liability is not discounted and is established based upon analysis of historical data and actuarial estimates. While we believe these estimates are reasonable based on the information currently available, if actual trends, including the severity of claims and medical cost inflation, differ from our estimates, our results of operations could be impacted. Results of Operations The following table sets forth for the periods indicated below, certain information derived from our consolidated statements of income expressed as a percentage of revenues. There can be no assurance that any trend in operating results will continue in the future. Fiscal Years Ended July 31, 2005 2004 2003 Revenues 100.0 % 100.0 % 100.0 % Operating expenses: Yard and fleet 55.4 58.9 64.6 General and administrative 10.3 10.0 9.3 Total operating expenses 65.7 68.9 73.9 Operating income 34.3 31.1 26.1 Other income, net 1.8 1.4 1.0 Income before income taxes 36.1 32.5 27.1 Income taxes 13.8 12.7 10.6 Net income 22.3 % 19.8 % 16.5 % 31 Fiscal 2005 Compared to Fiscal 2004 Revenues were approximately $457.1 million during fiscal 2005, an increase of approximately $56.3 million, or 14%, over fiscal 2004. The increase was due primarily to increased vehicle sales volume, on which fees are generated and higher fees resulting from increased sales proceeds per vehicle. The increase in gross proceeds per vehicle (the gross sales price of the vehicle) yields higher revenue per car as buyer fees and certain fees, including those sold under the PIP program, are based on the gross proceeds per vehicle and generally increase as gross proceeds per vehicle grow. We believe the increase in proceeds per vehicle was the result of the introduction of Virtual Bidding Second Generation VB 2 as more buyers are able to participate in the sales. Existing facilities contributed approximately $51.7 million of the revenue growth and new facilities in or near Strongsville, Ohio; Ocala, Florida; Knoxville, Tennessee; Lexington, Kentucky; Loganville, Georgia; Spokane, Washington; Tallahassee, Florida; Hialeah, Florida and Columbia, Missouri contributed approximately $4.6 million of new revenue. Historically, we recorded revenue for most seller and buyer fees upon completion of a sale. During the fourth quarter of fiscal 2005, we recorded an immaterial correction of an error to account for our services in accordance with the policy above; the effect of which was to reduce revenue, net income and diluted earnings per share by $4.4 million, $1.5 million and $0.01, respectively for the fourth quarter and fiscal year ended July 31, 2005. Yard and fleet expenses were approximately $253.3 million during fiscal 2005, an increase of approximately $17.5 million, or 7%, over fiscal 2004. The increase in yard and fleet expenses was due principally to the cost of handling increased volume at existing operations and the costs of new facilities. Approximately $4.4 million of the increase was the result of the acquisition and opening of new facilities. Yard and fleet expenses from existing facilities, grew by approximately $13.1 million, or 6%. Yard and fleet expenses decreased to 55% of revenues during fiscal 2005, as compared to 59% of revenues during fiscal 2004 due in part to the fixed cost nature of our business. Yard and fleet expenses in fiscal 2004 included a net adjustment to insurance reserves and sales taxes that decreased this expense by $3.6 million. General and administrative expenses were approximately $47.0 million during fiscal 2005, an increase of approximately $6.8 million, or 17%, over fiscal 2004. The increase was primarily due to increases in software development cost, technology hardware leasing cost, and IT payroll costs, all directly associated with the development and deployment of VB 2 . In addition, the company saw increases in the cost of professional services, impacted by Sarbanes-Oxley compliance and increased payroll and benefit costs associated with expanded support headcount. General and administrative expenses remained relatively flat as a percentage of revenues during fiscal 2005 and 2004. Total other income was approximately $8.2 million during fiscal 2005, an increase of approximately $2.7 million, or 48% from fiscal 2004. The increase was due primarily to an increase in interest income of approximately $3.4 million due to higher interest rates and a higher cash balance. Gain on the sale of fleet equipment decreased approximately $1.4 million as we sold the majority of the fleet in fiscal 2004 in connection with our decision to subcontract towing services. Other income, which consists primarily of rental income, increased approximately $0.7 million as we continued the rental of primarily unutilized areas within our facilities. Our effective combined federal, state and local income tax rate for fiscal 2005 and fiscal 2004 was approximately 38% and 39%, respectively . The decrease in rate is attributable to an overall lower state tax rate, as we made certain revisions to our transfer pricing methodology and the beneficial impact of the growth in interest income which is predominantly federal tax exempt. We do not expect significant changes to our effective tax rate in fiscal 2006. Due to the foregoing factors, we realized net income of approximately $102.1 million for fiscal 2005, compared to net income of approximately $79.2 million for fiscal 2004. 32 Fiscal 2004 Compared to Fiscal 2003 Revenues were approximately $400.8 million during fiscal 2004, an increase of approximately $53.4 million, or 15%, over fiscal 2003. The increase was due primarily to increased salvage vehicle volume, new service revenue and higher fees resulting from increased sales proceeds per vehicle. We believe the increase in proceeds per vehicle was the result of the introduction of Virtual Bidding Second Generation VB 2 as more buyers are able to participate in the sales. Existing facilities contributed approximately $52.0 million of new revenue and new facilities in or near Toronto, Canada; Eugene, Oregon; Helena, Montana; Cleveland, Ohio and Anchorage, Alaska contributed approximately $1.4 million of new revenue. Yard and fleet expenses were approximately $235.8 million during fiscal 2004, an increase of approximately $11.4 million, or 5%, over fiscal 2003. Included in yard and fleet expense is a net adjustment to insurance reserves that decreased this expense by $3.6 million. The increase in yard and fleet expenses was due principally to the cost of handling increased volume at existing operations and the costs of new facilities. Approximately $2.1 million of the increase was the result of the acquisition and opening of new facilities. Depreciation and amortization expense associated with yard activities increased approximately $5.0 million over fiscal 2003. This increase was due primarily to depreciation and amortization of capital expenditures and covenants not to compete and depreciation of acquired assets resulting from the acquisition of new storage and sales facilities. Yard and fleet expenses decreased to 59% of revenues during fiscal 2004, as compared to 65% of revenues during fiscal 2003. Yard and fleet expenses decreased as a percentage of revenue and was due in part to the fixed cost nature of our business. General and administrative expenses were approximately $40.2 million during fiscal 2004, an increase of approximately $8.0 million, or 25%, over fiscal 2003. The increase was primarily due to increases in software development cost, technology hardware leasing cost, and IT payroll costs, all directly associated with the development and deployment of VB 2 . In addition, the company saw increases in the cost of professional services, impacted by Sarbanes-Oxley compliance and increased payroll and benefit costs associated with expanded support headcount. General and administrative expenses increased to 10% of revenues during fiscal 2004, as compared to 9% of revenues during fiscal 2003. Total other income was approximately $5.5 million during fiscal 2004, an increase of approximately $2.1 million, or 62% from fiscal 2003. Gain on sale of fleet equipment represents the gain on the sale of 602 vehicles. The sale of the equipment is associated with our decision to replace company owned trucks with subhaulers for towing services. Interest income decreased approximately $0.1 million due to lower interest rates during the first nine months of the fiscal year. Other income, which consists primarily of rental income, increased approximately $1.1 million as we rented several under-utilized facilities. Our effective combined federal, state and local income tax rate for fiscal 2004 and fiscal 2003 was approximately 39%. Due to the foregoing factors, we realized net income of approximately $79.2 million for fiscal 2004, compared to net income of approximately $57.2 million for fiscal 2003. Liquidity and Capital Resources Historically, we have financed our growth through cash generated from operations, public offerings of common stock, equity issued in conjunction with certain acquisitions and debt financing. Cash and cash equivalents increased by approximately $246.8 million and $61.6 million in fiscal 2005 and 2004, respectively, mainly as a result of the conversion of $172.6 million in short-term investments in fiscal 2005 and changes in operating activities. Our liquidity and capital resources have not been materially affected by inflation. During the winter months, most of our facilities process 10% to 30% more vehicles than at other times of the year. This seasonal volume growth requires increased cash to pay out advances and handling costs of the additional business. 33 As of July 31, 2005, we had working capital of approximately $296.0 million, including cash and cash equivalents of approximately $252.5 million. We invest substantially all of our cash balances in AAA rated auction rate securities. Auction rate securities are principally variable rate securities tied to short-term interest rates with maturities on the face of the securities in excess of 90 days. Auction rate securities have interest rate resets through a modified Dutch auction, at predetermined short-term intervals, usually every 7, 28 or 35 days. They trade at par and are callable at par on any interest payment date at the option of the issuer. Interest paid during a given period is based upon the interest rate determined during the prior auction. Although these instruments are issued and rated as long-term securities, they are priced and traded as short-term securities because of the liquidity provided through the interest rate reset. These auction rate securities were converted to cash prior to the end of the current fiscal year and were held in money market accounts. Our primary source of cash is from the collection of sellers fees and buyers fees from the sale of salvage vehicles. We believe that our currently available cash, cash generated from operations and borrowing availability under our bank credit facilities will be sufficient to satisfy our operating and working capital requirements for at least the next twelve months. However, if we experience significant growth in the future, we may be required to raise additional cash through the issuance of new debt or additional equity. Operating Activities Net cash provided by operating activities increased by $20.9 million from fiscal 2004 to $136.0 million in fiscal 2005, due to the profitability of the company offset by routine changes in working capital. Investing Activities During the fiscal year ended July 31, 2005, we purchased approximately $755.4 million in short-term investments. These purchases were offset by the sale of $928.0 million of short-term investments. We typically invest our cash in auction rate notes with ratings of AAA, which were converted to cash prior to the end of the fiscal year. Capital expenditures (excluding those associated with fixed assets attributable to acquisitions) were approximately $66.3 million, $64.6 million and $70.7 million for fiscal 2005, 2004 and 2003, respectively. Our capital expenditures have related primarily to opening and improving facilities and acquiring yard equipment. In addition, in fiscal 2004, the company sold most of its transportation fleet as it moved to outsource this function. Sale of fleet equipment generated approximately $19.0 million in gross proceeds. During the fiscal year ended July 31, 2005, we used cash for the acquisition of operations in Lexington, Kentucky and Columbia, Missouri, which had an aggregate cash cost of approximately $4.5 million. During the fiscal year ended July 31, 2004, we used cash for the acquisition of operations in Eugene, Oregon; Cleveland, Ohio and Anchorage, Alaska, which had an aggregate cash cost of approximately $4.7 million. During the fiscal year ended July 31, 2003, we used cash for the acquisition of operations in West Mifflin, Pennsylvania; Reno, Nevada and Richmond, Virginia, which had an aggregate cash cost of approximately $6.6 million. Financing Activities In fiscal 2005, 2004 and 2003, we generated approximately $1.8 million, $5.1 million and $0.4 million, respectively, through the exercise of stock options. In fiscal 2005, 2004 and 2003, we generated approximately $1.4 million, $1.3 million and $1.9 million, respectively, through the issuance of shares under the employee stock purchase program. In February 2003, the Company Board of Directors authorized the Company to repurchase up to 9 million shares of its Common Stock. The repurchases may be effected through solicited or unsolicited 34 transactions in the open market or in privately negotiated transactions. No time limit has been placed on the duration of the share repurchase program. The repurchases will be made at such times and in such amounts, as we deem appropriate and may be discontinued at any time. For the year ended July 31, 2005, we did not repurchase any shares. As of July 31, 2005, we repurchased a total of 3,672,300 shares at a weighted average price of $8.49. For the year ended July 31, 2004, we repurchased a total of 977,100 shares at a weighted average price of $10.97 per share. We accounted for the repurchase of our Common Stock by charging Common Stock for $31.2 million. Through October 14, 2005, we have not repurchased any shares. Lease, Purchase and Other Contractual Obligations The following table summarizes our significant contractual obligations and commercial commitments as of July 31, 2005 (in thousands): Payments Due By Period Contractual Obligations(1) Total Less than 1 Year 1-3 Years 3-5 Years More than 5 Years Operating Leases $ 108,338 $ 23,566 $ 33,595 $ 21,917 $ 29,260 Amount of Commitment Expiration Per Period Commercial Commitments(2) Total Less than 1 Year 1-3 Years 3-5 Years More than 5 Years Letters of Credit $10,550 $10,550 (1) Contractual obligations consist of future minimum lease payments under operating leases, including off-balance sheet leases, used in the normal course of business. (2) Commercial commitments include primarily letters of credit provided for insurance programs and certain business transactions. Credit Facilities On February 23, 2001, we entered into a credit facility with our existing banking syndicate. The facility provided by Wells Fargo Bank, Fleet National Bank and U.S. Bank National Association consists of an unsecured revolving reducing line of credit in the amount of $10.6 million that matures in 2006. As of July 31, 2005, we had available $0.1 million under this facility, after taking into account $10.5 million of outstanding letters of credit. We are subject to customary covenants, including the following financial covenants: 1) ratio of funded debt to earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization (EBITDA); 2) profitable operation; 3) leverage ratio and 4) interest coverage ratio. We are in compliance with all covenants at July 31, 2005. Recently Issued Accounting Standards In November 2004, the FASB issued SFAS No. 151, Inventory Costs, an amendment of ARB No. 43, Chapter 4 . This statement amends the guidance in ARB No. 43, Chapter 4, Inventory Pricing , to clarify the accounting for abnormal amounts of idle facility expense, freight, handling costs, and wasted material (spoilage). SFAS No. 151 requires that those items be recognized as current-period charges regardless of whether they meet the criterion of so abnormal. In addition, this statement requires that allocation of fixed production overheads to the costs of conversion be based on the normal capacity of the production facilities. The provisions of SFAS 151 shall be applied prospectively and are effective for inventory costs incurred during fiscal years beginning after June 15, 2005, with earlier application permitted for inventory costs incurred during fiscal years beginning after the date this Statement is issued. The adoption of SFAS No. 151 is not expected to have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements. 35 In December 2004, the FASB issued SFAS No. 123 (revised 2004), Share-Based Payment ( SFAS 123R ), which replaces SFAS 123. The accounting required by SFAS 123R is similar to that of SFAS 123; however, the choice between recognizing the fair value of stock options in the income statement or disclosing the pro forma income statement effect of the fair value of stock options in the notes to the financial statements allowed under SFAS 123 has been eliminated in SFAS 123R. SFAS 123R is effective for all fiscal years beginning after June 15, 2005, and early adoption is permitted. Management intends to use the modified prospective transition method to adopt SFAS 123R beginning in fiscal 2006 and expects that the implementation of SFAS 123R will increase our stock-based compensation expense in fiscal 2006. In May 2005, the FASB issued SFAS No. 154, Accounting Changes and Error Corrections a replacement of APB Opinion No. 20 and FASB Statement No. 3 . This Statement replaces APB Opinion No. 20, Accounting Changes, and FASB Statement No. 3, Reporting Accounting Changes in Interim Financial Statements, and changes the requirements for the accounting for and reporting of a change in accounting principle. This Statement applies to all voluntary changes in accounting principle. It also applies to changes required by an accounting pronouncement in the unusual instance that the pronouncement does not include specific transition provisions. SFAS 154 is effective for accounting changes and corrections of errors made in fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2005. Management currently believes that adoption of the provisions of SFAS No. 154 will not have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements. 
