CIK: 920148
Company Name: LABORATORY CORP OF AMERICA HOLDINGS
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2005-03-03


Item 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS General During 2004, the Company continued to strengthen its financial performance through the implementation of the Company strategic plan and the expansion of its national platform in routine testing. This plan continues to provide growth opportunities for the Company by building a leadership position in genomic and other advanced testing technologies primarily through internal development efforts, acquisitions and technology licensing activities. The Company Center for Molecular Biology and Pathology, located in Research Triangle Park, NC is a leader in the development and application of molecular diagnostics and polymerase chain reaction, or PCR, technologies in the areas of diagnostic genetics, oncology and infectious disease. The Company believes that these technologies may represent a significant savings to the healthcare system by increasing the detection of early stage (treatable) diseases. The Company National Genetics Institute in Los Angeles, CA, develops novel, highly-sensitive PCR methods used to test for hepatitis C and other infectious agents and is the only laboratory in the U.S. that is FDA-approved to screen plasma for infectious diseases. Viro-Med Laboratories, Inc., based in Minneapolis, MN, offers molecular microbial testing using real-time PCR platforms and provides significant additional capacity to support the continued expansion of the Company advanced testing business. These Centers of Excellence enable the Company to provide a broad menu of testing services for the infectious disease and cancer markets, which the Company believes represent two of the most significant areas of future growth in the clinical laboratory industry. The Dynacare integration has been completed and is performing as expected, including the achievement of the planned total synergy savings of approximately $45 million. Dynacare continues to strengthen the Company national network of routine testing. The DIANON integration has been completed and is performing as expected, including the achievement of the planned total synergy savings of approximately $32 million. The Company began applying DIANON standardized anatomic pathology processes in early 2004. To date, four major sites have been DIANIZED . By the end of 2006, the Company expects to have nearly 80 percent of all our anatomic pathology work DIANIZED . Effective February 3, 2005, the Company completed its purchase of US LABS, a well respected provider of anatomic pathology and oncology testing located in Irvine, California. US LABS sales were approximately $70 million in 2004. This acquisition increases the Company capabilities in the cancer testing market and provides additional lab capacity on the West Coast. During the fourth quarter of 2004, the Company entered into a multi-year agreement with Cytyc for their ThinPrep Imaging System. The ThinPrep Imaging System is the first fully integrated, interactive computer system that assists cytotechnologists and pathologists in the primary screening and diagnosis of ThinPrep Pap Test slides. The company intends to implement this state-of-the-art cervical cancer screening instrument by mid-2005. The Company believes future performance will be positively affected by several factors: 1) The expansion of higher-value genomic tests such as Cystic Fibrosis, HCV and HIV genotyping, along with the continued growth of HIV viral load and HPV testing; 2) Transition to Cytyc ThinPrep Imaging System; 3) Continued progress with existing licensing and business relationships (such as EXACT Sciences, Correlogic and BioPredictive); 4) The Company ongoing business acquisition strategy; and 5) Growing demand for genomic testing creating a positive shift in test mix toward higher value testing. On October 20, 2004, the Company Board of Directors authorized and announced a stock repurchase program under which the Company may purchase up to an aggregate of $250.0 million of its common stock from time-to-time. It is the Company intention to fund future purchases of its common stock with cash flow from operations. (30) Seasonality Volume of testing generally declines during the year-end holiday periods and other major holidays. In addition, volume declines due to inclement weather may reduce net revenues and cash flows. Therefore, comparison of the results of successive quarters may not accurately reflect trends or results for the full year. Results of Operations Year ended December 31, 2004 compared with Year ended December 31, 2003. Net sales for 2004 were $3,084.8 million, an increase of 4.9% from $2,939.4 million reported in the comparable 2003 period. Testing volume growth, measured by accessions, increased approximately 3.6% (primarily volume growth in genomic and esoteric testing of approximately 9.8% as well as volume growth of approximately 2.5% in the core business). Price per accession increased approximately 1.3% compared to 2003. Cost of sales, which includes primarily laboratory and distribution costs, was $1,795.5 million for 2004 compared to $1,714.8 million in 2003, an increase of 4.7%. The increase in cost of sales is primarily the result of increases in volume discussed above. Cost of sales as a percentage of net sales was 58.2% for 2004 and 58.3% in 2003. Selling, general and administrative expenses decreased to $649.1 million in 2004 from $651.8 million in 2003 representing a decrease of $2.7 million or 0.4%. As a percentage of net sales, selling, general and administrative expenses were 21.0% and 22.1% for the year ended 2004 and 2003, respectively. This decrease in selling, general and administrative expenses as a percentage of net sales is a result of the Company cost control initiatives, as well as a reduced effective bad debt expense rate resulting from improved billing and collection performance. The amortization of intangibles and other assets was $42.7 million and $37.6 million for 2004 and 2003, respectively. The increase in amortization expense is a result of licensed technology and other small business acquisitions. During the fourth quarter of 2004, the Company recorded certain adjustments to previously recorded restructuring charges due to changes in estimates, resulting in a credit of approximately of $0.9 million. During the third quarter of 2003, the Company recorded a pre-tax restructuring charge of $3.3 million in connection with the integration of DIANON. During the fourth quarter of 2003, the Company recorded a charge of $3.1 million, relating to the continuing integration of its recent acquisitions. The Company also recorded certain adjustments in the fourth quarter of 2003 to previously recorded restructuring charges due to changes in estimates, resulting in a credit of approximately $4.9 million. Interest expense was $36.1 million in 2004 compared to $40.9 million in 2003. This decrease was a direct result of debt reductions following the Company financing of the DIANON acquisition in 2003. Income from investments in joint venture partnerships was $51.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2004 compared to $43.7 million for the year end December 31, 2003. This income represents the Company ownership share in joint venture partnerships acquired as part of the Dynacare acquisition on July 25, 2002. A significant portion of this income is derived from investments in Ontario and Alberta, Canada, and is earned in Canadian dollars. The strengthening of the Canadian dollar versus the U.S. dollar during the year ended December 31, 2004 has had a positive impact on this income as well as the cash generated from the Canadian investments. The provision for income taxes as a percentage of earnings before taxes was 41.0% in 2004 compared to (31) 40.6% in 2003. The increase in the effective tax rate for 2004 is due to a $2.1 million state tax recovery during the third quarter of 2003. Year ended December 31, 2003 compared with Year ended December 31, 2002. Net sales for 2003 were $2,939.4 million, an increase of 17.2% from $2,507.7 million reported in the comparable 2002 period. Testing volume growth, measured by accessions, increased approximately 11.7% and was affected by the acquisitions of Dynacare and DIANON as well as growth in the Company esoteric test volumes (including HPV and cystic fibrosis). Price per accession increased approximately 5.5% compared to 2002. The growth in price was affected by this same shift in test mix and from shifts in histology testing which is primarily DIANON-related. These improvements were partially offset by the impact of severe winter weather during the first quarter of 2003 and physician strikes to protest rising malpractice insurance rates during the second quarter. Cost of sales, which includes primarily laboratory and distribution costs, was $1,714.8 million for 2003 compared to $1,445.9 million in 2002, an increase of 18.6%. The increase in cost of sales is primarily the result of increases in volume and supplies due to recent acquisitions, growth in the base business and growth in esoteric and genomic testing (with significant increases in cystic fibrosis and HPV testing). Cost of sales as a percentage of net sales was 58.3% for 2003 and 57.7% in 2002, reflecting the additional infrastructure costs (facilities and personnel) of Dynacare and DIANON acquisitions. Selling, general and administrative expenses increased to $651.8 million in 2003 from $585.5 million in 2002 representing an increase of $66.3 million or 11.3%. This increase resulted primarily from personnel and other costs as a result of the recent acquisitions. As a percentage of net sales, selling, general and administrative expenses were 22.1% and 23.3% for the year ended 2003 and 2002, respectively, reflecting the realization of synergies from the Dynacare and DIANON acquisitions, as well as the Company reduction of its bad debt expense rate by approximately 130 basis points during 2003 as compared to 2002. The amortization of intangibles and other assets was $37.6 million and $23.8 million for 2003 and 2002, respectively. The increase in amortization expense is a result of the acquisitions of Dynacare and DIANON. The Company recorded pre-tax restructuring charges of $3.3 million and $17.5 million during the third quarters of 2003 and 2002, respectively, in connection with the integrations of DIANON and Dynacare, Inc. During the fourth quarter of 2003, the Company recorded a charge of $3.1 million, relating to the continuing integration of its recent acquisitions. The Company also recorded certain adjustments in the fourth quarter of 2003 to previously recorded restructuring charges due to changes in estimates, resulting in a credit of approximately $4.8 million. Interest expense was $40.9 million in 2003 compared to $19.2 million in 2002. This increase was a direct result of the Company financing of the DIANON acquisition. Income from joint venture partnerships was $43.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2003 compared to $13.4 million for the year end December 31, 2002. This income represents the Company ownership share in joint venture partnerships acquired as part of the Dynacare acquisition on July 25, 2002. A significant portion of this income is derived from investments in Ontario and Alberta, Canada, and is earned in Canadian dollars. The strengthening of the Canadian dollar versus the U.S. dollar during the year ended December 31, 2003 has had a positive impact on this income as well as the cash generated from the Canadian investments. The provision for income taxes as a percentage of earnings before taxes was 40.6% in 2003 compared to 41.1% in 2002. The decrease in the effective tax rate for 2003 is due to a $2.1 million state tax recovery during the third quarter of 2003. (32) Liquidity and Capital Resources Net cash provided by operating activities was $538.1 million, $564.3 million and $444.9 million, in 2004, 2003 and 2002, respectively. Cash flow from operations in 2004 was less than 2003 due to approximately $50 million of one-time tax credits that were realized in 2003. Improvements in cash flow from operations primarily resulted from improved earnings, the expansion of the business through acquisitions, and the improvement of the Company accounts receivable days sales outstanding ( DSO ) to 52 days at the end of 2004 from 53 days at the end of 2003. This improvement was due to Company-wide efforts to increase cash collections from all payers, as well as on-going improvements to the claim submission processes. In addition, the Company continued to take steps necessary to improve DSO and cash collections by: 1) conversion of decentralized billing locations, including former Dynacare locations, to a centralized billing system. During 2003, billing activity in numerous Dynacare sites was converted to the centralized billing system. In 2004, the Company substantially completed its conversion activities on the remaining Dynacare locations as well as its Salt Lake City, Reno, San Diego and Viro-Med facilities. 2) continuing an initiative to reduce the number of requisitions received that are missing certain billing information. This initiative involves counting the number of clinical requisitions received from an ordering client, as well as determining what specific information was not provided. The Company then identifies root causes of why the information was missing and takes steps to ensure that information is provided in the future. These steps include re-educating clients as to what information is needed in order for the Company to bill and collect for the test. 3) implementation of numerous initiatives related to self-pay accounts receivable. These include: i) collecting payment at the time of service; ii) increased training for billing personnel related to improving collections during phone calls and iii) review of bill design and frequency. The Company utilizes a centralized billing system in the collection of substantially all of its accounts receivable. This system generates bills to customers based on the payer type. Client billing is typically generated monthly, whereas patient and third party billing are typically generated on a daily basis. Agings of accounts receivable are then monitored by billing personnel and re-bills and follow-up activities are conducted as necessary. Bad debt expense is recorded within selling, general and administrative expenses as a percentage of sales considered necessary to maintain the allowance for doubtful accounts at an appropriate level, based on the Company experience with its accounts receivable. The Company writes off accounts against the allowance for doubtful accounts when they are deemed to be uncollectible. For client billing, accounts are written off when all reasonable collection efforts prove to be unsuccessful. Patient accounts are written off after the normal dunning cycle has occurred and the account has been transferred to a third party collection agency. Third party and managed care accounts are written off when they exceed the payer timely filing limits. Capital expenditures were $95.0 million, $83.6 million and $74.3 million for 2004, 2003 and 2002, respectively. During 2004, the Company accelerated capital projects relating to its new financial system, and projects supporting its strategic initiatives centered around customer retention, scientific differentiation and managed care. The Company expects capital expenditures of approximately $110.0 to $125.0 million in 2005. The Company will continue to make important investments in information technology connectivity with its customers and financial systems. Such expenditures are expected to be funded by cash flow from operations as well as borrowings under the Company revolving credit facilities. In conjunction with the acquisition of DIANON, the Company planned financing of the acquisition, and announced share repurchase plan, Standard and Poor lowered its overall rating on the Company to BBB from BBB+ and Moody issued a Baa3 rating to the Company Senior Notes. On January 13, 2005, the Company entered into a $350.0 senior credit facility with Credit Suisse First Boston and UBS Securities LLC, acting as Co-Lead Arrangers, and a group of financial institutions. This (33) new five year credit facility replaced the existing $150.0 364-day revolving credit facility and the $200.0 three-year revolving credit facility which was amended on January 14, 2003 and was scheduled to expire on February 18, 2005. This credit facility bears interest at varying rates based upon the Company credit rating with Standard & Poor Ratings Services. The new facility also provides for an accordion feature to increase the facility up to an additional $150 million, with the consent of the lenders, if needed to support the Company growth. There were no balances outstanding on the Company senior credit facilities at December 31, 2004 and 2003. On January 17, 2003, in conjunction with the acquisition of DIANON, the Company borrowed $350.0 million under the DIANON Bridge Loan Agreement with Credit Suisse First Boston, acting as Administrative Agent. On January 31, 2003, the Company sold $350.0 million aggregate principal amount of its 5 % Senior Notes due February 1, 2013. Proceeds from the issuance of these Notes ($345.1 million), together with cash on hand was used to repay the $350.0 million principal amount of the Company bridge loan facility, and as a result, the loan was terminated. During the first quarter of 2003, the Company entered into an interest rate swap agreement with a major financial institution, solely to manage its interest rate exposure on $175.0 million of its 5 % Senior Notes. This swap agreement was terminated during June 2003 and resulted in net proceeds to the Company of $5.3 million. On September 11, 2004, no holders of its zero coupon-subordinated notes elected to exercise their option to redeem their notes. On February 3, 2005, the Company completed its acquisition of US LABS for approximately $155 million in cash on hand. Pension Funding During 2004, 2003 and 2002, the Company made contributions to its defined pension plan in the amounts of $60.0 million, $18.3 million and $18.3 million, respectively. The Company expects to contribute $24.0 million to its defined pension plan during 2005. See Note 21 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for a further discussion of the Company pension and postretirement plans. New Accounting Pronouncements In December 2004 the Financial Standards Accounting Board (FASB) issued FAS 123(R), Share-Based Payment (revised 2004) . This Statement is a revision of FASB Statement No. 123, Accounting for Stock-Based Compensation. This Statement supersedes APB Opinion No. 25, Accounting for Stock Issued to Employees, and its related implementation guidance. This Statement establishes standards for the accounting for transactions in which an entity exchanges its equity instruments for goods or services. It also addresses transactions in which an entity incurs liabilities in exchange for goods or services that are based on the fair value of the entity equity instruments or that may be settled by the issuance of those equity instruments. The Company has not finalized what, if any, changes may be made to its equity compensation plans in light of the accounting change, and therefore is not yet in a position to quantify its impact. The Company expects to announce the impact in connection with reporting its second quarter 2005 financial results. The impact on cash from operations of adopting the new accounting standard cannot be estimated at this time. See Note 1 to Consolidated Financial Statements for proforma impact of expensing all equity-based compensation, which the Company believes would approximate the annual effect of adopting the new accounting standard. This Statement focuses primarily on accounting for transactions in which an entity obtains employee services in share-based payment transactions. This Statement does not change the accounting guidance for share-based payment transactions with parties other than employees provided in Statement 123 as originally issued and EITF Issue No. 96-18, Accounting for Equity Instruments That Are Issued to Other Than Employees for Acquiring, or in Conjunction with Selling, Goods or Services. This Statement does not address the accounting for employee share ownership plans, which are subject to AICPA Statement of Position 93-6, Employers Accounting for Employee Stock Ownership Plans. (34) In December 2004, the FASB issued FAS 153, Exchanges of Nonmonetary Assets . This Statement amends the guidance in APB Opinion No. 29, Accounting for Nonmonetary Transactions. That statement is based on the principle that exchanges of nonmonetary assets should be measured based on the fair value of the assets exchanged. The guidance in that Opinion, however, included certain exceptions to that principle. This Statement amends Opinion 29 to eliminate the exception to for nonmonetary exchanges of similar productive assets and replaces it with a general exception for exchanges of nonmonetary assets that do not have commercial substance. A nonmonetary exchange has commercial substance if the future cash flows of the entity are expected to change significantly as a result of the exchange. The Company has not historically entered into a significant level of nonmonetary transactions and therefore does not expect that this standard will impact is financial position or results unless nonmonetary transactions are utilized in the future. This statement is effective for non-monetary asset exchanges occurring in fiscal periods beginning after June 15, 2005. Contractual Cash Obligations Payments Due by Period <1 Yr 1-3 Yrs 3-5 Yrs >5 Yrs Capital lease obligations $ 3.4 $ 4.3 $ -- $ -- Operating leases 61.4 82.2 42.9 40.4 Contingent future licensing payments (a) 22.7 32.9 0.3 0.4 Minimum royalty payments 5.8 12.0 11.0 3.7 Minimum purchase obligations 10.3 20.0 10.0 -- Scheduled principal on 5 1/2% Senior Notes -- -- -- 350.0 Scheduled interest payments on 5 1/2% Senior Notes 19.3 38.5 38.5 67.4 Zero coupon-subordinated notes (b) -- 552.0 -- -- Total contractual cash obligations $ 122.9 $ 741.9 $ 102.4 $ 461.9 (a) Contingent future licensing payments will be made if certain events take place, such as the launch of a specific test, the transfer of certain technology, and when specified revenue milestones are met. (b) Holders of the zero coupon-subordinated notes may require the Company to purchase in cash all or a portion of their notes on September 11, 2006 and 2011 at prices ranging from $741.92 to $819.54 per note. Should the holders put the notes to the Company on any of the dates above, the Company believes that it will be able to satisfy this contingent obligation with cash on hand, borrowings on the revolving credit facility, and additional financing if necessary. (c) The table does not include obligations under the Company pension and postretirement benefit plans which are included in Note 21 to Consolidated Financial Statements. The Company expects to contribute approximately $24 million to its defined pension plan during 2005, although it is not legally required to do so. Benefits under the Company postretirement medical plan are made when claims are submitted for payment, the timing of which are not practicable to estimate. Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements The Company does not have transactions or relationships with special purpose entities, and the Company does not have any off balance sheet financing other than normal operating leases. (35) Other Commercial Commitments At December 31, 2004, the Company provided letters of credit aggregating approximately $63.5 million, primarily in connection with certain insurance programs. These letters of credit are secured by the Company senior credit facilities and are renewed annually, around mid-year. Based on current and projected levels of operations, coupled with availability under its new senior credit facilities, the Company believes it has sufficient liquidity to meet both its short-term and long-term cash needs. For a discussion of the Company zero coupon-subordinated notes, see Note 12 to Consolidated Financial Statements. For a discussion of the Company new senior credit facilities, see Note 13 to Consolidated Financial Statements. Critical Accounting Policies The preparation of financial statements in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reported periods. Significant estimates include the allowances for doubtful accounts, pension expense, amortization lives for intangible assets, accruals for self-insurance reserves, income taxes and reserves for professional liability claims. Allowances for doubtful accounts Revenue is recognized for services rendered when test results are reported to the ordering physician and the testing process is complete. The Company sales are generally billed to three types of payers clients, patients and third parties, such as managed care companies, Medicare and Medicaid. For clients, sales are recorded on a fee-for-service basis at the Company client list price, less any negotiated discount. Patient sales are recorded at the Company patient fee schedule, net of any discounts negotiated with physicians on behalf of their patients. The Company bills third party payers in two ways fee-for-service and capitated agreements. Fee-for-service third party payers are billed at the Company patient fee schedule amount, and third party revenue is recorded net of contractual discounts. These discounts are recorded at the transaction level at the time of sale based on a fee schedule that is maintained for each third party payer. The majority of the Company third party sales are recorded using an actual or contracted fee schedule at the time of sale. For the remaining third party sales, estimated fee schedules are maintained for each payer. Adjustments to the estimated payment amounts are recorded at the time of final collection and settlement of each transaction as an adjustment to revenue. These adjustments are not material to the Company results of operations in any period presented. The Company periodically adjusts these estimated fee schedules based upon historical payment trends. Under capitated agreements with managed care companies, the Company recognizes revenue based on a negotiated monthly contractual rate for each member of the managed care plan regardless of the number or costs of services performed. The Company has a formal process to estimate and review the collectibility of its receivables based on the period of time they have been outstanding. Bad debt expense is recorded within selling, general and administrative expenses as a percentage of sales considered necessary to maintain the allowance for doubtful accounts at an appropriate level. The Company process for determining the appropriate level of the allowance for doubtful accounts involves judgment, and considers such factors as the age of the underlying receivables, historical and projected collection experience, and other external factors that could affect the collectibility of its receivables. Accounts are written off against the allowance for doubtful accounts based on the Company write off policy (e.g. when they are deemed to be uncollectible). In the determination of the appropriate level of the allowance, accounts are progressively reserved based on the historical timing of cash collections relative to their respective aging categories within the Company receivables. These collection and reserve processes, along with the close monitoring of the billing process, help reduce the risks of material revisions to reserve estimates resulting from adverse changes in collection or reimbursement experience. (36) The following table presents the percentage of the Company net accounts receivable outstanding by aging category at December 31, 2004 and 2003: Days Outstanding 2004 2003 0 - 30 47.3% 43.7% 31 - 61 19.2% 21.3% 61 - 91 10.1% 12.5% 91 - 120 6.7% 7.7% 121 - 150 5.1% 4.2% 151 - 180 3.9% 3.4% 181 - 270 6.0% 5.5% 271 - 360 1.4% 1.4% Over 360 0.3% 0.3% Pension Expense. The Company net pension cost is developed from actuarial valuations. Inherent in these valuations are key assumptions, including discount rates and expected return on plan assets, which are updated on an annual basis at the beginning of each year. The Company is required to consider current market conditions, including changes in interest rates, in making these assumptions. Changes in pension costs may occur in the future due to changes in these assumptions. The key assumptions used in accounting for the defined benefit plans were a 6.0% discount rate and an 8.5% expected return on plan assets as of December 31, 2004. In establishing its expected return on plan assets assumption, the Company reviews asset allocation considering plan maturity and develops return assumptions based on different asset classes adjusting for plan operating expenses. Actual asset over/under performance compared to expected returns will respectively decrease/increase unrecognized loss. The change in the unrecognized loss will change amortization cost in upcoming periods. A one percentage point change in the expected return assumption in the current year would have resulted in a change in pension expense of approximately $1.7 million. Current year net pension cost was $11.3 million, a decrease of $4.9 million from 2003. Our actuaries have estimated that 2005 net pension cost should be comparable to or slightly less than fiscal 2004 net pension cost. Favorable asset performance in 2004 and contributions to plan assets will cause a reduction in net pension cost for fiscal 2005. However, the decrease in the discount rate assumption during fiscal 2004 will cause an offsetting increase in net pension cost for 2005. Accruals for Self-insurance Reserves. Accruals for self-insurance reserves (including workers compensation, auto and employee medical) are determined based on historical payment trends and claims history, along with current and estimated future economic conditions. The Company is self-insured for professional liability claims arising in the normal course of business, generally related to the testing and reporting of laboratory test results. The Company records an accrual for such claims payable and claims incurred but not reported based on an actuarial assessment of the accrual driven by frequency and amounts of claims, which is performed at least annually. While management believes these estimates are reasonable and consistent, they are by their very nature, estimates of amounts that will depend on future events. Accordingly, actual results could differ from these estimates. The Company Audit Committee periodically reviews the Company significant accounting policies. See Note 1 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion of significant accounting policies. (37) Income Taxes. The Company accounts for income taxes utilizing the asset and liability method. Under this method deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases and for tax loss carryforwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in income in the period that includes the enactment date. Future tax benefits, such as net operating loss carryforwards, are recognized to the extent that realization of such benefits is more likely than not. (38) FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS The Company has made in this report, and from time to time may otherwise make in its public filings, press releases and discussions by Company management, forward-looking statements concerning the Company operations, performance and financial condition, as well as its strategic objectives. Some of these forward-looking statements can be identified by the use of forward-looking words such as believes , expects , may , will , should , seeks , approximately , intends , plans , estimates , or anticipates or the negative of those words or other comparable terminology. Such forward-looking statements are subject to various risks and uncertainties and the Company claims the protection afforded by the safe harbor for forward-looking statements contained in the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Actual results could differ materially from those currently anticipated due to a number of factors in addition to those discussed elsewhere herein and in the Company other public filings, press releases and discussions with Company management, including: 1. changes in federal, state, local and third party payer regulations or policies (or in the interpretation of current regulations) affecting governmental and third-party reimbursement for clinical laboratory testing; 2. adverse results from investigations of clinical laboratories by the government, which may include significant monetary damages and/or exclusion from the Medicare and Medicaid programs; 3. loss or suspension of a license or imposition of a fine or penalties under, or future changes in, the law or regulations of the Clinical Laboratory Improvement Act of 1967, and the Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments of 1988, or those of Medicare, Medicaid or other federal, state or local agencies; 4. failure to comply with the Federal Occupational Safety and Health Administration requirements and the Needlestick Safety and Prevention Act which may result in penalties and loss of licensure; 5. failure to comply with HIPAA, which could result in significant fines; 6. failure of third party payers to complete testing with the Company, or accept or remit transactions in HIPAA-required standard transaction and code set format, could result in an interruption in the Company cash flow; 7. increased competition, including price competition; 8. changes in payer mix, including an increase in capitated managed-cost health care or the impact of a shift to consumer driven health plans; 9. failure to obtain and retain new customers and alliance partners, or a reduction in tests ordered or specimens submitted by existing customers; 10. failure to integrate newly acquired businesses and the cost related to such integration; 11. adverse results in litigation matters; 12. inability to attract and retain experienced and qualified personnel; 13. failure to maintain the Company days sales outstanding levels; 14. decrease in credit ratings by Standard & Poor and/or Moody s; (39) 15. failure to develop or acquire licenses for new or improved technologies, or if customers use new technologies to perform their own tests; 16. inability to commercialize newly licensed tests or technologies or to obtain appropriate reimbursement for such tests, which could result in impairment in the value of certain capitalized licensing costs; 17. inability to obtain and maintain adequate patent and other proprietary rights protection of the Company products and services and successfully enforce the Company proprietary rights; 18. the scope, validity and enforceability of patents and other proprietary rights held by third parties which might have an impact on the Company ability to develop, perform, or market the Company tests or operate its business; 19. failure in the Company information technology systems resulting in an increase in testing turnaround time or billing processes or the failure to meet future regulatory or customer information technology and connectivity requirements; 20. liabilities that result from the inability to comply with new Corporate governance requirements; and 21. failure by the Company to comply with the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, including Section 404 of that Act which requires management to report on, and our independent registered public accounting firm to attest to and report on, our internal controls. 
