CIK: 922224
Company Name: PPL CORP
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2010-02-26


Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Overview PPL Electric is an electricity delivery service provider in eastern and central Pennsylvania with headquarters in Allentown, Pennsylvania. Refer to "Item 1. Business - Background" for a description of its business. PPL Electric's strategy and principal challenge is to own and operate its electricity delivery business at the most efficient cost while maintaining high quality customer service and reliability. PPL Electric's electricity delivery business is rate-regulated. Accordingly, this business is subject to regulatory risk with respect to costs that may be recovered and investment returns that may be collected through customer rates. See "Customer Choice - End of Transition Period" below for information on additional risks PPL Electric may face. In order to manage financing costs and access to credit markets, a key objective for PPL Electric's business as a whole is to maintain a strong credit profile. PPL Electric continually focuses on maintaining an appropriate capital structure and liquidity position. See "Item 1A. Risk Factors" for more information concerning these and other material risks PPL Electric faces in its business. The purpose of "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" is to provide information concerning PPL Electric's performance in implementing the strategies and managing the risks and challenges mentioned above. Specifically: "Results of Operations" provides an overview of PPL Electric's operating results in 2009, 2008 and 2007, including a review of earnings. It also provides a brief outlook for 2010. "Financial Condition - Liquidity and Capital Resources" provides an analysis of PPL Electric's liquidity position and credit profile, including its sources of cash (including bank credit facilities and sources of operating cash flow) and uses of cash (including contractual obligations and capital expenditure requirements) and the key risks and uncertainties that impact PPL Electric's past and future liquidity position and financial condition. This subsection also includes a listing and discussion of PPL Electric's current credit ratings. "Financial Condition - Risk Management" provides an explanation of PPL Electric's risk management programs relating to market risk and credit risk. "Application of Critical Accounting Policies" provides an overview of the accounting policies that are particularly important to the results of operations and financial condition of PPL Electric and that require its management to make significant estimates, assumptions and other judgments. The information provided in this Item 7 should be read in conjunction with PPL Electric's Consolidated Financial Statements and the accompanying Notes. Terms and abbreviations are explained in the glossary. Dollars are in millions unless otherwise noted. Customer Choice End of Transition Period In 1996, the Customer Choice Act was enacted to restructure Pennsylvania's electric utility industry in order to create retail access to a competitive market for generation of electricity. The Customer Choice Act required each Pennsylvania electric utility, including PPL Electric, to file a restructuring plan to "unbundle" its rates into separate generation, transmission and distribution components and to permit its customers to directly access alternate suppliers of electricity. Under the Customer Choice Act, PPL Electric was required to act as a PLR. As part of a settlement approved by the PUC and in connection with the restructuring plan PPL Electric filed under the Customer Choice Act, PPL Electric agreed to provide electricity as a PLR at predetermined "capped" rates through 2009. In addition, the PUC authorized recovery of approximately $2.97 billion of competitive transition or "stranded" costs (generation-related costs that might not otherwise be recovered in a competitive market) from customers during an 11-year transition period. For PPL Electric, this transition period ended on December 31, 2009. As a result of the PUC settlement order and the PLR obligation, PPL Electric, through 2009, generally bore the risk that it would not be able to obtain adequate energy supply at the "capped" rates it could charge to its customers who did not select an alternate electricity supplier. To mitigate this risk, PPL Electric entered into full requirements energy supply agreements with PPL EnergyPlus, a PPL Electric affiliate. Under these agreements, through 2009, PPL EnergyPlus supplied PPL Electric's entire PLR load at predetermined prices equal to the capped generation rates that PPL Electric was authorized to charge its customers. Related to PPL Electric's transition period, the following has occurred or will occur: In August 1999, CTC of $2.4 billion were converted to intangible transition costs when they were securitized by the issuance of transition bonds. The intangible transition costs were amortized over the life of the transition bonds, through December 2008, in accordance with an amortization schedule filed with the PUC. These transition bonds matured in tranches, with the final tranche being repaid in December 2008. During the transition period, PPL Electric was authorized by the PUC to bill its customers $130 million for a portion of the costs associated with decommissioning of PPL's Susquehanna nuclear plant. Under the power supply agreements between PPL Electric and PPL EnergyPlus, these revenues were passed on to PPL EnergyPlus. Similarly, these revenues were passed on to PPL Susquehanna under a power supply agreement between PPL EnergyPlus and PPL Susquehanna and invested in the NDT funds. Effective January 1, 2010, these ratepayer billings have ceased. In December 2009, PPL Electric filed with the PUC a final reconciliation of CTC and ITC recoveries during the transition period. At December 31, 2009, PPL Electric has recorded a net regulatory liability of $33 million related to these recoveries. The net overcollection will be reflected in customer rates in 2010. At December 31, 2009, PPL Electric's long-term power purchase agreements with PPL EnergyPlus (effective since 2000 and 2002) expired. To mitigate 2010 rate increases, PPL Electric implemented two programs in 2008 and 2009 that allowed customers to make prepayments toward their 2010 and 2011 electric bills or to defer any 2010 electric bill increases exceeding 25%. Any deferred amounts are to be repaid by 2012. At December 31, 2009, PPL Electric has recorded a liability of $36 million for these programs. Effective January 1, 2010, PPL Electric's rates for generation supply as a PLR are no longer capped and the cost of electric generation is based on a competitive solicitation process. During 2007 through 2009, PPL Electric procured through PUC-approved solicitation procedures, the electric generation supply it will need in 2010 for customers who do not choose an alternative supplier. The prices in these contracts will result in an average residential customer paying approximately 30% higher rates, as compared to the previously-capped rates on delivered electricity. PPL Electric is currently procuring the PLR supply it will need for the January 2011 through May 2013 period. The results of all procurements continue to require the approval of the PUC. For those customers who choose to procure generation supply from alternative providers, PPL Electric will provide services for these alternative generation suppliers to bill usage charges, among other duties. As required by a PUC-approved plan, PPL Electric will be purchasing certain receivables from alternative suppliers at a discount. In October 2008, Act 129 became effective. This law created requirements for energy efficiency and conservation programs and for the use of smart metering technology, imposed new PLR electricity supply procurement rules, provided remedies for market misconduct, and made changes to the existing Alternative Energy Portfolio Standard. Prior to the expiration of the generation rate caps, customers' interest in purchasing generation supply from other providers was limited because in recent years, the long-term supply agreement between PPL Electric and PPL EnergyPlus provided a below-market cost of generation supply for these customers. As a result, a limited amount of "shopping" occurred. In 2010, several alternative suppliers have offered to provide generation supply in PPL Electric's service territory. When its customers purchase supply from these alternative suppliers or from PPL Electric as PLR, the purchase of such supply has no significant impact on the operating results of PPL Electric. The cost to purchase PLR supply is passed directly by PPL Electric to its customers without markup. For those customers who receive their supply from an alternative supplier, PPL Electric may act as billing agent or the alternative supplier may bill for their supply directly, and in either case, PPL Electric does not record revenues or expenses related to this supply. PPL Electric remains the distribution provider for all the customers in its service territory and charges a regulated rate for the service of delivering that electricity. Lower demand for electric power due to increased prices, the economic downturn or the conservation provisions of Act 129 that require PPL Electric to reduce its customers' electricity usage in future periods, could impact future revenues. The reduction in volume could be offset by changes in customer rates for this service, subject to PUC approval, depending on PPL Electric's cost structure. Act 129 includes one-time penalties of up to $20 million for not attaining the required reductions by 2011 and 2013. At this time, PPL Electric expects to meet these targeted reductions. The costs of complying with the other provisions of Act 129 would, subject to PUC approval, be recoverable through an automatic adjustment clause. None of the above changes are expected to have a significant impact on PPL Electric's 2010 financial condition, operating results or cash flows. The final expiration of generation rate caps in Pennsylvania, applicable to three other large regulated utilities, is scheduled to occur at the end of 2010. Discussions concerning generation rate caps and rate increase mitigation are continuing. The final result of those discussions and the future impact on the financial condition and future cash flows of PPL Electric cannot be predicted at this time. See Note 14 to the Financial Statements for additional information on Pennsylvania legislative and other regulatory activities. Market Events In 2008, conditions in the financial markets became disruptive to the processes of managing credit risk, responding to liquidity needs, measuring financial instruments at fair value, and managing market price risk. Bank credit capacity was reduced and the cost of renewing or establishing new credit facilities increased, thereby introducing uncertainties as to PPL Electric's ability to reliably estimate the longer-term cost and availability of credit. In general, bank credit capacity has increased from the significantly constrained levels of 2008 and early 2009. In addition, the cost of renewing or establishing new credit facilities has improved when compared with the 2008 and early 2009 periods. Credit Risk Credit risk is the risk that PPL Electric would incur a loss as a result of nonperformance by counterparties of their contractual obligations. PPL Electric maintains credit policies and procedures to limit counterparty credit risk. Conditions in the financial and commodity markets have generally increased PPL Electric's exposure to credit risk. See Notes 15, 17 and 18 to the Financial Statements, and "Risk Management - Credit Risk" for more information on credit risk. Liquidity Risk PPL Electric expects to continue to have access to adequate sources of liquidity through operating cash flows, cash and cash equivalents, credit facilities and, from time to time, the issuance of capital market securities. PPL Electric's ability to access capital markets may be impacted by conditions in the overall financial and capital markets, as well as conditions specific to the utility sector. See "Financial Condition - Liquidity and Capital Resources" for an expanded discussion of PPL Electric's liquidity position and a discussion of its forecasted sources of cash. Securities Price Risk PPL Electric participates in and is allocated costs from defined benefit plans sponsored by PPL. Declines in the market price of debt and equity securities result in unrealized losses that reduce the asset values of PPL's defined benefit plans. PPL's defined benefit plans earned positive returns in the second half of 2009, thereby recovering a portion of the negative returns incurred in 2008 and the first quarter of 2009. Determination of the funded status of defined benefit plans, contribution requirements and net periodic defined benefit costs for future years are subject to changes in various assumptions, in addition to the actual performance of the assets in the plans. See "Application of Critical Accounting Policies - Defined Benefits" for a discussion of the assumptions and sensitivities regarding those assumptions. The Economic Stimulus Package The Economic Stimulus Package was intended to stimulate the U.S. economy through federal tax relief, expansion of unemployment benefits and other social stimulus provisions, domestic spending for education, health care and infrastructure, including the energy sector. A portion of the benefits included in the Economic Stimulus Package are offered in the form of loan fee reductions, expanded loan guarantees and secondary market incentives. Funds from the Economic Stimulus Package have been allocated to various federal agencies, such as the DOE, and provided to state agencies through block grants. The DOE has made awards of the funds for smart grid and efficiency-related programs. In addition, in July 2009, PPL Electric proposed to the DOE that the agency provide funding for one-half of a $38 million smart grid project. The project would use smart grid technology to strengthen reliability, save energy and improve electric service for 60,000 Harrisburg, Pennsylvania area customers. It would also provide benefits beyond the Harrisburg region, helping to speed power restoration across PPL Electric's 29-county service territory. In October 2009, PPL Electric received notification that its grant proposal had been selected by the DOE for award negotiations. PPL Electric cannot predict the outcome of these award negotiations. Results of Operations Earnings Income available to PPL was: 2009 2008 2007 $ 124 $ 158 $ 145 The changes in income available to PPL from year to year were, in part, attributable to several special items that management considers significant. Details of these special items are provided below. The after-tax changes in income available to PPL between these periods were due to the following factors. 2009 vs. 2008 2008 vs. 2007 Delivery revenues (net of CTC/ITC amortization, interest expense on transition bonds and ancillary charges) $ (16 ) $ 32 Other operation and maintenance 3 (8 ) Other income - net (a) (2 ) (10 ) Interest expense (12 ) 1 Other 2 (3 ) Special items (9 ) 1 $ (34 ) $ 13 (a) Includes interest income from affiliate. Delivery revenues decreased in 2009 compared with 2008, primarily due to unfavorable economic conditions, including industrial customers scaling back on production and the unfavorable impact of weather on sales volumes. See "Revenue Recognition" in Note 1 to the Financial Statements for information on a true-up of FERC formula-based transmission revenues. Delivery revenues increased in 2008 compared with 2007, primarily due to a base rate increase effective January 1, 2008 and normal load growth. Other operation and maintenance expenses increased in 2008 compared with 2007, primarily due to insurance recovery of storm costs in 2007, higher vegetation management costs and higher regulatory asset amortization. Other income - net decreased in 2008 compared with 2007, primarily due to a decrease in interest income from affiliate resulting from a decrease in the average balance outstanding on a note receivable from an affiliate and a lower average floating interest rate. Interest expense increased in 2009 compared with 2008, primarily due to $400 million of debt issuances in October 2008 that prefunded a portion of August 2009 debt maturities. The following after-tax amounts, which management considers special items, also impacted earnings. 2009 2008 2007 Impairments $ (1 ) Workforce reduction (a) (5 ) $ (1 ) Other Change in tax accounting method related to repairs (Note 5) (3 ) Total $ (9 ) $ (1 ) (a) See Note 12 to the Financial Statements for additional information related to the 2009 workforce reduction. PPL Electric's earnings beyond 2009 are subject to various risks and uncertainties. See "Forward-Looking Information," "Item 1A. Risk Factors," the rest of this Item 7 and Note 14 to the Financial Statements for a discussion of the risks, uncertainties and factors that may impact PPL Electric's future earnings. 2010 Outlook Excluding special items, PPL Electric projects lower earnings in 2010 compared with 2009, as a net result of lower distribution revenues, primarily due to continued slow economic growth and weak customer demand; higher operation and maintenance expenses; offset by lower financing costs. In late March 2010, PPL Electric expects to file a request with the PUC seeking an increase in its distribution rates beginning in January 2011. See Note 14 to the Financial Statements for a discussion of items that could impact future earnings, including Pennsylvania legislative and other regulatory activities. Statement of Income Analysis -- Operating Revenues Retail Electric The changes in revenues from retail electric operations were attributable to: 2009 vs. 2008 2008 vs. 2007 Delivery $ (60 ) $ 17 PLR (20 ) 19 Other 9 3 $ (71 ) $ 39 The decrease in retail electric revenues for 2009 compared with 2008 was attributable to unfavorable economic conditions, including industrial customers scaling back on production. In addition, weather had an unfavorable impact on sales volumes. These decreases were partially offset by favorable price increases. See "Revenue Recognition" in Note 1 to the Financial Statements for information on a true-up of FERC formula-based transmission revenues. The increase in PLR revenue for 2008 compared with 2007 was attributable to normal load growth, as well as a favorable price increase. The increase in delivery revenue for the same period was primarily due to a base rate increase effective January 1, 2008, and normal load growth. These increases were partially offset by the unfavorable impact of weather on residential and commercial sales in 2008. Wholesale Electric to Affiliate PPL Electric has a contract to sell to PPL EnergyPlus the electricity that PPL Electric purchases under contracts with NUGs. The decrease of $38 million in wholesale electric to affiliate in 2009 compared with 2008 was primarily due to the expiration of NUG contracts in 2008 and 2009. The final NUG contract will expire in 2014. The decrease of $48 million in wholesale electric to affiliate in 2008 compared with 2007 was primarily due to the expiration of a NUG contract at the end of 2007 and the expiration of two NUG contracts during 2008. The decrease was partially offset by higher prices on certain NUG contracts. Energy Purchases Energy purchases decreased by $49 million for 2009 compared with 2008, primarily due to the expiration of NUG contracts in 2008 and 2009, as well as lower ancillary charges, which are primarily the result of lower pricing. The final NUG contract will expire in 2014. Energy purchases decreased by $43 million for 2008 compared with 2007, primarily due to the expiration of a NUG contract at the end of 2007 and two NUG contracts in 2008, partially offset by higher prices on certain NUG contracts. Energy Purchases from Affiliate Energy purchases from affiliate decreased by $20 million in 2009 compared with 2008. The decrease was attributable to unfavorable weather and the impact of economic conditions, primarily on industrial customers' load, partially offset by higher prices for energy purchased under the power supply contracts with PPL EnergyPlus that support the PLR load. Energy purchases from affiliate increased by $16 million in 2008 compared with 2007. The increase was primarily due to higher prices for energy purchased under the power supply contracts with PPL EnergyPlus that support the PLR load, as well as higher PLR load. Other Operation and Maintenance The increases in other operation and maintenance expense were due to: 2009 vs. 2008 2008 vs. 2007 Workforce reduction (Note 12) $ 9 Uncollectible accounts 7 $ 1 Employee benefits 5 (6 ) Insurance recovery of storm costs 3 5 Payroll-related costs 3 (3 ) Regulatory asset amortization 4 PUC-reportable storm costs (11 ) (4 ) Vegetation management costs (5 ) 5 Contractor-related expenses (2 ) 1 Customer education programs (2 ) Other 5 $ 7 $ 8 Amortization of Recoverable Transition Costs Amortization of recoverable transition costs increased by $11 million in 2009 compared with 2008 and decreased by $17 million in 2008 compared with 2007. The amortization of recoverable transition costs was based on a PUC amortization schedule, adjusted for ITC and CTC recoveries in customer rates and related expenses. Since the amortization substantially matches the revenue recorded based on recovery in customer rates, there is minimal impact on earnings. At the end of 2009, PPL Electric's recoverable transition costs have been fully amortized. Taxes, Other Than Income Taxes, other than income decreased by $9 million in 2009 compared with 2008. The decrease was primarily due to a $12 million decrease in Pennsylvania gross receipts tax expense, which reflects a decrease in the tax rate in 2009. Gross receipts tax is passed through to customers. Taxes, other than income increased by $3 million in 2008 compared with 2007. The increase was primarily due to a $6 million increase in Pennsylvania gross receipts tax expense, which reflects an increase in the tax rate in 2008. Other Income - net See Note 16 to the Financial Statements for details of other income. Interest Income from Affiliate Interest income from affiliate decreased by $5 million in 2009 compared with 2008, and decreased by $10 million in 2008 compared with 2007. These decreases were the result of a reduced average balance outstanding on a note receivable from an affiliate and a lower average rate on this note due to the floating interest rate. Interest Expense The changes in interest expense, which includes "Interest Expense" and "Interest Expense with Affiliate," were due to: 2009 vs. 2008 2008 vs. 2007 Long-term debt interest expense (a) $ 24 $ 7 Repayment of transition bonds (13 ) (22 ) Interest on PLR contract collateral (Note 15) (8 ) (7 ) Other 4 (2 ) $ 7 $ (24 ) (a) The increases were primarily due to $400 million of debt issuances in October 2008 that prefunded a portion of August 2009 debt maturities. Income Taxes The changes in income taxes were due to: 2009 vs. 2008 2008 vs. 2007 Higher (lower) pre-tax book income $ (19 ) $ 16 Tax return adjustments (a) (2 ) 7 Tax reserve adjustments (2 ) (1 ) Other (3 ) $ (23 ) $ 19 (a) During 2009, PPL Electric received consent from the IRS to change its method of accounting for certain expenditures for tax purposes. PPL deducted the resulting IRC Sec. 481 adjustment on its 2008 tax return and recorded a $3 million adjustment to federal and state income tax expense which results from the reversal of prior years' state income tax benefits related to regulated depreciation. See Note 5 to the Financial Statements for additional information on income taxes. Financial Condition Liquidity and Capital Resources PPL Electric continues to focus on maintaining a strong credit profile and liquidity position. PPL Electric expects to continue to have adequate liquidity available through operating cash flows, cash and cash equivalents and its credit facilities. PPL Electric currently does not plan to access commercial paper markets or debt and equity capital markets in 2010. PPL Electric's cash flows from operations and access to cost-effective bank and capital markets are subject to risks and uncertainties including, but not limited to: unusual or extreme weather that may damage PPL Electric's transmission and distribution facilities or affect energy sales to customers; the ability to recover and the timeliness and adequacy of recovery of costs associated with regulated utility businesses; any adverse outcome of legal proceedings and investigations with respect to PPL Electric's current and past business activities; deterioration in the financial markets that could make obtaining new sources of bank and capital markets funding more difficult and more costly; and a downgrade in PPL Electric's credit ratings that could adversely affect its ability to access capital and increase the cost of credit facilities and any new debt. See "Item 1A. Risk Factors" for further discussion of risks and uncertainties affecting PPL Electric's cash flows. At December 31, PPL Electric had the following: 2009 2008 2007 Cash and cash equivalents $ 485 $ 483 $ 33 Short-term debt $ 95 $ 41 The changes in PPL Electric's cash and cash equivalents position resulted from: 2009 2008 2007 Net Cash Provided by Operating Activities $ 294 $ 648 $ 568 Net Cash Provided by (Used in) Investing Activities 6 (226 ) (239 ) Net Cash Provided by (Used in) Financing Activities (298 ) 28 (446 ) Net Increase (Decrease) in Cash and Cash Equivalents $ 2 $ 450 $ (117 ) Operating Activities Net cash provided by operating activities decreased by 55%, or $354 million, in 2009 compared with 2008, primarily as a result of the repayment by PPL Electric of $300 million in cash collateral related to the long-term PLR energy supply agreements with PPL Energy Supply, which expired at the end of 2009. The decrease also reflects the impact of lower delivery revenues and higher payments of interest and income taxes. Net cash provided by operating activities increased by 14%, or $80 million, in 2008 compared with 2007, primarily as a result of increased revenues, which was due primarily to a base rate increase effective January 1, 2008 and normal load growth, as well as less interest incurred on long-term debt, as a result of the repayment of transition bonds during 2007 and 2008. The increases to cash provided by operating activities resulting from these items were partially offset by increased energy purchases, primarily as a result of higher prices for energy purchased from PPL EnergyPlus under the PLR contracts and higher PLR load, as well as an insurance recovery of storm costs in 2007. PPL Electric expects be able to achieve relatively stable cash flows from operations through the support of (i) contracts it has entered into to procure the 2010 and a portion of 2011 PLR electricity supply it expects to need for residential, small commercial and small industrial customers who do not choose an alternative supplier and (ii) purchasing receivables from alternative suppliers for those customers who purchase generation from other suppliers. See Note 14 to the Financial Statements for information on the energy purchase contracts and "Customer Choice - End of Transition Period" in "Overview" in this Item 7 for a discussion of the ability of customers to purchase generation supply from other providers and PPL Electric's purchase of the related receivables. Investing Activities The primary use of cash in investing activities is capital expenditures. See "Forecasted Uses of Cash" for detail regarding capital expenditures in 2009 and projected expenditures for the years 2010 through 2012. Net cash provided by investing activities was $6 million in 2009 compared with cash used in investing activities of $226 million in 2008. The change from 2008 to 2009 primarily reflects the receipt of $300 million from an affiliate as repayment of a demand loan. Net cash used in investing activities remained relatively stable in 2008 compared with 2007, but there were significant changes in certain components. In 2008, there was a net decrease of $69 million in restricted cash and cash equivalents compared to a net increase of $8 million in 2007. Capital expenditures decreased $18 million in 2008 compared with 2007. In 2008, PPL Electric loaned $23 million to an affiliate compared with receiving $23 million in 2007 from an affiliate as partial repayment of a demand loan. Additionally, PPL Electric received net proceeds of $25 million from purchases and sales of investments in 2007 compared with none in 2008. Financing Activities Net cash used in financing activities was $298 million in 2009 compared with net cash provided by financing activities of $28 million in 2008. The change from 2008 to 2009 primarily reflects less issuances and increased retirements of long-term debt, contributions received from PPL, increased common stock dividends to PPL and the repayment of short-term borrowings in 2009. PPL Electric had net debt retirements of $392 million in 2009 compared with net debt issuances of $148 million in 2008, received $400 million of contributions from PPL in 2009 and paid $176 million more of common stock dividends to PPL in 2009 compared to 2008. Net cash provided by financing activities was $28 million in 2008 compared with net cash used in financing activities of $446 million in 2007. The change from 2007 to 2008 primarily reflects increased issuances and less retirements of long-term debt, less common stock dividends to PPL and increased short-term borrowings in 2008. PPL Electric had net debt issuances of $148 million in 2008 compared to net debt retirements of $306 million in 2007, and it paid $21 million less of common stock dividends to PPL in 2008 compared to 2007. See "Forecasted Sources of Cash" for a discussion of PPL Electric's plans to issue debt and equity securities, as well as a discussion of credit facility capacity available to PPL Electric. Also see "Forecasted Uses of Cash" for a discussion of PPL Electric's plans to pay dividends on its common and preferred securities, as well as maturities of PPL Electric's long-term debt. PPL Electric's debt financing activity in 2009 was: Issuance Retirements Senior Secured Bonds (a) $ 298 $ (586 ) Variable Rate Pollution Control Facilities Note (9 ) Short-term debt (95 ) Total $ 298 $ (690 ) Net decrease $ (392 ) (a) Issuance is net of pricing discount. Retirements exclude a $9 million premium paid in connection with the December 2009 redemption of PPL Electric's 4.30% Senior Secured Bonds due 2013. See Note 7 to the Financial Statements for more detailed information regarding PPL Electric's financing activities in 2009. Forecasted Sources of Cash PPL Electric expects to continue to have significant sources of cash available in the near term, including various credit facilities and a commercial paper program. PPL Electric currently does not plan to access commercial paper markets or debt and equity capital markets in 2010, but may decide to do so, subject to market conditions, to enhance its liquidity. Credit Facilities At December 31, 2009, PPL Electric's total committed borrowing capacity under its credit facilities and the use of this borrowing capacity were: Committed Capacity Borrowed Letters of Credit Issued (d) Unused Capacity 5-year Syndicated Credit Facility (a) $ 190 $ 6 $ 184 Asset-backed Credit Facility (b) 150 150 Total PPL Electric Credit Facilities (c) $ 340 $ 6 $ 334 (a) The commitments under this credit facility are provided by a diverse bank group, with no one bank and its affiliates providing an aggregate commitment of more than 18% of the total committed capacity. Borrowings under this credit facility generally bear interest at LIBOR-based rates plus a spread, depending upon the company's public debt rating. PPL Electric also has the capability to request the lenders to issue up to $190 million of letters of credit under this facility, which issuances reduce available borrowing capacity. Under certain conditions, PPL Electric may request that the facility's capacity be increased by up to $100 million. This credit facility contains a financial covenant requiring debt to total capitalization to not exceed 70%. At December 31, 2009 and 2008, PPL Electric's consolidated debt to total capitalization percentages, as calculated in accordance with its credit facility, were 44% and 53%. This credit facility also contains standard representations and warranties that must be made for PPL Electric to borrow under it. (b) This credit facility relates to an asset-backed commercial paper program through which PPL Electric obtains financing by selling and contributing its eligible accounts receivable and unbilled revenues to a special purpose, wholly owned subsidiary on an ongoing basis. The subsidiary pledges these assets to secure loans of up to an aggregate of $150 million from a commercial paper conduit sponsored by a financial institution. At December 31, 2009, based on accounts receivable and unbilled revenue pledged, $150 million was available for borrowing. (c) The committed capacity expires as follows: $150 million in 2010 and $190 million in 2012. PPL Electric intends to renew its existing $150 million asset-backed credit facility in 2010 in order to maintain its current total committed capacity level. (d) PPL Electric has a reimbursement obligation to the extent any letters of credit are drawn upon. In addition to the financial covenant noted in the table above, the credit agreements governing the credit facilities contain various other covenants. Failure to comply with the covenants after applicable grace periods could result in acceleration of repayment of borrowings and/or termination of the agreements. PPL Electric monitors compliance with the covenants on a regular basis. At December 31, 2009, PPL Electric was in material compliance with these covenants. At this time, PPL Electric believes that these covenants and other borrowing conditions will not limit access to these funding sources. See Note 7 to the Financial Statements for further discussion of PPL Electric's credit facilities. Commercial Paper PPL Electric maintains a commercial paper program for up to $200 million to provide an additional financing source to fund its short-term liquidity needs, if and when necessary. Commercial paper issuances are supported by PPL Electric's five-year syndicated credit facility based on available capacity. As noted below under "Credit Ratings," commercial paper for PPL Electric is rated P-2, A-2 and F2 by Moody's, S&P and Fitch. Market conditions to issue commercial paper with these ratings have strengthened significantly since 2008, when the downturn in the financial markets created extremely limited liquidity resulting in high borrowing rates. PPL Electric did not issue any commercial paper during 2009. Based on its current cash position and anticipated cash flows, PPL Electric currently does not plan to issue any commercial paper during 2010, but it may do so from time to time, subject to market conditions, to facilitate short-term cash flow needs. Contributions from PPL From time to time PPL may make capital contributions to PPL Electric. PPL Electric may use these contributions for general corporate purposes. Long-Term Debt and Equity Securities PPL Electric currently does not plan to issue any debt or equity securities in 2010. Forecasted Uses of Cash In addition to expenditures required for normal operating activities, such as purchased power, payroll, and taxes, PPL Electric currently expects to incur future cash outflows for capital expenditures, various contractual obligations, payment of dividends on its common and preferred securities and possibly the purchase or redemption of a portion of its debt securities. Capital Expenditures The table below shows PPL Electric's actual spending for the year 2009 and current capital expenditure projections for the years 2010 through 2012. Actual Projected 2009 2010 2011 2012 Construction expenditures (a) (b) Transmission and distribution facilities $ 264 $ 542 $ 739 $ 605 Other 34 47 38 39 Total Capital Expenditures $ 298 $ 589 $ 777 $ 644 (a) Construction expenditures include AFUDC, which is expected to be approximately $34 million for the years 2010 through 2012. (b) Includes expenditures for intangible assets. PPL Electric's capital expenditure projections for the years 2010 through 2012 total approximately $2.0 billion. Capital expenditure plans are revised periodically to reflect changes in operational, market and regulatory conditions. The table includes projected costs for the asset optimization program focused on the replacement of aging transmission and distribution assets, and the PJM-approved regional transmission line expansion project. See Note 8 to the Financial Statements for additional information. PPL Electric plans to fund its capital expenditures in 2010 with cash on hand and cash from operations. Contractual Obligations PPL Electric has assumed various financial obligations and commitments in the ordinary course of conducting its business. At December 31, 2009, the estimated contractual cash obligations of PPL Electric were: Total Less Than 1 Year 1-3 Years 4-5 Years After 5 Years Long-term Debt (a) $ 1,474 $ 410 $ 1,064 Interest on Long-term Debt (b) 1,454 $ 89 $ 173 147 1,045 Purchase Obligations (c) 3,142 2,599 537 6 Other Long-term Liabilities Reflected on the Balance Sheets under GAAP (d) Total Contractual Cash Obligations $ 6,070 $ 2,688 $ 710 $ 563 $ 2,109 (a) Reflects principal maturities only based on legal maturity dates. See Note 7 to the Financial Statements for a discussion of variable-rate remarketable bonds issued by the PEDFA on behalf of PPL Electric. PPL Electric does not have any capital or operating lease obligations. (b) Assumes interest payments through maturity. The payments herein are subject to change, as payments for variable-rate debt have been estimated. (c) The payments reflected herein are subject to change, as the purchase obligation reflected is an estimate based on projected obligated quantities and projected pricing under the contract. Purchase orders made in the ordinary course of business are excluded from the amounts presented. (d) At December 31, 2009, total unrecognized tax benefits of $74 million were excluded from this table as PPL Electric cannot reasonably estimate the amount and period of future payments. See Note 5 to the Financial Statements for additional information. Dividends From time to time, as determined by its Board of Directors, PPL Electric pays dividends on its common stock to its parent, PPL. As discussed in Note 7 to the Financial Statements, PPL Electric may not pay dividends on its common stock, except in certain circumstances, unless full dividends have been paid on the 6.25% Series Preference Stock for the then-current dividend period. PPL Electric does not, at this time, expect that such limitation would significantly impact its ability to declare dividends. PPL Electric expects to continue to pay quarterly dividends on its outstanding preferred securities, if and as declared by its Board of Directors. Purchase or Redemption of Debt Securities PPL Electric will continue to evaluate purchasing or redeeming outstanding debt securities and may decide to take action depending upon prevailing market conditions and available cash. Credit Ratings Moody's, S&P and Fitch periodically review the credit ratings on the debt and preferred securities of PPL Electric. Based on their respective independent reviews, the rating agencies may make certain ratings revisions or ratings affirmations. A credit rating reflects an assessment by the rating agency of the creditworthiness associated with an issuer and particular securities that it issues. The credit ratings of PPL Electric are based on information provided by PPL Electric and other sources. The ratings of Moody's, S&P and Fitch are not a recommendation to buy, sell or hold any securities of PPL Electric. Such ratings may be subject to revisions or withdrawal by the agencies at any time and should be evaluated independently of each other and any other rating that may be assigned to the securities. A downgrade in PPL Electric's credit ratings could result in higher borrowing costs and reduced access to capital markets. The following table summarizes the credit ratings of PPL Electric at December 31, 2009: Moody's S&P Fitch (a) PPL Electric (b) Senior Unsecured/Issuer Rating Baa1 A- BBB First Mortgage Bonds/Senior Secured Bonds A3 A- A- Commercial Paper P-2 A-2 F2 Preferred Stock Baa3 BBB BBB Preference Stock Baa3 BBB BBB Outlook Negative Negative STABLE (a) Issuer Rating for Fitch is an "Issuer Default Rating." (b) Excludes Pollution Control Revenue Bonds issued by the LCIDA and the PEDFA on behalf of PPL Electric, of which the LCIDA bonds are insured and may be rated on the basis of relevant factors, including the insurer's ratings. In January 2009, S&P completed a review of PPL Electric, upon which it revised its outlook to negative from stable and affirmed the A- issuer rating of PPL Electric. S&P stated in its press release that the revision in its outlook reflects the linkage with PPL, whose outlook was also revised to negative from stable, along with their expectation that PPL Electric's financial metrics could weaken beginning in 2010. In May 2009, Moody's completed a review of PPL Electric. As a result of that review, Moody's revised its outlook for PPL Electric to negative from stable. Moody's stated in its press release that the revision in the outlook for PPL Electric reflects Moody's expectation that PPL Electric's financial metrics will deteriorate beyond 2009 and considers the potential for additional pressure on cash flows. In October 2009, Fitch completed a review of PPL Electric, upon which it affirmed all ratings of PPL Electric. In January 2010, as a result of implementing its recently revised guidelines for rating preferred stock and hybrid securities, Fitch lowered the ratings of PPL Electric's preferred stock and preference stock to BBB- from BBB. Fitch stated in its press release that the new guidelines, which apply to instruments issued by companies in all sectors, typically resulted in downgrades of one notch for many instruments that provide for the ability to defer interest or dividend payments. Fitch stated that it has no reason to believe that deferral will be activated. Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements PPL Electric has entered into certain agreements that may contingently require payment to a guaranteed or indemnified party. See Note 14 to the Financial Statements for a discussion of these agreements. Risk Management Market Risk Commodity Price and Volumetric Risk - PLR Contracts PPL Electric has an obligation to act as a PLR. This role has the potential to expose PPL Electric to electric generation price and volumetric risk. Through 2009, PPL Electric and PPL EnergyPlus had power supply agreements under which PPL EnergyPlus sold PPL Electric (under a predetermined pricing arrangement) energy and capacity to fulfill this PLR obligation. As a result, PPL Electric had shifted these risks to PPL EnergyPlus. For its 2010 PLR obligation, PPL Electric has entered into power purchase agreements with several counterparties, which include fixed prices that shift these risks to the counterparties. PPL Electric is in the process of procuring such supply for the period January 2011 through May 2013. In the event a supplier defaults on its obligation, PPL Electric would be required to seek replacement power in the market. All incremental costs incurred by PPL Electric would be recoverable from customers in future rates. See "Overview" in this Item 7 and Note 14 to the Financial Statements for information on the PUC-approved procurement plan and other ongoing Pennsylvania regulatory and legislative activities. Interest Rate Risk PPL Electric has issued debt to finance its operations, which exposes it to interest rate risk. PPL Electric's potential annual exposure to increased interest expense, based on a 10% increase in interest rates, was not significant at December 31, 2009 and 2008. PPL Electric estimated that a 10% decrease in interest rates at December 31, 2009 would increase the fair value of its debt portfolio by $69 million, compared with $50 million at December 31, 2008. Credit Risk Credit risk is the risk that PPL Electric would incur a loss as a result of nonperformance by counterparties of their contractual obligations. PPL Electric requires that counterparties maintain specified credit ratings and requires other assurances in the form of credit support or collateral in certain circumstances in order to limit counterparty credit risk. However, PPL Electric has concentrations of suppliers, financial institutions and customers. These concentrations may impact PPL Electric's overall exposure to credit risk, positively or negatively, as counterparties may be similarly affected by changes in economic, regulatory or other conditions. In 2007, the PUC approved PPL Electric's post-rate cap plan to procure default electricity supply for retail customers who do not choose an alternative competitive supplier in 2010. From 2007 through 2009, PPL Electric conducted six competitive solicitations to purchase electricity generation supply for these customers. In October 2009, PPL Electric purchased 2010 supply for fixed-price default service to large commercial and large industrial customers who elect to take that service. In November 2009, PPL Electric purchased supply to provide hourly default service to large commercial and industrial customers in 2010. In June 2009, the PUC approved PPL Electric's procurement plan for the period January 2011 through May 2013. The first two of 14 planned competitive solicitations occurred in 2009. Under the standard Supply Master Agreement (the Agreement) for the bid solicitation process, PPL Electric requires all suppliers to post collateral if their credit exposure exceeds an established credit limit. In the event a supplier defaults on its obligation, PPL Electric would be required to seek replacement power in the market. All incremental costs incurred by PPL Electric would be recoverable from customers in future rates. At December 31, 2009, all of the successful bidders under all of the solicitations had an investment grade credit rating from S&P, and were not required to post collateral under the Agreement. There is no instance under the Agreement in which PPL Electric is required to post collateral to its suppliers. See "Overview" in this Item 7 and Notes 14, 15, 17 and 18 to the Financial Statements for additional information on the competitive solicitations, the Agreement and credit concentration and risk. Related Party Transactions PPL Electric is not aware of any material ownership interests or operating responsibility by senior management of PPL Electric in outside partnerships, including leasing transactions with variable interest entities, or other entities doing business with PPL Electric. For additional information on related party transactions, see Note 15 to the Financial Statements. Environmental Matters See "Item 1. Business - Environmental Matters" and Note 14 to the Financial Statements for a discussion of environmental matters. Competition See "Item 1. Business - Segment Information - Pennsylvania Delivery Segment - Competition" and "Item 1A. Risk Factors" for a discussion of competitive factors affecting PPL Electric. New Accounting Guidance See Notes 1 and 22 to the Financial Statements for a discussion of new accounting guidance adopted and pending adoption. Application of Critical Accounting Policies PPL Electric's financial condition and results of operations are impacted by the methods, assumptions and estimates used in the application of critical accounting policies. The following accounting policies are particularly important to the financial condition or results of operations of PPL Electric, and require estimates or other judgments of matters inherently uncertain. Changes in the estimates or other judgments included within these accounting policies could result in a significant change to the information presented in the Financial Statements (these accounting policies are also discussed in Note 1 to the Financial Statements). PPL's senior management has reviewed these critical accounting policies and the estimates and assumptions regarding them with its Audit Committee. In addition, PPL's senior management has reviewed the following disclosures regarding the application of these critical accounting policies with the Audit Committee. Effective January 1, 2009, PPL Electric fully applied accounting guidance that provides a framework for measuring fair value. The fair value measurement concepts provided by this guidance are used within its financial statements where applicable. See Notes 1 and 17 to the Financial Statements for additional information regarding fair value measurements. 1) Defined Benefits PPL Electric participates in and is allocated a significant portion of the liability and net periodic defined benefit pension and other postretirement costs of plans sponsored by PPL Services based on participation in those plans. PPL Electric records an asset or liability to recognize the funded status of all defined benefit plans with an offsetting entry to regulatory assets. Consequently, the funded status of all defined benefit plans is fully recognized on the Balance Sheets. See Note 12 to the Financial Statements for additional information about the plans and the accounting for defined benefits. PPL makes certain assumptions regarding the valuation of benefit obligations and the performance of plan assets. When accounting for defined benefits, delayed recognition in earnings of differences between actual results and expected or estimated results is a guiding principle. Annual net periodic defined benefit costs are recorded in current earnings based on estimated results. Any differences between actual and estimated results are recorded in regulatory assets. The amount in regulatory assets is amortized to income over future periods. The delayed recognition allows for a smoothed recognition of costs over the working lives of the employees who benefit under the plans. The primary assumptions are: Discount Rate - The discount rate is used in calculating the present value of benefits, which is based on projections of benefit payments to be made in the future. The objective in selecting the discount rate is to measure the single amount that, if invested at the measurement date in a portfolio of high-quality debt instruments, would provide the necessary future cash flows to pay the accumulated benefits when due. Expected Return on Plan Assets - Management projects the long-term rates of return on plan assets based on historical performance, future expectations and periodic portfolio rebalancing among the diversified asset classes. These projected returns reduce the net benefit costs PPL Electric records currently. Rate of Compensation Increase - Management projects employees' annual pay increases, which are used to project employees' pension benefits at retirement. Health Care Cost Trend Rate - Management projects the expected increases in the cost of health care. In selecting a discount rate for its U.S. defined benefit plans, PPL starts with an analysis of the expected benefit payment stream for its plans. This information is first matched against a spot-rate yield curve. A portfolio of 526 Aa-graded non-callable (or callable with make-whole provisions) bonds, with a total amount outstanding in excess of $541 billion, serves as the base from which those with the lowest and highest yields are eliminated to develop the ultimate yield curve. The results of this analysis are considered together with other economic data and movements in various bond indices to determine the discount rate assumption. At December 31, 2009, PPL decreased the discount rate for its U.S. pension plans from 6.50% to 6.00% as a result of this assessment and decreased the discount rate for its other postretirement benefit plans from 6.45% to 5.81%. The expected long-term rates of return for PPL's U.S. defined benefit pension and other postretirement benefits have been developed using a best-estimate of expected returns, volatilities and correlations for each asset class. PPL management corroborates these rates with expected long-term rates of return calculated by its independent actuary, who uses a building block approach that begins with a risk-free rate of return with factors being added such as inflation, duration, credit spreads and equity risk. Each plan's specific asset allocation is also considered in developing a reasonable return assumption. At December 31, 2009, PPL's expected return on plan assets remained at 8.00% for its U.S. pension plans and remained at 7.00% for its other postretirement benefit plans. In selecting a rate of compensation increase, PPL considers past experience in light of movements in inflation rates. At December 31, 2009, PPL's rate of compensation increase remained at 4.75% for its U.S. plans. In selecting health care cost trend rates for PPL's other postretirement benefit plans, PPL considers past performance and forecasts of health care costs. At December 31, 2009, PPL's health care cost trend rates were 8.00% for 2010, gradually declining to 5.50% for 2016. A variance in the assumptions listed above could have a significant impact on the accrued defined benefit liabilities or assets, reported annual net periodic defined benefit costs and the regulatory assets allocated to PPL Electric. While the charts below reflect either an increase or decrease in each assumption, the inverse of this change would impact the accrued defined benefit liabilities or assets, reported annual net periodic defined benefit costs and regulatory assets by a similar amount in the opposite direction. The sensitivities below reflect an evaluation of the change based solely on a change in that assumption and does not include income tax effects. At December 31, 2009, PPL Electric had recorded the following defined benefit plan liabilities: Pension liabilities $ 245 Other postretirement benefit liabilities 73 The following chart reflects the sensitivities in the December 31, 2009 Balance Sheet associated with a change in certain assumptions based on PPL's primary defined benefit plans. Increase (Decrease) Actuarial assumption Change in assumption Impact on defined benefit liabilities Impact on regulatory assets Discount Rate (0.25)% $ 31 $ 31 Rate of Compensation Increase 0.25% 5 5 Health Care Cost Trend Rate (a) 1.0% 5 5 (a) Only impacts other postretirement benefits. In 2009, PPL Electric was allocated net periodic defined benefit costs charged to operating expense of $24 million. This amount represents a $6 million increase compared with the charge recognized during 2008. The following chart reflects the sensitivities in the 2009 Statement of Income (excluding income tax effects) associated with a change in certain assumptions based on PPL's primary defined benefit plans. Actuarial assumption Change in assumption Impact on defined benefit costs Discount Rate (0.25)% $ 1 Expected Return on Plan Assets (0.25)% 2 Rate of Compensation Increase 0.25% 1 Health Care Cost Trend Rate (a) 1.0% 1 (a) Only impacts other postretirement benefits. 2) Loss Accruals PPL Electric accrues losses for the estimated impacts of various conditions, situations or circumstances involving uncertain or contingent future outcomes. For loss contingencies, the loss must be accrued if (1) information is available that indicates it is probable that a loss has been incurred, given the likelihood of the uncertain future events, and (2) the amount of the loss can be reasonably estimated. Accounting guidance defines "probable" as cases in which "the future event or events are likely to occur." PPL Electric does not record the accrual of contingencies that might result in gains, unless recovery is assured. PPL Electric continuously assesses potential loss contingencies for environmental remediation, litigation claims, regulatory penalties and other events. The accounting aspects of estimated loss accruals include (1) the initial identification and recording of the loss, (2) the determination of triggering events for reducing a recorded loss accrual, and (3) the ongoing assessment as to whether a recorded loss accrual is sufficient. All three of these aspects require significant judgment by PPL Electric's management. PPL Electric uses its internal expertise and outside experts (such as lawyers and engineers), as necessary, to help estimate the probability that a loss has been incurred and the amount (or range) of the loss. No new significant loss accruals were recorded in 2009. PPL Electric has identified certain other events that could give rise to a loss, but that do not meet the conditions for accrual. Such events are disclosed, but not recorded, when it is "reasonably possible" that a loss has been incurred. See Note 14 to the Financial Statements for disclosure of other potential loss contingencies that have not met the criteria for accrual. When an estimated loss is accrued, PPL Electric identifies, where applicable, the triggering events for subsequently reducing the loss accrual. The triggering events generally occur when the contingency has been resolved and the actual loss is incurred, or when the risk of loss has diminished or been eliminated. The following are some of the triggering events that provide for the reduction of certain recorded loss accruals: Allowances for uncollectible accounts are reduced when accounts are written off after prescribed collection procedures have been exhausted, a better estimate of the allowance is determined or underlying amounts are ultimately collected. Environmental and other litigation contingencies are reduced when the contingency is resolved and PPL Electric makes actual payments, a better estimate of the loss is determined or the loss is no longer considered probable. PPL Electric reviews its loss accruals on a regular basis to assure that the recorded potential loss exposures are appropriate. This involves ongoing communication and analyses with internal and external legal counsel, engineers, operation management and other parties. 3) Income Tax Uncertainties Significant management judgment is required in developing PPL Electric's provision for income taxes primarily due to the uncertainty related to tax positions taken or expected to be taken in tax returns and the determination of deferred tax assets, liabilities and valuation allowances. Significant management judgment is required to determine the amount of benefit recognized related to an uncertain tax position. PPL Electric evaluates its tax positions following a two-step process. The first step requires an entity to determine whether, based on the technical merits supporting a particular tax position, it is more likely than not (greater than a 50% chance) that the tax position will be sustained. This determination assumes that the relevant taxing authority will examine the tax position and is aware of all the relevant facts surrounding the tax position. The second step requires an entity to recognize in the financial statements the benefit of a tax position that meets the more-likely-than-not recognition criterion. The benefit recognized is measured at the largest amount of benefit that has a likelihood of realization, upon settlement, that exceeds 50%. PPL Electric's management considers a number of factors in assessing the benefit to be recognized, including negotiation of a settlement. On a quarterly basis, PPL Electric reassesses its uncertain tax positions by considering information known at the reporting date. Based on management's assessment of new information, PPL Electric may subsequently recognize a tax benefit for a previously unrecognized tax position, de-recognize a previously recognized tax position, or re-measure the benefit of a previously recognized tax position. The amounts ultimately paid upon resolution of issues raised by taxing authorities may differ materially from the amounts accrued and may materially impact PPL Electric's financial statements in the future. The balance sheet classification of unrecognized tax benefits and the need for valuation allowances to reduce deferred tax assets also require significant management judgment. PPL Electric classifies unrecognized tax benefits as current, to the extent management expects to settle an uncertain tax position, by payment or receipt of cash, within one year of the reporting date. Valuation allowances are initially recorded and reevaluated each reporting period by assessing the likelihood of the ultimate realization of a deferred tax asset. Management considers a number of factors in assessing the realization of a deferred tax asset, including the reversal of temporary differences, future taxable income and ongoing prudent and feasible tax planning strategies. Any tax planning strategy utilized in this assessment must meet the recognition and measurement criteria utilized by PPL Electric to account for an uncertain tax positions. See Note 5 to the Financial Statements for the required disclosures. At December 31, 2009, it was reasonably possible that during the next 12 months the total amount of unrecognized tax benefits could increase by as much as $23 million or decrease by up to $22 million for PPL Electric. This change could result from the timing and/or valuation of certain deductions, intercompany transactions and unitary filing groups. The events that could cause these changes are direct settlements with taxing authorities, litigation, legal or administrative guidance by relevant taxing authorities and the lapse of an applicable statute of limitation. 4) Regulatory Assets PPL Electric's electricity delivery business is subject to cost-based rate-regulation. As a result, PPL Electric is required to reflect the effects of regulatory actions in its financial statements. PPL Electric records assets that result from the regulated ratemaking process that may not be recorded under GAAP for non-regulated entities. Regulatory assets generally represent incurred costs that have been deferred because such costs are probable of future recovery in regulated customer rates. Management continually assesses whether the regulatory assets are probable of future recovery by considering factors such as changes in the applicable regulatory and political environments, the ability to recover costs through regulated rates, recent rate orders to other regulated entities, and the status of any pending or potential deregulation legislation. Based on this continual assessment, management believes the existing regulatory assets are probable of recovery. This assessment reflects the current political and regulatory climate at the state and federal levels, and is subject to change in the future. If future recovery of costs ceases to be probable, then asset write-offs would be required to be recognized in operating income. Additionally, the regulatory agencies can provide flexibility in the manner and timing of the depreciation of PP&E and amortization of regulatory assets. At December 31, 2009 and 2008, PPL Electric had regulatory assets of $531 million and $763 million. All of PPL Electric's regulatory assets are either currently being recovered under specific rate orders or represent amounts that will be recovered in future rates based upon established regulatory practices. Other Information PPL's Audit Committee has approved the independent auditor to provide audit and audit-related services and other services permitted by Sarbanes-Oxley and SEC rules. The audit and audit-related services include services in connection with statutory and regulatory filings, reviews of offering documents and registration statements, and internal control reviews. 
