CIK: 922224
Company Name: PPL CORP
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2007-02-28


ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS Overview PPL Electric provides electricity delivery service in eastern and central Pennsylvania. Its headquarters are in Allentown, PA. See "Item 1. Business - Background," for a description of PPL Electric's business. PPL Electric's strategy and principal challenge is to own and operate its electricity delivery business while maintaining high standards of customer service and reliability in a cost-effective manner. PPL Electric's electricity delivery business is rate-regulated. Accordingly, this business is subject to regulatory risk in terms of the costs that they may recover and the investment returns that they may collect in customer rates. PPL Electric's PLR obligation and the associated recovery from customers of its energy supply costs after 2009, when PPL Electric's full requirements energy supply agreements with PPL EnergyPlus expire, will be determined by the PUC pursuant to rules that have not yet been promulgated. To address this risk, PPL Electric has filed a plan with the PUC detailing how it proposes to acquire its electricity supply for non-shopping customers after 2009. In February 2007, a PUC Administrative Law Judge issued a recommended decision approving PPL Electric's plan with minor modifications. PPL Electric cannot predict when the PUC will act on the recommended decision or what action it will take. Also, in February 2007, the PUC issued proposed PLR regulations and a policy statement regarding interpretation and implementation of those regulations. The PUC is requesting public comment on both the regulations and policy statement. At current forward market prices, PPL Electric currently estimates that customer rates could increase by about 20% in 2010. A key challenge for PPL Electric is to maintain a strong credit profile. Investors, analysts and rating agencies that follow companies in the energy industry continue to be focused on the credit quality and liquidity position of these companies. PPL Electric continually focuses on maintaining an appropriate capital structure and liquidity position, thereby managing its target credit profile. See "Item 1A. Risk Factors" for more information concerning material risks PPL Electric faces in its business. The purpose of "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" is to provide information concerning PPL Electric's past and expected future performance in implementing the strategy and challenges mentioned above. Specifically: "Results of Operations" provides an overview of PPL Electric's operating results in 2006, 2005 and 2004, including a review of earnings. It also provides a brief outlook for 2007. "Financial Condition - Liquidity and Capital Resources" provides an analysis of PPL Electric's liquidity position and credit profile, including its sources of cash (including bank credit facilities and sources of operating cash flow) and uses of cash (including contractual commitments and capital expenditure requirements) and the key risks and uncertainties that impact PPL Electric's past and future liquidity position and financial condition. This subsection also includes a listing of PPL Electric's current credit ratings. "Financial Condition - Risk Management" includes an explanation of PPL Electric's risk management activities regarding commodity price risk and interest rate risk. "Application of Critical Accounting Policies" provides an overview of the accounting policies that are particularly important to the results of operations and financial condition of PPL Electric and that require its management to make significant estimates, assumptions and other judgments. The information provided in this Item 7 should be read in conjunction with PPL Electric's Financial Statements and the accompanying Notes. Terms and abbreviations are explained in the glossary. Dollars are in millions unless otherwise noted. Results of Operations Earnings Income available to PPL was: 2006 2005 2004 $ 180 $ 145 $ 74 The after-tax changes in income available to PPL were due to: 2006 vs. 2005 2005 vs. 2004 Delivery revenues (net of CTC/ITC amortization, interest expense on transition bonds and ancillary charges) $ (6 ) $ 123 Operation and maintenance expenses (13 ) (6 ) Taxes, other than income (excluding gross receipts tax) 1 (9 ) Depreciation (4 ) (3 ) Change in tax reserves associated with stranded costs securitization (Note 5) (15 ) Interest income on 2004 IRS tax settlement (5 ) Financing costs (excluding transition bond interest expense) (6 ) 4 Interest income on loans to affiliates 4 6 Income tax return adjustments (4 ) Income tax reserve adjustments 5 Other (1 ) Unusual items 64 (29 ) $ 35 $ 71 PPL Electric's year-to-year earnings were impacted by a number of key factors, including: Delivery revenues decreased in 2006 compared with 2005 primarily due to milder weather in 2006. In December 2004, the PUC approved an increase in PPL Electric's distribution rates of $137 million (based on a return on equity of 10.7%), and approved PPL Electric's proposed mechanism for collecting an additional $57 million in transmission-related charges, for a total annual increase of $194 million, effective January 1, 2005. Additionally, delivery revenues increased in 2005 compared with 2004 due to a 4.3% increase in electricity delivery sales volumes. Operation and maintenance expense increased in 2006 compared with 2005, primarily due to higher tree trimming costs, a union contract ratification bonus and storm restoration costs. Operation and maintenance expense increased in 2005 compared with 2004, primarily due to increased system reliability work and tree trimming costs. Operation and maintenance expenses were also impacted in 2005 due to the January 2005 ice storm costs and subsequent deferral as discussed below. In January 2005, severe ice storms hit PPL Electric's service territory. The total cost of restoring service to 238,000 customers, excluding capitalized costs and regular payroll expenses, was $16 million. In August 2005, the PUC issued an order granting PPL Electric's petition for authority to defer and amortize for regulatory accounting and reporting purposes a portion of the ice storm costs, subject to certain conditions. As a result of the PUC Order and in accordance with SFAS 71, "Accounting for the Effects of Certain Types of Regulation," in the third quarter of 2005, PPL Electric deferred $12 million of its previously expensed storm costs. The deferral was based on its assessment of the timing and likelihood of recovering the deferred costs in PPL Electric's next distribution base rate case. The following after-tax items, which management considers unusual, also had a significant impact on earnings. See the indicated Notes to the Financial Statements for additional information. 2006 2005 2004 Reversal of cost recovery - Hurricane Isabel (Note 1) $ (7 ) Realization of benefits related to Black Lung Trust assets (Note 13) 21 PJM billing dispute (Note 15) 21 $ (27 ) Acceleration of stock-based compensation expense for periods prior to 2005 (Note 1) (2 ) Total $ 35 $ (29 ) PPL Electric's earnings beyond 2006 are subject to various risks and uncertainties. See "Forward-Looking Information," "Item 1A. Risk Factors," the rest of this Item 7 and Note 15 to the Financial Statements for a discussion of the risks, uncertainties and factors that may impact PPL Electric's future earnings. 2007 Outlook PPL Electric expects to have flat earnings in 2007 compared with 2006, with modest load growth being offset by increased operation and maintenance expenses. In late March 2007, PPL Electric expects to file a request with the PUC seeking an increase in its distribution rates beginning in January 2008. Statement of Income Analysis -- Operating Revenues Retail Electric The increases in revenues from retail electric operations were attributable to: 2006 vs. 2005 2005 vs. 2004 PLR electric generation supply $ 127 $ 122 Electric delivery (38 ) 201 Other (1 ) 1 $ 88 $ 324 The increases in revenues from retail electric operations for 2006 compared with 2005 were primarily due to increased PLR revenues resulting from an 8.4% rate increase, offset by a decrease in electric delivery revenues resulting from a decrease in sales volumes due in part to milder weather in 2006. The increases in revenues from retail electric operations for 2005 compared with 2004 were primarily due to: higher electric delivery revenues resulting from higher transmission and distribution customer rates effective January 1, 2005, and a 4.3% increase in sales volume; and higher PLR revenues due to a 2% rate increase and a 6% increase in sales volume, in part due to the return of customers previously served by alternate suppliers. Wholesale Electric to Affiliate PPL Electric has a contract to sell to PPL EnergyPlus the electricity that PPL Electric purchases under contracts with NUGs. The $9 million increase in wholesale revenue to affiliate in 2006 compared with 2005 was primarily due to an unplanned outage at a NUG facility in 2005. PPL Electric therefore had more electricity to sell to PPL EnergyPlus in 2006. The $6 million decrease in wholesale revenue to affiliate in 2005 compared with 2004 was also primarily due to the unplanned outage at a NUG facility in 2005. Energy Purchases Energy purchases decreased by $81 million for 2006 compared with 2005 primarily due to the $39 million loss accrual for the PJM billing dispute recorded in 2005 and the $28 million reduction of that accrual recorded in December 2006. See Note 15 to the Financial Statements for additional information regarding the PJM billing dispute. Also, the decrease reflects $14 million in lower ancillary costs and a reduction of $8 million resulting from the elimination of a charge to load-serving entities, which minimized the impacts of integrating into the Midwest ISO and PJM markets, contributed to the decrease. These decreases were partially offset by a $7 million increase due to an unplanned NUG outage in 2005. Energy purchases increased by $49 million in 2005 compared with 2004 primarily due to the $39 million accrual for the PJM billing dispute. Also, the increase reflects a $6 million increase in ancillary costs and a $10 million charge to load-serving entities which began in May 2005, retroactive to December 2004. This charge minimized the revenue impacts to transmission owners that resulted from the integration of the Midwest ISO and PJM markets and continued until March 2006. These increases were partially offset by a $7 million decrease due to an unplanned NUG outage in 2005. Energy Purchases from Affiliate Energy purchases from affiliate increased by $118 million in 2006 compared with 2005. The increase is primarily the result of an 8.4% increase in prices for energy purchased under the power supply contracts with PPL EnergyPlus needed to support PLR load, offset by a slight decrease in that load. Energy purchases from affiliate increased by $90 million in 2005 compared with 2004. The increase reflects an increase in PLR load, as well as higher prices for energy purchased under the power supply contracts with PPL EnergyPlus that was needed to support the PLR load. Other Operation and Maintenance For the year ended 2006, PPL Electric's other operation and maintenance expense was reduced by a $36 million pre-tax one-time credit in connection with the realization of benefits related to the ability to use excess Black Lung Trust assets to make future benefit payments for retired miners' medical benefits. See Note 13 to the Financial Statements for additional information. Excluding this one-time credit, the increases in other operation and maintenance expenses were due to: 2006 vs. 2005 2005 vs. 2004 Costs associated with severe ice storms in January 2005 (Note 1) $ (16 ) $ 16 Subsequent deferral of a portion of costs associated with January 2005 ice storms (Note 1) 12 (12 ) Increase in PUC-reportable storm costs 9 Increase in domestic system reliability work, including tree trimming 19 10 Accelerated amortization of stock-based compensation (Note 1) (5 ) 5 Increase in pension and postretirement benefit costs (Note 13) 4 1 Increase in allocation of certain corporate service costs (Note 16) 2 1 Reversal of cost recovery - Hurricane Isabel (Note 1) 11 Decrease in employee benefits due to transfer of field services employees to PPL Generation (7 ) Union contract ratification bonus 3 PJM system control and dispatch services (5 ) (3 ) Change in retired miners' medical benefits (7 ) 5 Other 3 (6 ) $ 30 $ 10 Depreciation Depreciation increased by $6 million in 2006 compared with 2005 and by $5 million in 2005 compared with 2004 primarily due to plant additions. 2006 compared with 2005 was impacted by the purchase of equipment previously leased. See Note 11 to the Financial Statements for additional information. 2005 compared with 2004 was impacted by the Automated Meter Reading project. Taxes, Other Than Income A $7 million increase in gross receipts tax expense, offset by a $2 million decrease in real estate tax expense, are the primary reasons for the $4 million increase in taxes, other than income, in 2006 compared with 2005. In 2004, PPL Electric reversed a $14 million accrued liability for 1998 and 1999 PURTA taxes that had been accrued based on potential exposure in the proceedings regarding the Susquehanna nuclear station tax assessment. The rights of third-party intervenors to further appeal expired in 2004. The reversal and a $19 million increase in domestic gross receipts tax expense in 2005 are the primary reasons for the $33 million increase in taxes, other than income in 2005, compared with 2004. Other Income - net See Note 17 to the Financial Statements for details of other income and deductions. Financing Costs The decreases in financing costs, which include "Interest Expense," "Interest Expense with Affiliate" and "Dividends on Preferred Securities," were due to: 2006 vs. 2005 2005 vs. 2004 Dividends on 6.25% Series Preference Stock (Note 7) $ 12 Interest on PLR contract collateral (Note 16) 5 $ 9 Decrease in long-term debt interest expense (20 ) (24 ) Interest accrued for PJM billing dispute (Note 15) (15 ) 8 Other (1 ) (1 ) $ (19 ) $ (8 ) Income Taxes The changes in income taxes were due to: 2006 vs. 2005 2005 vs. 2004 Higher pre-tax book income $ 30 $ 50 Tax return adjustments 4 Tax reserve adjustments 10 Other 1 1 $ 35 $ 61 See Note 5 to the Financial Statements for details on effective income tax rates. Financial Condition Liquidity and Capital Resources PPL Electric is focused on maintaining an appropriate liquidity position and strengthening its balance sheet, thereby continuing to improve its credit profile. PPL Electric believes that its cash on hand, short-term investments, operating cash flows, access to debt and equity capital markets and borrowing capacity, taken as a whole, provide sufficient resources to fund its ongoing operating requirements, future security maturities and estimated future capital expenditures. PPL Electric currently expects cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments at the end of 2007 to be less than $100 million, while maintaining approximately $200 million in credit facility capacity and up to $150 million in short-term debt capacity related to an asset-backed commercial paper program. However, PPL Electric's cash flows from operations and its access to cost effective bank and capital markets are subject to risks and uncertainties, including but not limited to: unusual or extreme weather that may damage PPL Electric's transmission and distribution facilities or affect energy sales to customers; the ability to recover and the timeliness and adequacy of recovery of costs associated with regulated utility businesses; any adverse outcome of legal proceedings and investigations with respect to PPL Electric's current and past business activities; and a downgrade in PPL Electric's or its subsidiary's credit ratings that could negatively affect their ability to access capital and increase the cost of maintaining credit facilities and any new debt. At December 31, PPL Electric had the following: 2006 2005 2004 Cash and cash equivalents $ 150 $ 298 $ 151 Short-term investments 26 25 10 176 323 161 Short-term debt 42 42 42 The changes in PPL Electric's cash and cash equivalents position resulted from: 2006 2005 2004 Net Cash Provided by Operating Activities $ 578 $ 580 $ 898 Net Cash Used in Investing Activities (287 ) (193 ) (523 ) Net Cash Used in Financing Activities (439 ) (240 ) (386 ) Net (Decrease) Increase in Cash and Cash Equivalents $ (148 ) $ 147 $ (11 ) Operating Activities PPL Electric's cash provided by operating activities remained flat in 2006 compared with 2005. Except for the items explained below, there were no other significant changes in the components of PPL Electric's cash provided by operating activities. Domestic retail electric revenues increased as a result of an 8.4% increase in PLR sales prices in 2006, but were partially offset by a decrease in domestic delivery revenues resulting from a decrease in sales volumes, due in part to milder weather in 2006. The net increase from revenues was offset by energy purchases PPL Electric made from PPL EnergyPlus under the PLR contracts. PPL Electric purchased less energy under the PLR contracts in 2006 but incurred a scheduled 8.4% increase in the price it pays under such contracts. Net cash provided by operating activities decreased by $318 million in 2005 compared with 2004, primarily as a result of receipts in 2004 of $300 million in cash collateral related to the PLR energy supply agreements and a federal income tax refund in 2004. The decrease for 2005 compared with 2004 was partially mitigated by the 7.1% increase in distribution rates and transmission cost recoveries effective January 1, 2005. An important element supporting the stability of PPL Electric's cash from operations is its long-term purchase contracts with PPL EnergyPlus. These contracts provide sufficient energy for PPL Electric to meet its PLR obligation through 2009, at the predetermined capped rates it is entitled to charge its customers over this period. These contracts require cash collateral or other credit enhancement, or reductions or terminations of a portion of the entire contract through cash settlement, in the event of adverse changes in market prices. Also under the contracts, PPL Energy Supply may request cash collateral or other credit enhancement, or reductions or terminations of a portion of the entire contract through cash settlement, in the event of a downgrade of PPL Electric's credit ratings. The maximum amount that PPL Electric would have to post under these contracts is $300 million, and PPL Electric estimates that it would not have had to post any collateral if energy prices decreased by 10% from year-end 2006 or 2005 levels. Investing Activities The primary use of cash in investing activities is capital expenditures. See "Forecasted Uses of Cash" for detail regarding capital expenditures in 2006 and projected expenditures for the years 2007 through 2011. Net cash used in investing activities increased by $94 million in 2006 compared with 2005, primarily as a result of an increase of $115 million in capital expenditures, of which $52 million related to the purchase of leased equipment. See Note 11 to the Financial Statements for further discussion of the purchase of leased equipment in connection with the termination of the related master lease agreements. Net cash used in investing activities decreased by $330 million in 2005 compared with 2004, primarily as a result of initiating a $300 million demand loan to an affiliate in 2004. Financing Activities Net cash used in financing activities increased $199 million in 2006 compared with 2005, primarily as a result of the repurchase of $200 million of common stock from PPL, an increase of $298 million in net debt retirements and an increase of $23 million in dividends paid to PPL, partially offset by net proceeds of $245 million from the issuance of preference stock and a $75 million contribution from PPL. A portion of the proceeds received from the issuance of the preference stock was used to fund the repurchase of common stock from PPL. See Note 7 to the Financial Statements for details regarding the preference stock. PPL Electric did not issue any long-term debt in 2006. See Note 8 to the Financial Statements for more detailed information regarding PPL Electric's debt retirements during 2006. Net cash used in financing activities decreased by $146 million in 2005 compared with 2004, primarily due to a decrease of $217 million in net debt retirements, partially offset by an increase of $69 million in dividends paid to PPL. See "Forecasted Sources of Cash" for a discussion of PPL Electric's plans to issue debt and equity securities, as well as a discussion of credit facility capacity available to PPL Electric. Also see "Forecasted Uses of Cash" for a discussion of PPL Electric's plans to pay dividends on its common and preferred securities, as well as maturities of PPL Electric's long-term debt. Forecasted Sources of Cash PPL Electric expects to continue to have significant sources of cash available in the near term, including a credit facility, a commercial paper program and an asset-backed commercial paper program. PPL Electric also expects to continue to have access to debt and equity capital markets, as necessary, for its long-term financing needs. Credit Facility At December 31, 2006, PPL Electric's total committed borrowing capacity under its credit facility and the use of this borrowing capacity were: Committed Capacity Borrowed Letters of Credit Issued (b) Available Capacity PPL Electric Credit Facility (a) $ 200 $ 200 (a) Borrowings under PPL Electric's credit facility bear interest at LIBOR-based rates plus a spread, depending upon the company's public debt rating. PPL Electric also has the capability to cause the lenders to issue up to $200 million of letters of credit under this facility, which issuances reduce available borrowing capacity. The credit facility contains a financial covenant requiring debt to total capitalization to not exceed 70%. At December 31, 2006 and 2005, PPL Electric's consolidated debt to total capitalization percentages, as calculated in accordance with its credit facility, were 48% and 55%. The credit facility also contains standard representations and warranties that must be made for PPL Electric to borrow under it. (b) PPL Electric has a reimbursement obligation to the extent any letters of credit are drawn upon. In addition to the financial covenants noted in the table above, the credit agreement contains various other covenants. Failure to meet the covenants beyond applicable grace periods could result in acceleration of due dates of borrowings and/or termination of the agreement. PPL Electric monitors the covenants on a regular basis. At December 31, 2006, PPL Electric was in material compliance with these covenants. At this time PPL Electric believes that these covenants and other borrowing conditions will not limit access to this funding source. PPL Electric intends to renew and extend its $200 million credit facility in 2007. Commercial Paper PPL Electric maintains a commercial paper program for up to $200 million to provide it with an additional financing source to fund its short-term liquidity needs, if and when necessary. Commercial paper issuances are supported by the $200 million credit facility of PPL Electric. PPL Electric had no commercial paper outstanding at December 31, 2006 and 2005. During 2007, PPL Electric may issue commercial paper from time to time to facilitate short-term cash flow needs. Asset-Backed Commercial Paper Program PPL Electric participates in an asset-backed commercial paper program through which PPL Electric obtains financing by selling and contributing its eligible accounts receivable and unbilled revenue to a special purpose, wholly-owned subsidiary on an ongoing basis. The subsidiary pledges these assets to secure loans of up to an aggregate of $150 million from a commercial paper conduit sponsored by a financial institution. PPL Electric uses the proceeds from the program for general corporate purposes and to cash collateralize letters of credit. At December 31, 2006 and 2005, the loan balance outstanding was $42 million, all of which was used to cash collateralize letters of credit. See Note 8 to the Financial Statements for further discussion of the asset-backed commercial paper program. Long-Term Debt and Equity Securities Subject to market conditions in 2007, PPL Electric currently plans to issue up to $300 million in long-term debt securities. PPL Electric expects to use the proceeds to fund a maturity of existing debt and for general corporate purposes. PPL Electric currently does not plan to issue any equity securities in 2007. Forecasted Uses of Cash In addition to expenditures required for normal operating activities, such as purchased power, payroll, and taxes, PPL Electric currently expects to incur future cash outflows for capital expenditures, various contractual obligations and payment of dividends on its common and preferred securities. Capital Expenditures The table below shows PPL Electric's actual spending for the year 2006 and current capital expenditure projections for the years 2007 through 2011. Actual Projected 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 Construction expenditures (a) Transmission and distribution facilities $ 268 $ 272 $ 234 $ 260 $ 268 $ 317 Other 21 24 20 17 17 21 Total Capital Expenditures $ 289 $ 296 $ 254 $ 277 $ 285 $ 338 (a) Construction expenditures include AFUDC, which is expected to be approximately $13 million for the 2007-2011 period. PPL Electric's capital expenditure projections for the years 2007-2011 total approximately $1.5 billion. Capital expenditure plans are revised periodically to reflect changes in operational, market and regulatory conditions. PPL Electric plans to fund all of its capital expenditures in 2007 with cash on hand and cash from operations. Contractual Obligations PPL Electric has assumed various financial obligations and commitments in the ordinary course of conducting its business. At December 31, 2006, the estimated contractual cash obligations of PPL Electric were: Contractual Cash Obligations Total Less Than 1 Year 1-3 Years 4-5 Years After 5 Years Long-term Debt (a) $ 1,979 $ 555 $ 881 $ 543 Capital Lease Obligations Operating Leases Purchase Obligations (b) 5,370 1,737 3,633 Other Long-term Liabilities Reflected on the Balance Sheets under GAAP Total Contractual Cash Obligations $ 7,349 $ 2,292 $ 4,514 $ 543 (a) Reflects principal maturities only. Includes $605 million of transition bonds issued by PPL Transition Bond Company in 1999 to securitize a portion of PPL Electric's stranded costs. This debt is non-recourse to PPL Electric. (b) The payments reflected herein are subject to change, as the purchase obligation reflected is an estimate based on projected obligated quantities and projected pricing under the contract. Purchase orders made in the ordinary course of business are excluded from the amounts presented. Dividends From time to time, as determined by its Board of Directors, PPL Electric pays dividends on its common stock to its parent, PPL, which uses the dividends for general corporate purposes, including meeting its cash flow needs. As discussed in Note 7 to the Financial Statements, PPL Electric may not pay dividends on its common stock, except in certain circumstances, unless full dividends have been paid on the 6.25% Series Preference Stock for the then-current dividend period. PPL Electric expects to continue to pay quarterly dividends on its outstanding preferred securities, if and as declared by its Board of Directors. PPL Electric's 2001 Senior Secured Bond Indenture restricts dividend payments in the event that PPL Electric fails to meet interest coverage ratios or fails to comply with certain requirements included in its Articles of Incorporation and Bylaws to maintain its separateness from PPL and PPL's other subsidiaries. PPL Electric does not, at this time, expect that any of such limitations would significantly impact its ability to declare dividends. Credit Ratings Moody's, S&P and Fitch periodically review the credit ratings on the debt and preferred securities of PPL Electric and PPL Transition Bond Company. Based on their respective independent reviews, the rating agencies may make certain ratings revisions or ratings affirmations. A credit rating reflects an assessment by the rating agency of the creditworthiness associated with an issuer and particular securities that it issues. The credit ratings of PPL Electric and PPL Transition Bond Company are based on information provided by PPL Electric and other sources. The ratings of Moody's, S&P and Fitch are not a recommendation to buy, sell or hold any securities of PPL Electric or PPL Transition Bond Company. Such ratings may be subject to revisions or withdrawal by the agencies at any time and should be evaluated independently of each other and any other rating that may be assigned to their securities. A downgrade in PPL Electric's or PPL Transition Bond Company's credit ratings could result in higher borrowing costs and reduced access to capital markets. The following table summarizes the credit ratings of PPL Electric and PPL Transition Bond Company at December 31, 2006. Moody's S&P Fitch (b) PPL Electric Senior Unsecured/Issuer Rating Baa1 A- BBB First Mortgage Bonds A3 A- A- Pollution Control Bonds (a) Aaa AAA Senior Secured Bonds A3 A- A- Commercial Paper P-2 A-2 F2 Preferred Stock Baa3 BBB BBB+ Preference Stock Baa3 BBB BBB Outlook STABLE STABLE STABLE PPL Transition Bond Company Transition Bonds Aaa AAA AAA (a) Insured as to payment of principal and interest. (b) Issuer Rating for Fitch is an "Issuer Default Ratings." In March 2006, Moody's upgraded the issuer rating of PPL Electric to Baa1 from Baa2, upgraded the ratings of its First Mortgage Bonds and Senior Secured Bonds to A3 from Baa1 and upgraded the rating of its preferred stock to Baa3 from Ba1. In connection with PPL Electric's issuance of preference stock in April 2006, S&P affirmed all of PPL Electric's credit ratings. In August 2006, Fitch affirmed its credit ratings and stable outlook for PPL Electric. In November 2006, S&P completed its annual review of its credit ratings for PPL Electric. At that time, S&P affirmed its credit ratings and stable outlook for PPL Electric. Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements PPL Electric has entered into certain guarantee agreements that are within the scope of FIN 45, "Guarantor's Accounting and Disclosure Requirements for Guarantees, Including Indirect Guarantees of Indebtedness of Others, an Interpretation of FASB Statements No. 5, 57, and 107 and Rescission of FASB Interpretation No. 34." See Note 15 to the Financial Statements for a discussion on guarantees. Risk Management Market Risk Commodity Price Risk - PLR Contracts PPL Electric and PPL EnergyPlus have power supply agreements under which PPL EnergyPlus sells to PPL Electric (under a predetermined pricing arrangement) energy and capacity to fulfill PPL Electric's PLR obligation through 2009. As a result, PPL Electric has shifted any electric price risk relating to its PLR obligation to PPL EnergyPlus through 2009. See Note 16 to the Financial Statements for information on the PLR contracts. Interest Rate Risk PPL Electric has issued debt to finance its operations, which increases its interest rate risk. At December 31, 2006 and 2005, PPL Electric's potential annual exposure to increased interest expense, based on a 10% increase in interest rates, was not significant. PPL Electric is also exposed to changes in the fair value of its debt portfolio. At December 31, 2006, PPL Electric estimated that its potential exposure to a change in the fair value of its debt portfolio, through a 10% adverse movement in interest rates, was $37 million, compared with $43 million at December 31, 2005. Related Party Transactions PPL Electric is not aware of any material ownership interests or operating responsibility by senior management of PPL Electric in outside partnerships, including leasing transactions with variable interest entities, or other entities doing business with PPL Electric. For additional information on related party transactions, see Note 16 to the Financial Statements. Environmental Matters See Note 15 to the Financial Statements for a discussion of environmental matters. Competition See "Item 1. Business - Competition" and "Item 1A. Risk Factors" for a discussion of competitive factors affecting PPL Electric. New Accounting Standards See Note 23 to the Financial Statements for a discussion of new accounting standards recently adopted or pending adoption. Application of Critical Accounting Policies PPL Electric's financial condition and results of operations are impacted by the methods, assumptions and estimates used in the application of critical accounting policies. The following accounting policies are particularly important to the financial condition or results of operations of PPL Electric, and require estimates or other judgments of matters inherently uncertain. Changes in the estimates or other judgments included within these accounting policies could result in a significant change to the information presented in the Financial Statements. (These accounting policies are also discussed in Note 1 to the Financial Statements.) PPL's senior management has reviewed these critical accounting policies, and the estimates and assumptions regarding them, with its Audit Committee. In addition, PPL's senior management has reviewed the following disclosures regarding the application of these critical accounting policies with the Audit Committee. In September 2006, the FASB issued SFAS 157, "Fair Value Measurements." Among other things, SFAS 157 provides a definition of fair value as well as a framework for measuring fair value. PPL Electric must adopt SFAS 157 no later than January 1, 2008. The adoption of SFAS 157 is expected to impact the fair value component of PPL Electric's critical accounting policy related to "Pension and Other Postretirement Benefits." See Note 23 to the Financial Statements for additional information regarding SFAS 157. 1) Pension and Other Postretirement Benefits As described in Note 13 to the Financial Statements, PPL Electric participates in, and is allocated a significant portion of the liability and net periodic pension and other postretirement costs of plans sponsored by PPL Services based on participation in those plans. PPL follows the guidance of SFAS 87, "Employers' Accounting for Pensions," and SFAS 106, "Employers' Accounting for Postretirement Benefits Other Than Pensions," when accounting for these benefits. In addition, PPL adopted the recognition and measurement date provisions of SFAS 158, "Employers' Accounting for Defined Benefit Pension and Other Postretirement Plans," effective December 31, 2006. See Note 13 to the Financial Statements for further details. Under these accounting standards, assumptions are made regarding the valuation of benefit obligations and performance of plan assets. Delayed recognition in earnings of differences between actual results and expected or estimated results is a guiding principle of these standards. This delayed recognition of actual results allows for a smoothed recognition of costs over the working lives of the employees who benefit under the plans. The primary assumptions are: Discount Rate - The discount rate is used in calculating the present value of benefits, which are based on projections of benefit payments to be made in the future. The objective in selecting the discount rate is to measure the single amount that, if invested at the measurement date in a portfolio of high-quality debt instruments, would provide the necessary future cash flows to pay the accumulated benefits when due. Expected Return on Plan Assets - Management projects the future return on plan assets considering prior performance, but primarily based upon the plans' mix of assets and expectations for the long-term returns on those asset classes. These projected returns reduce the net benefit costs PPL Electric records currently. Rate of Compensation Increase - Management projects employees' annual pay increases, which are used to project employees' pension benefits at retirement. Health Care Cost Trend Rate - Management projects the expected increases in the cost of health care. In selecting a discount rate for its domestic pension and other postretirement plans, PPL starts with an analysis of the expected benefit payment stream for its plans. This information is first matched against a spot-rate yield curve. A portfolio of over 500 Moody's Aa-graded non-callable (or callable with make-whole provisions) bonds, with a total amount outstanding in excess of $370 billion, serves as the base from which those with the lowest and highest yields are eliminated to develop the ultimate yield curve. The results of this analysis are considered in conjunction with other economic data and consideration of movements in the Moody's Aa bond index to determine the discount rate assumption. At December 31, 2006, PPL increased the discount rate for its domestic plans from 5.70% to 5.94%. In selecting an expected return on plan assets, PPL considers tax implications, past performance and economic forecasts for the types of investments held by the plans. At December 31, 2006, PPL's expected return on plan assets remained at 8.50% for its domestic pension plans and decreased to 7.75% from 8.00% for its other postretirement benefit plans. In selecting a rate of compensation increase, PPL considers past experience in light of movements in inflation rates. At December 31, 2006, PPL's rate of compensation increase remained at 4.75% for its domestic plans. In selecting health care cost trend rates, PPL considers past performance and forecasts of health care costs. At December 31, 2006, PPL's health care cost trend rates were 9.0% for 2007, gradually declining to 5.5% for 2012. A variance in the assumptions listed above could have a significant impact on the accrued pension and other postretirement benefit liabilities and reported annual net periodic pension and other postretirement benefit cost allocated to PPL Electric. The following chart reflects the sensitivities in the 2006 financial statements associated with a change in certain assumptions based on PPL's primary pension and other postretirement plans. While the chart below reflects either an increase or decrease in each assumption, the inverse of this change would impact the accrued pension and other postretirement benefit liabilities and reported annual net periodic pension and other postretirement benefit cost by a similar amount in the opposite direction. Each sensitivity below reflects an evaluation of the change based solely on a change in that assumption and does not include income tax effects. Increase (Decrease) Actuarial Assumption Change in Assumption Impact on Liabilities Impact on Cost Impact on OCI Discount Rate (0.25)% $ 32 $ 1 $ 31 Expected Return on Plan Assets (0.25)% N/A 2 (2 ) Rate of Compensation Increase 0.25% 6 1 6 Health Care Cost Trend Rate (a) 1.0% 8 1 7 (a) Only impacts other postretirement benefits. At December 31, 2006, PPL Electric's Balance Sheet reflected a net liability of $133 million for pension and other postretirement benefits allocated from plans sponsored by PPL Services. In 2006, PPL Electric was allocated net periodic pension and other postretirement costs charged to operating expense of $15 million. This amount represents a $4 million increase compared with the charge recognized during 2005. This increase was primarily due to updated demographic assumptions, primarily due to updating the mortality table used to measure obligation and cost. Refer to Note 13 to the Financial Statements for additional information regarding pension and other postretirement benefits. 2) Loss Accruals PPL Electric periodically accrues losses for the estimated impacts of various conditions, situations or circumstances involving uncertain outcomes. PPL Electric's accounting for such events is prescribed by SFAS 5, "Accounting for Contingencies," and other related accounting guidance. SFAS 5 defines a contingency as "an existing condition, situation, or set of circumstances involving uncertainty as to possible gain or loss to an enterprise that will ultimately be resolved when one or more future events occur or fail to occur." For loss contingencies, the loss must be accrued if (1) information is available that indicates it is "probable" that the loss has been incurred, given the likelihood of the uncertain future events and (2) the amount of the loss can be reasonably estimated. The FASB defines "probable" as cases in which "the future event or events are likely to occur." SFAS 5 does not permit the accrual of contingencies that might result in gains. PPL Electric continuously assesses potential loss contingencies for environmental remediation, litigation claims, income taxes, regulatory penalties and other events. The accounting aspects of estimated loss accruals include: (1) the initial identification and recording of the loss; (2) the determination of triggering events for reducing a recorded loss accrual; and (3) the ongoing assessment as to whether a recorded loss accrual is sufficient. All three of these aspects of accounting for loss accruals require significant judgment by PPL Electric's management. Initial Identification and Recording of the Loss Accrual PPL Electric uses its internal expertise and outside experts (such as lawyers, tax specialists and engineers), as necessary, to help estimate the probability that a loss has been incurred and the amount (or range) of the loss. In 2005, a significant loss accrual was initially recorded for the PJM billing dispute. Significant judgment was required by PPL Electric's management to perform the initial assessment of this contingency. In 2004, Exelon Corporation, on behalf of its subsidiary, PECO Energy, Inc. (PECO), filed a complaint against PJM and PPL Electric with the FERC, alleging that PJM had overcharged PECO from April 1998 through May 2003 as a result of an error by PJM. The complaint requested the FERC, among other things, to direct PPL Electric to refund to PJM $39 million, plus interest of $8 million, and for PJM to refund these same amounts to PECO. In April 2005, the FERC issued an Order Establishing Hearing and Settlement Judge Proceedings (the Order). In the Order, the FERC determined that PECO was entitled to reimbursement for the transmission congestion charges that PECO asserted PJM erroneously billed. The FERC ordered settlement discussions, before a judge, to determine the amount of the overcharge to PECO and the parties responsible for reimbursement to PECO. Based on an evaluation of the FERC Order, PPL Electric's management concluded that it was probable that a loss had been incurred in connection with the PJM billing dispute. PPL Electric recorded a loss accrual of $47 million, the amount of PECO's claim, in the first quarter of 2005. See Note 15 to the Financial Statements for additional information. See "Ongoing Assessment of Recorded Loss Accruals" for a discussion of the year-end assessments of this contingency. PPL Electric has identified certain other events that could give rise to a loss, but that do not meet the conditions for accrual under SFAS 5. SFAS 5 requires disclosure, but not a recording, of potential losses when it is "reasonably possible" that a loss has been incurred. The FASB defines "reasonably possible" as cases in which "the chance of the future event or events occurring is more than remote but less than likely." See Note 15 to the Financial Statements for disclosure of other potential loss contingencies that have not met the criteria for accrual under SFAS 5. Reducing Recorded Loss Accruals When an estimated loss is accrued, PPL Electric identifies, where applicable, the triggering events for subsequently reducing the loss accrual. The triggering events generally occur when the contingency has been resolved and the actual loss is incurred, or when the risk of loss has diminished or been eliminated. The following are some of the triggering events that provide for the reduction of certain recorded loss accruals: Allowances for excess or obsolete inventory are reduced as the inventory items are pulled from the warehouse shelves and sold as scrap or otherwise disposed. Allowances for uncollectible accounts are reduced when accounts are written off after prescribed collection procedures have been exhausted, a better estimate of the allowance is determined or when underlying amounts are ultimately collected. Environmental and other litigation contingencies are reduced when the contingency is resolved and PPL Electric makes actual payments, a better estimate of the loss is determined or the loss is no longer considered probable. Ongoing Assessment of Recorded Loss Accruals PPL Electric reviews its loss accruals on a regular basis to assure that the recorded potential loss exposures are sufficient. This involves ongoing communication and analyses with internal and external legal counsel, engineers, tax specialists, operation management and other parties. As part of the year-end preparation of its financial statements, PPL Electric's management re-assessed the loss accrual related to the PJM billing dispute, described above under "Initial Identification and Recording of the Loss Accrual." See Note 15 to the Financial Statements for additional information. In March 2006, the FERC rejected the proposed settlement agreement that was filed with the FERC in September 2005. Subsequently, in March 2006, PPL Electric and Exelon filed with the FERC a new proposed settlement agreement. In November 2006, the FERC entered an order accepting the March 2006 proposed settlement agreement, upon the condition that PPL Electric agree to certain modifications. In December 2006, PPL Electric and Exelon filed with the FERC a modified offer of settlement (Compliance Filing). Under the Compliance Filing, which must be approved by the FERC, PPL Electric would make a single payment through its monthly PJM bill of $38 million, plus interest through the date of payment, and PJM would include a single credit for this amount in PECO's monthly PJM bill. Through December 31, 2006, the estimated interest on this payment would be $4 million, for a total payment of $42 million. As a result, PPL Electric reduced the recorded loss accrual to $42 million at December 31, 2006. Based on the terms of the latest settlement agreement and the effective date and provisions of power supply agreements between PPL Electric and PPL EnergyPlus, PPL has determined that PPL Electric is responsible for the claims prior to July 1, 2000 (totaling $12 million), and that PPL EnergyPlus is responsible for the claims subsequent to that date (totaling $30 million). Therefore, PPL Electric recorded a receivable from PPL EnergyPlus of $30 million at December 31, 2006, for the portion of claims allocated to PPL EnergyPlus. As a result of the reduction of the loss accrual and allocation to PPL EnergyPlus, PPL Electric recorded credits to expense of $35 million, including $28 million of "Energy purchases" and $7 million of "Interest Expense" on the Statement of Income. PPL Electric's management will continue to assess the loss accrual for this contingency in future periods. Income Tax Uncertainties Significant management judgment is required in developing PPL Electric's contingencies, or reserves, for income taxes and valuation allowances for deferred tax assets. The ongoing assessment of tax contingencies is intended to result in management's best estimate of the ultimate settled tax position for each tax year. Annual tax provisions include amounts considered sufficient to pay assessments that may result from examination of prior year tax returns by taxing authorities. However, the amount ultimately paid upon resolution of any issues raised by such authorities may differ from the amount accrued. In evaluating the exposure associated with various filing positions, PPL Electric accounts for changes in probable exposures based on management's best estimate of the amount of benefit that should be recognized in the financial statements. An allowance is maintained for the tax contingencies, the balance of which management believes to be adequate. The ongoing assessment of valuation allowances is based on an assessment of whether deferred tax assets will ultimately be realized. Management considers a number of factors in assessing the ultimate realization of deferred tax assets, including forecasts of taxable income in future periods. In June 2006, the FASB issued FIN 48, "Accounting for Uncertainty in Income Taxes, an interpretation of FASB Statement No. 109." PPL Electric adopted FIN 48 effective January 1, 2007. The adoption of FIN 48 alters the methodology PPL Electric currently uses to account for income tax uncertainties. Effective with the adoption of FIN 48, uncertain tax positions are no longer considered to be contingencies under SFAS 5. See Note 23 to the Financial Statements for a more detailed discussion of FIN 48 and for information regarding the expected impact of adoption. Other Information PPL's Audit Committee has approved the independent auditor to provide audit and audit-related services and other services permitted by the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 and SEC rules. The audit and audit-related services include services in connection with statutory and regulatory filings, reviews of offering documents and registration statements, and internal control reviews . 
