CIK: 922224
Company Name: PPL CORP
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2005-03-01


ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS Overview PPL Electric provides electricity delivery service in eastern and central Pennsylvania. Its headquarters are in Allentown, PA. See "Item 1. Business - Background," for a description of PPL Electric's business. PPL Electric's strategy and principal challenge is to own and operate its electricity delivery business at the highest level of quality and reliability and at the most efficient cost. PPL Electric's electricity delivery business is rate-regulated. Accordingly, PPL Electric is subject to regulatory risks in terms of the costs that it may recover and the investment returns that it may collect in customers' rates. An important challenge for PPL Electric is to maintain a strong credit profile. In the past few years, investors, analysts and rating agencies that follow companies in the energy industry have been particularly focused on the credit quality and liquidity position of these companies. PPL Electric is focused on strengthening its balance sheet and improving its liquidity position, thereby improving its credit profile. The purpose of "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" is to provide information concerning PPL Electric's past and expected future performance in implementing the strategy and challenges outlined above. Specifically: "Results of Operations" provides an overview of PPL Electric's operating results in 2004, 2003 and 2002, starting with a review of earnings. The earnings review discusses the outcome of the delivery rate increase that PPL Electric filed with the PUC in 2004. "Results of Operations" also includes an explanation of changes during this three-year period in significant income statement components, such as operating revenues, operation and maintenance expenses, financing costs and income taxes. "Financial Condition - Liquidity" provides an analysis of PPL Electric's liquidity position and credit profile, including its sources of cash (including bank credit facilities and sources of operating cash flow) and uses of cash (including contractual commitments and capital expenditure requirements) and the key risks and uncertainties that impact PPL Electric's past and future liquidity position and financial condition. This subsection also includes a listing of PPL Electric's current credit ratings. "Financial Condition - Risk Management" includes an explanation of PPL Electric's risk management activities regarding commodity price risk and interest rate risk. "Application of Critical Accounting Policies" provides an overview of the accounting policies that are particularly important to the results of operations and financial condition of PPL Electric and that require PPL Electric's management to make significant estimates, assumptions and other judgments. Although PPL Electric's management believes that these estimates, assumptions and other judgments are appropriate, they relate to matters that are inherently uncertain. Accordingly, changes in the estimates, assumptions and other judgments applied to these accounting policies could have a significant impact on PPL Electric's results of operations and financial condition, as reflected in PPL Electric's Financial Statements. The information provided in "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" should be read in conjunction with PPL Electric's Financial Statements and the accompanying Notes. Terms and abbreviations are explained in the glossary. Dollars are in millions unless otherwise noted. Results of Operations The following discussion, which explains significant annual changes in principal items on the Statement of Income, compares 2004 to 2003 and compares 2003 to 2002. Earnings Income available to PPL was as follows: 2004 2003 2002 $ 74 $ 25 $ 39 The after-tax changes in income available to PPL were primarily due to: 2004 vs. 2003 2003 vs. 2002 Delivery revenues (net of CTC/ITC amortization, interest expense on transition bonds and ancillary charges) $ 5 $ 11 Operation and maintenance expenses (3 ) (15 ) Taxes, other than income (excluding gross receipts tax) 9 (6 ) Depreciation (2 ) (5 ) Reduction in tax reserves associated with stranded costs securitization 22 Interest income on IRS tax settlement 5 Financing costs (excluding transition bond interest expense) 2 (6 ) Other 6 (7 ) Unusual item - workforce reduction (Note 20) 5 14 $ 49 $ (14 ) The year-to-year changes in earnings components are discussed in the balance of "Results of Operations." PPL Electric's future earnings could be, or will be, impacted by a number of factors, including the following: In March 2004, PPL Electric filed a request with the PUC for an overall annual net increase in distribution rates of approximately $164 million (subsequently amended to $160 million), based on a return on equity of 11.5%, and notified the PUC that it planned to pass through to customers approximately $57 million in increased transmission charges imposed on PPL Electric by PJM. In December 2004, the PUC approved an increase in PPL Electric's distribution rates of approximately $137 million (based on a return on equity of 10.7%), and approved PPL Electric's proposed mechanism for collecting the additional $57 million in transmission-related charges, for a total increase of approximately $194 million, effective January 1, 2005. As discussed in "Item 1. Business - Background," PPL Electric has agreed to provide electricity supply to its PLR customers at predetermined rates through 2009, and it has entered into PUC-approved, full requirements energy supply agreements with PPL EnergyPlus to fulfill its PLR obligation. The predetermined charges for generation supply which PPL Electric collects from its PLR customers and pays to PPL EnergyPlus under the energy supply agreements provide for annual increases in each year commencing in 2006 and continuing through 2009. PPL Electric's PLR obligation after 2009 will be determined by the PUC pursuant to rules that have not yet been promulgated. In January 2005, severe ice storms hit PPL Electric's service territory. PPL Electric had to restore service to about 238,000 customers. Although the actual cost of these storms and the specific allocation of such cost between operation and maintenance expense and capital costs is not yet finalized, PPL Electric currently estimates a total cost of $22 million, with approximately 85% being expensed. On February 11, 2005, PPL Electric filed a petition with the PUC for authority to defer and amortize for regulatory accounting and reporting purposes its actual cost of these storms, excluding capitalized costs of approximately $3 million and regular payroll expenses of approximately $2 million (pursuant to PUC precedent on this issue). If the PUC grants this petition, PPL Electric's management at that time will assess the recoverability of these costs in PPL Electric's next general rate increase proceeding. Based on the PUC's action on the petition and management's assessment, PPL Electric would either record these storm expenses, excluding regular payroll, as a regulatory asset in accordance with SFAS 71, "Accounting for the Effects of Certain Types of Regulation," or record these storm expenses on its income statement. If the PUC grants the petition before PPL Electric files its Form 10-Q for the first quarter of 2005, the result of this assessment will be reflected in PPL Electric's financial statements for the first quarter of 2005. If the PUC has not acted on or has denied the petition by such date, PPL Electric would record these storm expenses on its income statement. At this time, PPL Electric cannot predict the outcome of this matter. See Note 14 to the Financial Statements for potential commitments and contingent liabilities that may impact future earnings. See "Application of Critical Accounting Policies" for an overview of accounting policies that are particularly important to the results of operations and financial condition of PPL Electric and that require PPL Electric's management to make significant estimates, assumptions and other judgments. Although PPL Electric's management believes that these estimates, assumptions and other judgments are appropriate, they relate to matters that are inherently uncertain. See Note 23 to the Financial Statements for new accounting standards that have been issued but not yet adopted by PPL Electric that may impact future earnings. Operating Revenues Retail Electric (Including to Affiliate) The increases in revenues from retail electric operations were attributable to the following: 2004 vs. 2003 2003 vs. 2002 PLR electric generation supply $ 94 $ 22 Electric delivery (7 ) 48 Delivery and PLR supply to PPL Generation (5 ) (15 ) Other (1 ) $ 81 $ 55 The increase in revenues from retail electric operations for 2004 compared with 2003 was primarily due to: higher PLR revenues due to higher energy and capacity rates, and a 3.6% increase in volume, in part due to the return of customers previously served by alternate suppliers; partially offset by lower electric delivery revenues due to a decrease in ITC and CTC revenue as a result of lower ITC rates, and several rate groups reaching their cap; and lower sales to PPL Generation. PPL Generation's power plants began self-supplying their station use in April 2003, rather than taking supply from PPL Electric. The increase in revenues from retail electric operations for 2003 compared with 2002 was primarily due to: higher PLR revenues due to higher energy and capacity rates; and higher electric delivery revenues resulting from a 1.1% increase in delivery sales, in part due to colder winter weather in the first quarter of 2003; partially offset by lower sales to PPL Generation. PPL Generation's power plants began self-supplying their station use in April 2003, rather than taking supply from PPL Electric. Wholesale Electric PPL Electric wholesale revenues are derived from sales to municipalities. The $23 million decrease in wholesale electric revenues in 2004 compared with 2003 was due to the expiration of all municipal purchase power agreements at the end of January 2004. Wholesale Electric to Affiliate PPL Electric has a contract to sell to PPL EnergyPlus the electricity that PPL Electric purchases under contracts with NUGs. The termination of one NUG contract in April 2003 and another in February 2002 caused PPL Electric to purchase $8 million less NUG energy in 2003 compared to 2002. PPL Electric therefore had less electricity to sell to PPL EnergyPlus. Energy Purchases from Affiliate Energy purchases from affiliate increased by $56 million in 2004 compared with 2003. The increase reflects an increase in PLR load, as well as higher prices for energy purchased under the power supply contracts with PPL EnergyPlus needed to support PLR load. Energy purchases from affiliate increased by $13 million in 2003 compared with 2002, reflecting higher prices under the power supply contracts with PPL EnergyPlus. Other Operation and Maintenance The increases in other operation and maintenance expenses were primarily due to: 2004 vs. 2003 2003 vs. 2002 Increase in pension costs $ 5 $ 13 Lower net rent allocations to other PPL affiliates in 2004 and 2003 4 6 Write-off of Hurricane Isabel costs not approved for recovery by the PUC 4 Increase in expenses related to pole attachments 2 Increase (decrease) in other postretirement benefit expense (11 ) 7 Increases in expenses in responding to customers' service calls 2 Work performed to assure reliability of the T&D system 2 Environmental accrual in 2003 for a former manufactured gas plant (2 ) 2 Estimated reduction in salaries and benefits as a result of the workforce reduction initiated in 2002 (8 ) Vacation liability adjustment in 2002 in conjunction with the workforce reduction (7 ) Other - net 6 9 $ 8 $ 26 Depreciation Depreciation increased by $4 million in 2004 compared to 2003 and by $9 million in 2003 compared to 2002. These increases were primarily due to plant additions, including the Automated Meter Reading project. Additionally, 2003 compared with 2002 was impacted by software additions. Taxes, Other Than Income In the first quarter of 2004, PPL Electric reversed a $14 million accrued liability for 1998 and 1999 PURTA taxes that had been accrued based on potential exposure in the proceedings regarding the Susquehanna nuclear station tax assessment. The rights of the third-party intervenors to further appeal expired in 2004. The reversal is the primary reason for the $12 million decrease in taxes in 2004, compared with 2003. Also contributing to the decrease was lower capital stock tax expense. These decreases were partially offset by higher gross receipts tax expense. Taxes, other than income, increased by $11 million in 2003 compared with 2002 due to the settlement of prior years' capital stock tax refund claims of $8 million in 2002, and higher taxes related to an increase in the basis on which capital stock tax is calculated in 2003. Workforce Reduction See Note 20 to the Financial Statements for information on the charges recorded in 2003 and 2002. Other Income - net See Note 16 to the Financial Statements for details of other income and deductions. Financing Costs Interest expense decreased by $21 million in 2004 compared to 2003 and by $7 million in 2003 compared to 2002. These decreases reflect the net impact of long-term debt retirements. Over the past two years, $824 million of long-term debt retirements have occurred, while new issuances over the same period totaled $190 million. Distributions on preferred securities decreased by $13 million in 2003 compared to 2002 due to retirements and redemptions of preferred securities and preferred stock. Income Taxes Income tax expense decreased by $10 million in 2004 compared with 2003. This decrease was primarily attributable to: a $22 million tax benefit recognized in 2004 related to a reduction in tax reserves associated with stranded costs securitization predicated upon management's reassessment of its best estimate of probable tax exposure, relative to 2003; offset by a $15 million increase in income tax expense related to higher pre-tax book income. Income tax expense did not change for 2003 compared with 2002. This was due to lower pre-tax book income, resulting in a $5 million reduction in income taxes, offset by a $3 million increase in income tax expense related to the filing of PPL Electric's income tax returns. Annual tax provisions include amounts considered sufficient to pay assessments that may result from examination of prior year tax returns by taxing authorities. However, the amount ultimately paid upon resolution of any issues raised by such authorities may differ materially from the amount accrued. In evaluating the exposure associated with various filing positions, PPL Electric accounts for changes in probable exposures based on management's best estimate of the amount that should be recognized. An allowance is maintained for the tax contingencies, the balance of which management believes to be adequate. During 2004, PPL Electric reached partial settlement with the IRS with respect to the tax years 1991 through 1995 and received a cash refund in the amount of $45 million. As a result of this settlement, the net tax impact recorded in 2004 was not significant. See Note 5 to the Financial Statements for details on effective income tax rates and other income tax related matters. Financial Condition Liquidity PPL Electric is focused on maintaining a strong liquidity position and strengthening its balance sheet, thereby improving its credit profile. PPL Electric believes that its cash on hand, operating cash flows, access to debt and equity capital markets and borrowing capacity, taken as a whole, provide sufficient resources to fund its ongoing operating requirements, future security maturities and estimated future capital expenditures. PPL Electric currently expects cash on hand at the end of 2005 to be approximately $100 million, with about $300 million in credit facilities and up to $150 million in short-term debt capacity related to an asset-backed commercial paper program. However, PPL Electric's cash flows from operations and its access to cost effective bank and capital markets are subject to risks and uncertainties, including but not limited to, the following: unusual or extreme weather that may damage PPL Electric's transmission and distribution facilities or affect energy sales to customers; ability to recover and the timeliness and adequacy of recovery of costs associated with regulated utility businesses; and a downgrade in PPL Electric's credit ratings that could negatively affect its ability to access capital and increase the cost of maintaining credit facilities and any new debt. At December 31, 2004, PPL Electric had $151 million in cash and cash equivalents and $42 million of short-term debt compared to $162 million in cash and cash equivalents and no short-term debt at December 31, 2003, and $29 million in cash and cash equivalents and $15 million of short-term debt at December 31, 2002. The $42 million increase in short-term debt from 2003 to 2004 resulted entirely from loan proceeds attributable to the asset-backed commercial paper program, of which the full amount was used to cash collateralize letters of credit. The change in short-term debt from 2002 to 2003 reflects the repayment of PPL Electric commercial paper. The changes in cash and cash equivalents resulted from the following: 2004 2003 2002 Net Cash Provided by Operating Activities $ 898 $ 528 $ 270 Net Cash Provided by (Used in) Investing Activities (523 ) (145 ) 89 Net Cash Used in Financing Activities (386 ) (250 ) (365 ) Increase (Decrease) in Cash & Cash Equivalents $ (11 ) $ 133 $ (6 ) Net Cash Provided by Operating Activities Net cash provided by operating activities increased by $370 million in 2004 versus 2003, reflecting primarily the receipt of $300 million in cash collateral related to the PLR energy supply agreements and a federal income tax refund. An important element supporting the stability of PPL Electric's cash from operations is its long-term purchase contracts with PPL EnergyPlus. These contracts provide sufficient energy for PPL Electric to meet its PLR obligation through 2009, at the predetermined capped rates it is entitled to charge its customers over this period. These contracts require cash collateral or other credit enhancement, or reductions or terminations of a portion of the entire contract through cash settlement in the event of a downgrade of PPL Electric or adverse changes in market prices. For example, if PPL Electric's ratings were lowered to below "investment grade" and energy prices decreased by 10% from year-end 2004 or 2003 price levels, PPL Electric estimates that, based on its December 31, 2004 positions, it would not have had to post additional collateral compared to $300 million at December 31, 2003. The maximum amount that PPL Electric would have to post under these contracts is $300 million. The increase of $258 million in net cash provided by operating activities in 2003 compared to 2002 reflected working capital improvements resulting from a decrease in accounts receivable and an increase in accounts payable. The savings from a workforce reduction program that was commenced in 2002 was more than offset by rising transmission and distribution operating costs. Net Cash Provided by (Used in) Investing Activities Net cash used in investing activities increased by $378 million in 2004 versus 2003 primarily as a result of initiating a $300 million demand loan to an affiliate. The primary use of cash for investing activities is capital and investment expenditures. See "Capital Expenditure Requirements" for capital and investment expenditures in 2004 and expected expenditures in 2005 through 2009. In 2005, PPL Electric expects to be able to fund all of its capital expenditures with cash from operations. The increase of $234 million in net cash used in investing activities in 2003 compared to 2002 was primarily the result of a lower loan repayment by an affiliate. Net Cash Used in Financing Activities Net cash used in financing activities increased by $136 million in 2004 compared to 2003, due to the lack of new long-term debt issuances in 2004 compared to $190 million in 2003. In 2004, the $386 million of cash used in financing activities consisted of net debt retirements of $352 million and common and preferred dividends of $26 million. PPL Electric's debt financing activity in 2004 was as follows: Issuances Retirements PPL Transition Bond Company Transition Bonds $ (264 ) PPL Electric First Mortgage Bonds (71 ) PPL Electric Senior Secured Bonds (59 ) PPL Electric Asset-backed Commercial Paper (net change) $ 42 Total $ 42 $ (394 ) Net reduction $ (352 ) Debt issued during 2004 had stated interest rates ranging from 1.1% to 2.3% and with maturities in 2004 or 2005. See Note 8 to the Financial Statements for more detailed information regarding PPL Electric's financing activities. In March 2004, PPL Electric reactivated its commercial paper program to provide it with an additional financing source to fund its short-term liquidity needs, if and when necessary. At December 31, 2004, PPL Electric had no commercial paper outstanding. In August 2004, PPL Electric began participating in an asset-backed commercial paper program through which PPL Electric obtains financing by selling and contributing its eligible accounts receivable and unbilled revenue to a special purpose, wholly owned subsidiary on an ongoing basis. The subsidiary pledges these assets to secure loans of up to an aggregate of $150 million from a commercial paper conduit sponsored by a financial institution. PPL Electric expects to use the proceeds from the program for general corporate purposes and to cash collateralize letters of credit. At December 31, 2004, the loan balance outstanding was $42 million, all of which was being used to cash collateralize letters of credit. At December 31, 2004, PPL Electric's total committed borrowing capacity under credit facilities and the use of this borrowing capacity were as follows: Committed Capacity Borrowed Letters of Credit Issued (b) Available Capacity PPL Electric Credit Facilities (a) $ 300 $ 300 (a) PPL Electric's credit facilities allow for borrowings at LIBOR-based rates plus a spread, depending upon the company's public debt rating. PPL Electric also has the capability to cause the lenders to issue up to $300 million of letters of credit under these facilities, which issuances reduce available borrowing capacity. The credit facilities contain a financial covenant requiring debt to total capitalization to not exceed 70%. At December 31, 2004 and 2003, PPL Electric's consolidated debt to total capitalization percentages, as calculated in accordance with its credit facilities, were 54% and 57%. The credit facilities also contain certain representations and warranties that must be made for PPL Electric to borrow under them, including, but not limited to, a material adverse change clause that relates to PPL Electric's ability to perform its obligations under the credit agreements and related loan documents. (b) PPL Electric has a reimbursement obligation to the extent any letters of credit are drawn. These credit agreements contain various other covenants. Failure to meet those covenants beyond applicable grace periods could result in acceleration of due dates of borrowings and/or termination of the agreements. PPL Electric monitors the covenants on a regular basis. At December 31, 2004, PPL Electric was in material compliance with those covenants. At this time PPL Electric believes that these covenants and other borrowing conditions will not limit access to these funding sources. PPL Electric's 2001 Senior Secured Bond Indenture restricts dividend payments in the event that PPL Electric fails to meet interest coverage ratios or fails to comply with certain requirements included in its Articles of Incorporation and Bylaws to maintain its separateness from PPL and PPL's other subsidiaries. PPL Electric does not, at this time, expect that any of such limitations would significantly impact its ability to declare dividends. The decrease of $115 million in net cash used in financing activities in 2003 compared to 2002 reflects the repayment of long-term debt. In 2003, the $250 million of cash used in financing activities primarily consisted of net debt retirements of $255 million, preferred stock retirements of $31 million, and common and preferred dividends paid of $32 million, offset by a contribution from parent of $75 million. Operating Leases PPL Electric has operating lease agreements to lease vehicles, office space, land, buildings, personal computers and other equipment. These leasing structures provide PPL Electric with additional operating and financing flexibility. The operating leases contain covenants that are typical for these agreements, such as maintaining insurance, maintaining corporate existence and timely payment of rent and other fees. Failure to meet these covenants could limit or restrict access to these funds or require early payment of obligations. At this time, PPL Electric believes that these covenants will not limit access to these funding sources or cause acceleration or termination of the leases. See Note 10 to the Financial Statements for further discussion of the operating leases. Contractual Obligations At December 31, 2004, the estimated contractual cash obligations of PPL Electric were as follows: Contractual Cash Obligations Total Less Than 1 Year 1-3 Years 3-5 Years After 5 Years Long-term Debt (a) $ 2,548 $ 336 $ 989 $ 881 $ 342 Capital Lease Obligations Operating Leases 49 13 18 10 8 Purchase Obligations (b) 8,890 1,564 3,517 3,809 Other Long-term Liabilities Reflected on the Balance Sheet under GAAP Total Contractual Cash Obligations $ 11,487 $ 1,913 $ 4,524 $ 4,700 $ 350 (a) Reflects maturities only. Includes $1.2 billion of transition bonds issued by PPL Transition Bond Company in 1999 to securitize a portion of PPL Electric's stranded costs. This debt is non-recourse to PPL Electric. (b) The payments reflected herein are subject to change, as the purchase obligation reflected is an estimate based on projected obligated quantities and projected pricing under the contract. Credit Ratings Standard & Poor's Ratings Services (S&P), Moody's Investors Service, Inc. (Moody's) and Fitch Ratings (Fitch) periodically review the credit ratings on the debt and preferred securities of PPL Electric and its subsidiary. Based on their respective reviews, the rating agencies may make certain ratings revisions. The ratings of S&P, Moody's and Fitch are not a recommendation to buy, sell or hold any securities of PPL Electric or its subsidiary, PPL Transition Bond Company. Such ratings may be subject to revisions or withdrawal by the agencies at any time and should be evaluated independently of each other and any other rating that may be assigned to their securities. The following table summarizes the credit ratings of PPL Electric and its subsidiary, PPL Transition Bond Company, at December 31, 2004: Moody's S&P Fitch PPL Electric Senior Unsecured/Issuer Rating Baa2 A- First Mortgage Bonds Baa1 A- A- Pollution Control Bonds (a) Aaa AAA Senior Secured Bonds Baa1 A- A- Commercial Paper P-2 A-2 F2 Preferred Stock Ba1 BBB BBB+ Outlook STABLE NEGATIVE STABLE PPL Transition Bond Company Transition Bonds Aaa AAA AAA (a) Insured as to payment of principal and interest. Rating Agency Actions in 2004 In March 2004, Moody's and Fitch confirmed their ratings of P-2 and F2, respectively, for PPL Electric's commercial paper. In May 2004, S&P affirmed its A-/A-2 rating and negative outlook on PPL Electric. Subsequent Ratings Events In January 2005, S&P affirmed PPL Electric's A-/A-2 corporate credit ratings and has favorably revised its outlook on the company to stable from negative following the authorization of a $194 million rate increase by the PUC. S&P indicated that the outlook revision reflects its expectations that the rate increase, effective January 1, 2005, will allow for material improvement in PPL Electric's financial profile, which had lagged S&P's expectations in recent years. S&P indicated that the stable outlook reflects its expectations that PPL Electric "will rapidly improve and then maintain financial metrics more consistent with its ratings." S&P indicated that it expects PPL Electric's operations to remain stable through the expiration of the PLR agreement. Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements PPL Electric has entered into certain guarantee agreements that are within the scope of FIN 45, "Guarantor's Accounting and Disclosure Requirements for Guarantees, Including Indirect Guarantees of Indebtedness of Others, an Interpretation of FASB Statements No. 5, 57, and 107 and Rescission of FASB Interpretation No. 34." See Note 14 to the Financial Statements for a discussion on guarantees. Risk Management Market Risk Commodity Price Risk - PLR Contracts PPL Electric and PPL EnergyPlus have power supply agreements under which PPL EnergyPlus sells to PPL Electric (under a predetermined pricing arrangement) energy and capacity to fulfill PPL Electric's PLR obligation through 2009. As a result, PPL Electric has shifted any electric price risk relating to its PLR obligation to PPL EnergyPlus through 2009. See Note 15 to the Financial Statements for information on the PLR contracts. Interest Rate Risk PPL Electric has issued debt to finance its operations, which increases its interest rate risk. At December 31, 2004 and 2003, PPL Electric's potential annual exposure to increased interest expense, based on a 10% increase in interest rates, was insignificant. PPL Electric is also exposed to changes in the fair value of its debt portfolio. At December 31, 2004, PPL Electric estimated that its potential exposure to a change in the fair value of its debt portfolio, through a 10% adverse movement in interest rates, was approximately $50 million, compared to $59 million at December 31, 2003. Related Party Transactions PPL Electric is not aware of any material ownership interests or operating responsibility by senior management of PPL Electric in outside partnerships, including leasing transactions with variable interest entities, or other entities doing business with PPL Electric. For additional information on related party transactions, see Note 15 to the Financial Statements. Capital Expenditure Requirements The schedule below shows PPL Electric's current capital expenditure projections for the years 2005-2009 and actual spending for the year 2004: Actual Projected 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 Construction expenditures (a) Transmission and distribution facilities $ 179 $ 186 $ 205 $ 255 $ 242 $ 256 (a) Construction expenditures include AFUDC and capitalized interest, which are expected to be less than $3 million in each of the years 2005-2009. PPL Electric's capital expenditure projections for the years 2005-2009 total $1.1 billion. Capital expenditure plans are revised periodically to reflect changes in market and asset regulatory conditions. PPL Electric also leases vehicles, personal computers and other equipment, as described in Note 10 to the Financial Statements. Environmental Matters See Note 14 to the Financial Statements for a discussion of environmental matters. Competition See "Item 1. Business - Competition," for a discussion of competitive factors affecting PPL Electric. New Accounting Standards See Note 23 to the Financial Statements for information on new accounting standards adopted in 2004 or pending adoption. Application of Critical Accounting Policies PPL Electric's financial condition and results of operations are impacted by the methods, assumptions and estimates used in the application of critical accounting policies. The following accounting policies are particularly important to the financial condition or results of operations of PPL Electric, and require estimates or other judgments of matters inherently uncertain. Changes in the estimates or other judgments included within these accounting policies could result in a significant change to the information presented in the financial statements. (These accounting policies are also discussed in Note 1 to the Financial Statements.) PPL's senior management has reviewed these critical accounting policies, and the estimates and assumptions regarding them, with its Audit Committee. In addition, PPL's senior management has reviewed the following disclosures regarding the application of these critical accounting policies with the Audit Committee. 1) Pension and Other Postretirement Benefits As described in Note 12 to the Financial Statements, PPL Electric participates in, and is allocated a significant portion of the liability and net periodic pension cost of the PPL Retirement Plan and the PPL Postretirement Benefit Plan. PPL follows the guidance of SFAS 87, "Employers' Accounting for Pensions," and SFAS 106, "Employers' Accounting for Postretirement Benefits Other Than Pensions," when accounting for these benefits. Under these accounting standards, assumptions are made regarding the valuation of benefit obligations and performance of plan assets. Delayed recognition of differences between actual results and expected or estimated results is a guiding principle of these standards. This delayed recognition of actual results allows for a smoothed recognition of changes in benefit obligations and plan performance over the working lives of the employees who benefit under the plans. The primary assumptions are as follows: Discount Rate - The discount rate is used in calculating the present value of benefits, which are based on projections of benefit payments to be made in the future. Expected Return on Plan Assets - Management projects the future return on plan assets considering prior performance, but primarily based upon the plans' mix of assets and expectations for the long-term returns on those asset classes. These projected returns reduce the net benefit costs PPL Electric records currently. Rate of Compensation Increase - Management projects employees' annual pay increases, which are used to project employees' pension benefits at retirement. Health Care Cost Trend Rate - Management projects the expected increases in the cost of health care. In selecting discount rates, PPL considers fixed-income security yield rates. At December 31, 2004, PPL decreased the discount rate for its domestic plans from 6.25% to 5.75% as a result of decreased fixed-income security returns. In selecting an expected return on plan assets, PPL considers tax implications, past performance and economic forecasts for the types of investments held by the plan. At December 31, 2004, PPL's expected return on plan assets for its domestic pension plans remained at 9.0%. In selecting a rate of compensation increase, PPL considers past experience in light of movements in inflation rates. At December 31, 2004, PPL's rate of compensation increase remained at 4.0% for its domestic plans. In selecting health care cost trend rates, PPL considers past performance and forecasts of health care costs. At December 31, 2004, PPL's health care cost trend rates were 10% for 2005, gradually declining to 5.0% for 2010. A variance in the assumptions listed above could have a significant impact on the accrued pension and other postretirement benefit liabilities and reported annual net periodic pension and other postretirement benefit cost allocated to PPL Electric. The following chart reflects the sensitivities in the 2004 Financial Statements associated with a change in certain assumptions. While the chart below reflects either an increase or decrease in each assumption, the inverse of this change would impact the accrued pension and other postretirement benefit liabilities and reported annual net periodic pension and other postretirement benefit cost by a similar amount in the opposite direction. Each sensitivity below reflects an evaluation of the change based solely on a change in that assumption. Increase (Decrease) Actuarial Assumption Change in Assumption Impact on Liabilities Impact on Cost Discount Rate (0.25)% $ 2 $ 2 Expected Return on Plan Assets (0.25)% 2 2 Rate of Compensation Increase 0.25% 1 1 At December 31, 2004, PPL Electric's Balance Sheet reflected a net liability of $72 million for pension liabilities and prepaid other postretirement benefit costs allocated from plans sponsored by PPL Services. In 2004, PPL Electric was allocated net periodic pension and other postretirement costs charged to operating expense of $10 million. This amount represents a $6 million reduction in the charge recognized during 2003. This reduction was primarily due to decreased postretirement costs resulting from increased employee cost sharing, offset by increased pension costs resulting from the decrease in the discount rate at December 31, 2003. Refer to Note 12 to the Financial Statements for additional information regarding pension and other postretirement benefits. 2) Loss Accruals PPL Electric periodically accrues losses for the estimated impacts of various conditions, situations or circumstances involving uncertain outcomes. These events are called "contingencies," and PPL Electric's accounting for such events is prescribed by SFAS 5, "Accounting for Contingencies." SFAS 5 defines a contingency as "an existing condition, situation, or set of circumstances involving uncertainty as to possible gain or loss to an enterprise that will ultimately be resolved when one or more future events occur or fail to occur." For loss contingencies, the loss must be accrued if (1) information is available that indicates it is "probable" that the loss has been incurred, given the likelihood of the uncertain future events and (2) the amount of the loss can be reasonably estimated. FASB defines "probable" as cases in which "the future event or events are likely to occur." SFAS 5 does not permit the accrual of contingencies that might result in gains. PPL Electric continuously assesses potential loss contingencies for environmental remediation, litigation claims, income taxes, regulatory penalties and other events. PPL Electric also has accrued estimated losses on long-term purchase commitments when significant events have occurred. For example, estimated losses were accrued when PPL Electric's generation business was deregulated. Under regulatory accounting, PPL Electric recorded the above-market cost of energy purchases from NUGs as part of its purchased power costs on an as-incurred basis, since these costs were recovered in regulated rates. When the generation business was deregulated, the estimated loss associated with these long-term purchase commitments to make above-market NUG purchases was recorded because PPL Electric was committed to purchase electricity at above market prices but it could no longer recover these costs in regulated rates. The accounting aspects of estimated loss accruals include: (1) the initial identification and recording of the loss; (2) the determination of triggering events for reducing a recorded loss accrual; and (3) the on-going assessment as to whether a recorded loss accrual is sufficient. All three aspects of accounting for loss accruals - the initial identification and recording of a probable loss, the identification of triggering events to reduce the loss accrual, and the ongoing assessment of the sufficiency of a recorded loss accrual - require significant judgment by PPL Electric's management. Initial Identification and Recording of the Loss Accrual PPL Electric uses its internal expertise and outside experts (such as lawyers, tax specialists and engineers), as necessary, to help estimate the probability that a loss has been incurred and the amount (or range) of the loss. PPL Electric has identified certain events which could give rise to a loss, but which do not meet the conditions for accrual under SFAS 5. SFAS 5 requires disclosure, but not a recording, of potential losses when it is "reasonably possible" that a loss has been incurred. The FASB defines "reasonably possible" as cases in which "the chance of the future event or events occurring is more than remote but less than likely." See Note 14 to the Financial Statements for disclosure of potential loss contingencies, most of which have not met the criteria for accrual under SFAS 5. Reducing Recorded Loss Accruals When an estimated loss is accrued, PPL Electric identifies, where applicable, the triggering events for subsequently reducing the loss accrual. The triggering events generally occur when the contingency has been resolved and the actual loss is incurred, or when the risk of loss has diminished or been eliminated. The following are some of the triggering events that provide for the reduction of certain recorded loss accruals: Certain loss accruals are systematically reduced based on the expiration of contract terms. An example of this is the loss accrual for above-market NUG purchase commitments, which is described below. This loss accrual is being reduced over the lives of the NUG purchase contracts. Allowances for excess or obsolete inventory are reduced as the inventory items are pulled from the warehouse shelves and sold as scrap or otherwise disposed. Allowances for uncollectible accounts are reduced when accounts are written off after prescribed collection procedures have been exhausted or when underlying amounts are ultimately collected. Environmental and other litigation contingencies are reduced when the contingency is resolved and PPL Electric makes actual payments or the loss is no longer considered probable. On-Going Assessment of Recorded Loss Accruals PPL Electric reviews its loss accruals on a regular basis to assure that the recorded potential loss exposures are sufficient. This involves on-going communication and analyses with internal and external legal counsel, engineers, tax specialists, operation management and other parties. The largest loss accrual that had been on PPL Electric's balance sheet was for an impairment of above-market NUG purchase commitments. This loss accrual reflected the estimated difference between the above-market contract terms, under the purchase commitments, and the fair value of the electricity to be purchased. This loss accrual was originally recorded at $854 million in 1998, when PPL Electric's generation business was deregulated. This loss accrual was transferred to PPL EnergyPlus in the July 1, 2000, corporate realignment. When the loss accrual related to NUG purchases was recorded in 1998, PPL Electric established the triggering events for when the loss accrual would be reduced. A schedule was established to reduce the liability based on projected purchases over the lives of the NUG contracts. All but one of the NUG contracts expire by 2009, with the last one ending in 2014. Prior to the July 1, 2000 transfer, PPL Electric reduced the above-market NUG liability based on the aforementioned schedule. As PPL Electric reduced the liability for the above-market NUG purchases, it offset the actual cost of NUG purchases, thereby bringing the net power purchase expense more in line with market prices. Other Information PPL's Audit Committee has approved the independent auditor to provide audit and audit-related services and other services permitted by the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 and SEC rules. The audit and audit-related services include services in connection with statutory and regulatory filings, reviews of offering documents and registration statements, employee benefit plan audits and internal control reviews. 
