CIK: 922224
Company Name: PPL CORP
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2006-03-03


ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS Overview PPL Electric provides electricity delivery service in eastern and central Pennsylvania. Its headquarters are in Allentown, PA. See "Item 1. Business - Background," for a description of PPL Electric's business. PPL Electric's strategy and principal challenge is to own and operate its electricity delivery business at the highest level of customer service and reliability and at the most efficient cost. PPL Electric's electricity delivery business is rate-regulated. Accordingly, PPL Electric is subject to regulatory risks in terms of the costs that it may recover and the investment returns that it may collect in customer rates. A key challenge for PPL Electric is to maintain a strong credit profile. Investors, analysts and rating agencies that follow companies in the energy industry continue to be focused on the credit quality and liquidity position of these companies. PPL Electric continually focuses on strengthening its balance sheet and improving its liquidity position, thereby improving its credit profile. See "Item 1A. Risk Factors" for more information concerning material risks PPL Electric faces in its business. The purpose of "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" is to provide information concerning PPL Electric's past and expected future performance in implementing the strategy and challenges mentioned above. Specifically: "Results of Operations" provides an overview of PPL Electric's operating results in 2005, 2004 and 2003, including a review of earnings. It also provides a brief outlook for 2006. "Financial Condition - Liquidity and Capital Resources" provides an analysis of PPL Electric's liquidity position and credit profile, including its sources of cash (including bank credit facilities and sources of operating cash flow) and uses of cash (including contractual commitments and capital expenditure requirements) and the key risks and uncertainties that impact PPL Electric's past and future liquidity position and financial condition. This subsection also includes a listing of PPL Electric's current credit ratings. "Financial Condition - Risk Management" includes an explanation of PPL Electric's risk management activities regarding commodity price risk and interest rate risk. "Application of Critical Accounting Policies" provides an overview of the accounting policies that are particularly important to the results of operations and financial condition of PPL Electric and that require its management to make significant estimates, assumptions and other judgments. Although PPL Electric's management believes that these estimates, assumptions and other judgments are appropriate, they relate to matters that are inherently uncertain. Accordingly, changes in the estimates, assumptions and other judgments applied to these accounting policies could have a significant impact on PPL Electric's results of operations and financial condition, as reflected in PPL Electric's Financial Statements. The information provided in this Item 7 should be read in conjunction with PPL Electric's Financial Statements and the accompanying Notes. Terms and abbreviations are explained in the glossary. Dollars are in millions unless otherwise noted. Results of Operations Earnings Income available to PPL was: 2005 2004 2003 $ 145 $ 74 $ 25 The after-tax changes in income available to PPL were due to: 2005 vs. 2004 2004 vs. 2003 Delivery revenues (net of CTC/ITC amortization, interest expense on transition bonds and ancillary charges) $ 123 $ 5 Operation and maintenance expenses (6 ) (3 ) Taxes, other than income (excluding gross receipts tax) (9 ) 9 Change in tax reserves associated with stranded costs securitization (Note 5) (15 ) 22 Interest income on 2004 IRS tax settlement (5 ) 5 Financing costs (excluding transition bond interest expense) 4 2 Interest income on loans to affiliates 6 Other 2 4 Unusual items (29 ) 5 $ 71 $ 49 The following items, that management considers unusual, had a significant impact on earnings. 2005 2004 2003 PJM billing dispute (Note 14) $ (27 ) Acceleration of stock-based compensation expense for periods prior to 2005 (Note 1) (2 ) Workforce reduction (Note 20) $ (5 ) Total $ (29 ) $ (5 ) The year-to-year changes in significant earnings components are explained in the "Statement of Income Analysis." PPL Electric's 2005 earnings were impacted by a number of key factors, including: In December 2004, the PUC approved an increase in PPL Electric's distribution rates of approximately $137 million (based on a return on equity of 10.7%), and approved PPL Electric's proposed mechanism for collecting an additional $57 million in transmission-related charges, for a total annual increase of approximately $194 million, effective January 1, 2005. Delivery revenues also increased in 2005 compared with 2004 due to a 4.3% increase in electricity delivery sales volumes. In January 2005, severe ice storms hit PPL Electric's service territory. As a result, PPL Electric had to restore service to approximately 238,000 customers. The total cost of restoring service, excluding capitalized costs and regular payroll expenses, was approximately $16 million. On February 11, 2005, PPL Electric filed a petition with the PUC for authority to defer and amortize for regulatory accounting and reporting purposes these storm costs. On August 26, 2005, the PUC issued an order granting PPL Electric's petition subject to certain conditions, including: (i) the PUC's authorization of deferred accounting is not an assurance of future rate recovery of the storm costs, (ii) PPL Electric must request recovery of the deferred storm costs in its next distribution base rate case, and (iii) PPL Electric must begin immediately to expense the deferred storm costs on a ten-year amortization schedule for regulatory accounting and reporting purposes. As a result of the PUC Order and in accordance with SFAS 71, "Accounting for the Effects of Certain Types of Regulation," in the third quarter of 2005, PPL Electric deferred approximately $12 million of its previously expensed storm costs. The deferral was based on its assessment of the timing and likelihood of recovering the deferred costs in PPL Electric's next distribution base rate case. At this time, PPL Electric cannot be certain that it will recover the storm costs, nor can it predict whether future incidents of severe weather will cause significant facility damage and service disruptions that would also result in significant costs. Operation and maintenance expense increased in 2005 compared with 2004, primarily due to increased system reliability work and tree trimming costs. PPL Electric recognized an after-tax charge of $27 million in the first quarter of 2005 for a loss contingency related to the PJM billing dispute. See Note 14 for information concerning the settlement agreement reached by PPL Electric and Exelon Corporation to settle this litigation, which is subject to approval by the FERC. PPL Electric cannot be certain of the outcome of this matter or the impact on PPL Electric and its subsidiaries. PPL Electric's earnings beyond 2005 are subject to various risks and uncertainties. See "Forward-Looking Information," "Item 1A. Risk Factors," the rest of this Item 7 and Note 14 to the Financial Statements for a discussion of the risks, uncertainties and factors that may impact PPL Electric's future earnings. 2006 Outlook PPL Electric is projecting flat delivery revenues due to projected modest load growth in 2006 compared with 2005 and because of higher sales in 2005 as a result of unusually warm weather. PPL Electric is also expecting to experience increased operation and maintenance expenses in 2006. Statement of Income Analysis -- Operating Revenues Retail Electric The increases in revenues from retail electric operations were attributable to: 2005 vs. 2004 2004 vs. 2003 PLR electric generation supply $ 122 $ 94 Electric delivery 201 (7 ) Delivery and PLR supply to PPL Generation (5 ) Other 1 (2 ) $ 324 $ 80 The increase in revenues from retail electric operations for 2005 compared with 2004 was primarily due to: higher PLR revenues due to higher energy and capacity rates and a 6% increase in volume, in part due to the return of customers previously served by alternate suppliers; and higher electric delivery revenues resulting from higher transmission and distribution customer rates effective January 1, 2005, and a 4.3% increase in volume. The increase in revenues from retail electric operations for 2004 compared with 2003 was primarily due to: higher PLR revenues due to higher energy and capacity rates and a 3.6% increase in volume, in part due to the return of customers previously served by alternate suppliers; partially offset by lower electric delivery revenues due to a decrease in ITC and CTC revenue as a result of lower ITC rates, and several rate groups reaching their cap; and lower sales to PPL Generation. PPL Generation's power plants began self-supplying their station use in April 2003, rather than taking supply from PPL Electric. Wholesale Electric PPL Electric wholesale revenues were previously derived primarily from sales to municipalities. The $23 million decrease in wholesale electric revenues in 2004 compared with 2003 was due to the expiration of all municipal purchase power agreements at the end of January 2004. Wholesale Electric to Affiliate PPL Electric has a contract to sell to PPL EnergyPlus the electricity that PPL Electric purchases under contracts with NUGs. The $6 million decrease in wholesale revenue to affiliate in 2005 compared with 2004 was primarily due to an unplanned outage at a NUG facility during the second quarter of 2005. PPL Electric therefore had less electricity to sell to PPL EnergyPlus. Energy Purchases Energy purchases increased by $47 million in 2005 compared with 2004 primarily due to the $39 million accrual for the PJM billing dispute. See Note 14 to the Financial Statements for additional information regarding the loss accrual recorded for the PJM billing dispute. Also, the increase reflects a $10 million charge to load-serving entities which began in May 2005, retroactive to December 2004. This charge minimizes the revenue impacts to transmission owners that result from the integration of the Midwest ISO and PJM markets and will continue until March 2006. These increases were partially offset by a $7 million decrease due to an unplanned NUG outage in the second quarter of 2005. Energy Purchases from Affiliate Energy purchases from affiliate increased by $90 million in 2005 compared with 2004 and by $56 million in 2004 compared with 2003. The increases reflect an increase in PLR load, as well as higher prices for energy purchased under the power supply contracts with PPL EnergyPlus that was needed to support the PLR load. Other Operation and Maintenance The increases in other operation and maintenance expenses were due to: 2005 vs. 2004 2004 vs. 2003 Costs associated with severe ice storms in January 2005 $ 16 Subsequent deferral of a portion of costs associated with January 2005 ice storms (Note 1) (12 ) Increase in domestic system reliability work and tree trimming 10 Accelerated amortization of stock-based compensation (Note 1) 5 Increase in domestic pension costs 3 $ 5 Increase in allocation of certain corporate service costs (Note 15) 1 5 Write-off of Hurricane Isabel costs not approved for recovery by the PUC 4 Decrease in employee benefits due to transfer of field services employees to PPL Generation (7 ) Decrease in other postretirement benefit expense (2 ) (11 ) Other (2 ) 5 $ 12 $ 8 Depreciation Depreciation increased by $5 million in 2005 compared with 2004 and by $4 million in 2004 compared with 2003 due to plant additions, including the Automated Meter Reading project. Taxes, Other Than Income In 2004, PPL Electric reversed a $14 million accrued liability for 1998 and 1999 PURTA taxes that had been accrued based on potential exposure in the proceedings regarding the Susquehanna nuclear station tax assessment. The rights of third-party intervenors to further appeal expired in 2004. The reversal and a $19 million increase in domestic gross receipts tax expense in 2005 are the primary reasons for the $33 million increase in taxes, other than income, compared with 2004. The reversal of the PURTA tax liability is the primary reason for the $12 million decrease in taxes, other than income in 2004, compared with 2003. Also contributing to the decrease was lower capital stock tax expense. These decreases were partially offset by higher gross receipts tax expense. Workforce Reduction See Note 20 to the Financial Statements for information on the $9 million charge recorded in 2003. Other Income - net See Note 16 to the Financial Statements for details of other income and deductions. Interest Expense Interest expense, including interest expense with affiliate, decreased by $8 million in 2005 compared with 2004 and by $21 million in 2004 compared with 2003. These decreases primarily reflect the net impact of long-term debt retirements and new issuances. Over the past two years, $953 million of long-term debt retirements have occurred, while new issuances over the same period totaled $424 million. The decrease in 2005 was partially offset by $8 million of interest accrued for the PJM billing dispute and $9 million of additional interest paid on collateral held by PPL Electric relating to the PLR contract. See Note 15 to the Financial Statements for further discussion of collateral held under the PLR contract. Income Taxes Income tax expense increased by $61 million in 2005 compared with 2004. This increase was primarily attributable to: a $50 million increase in income tax expense related to higher pre-tax book income; and a $10 million reduction in tax benefits in 2005 related to federal and state income tax reserves that included a $15 million decrease in tax benefits associated with stranded costs securitization, offset by a $5 million increase in tax benefits associated with other income tax reserves, predicated upon management's reassessment of its best estimate of probable tax exposure relative to 2004. Income tax expense decreased by $10 million in 2004 compared with 2003. This decrease was primarily attributable to: a $22 million tax benefit recognized in 2004 related to a reduction in tax reserves associated with stranded costs securitization predicated upon management's reassessment of its best estimate of probable tax exposure relative to 2003; offset by a $15 million increase in income tax expense related to higher pre-tax book income. Annual tax provisions include amounts considered sufficient to pay assessments that may result from examination of prior year tax returns by taxing authorities. However, the amount ultimately paid upon resolution of any issues raised by such authorities may differ materially from the amount accrued. In evaluating the exposure associated with various filing positions, PPL Electric accounts for changes in probable exposures based on management's best estimate of the amount that should be recognized. An allowance is maintained for the tax contingencies, the balance of which management believes to be adequate. During 2004, PPL Electric reached partial settlement with the IRS with respect to the tax years 1991 through 1995 and received a cash refund in the amount of $45 million. As a result of this settlement, the net tax impact recorded in 2004 was not significant. See Note 5 to the Financial Statements for details on effective income tax rates and other income tax related matters. Financial Condition Liquidity and Capital Resources PPL Electric is focused on maintaining an appropriate liquidity position and strengthening its balance sheet, thereby continuing to improve its credit profile. PPL Electric believes that its cash on hand, short-term investments, operating cash flows, access to debt and equity capital markets and borrowing capacity, taken as a whole, provide sufficient resources to fund its ongoing operating requirements, future security maturities and estimated future capital expenditures. PPL Electric currently expects cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments at the end of 2006 to be approximately $100 million, while maintaining approximately $200 million in credit facilities and up to $150 million in short-term debt capacity related to an asset-backed commercial paper program. However, PPL Electric's cash flows from operations and its access to cost effective bank and capital markets are subject to risks and uncertainties, including but not limited to: unusual or extreme weather that may damage PPL Electric's transmission and distribution facilities or affect energy sales to customers; ability to recover and the timeliness and adequacy of recovery of costs associated with regulated utility businesses; any adverse outcome of legal proceedings and investigations currently being conducted with respect to PPL Electric's current and past business activities; and a downgrade in PPL Electric's or its subsidiary's credit ratings that could negatively affect their ability to access capital and increase the cost of maintaining credit facilities and any new debt. At December 31, 2005, PPL Electric had $323 million of cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments and $42 million in short-term debt, compared with $161 million in cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments and $42 million of short-term debt at December 31, 2004, and $162 million in cash and cash equivalents and no short-term investments or short-term debt at December 31, 2003. The $42 million of short-term debt at December 31, 2005 and 2004, is entirely from loan proceeds attributable to the asset-backed commercial paper program, of which the full amount was used to cash collateralize letters of credit. The changes in cash and cash equivalents resulted from: 2005 2004 2003 Net Cash Provided by Operating Activities $ 580 $ 898 $ 528 Net Cash Used in Investing Activities (193 ) (523 ) (145 ) Net Cash Used in Financing Activities (240 ) (386 ) (250 ) Net Increase (Decrease) in Cash and Cash Equivalents $ 147 $ (11 ) $ 133 Operating Activities Net cash provided by operating activities decreased by $318 million in 2005 compared with 2004 and increased by $370 million in 2004 compared with 2003, primarily as a result of receipts in 2004 of $300 million in cash collateral related to the PLR energy supply agreements and a federal income tax refund in 2004. The decrease for 2005 compared with 2004 was partially mitigated by the 7.1% increase in distribution rates and transmission cost recoveries effective January 1, 2005. An important element supporting the stability of PPL Electric's cash from operations is its long-term purchase contracts with PPL EnergyPlus. These contracts provide sufficient energy for PPL Electric to meet its PLR obligation through 2009, at the predetermined capped rates it is entitled to charge its customers over this period. These contracts require cash collateral or other credit enhancement, or reductions or terminations of a portion of the entire contract through cash settlement, in the event of adverse changes in market prices. Also under the contracts, PPL Energy Supply may request cash collateral or other credit enhancement, or reductions or terminations of a portion of the entire contract through cash settlement, in the event of a downgrade of PPL Electric's credit ratings. The maximum amount that PPL Electric would have to post under these contracts is $300 million, and PPL Electric estimates that it would not have had to post any collateral if energy prices decreased by 10% from year-end 2005 or 2004 levels. Investing Activities Net cash used in investing activities decreased by $330 million in 2005 compared with 2004, and increased by $378 million in 2004 compared with 2003, primarily as a result of initiating a $300 million demand loan to an affiliate in 2004. The primary use of cash in investing activities is capital expenditures. See "Forecasted Uses of Cash" for detail regarding capital expenditures in 2005 and projected expenditures for the years 2006 through 2010. Financing Activities Net cash used in financing activities decreased by $146 million in 2005 compared with 2004, primarily due to a decrease of $217 million in net debt retirements, partially offset by an increase of $69 million in dividends paid to PPL Corporation. Net cash used in financing activities increased by $136 million in 2004 compared with 2003, due to higher net retirements of long-term debt in 2004. See "Forecasted Sources of Cash" for a discussion of PPL Electric's plans to issue debt and equity securities, as well as a discussion of credit facility capacity available to PPL Electric. Also see "Forecasted Uses of Cash" for a discussion of PPL Electric's plans to pay dividends on its common and preferred securities, as well as maturities of PPL Electric's long-term debt. PPL Electric's debt financing activity in 2005 was: Issuances Retirements PPL Transition Bond Company Transition Bonds $ (266 ) PPL Electric First Mortgage Bonds (69 ) PPL Electric First Mortgage Pollution Control Bonds $ 224 (224 ) PPL Electric Senior Secured Bonds 200 Total $ 424 $ (559 ) Net reduction $ (135 ) Debt issued during 2005 had stated interest rates ranging from 2.25% to 5.15% and with maturities from 2005 through 2029. See Note 8 to the Financial Statements for more detailed information regarding PPL Electric's financing activities. Forecasted Sources of Cash PPL Electric expects to continue to have significant sources of cash available in the near term, including various credit facilities, a commercial paper program, an asset-backed commercial paper program and operating leases. PPL Electric also expects to continue to have access to debt and equity capital markets, as necessary, for its long-term financing needs. Credit Facilities At December 31, 2005, PPL Electric's total committed borrowing capacity under credit facilities and the use of this borrowing capacity were: Committed Capacity Borrowed Letters of Credit Issued (b) Available Capacity PPL Electric Credit Facilities (a) $ 300 $ 300 (a) Borrowings under PPL Electric's credit facilities bear interest at LIBOR-based rates plus a spread, depending upon the company's public debt rating. PPL Electric also has the capability to cause the lenders to issue up to $300 million of letters of credit under these facilities, which issuances reduce available borrowing capacity. The credit facilities contain a financial covenant requiring debt to total capitalization to not exceed 70%. At December 31, 2005 and 2004, PPL Electric's consolidated debt to total capitalization percentages, as calculated in accordance with its credit facilities, were 55% and 54%. The credit facilities also contain standard representations and warranties that must be made for PPL Electric to borrow under them. (b) PPL Electric has a reimbursement obligation to the extent any letters of credit are drawn upon. In addition to the financial covenants noted in the table above, these credit agreements contain various other covenants. Failure to meet the covenants beyond applicable grace periods could result in acceleration of due dates of borrowings and/or termination of the agreements. PPL Electric monitors the covenants on a regular basis. At December 31, 2005, PPL Electric was in material compliance with those covenants. At this time PPL Electric believes that these covenants and other borrowing conditions will not limit access to these funding sources. PPL Electric intends to renew and extend $200 million of its credit facility capacity in 2006. See Note 8 to the Financial Statements for further discussion of PPL Electric's credit facilities. Commercial Paper PPL Electric maintains a commercial paper program for up to $200 million to provide it with an additional financing source to fund its short-term liquidity needs, if and when necessary. Commercial paper issuances are supported by credit agreements of PPL Electric. PPL Electric had no commercial paper outstanding at December 31, 2005 and 2004. During 2006, PPL Electric may issue commercial paper from time to time to facilitate short-term cash flow needs. Asset-Backed Commercial Paper Program PPL Electric participates in an asset-backed commercial paper program through which PPL Electric obtains financing by selling and contributing its eligible accounts receivable and unbilled revenue to a special purpose, wholly owned subsidiary on an ongoing basis. The subsidiary pledges these assets to secure loans of up to an aggregate of $150 million from a commercial paper conduit sponsored by a financial institution. PPL Electric uses the proceeds from the program for general corporate purposes and to cash collateralize letters of credit. At December 31, 2005 and 2004, the loan balance outstanding was $42 million, all of which was being used to cash collateralize letters of credit. See Note 8 to the Financial Statements for further discussion of the asset-backed commercial paper program. Operating Leases PPL Electric also has available funding sources that are provided through operating leases. PPL Electric leases vehicles, office space, land, buildings, personal computers and other equipment. These leasing structures provide PPL Electric with additional operating and financing flexibility. The operating leases contain covenants that are typical for these agreements, such as maintaining insurance, maintaining corporate existence and timely payment of rent and other fees. Failure to meet these covenants could limit or restrict access to these funds or require early payment of obligations. At this time, PPL Electric believes that these covenants will not limit access to these funding sources or cause acceleration or termination of the leases. See Note 10 to the Financial Statements for further discussion of the operating leases. Long-Term Debt and Equity Securities PPL Electric currently does not plan to issue any long-term debt securities in 2006. Subject to market conditions in 2006, PPL Electric currently plans to sell $250 million in preferred securities. PPL Electric expects to use the proceeds primarily to repurchase securities, including stock from its parent, and for general corporate purposes. Forecasted Uses of Cash In addition to expenditures required for normal operating activities, such as purchased power, payroll, and taxes, PPL Electric currently expects to incur future cash outflows for capital expenditures, various contractual obligations, payment of dividends on its common and preferred securities and the repurchase of a portion of its common stock. Capital Expenditures The table below shows PPL Electric's current capital expenditure projections for the years 2006 through 2010 and actual spending for the year 2005. Actual Projected 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 Construction expenditures (a) Transmission and distribution facilities $ 164 $ 213 $ 231 $ 211 $ 246 $ 296 Other 10 13 13 15 11 13 Total Capital Expenditures $ 174 $ 226 $ 244 $ 226 $ 257 $ 309 (a) Construction expenditures include AFUDC, which is expected to be approximately $15 million for the 2006-2010 period. PPL Electric's capital expenditure projections for the years 2006-2010 total approximately $1.3 billion. Capital expenditure plans are revised periodically to reflect changes in market and regulatory conditions. PPL Electric plans to fund all of its capital expenditures in 2006 with cash on hand and cash from operations. Contractual Obligations PPL Electric has assumed various financial obligations and commitments in the ordinary course of conducting its business. At December 31, 2005, the estimated contractual cash obligations of PPL Electric were: Contractual Cash Obligations Total Less Than 1 Year 1-3 Years 4-5 Years After 5 Years Long-term Debt (a) $ 2,412 $ 434 $ 950 $ 486 $ 542 Capital Lease Obligations Operating Leases 54 14 20 12 8 Purchase Obligations (b) 9,443 1,704 3,558 4,181 Other Long-term Liabilities Reflected on the Balance Sheet under GAAP Total Contractual Cash Obligations $ 11,909 $ 2,152 $ 4,528 $ 4,679 $ 550 (a) Reflects principal maturities only. Includes $892 million of transition bonds issued by PPL Transition Bond Company in 1999 to securitize a portion of PPL Electric's stranded costs. This debt is non-recourse to PPL Electric. (b) The payments reflected herein are subject to change, as the purchase obligation reflected is an estimate based on projected obligated quantities and projected pricing under the contract. Purchase orders made in the ordinary course of business are excluded from the amounts presented. Dividends From time to time, as determined by its Board of Directors, PPL Electric pays dividends on its common stock to its parent, PPL, which uses the dividends for general corporate purposes, including meeting its cash flow needs. PPL Electric expects to continue to pay quarterly dividends on its outstanding preferred stock, and to pay quarterly dividends on the preferred securities expected to be issued in 2006, in each case if and as declared by its Board of Directors. PPL Electric's 2001 Senior Secured Bond Indenture restricts dividend payments in the event that PPL Electric fails to meet interest coverage ratios or fails to comply with certain requirements included in its Articles of Incorporation and Bylaws to maintain its separateness from PPL and PPL's other subsidiaries. PPL Electric does not, at this time, expect that any of such limitations would significantly impact its ability to declare dividends. Common Stock Repurchase PPL Electric plans to repurchase approximately $200 million of common stock from its parent in 2006. The repurchase is expected to be funded with proceeds received from the sale of preferred securities. Credit Ratings Moody's, S&P and Fitch periodically review the credit ratings on the debt and preferred securities of PPL Electric and PPL Transition Bond Company. Based on their respective reviews, the rating agencies may make certain ratings revisions. A credit rating reflects an assessment by the rating agency of the credit worthiness associated with particular securities issued by PPL Electric and PPL Transition Bond Company, based on information provided by PPL Electric and other sources. The ratings of Moody's, S&P and Fitch are not a recommendation to buy, sell or hold any securities of PPL Electric or PPL Transition Bond Company. Such ratings may be subject to revisions or withdrawal by the agencies at any time and should be evaluated independently of each other and any other rating that may be assigned to their securities. A downgrade in PPL Electric's or PPL Transition Bond Company's credit ratings could result in higher borrowing costs and reduced access to capital markets. The following table summarizes the credit ratings of PPL Electric and PPL Transition Bond Company at December 31, 2005. Moody's S&P Fitch (b) PPL Electric Senior Unsecured/Issuer Rating Baa2 A- BBB First Mortgage Bonds Baa1 A- A- Pollution Control Bonds (a) Aaa AAA Senior Secured Bonds Baa1 A- A- Commercial Paper P-2 A-2 F2 Preferred Stock Ba1 BBB BBB+ Outlook STABLE STABLE STABLE PPL Transition Bond Company Transition Bonds Aaa AAA AAA (a) Insured as to payment of principal and interest. (b) Issuer Rating for Fitch is an "Issuer Default Rating." Moody's did not take any actions on the debt and preferred securities of PPL Electric and PPL Transition Bond Company in 2005. In January 2005, S&P affirmed PPL Electric's A-/A-2 corporate credit ratings and favorably revised its outlook on the company to stable from negative following the authorization of a $194 million rate increase by the PUC. S&P indicated that the outlook revision reflects its expectations that the rate increase, effective January 1, 2005, will allow for material improvement in PPL Electric's financial profile, which had lagged S&P's expectations in recent years. S&P indicated that the stable outlook reflects its expectations that PPL Electric "will rapidly improve and then maintain financial metrics more consistent with its ratings." S&P indicated that it expects PPL Electric's operations to remain stable through the expiration of the PLR agreement. In October 2005, S&P affirmed its ratings of PPL Electric. The ratings affirmation is the result of S&P's annual review of PPL Electric, including its business and financial risk profiles. In December 2005, Fitch assigned issuer default ratings (IDRs) for its North American global power portfolio of issuers with ratings of BB- or higher. The IDR reflects Fitch's assessment of an issuer's ability to meet all of its financial commitments on a timely basis, effectively becoming its benchmark probability of default. Fitch rates securities in an issuer's capital structure higher, lower or the same as the IDR based on Fitch's assessment of a particular security's relative recovery prospects. There were no changes in Fitch's securities ratings at PPL Electric as a result of Fitch's assignment of an IDR. Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements PPL Electric has entered into certain guarantee agreements that are within the scope of FIN 45, "Guarantor's Accounting and Disclosure Requirements for Guarantees, Including Indirect Guarantees of Indebtedness of Others, an Interpretation of FASB Statements No. 5, 57, and 107 and Rescission of FASB Interpretation No. 34." See Note 14 to the Financial Statements for a discussion on guarantees. Risk Management Market Risk Commodity Price Risk - PLR Contracts PPL Electric and PPL EnergyPlus have power supply agreements under which PPL EnergyPlus sells to PPL Electric (under a predetermined pricing arrangement) energy and capacity to fulfill PPL Electric's PLR obligation through 2009. As a result, PPL Electric has shifted any electric price risk relating to its PLR obligation to PPL EnergyPlus through 2009. See Note 15 to the Financial Statements for information on the PLR contracts. Interest Rate Risk PPL Electric has issued debt to finance its operations, which increases its interest rate risk. At December 31, 2005 and 2004, PPL Electric's potential annual exposure to increased interest expense, based on a 10% increase in interest rates, was insignificant. PPL Electric is also exposed to changes in the fair value of its debt portfolio. At December 31, 2005, PPL Electric estimated that its potential exposure to a change in the fair value of its debt portfolio, through a 10% adverse movement in interest rates, was approximately $43 million, compared with $50 million at December 31, 2004. Related Party Transactions PPL Electric is not aware of any material ownership interests or operating responsibility by senior management of PPL Electric in outside partnerships, including leasing transactions with variable interest entities, or other entities doing business with PPL Electric. For additional information on related party transactions, see Note 15 to the Financial Statements. Environmental Matters See Note 14 to the Financial Statements for a discussion of environmental matters. Competition See "Item 1. Business - Competition" and "Item 1A. Risk Factors" for a discussion of competitive factors affecting PPL Electric. New Accounting Standards See Note 23 to the Financial Statements for a discussion of new accounting standards recently adopted or pending adoption. Application of Critical Accounting Policies PPL Electric's financial condition and results of operations are impacted by the methods, assumptions and estimates used in the application of critical accounting policies. The following accounting policies are particularly important to the financial condition or results of operations of PPL Electric, and require estimates or other judgments of matters inherently uncertain. Changes in the estimates or other judgments included within these accounting policies could result in a significant change to the information presented in the financial statements. (These accounting policies are also discussed in Note 1 to the Financial Statements.) PPL's senior management has reviewed these critical accounting policies, and the estimates and assumptions regarding them, with its Audit Committee. In addition, PPL's senior management has reviewed the following disclosures regarding the application of these critical accounting policies with the Audit Committee. 1) Pension and Other Postretirement Benefits As described in Note 12 to the Financial Statements, PPL Electric participates in, and is allocated a significant portion of the liability and net periodic pension cost of the PPL Retirement Plan and the PPL Postretirement Benefit Plan. PPL follows the guidance of SFAS 87, "Employers' Accounting for Pensions," and SFAS 106, "Employers' Accounting for Postretirement Benefits Other Than Pensions," when accounting for these benefits. Under these accounting standards, assumptions are made regarding the valuation of benefit obligations and performance of plan assets. Delayed recognition of differences between actual results and expected or estimated results is a guiding principle of these standards. This delayed recognition of actual results allows for a smoothed recognition of changes in benefit obligations and plan performance over the working lives of the employees who benefit under the plans. The primary assumptions are: Discount Rate - The discount rate is used in calculating the present value of benefits, which are based on projections of benefit payments to be made in the future. The objective in selecting the discount rate is to measure the single amount that, if invested at the measurement date in a portfolio of high-quality debt instruments, would provide the necessary future cash flows to pay the accumulated benefits when due. Expected Return on Plan Assets - Management projects the future return on plan assets considering prior performance, but primarily based upon the plans' mix of assets and expectations for the long-term returns on those asset classes. These projected returns reduce the net benefit costs PPL Electric records currently. Rate of Compensation Increase - Management projects employees' annual pay increases, which are used to project employees' pension benefits at retirement. Health Care Cost Trend Rate - Management projects the expected increases in the cost of health care. In selecting discount rates, PPL considers the expected cash outflows of its plans matched against appropriate fixed-income security yield rates. This information is first matched against a spot-rate yield curve. A portfolio of nearly 600 Moody's Aa-graded non-callable corporate bonds, with a total outstanding float in excess of $300 billion, serves as the base from which those with the lowest and highest yields are eliminated to develop the ultimate yield curve. The results of this analysis are considered in conjunction with other economic data and consideration of movements in the Moody's Aa bond index to determine the discount rate assumption. At December 31, 2005, PPL decreased the discount rate for its domestic plans from 5.75% to 5.70% as a result of decreased long duration fixed-income security returns. In selecting an expected return on plan assets, PPL considers tax implications, past performance and economic forecasts for the types of investments held by the plans. At December 31, 2005, PPL's expected return on plan assets was decreased from 8.75% to 8.50% for its domestic pension plans and increased to 8.00% from 7.90% for its other postretirement benefit plans. PPL's domestic pension plans have significantly exceeded the expected return on plan assets for 2004 and 2005. However, the expected return on plan assets assumption was decreased to reflect a long-term view of equity markets and an expected increase in long-term bond yields. In selecting a rate of compensation increase, PPL considers past experience in light of movements in inflation rates. At December 31, 2005, PPL's rate of compensation increase was moved to 4.75% from 4.00% for its domestic plans. In selecting health care cost trend rates, PPL considers past performance and forecasts of health care costs. At December 31, 2005, PPL's health care cost trend rates were 10.0% for 2006, gradually declining to 5.5% for 2011. A variance in the assumptions listed above could have a significant impact on the accrued pension and other postretirement benefit liabilities and reported annual net periodic pension and other postretirement benefit cost allocated to PPL Electric. The following chart reflects the sensitivities in the 2005 financial statements associated with a change in certain assumptions. While the chart below reflects either an increase or decrease in each assumption, the inverse of this change would impact the accrued pension and other postretirement benefit liabilities and reported annual net periodic pension and other postretirement benefit cost by a similar amount in the opposite direction. Each sensitivity below reflects an evaluation of the change based solely on a change in that assumption. Increase (Decrease) Actuarial Assumption Change in Assumption Impact on Liabilities Impact on Cost Discount Rate (0.25)% $ 1 $ 1 Expected Return on Plan Assets (0.25)% 2 2 Rate of Compensation Increase 0.25% 1 1 At December 31, 2005, PPL Electric's Balance Sheet reflected a net liability of $75 million for pension liabilities and prepaid other postretirement benefit costs allocated from plans sponsored by PPL Services. In 2005, PPL Electric was allocated net periodic pension and other postretirement costs charged to operating expense of $11 million. This amount represents a $1 million increase compared with the charge recognized during 2004. This increase was primarily due to the decrease in the discount rate at December 31, 2004. Refer to Note 12 to the Financial Statements for additional information regarding pension and other postretirement benefits. 2) Loss Accruals PPL Electric periodically accrues losses for the estimated impacts of various conditions, situations or circumstances involving uncertain outcomes. These events are called "contingencies," and PPL Electric's accounting for such events is prescribed by SFAS 5, "Accounting for Contingencies," and other related accounting guidance. SFAS 5 defines a contingency as "an existing condition, situation, or set of circumstances involving uncertainty as to possible gain or loss to an enterprise that will ultimately be resolved when one or more future events occur or fail to occur." For loss contingencies, the loss must be accrued if (1) information is available that indicates it is "probable" that the loss has been incurred, given the likelihood of the uncertain future events and (2) the amount of the loss can be reasonably estimated. FASB defines "probable" as cases in which "the future event or events are likely to occur." SFAS 5 does not permit the accrual of contingencies that might result in gains. PPL Electric continuously assesses potential loss contingencies for environmental remediation, litigation claims, income taxes, regulatory penalties and other events. The accounting aspects of estimated loss accruals include: (1) the initial identification and recording of the loss; (2) the determination of triggering events for reducing a recorded loss accrual; and (3) the ongoing assessment as to whether a recorded loss accrual is sufficient. All three of these aspects of accounting for loss accruals require significant judgment by PPL Electric's management. Initial Identification and Recording of the Loss Accrual PPL Electric uses its internal expertise and outside experts (such as lawyers, tax specialists and engineers), as necessary, to help estimate the probability that a loss has been incurred and the amount (or range) of the loss. In 2005, a significant loss accrual was recorded for the PJM billing dispute. Significant judgment was required by PPL Electric's management to perform the initial assessment of this contingency. In December 2004, Exelon Corporation, on behalf of its subsidiary, PECO Energy, Inc. (PECO), filed a complaint against PJM and PPL Electric with the FERC, alleging that PJM had overcharged PECO from April 1998 through May 2003 as a result of an error by PJM. The complaint requested the FERC, among other things, to direct PPL Electric to refund to PJM $39 million, plus interest of approximately $8 million, and for PJM to refund these same amounts to PECO. In April 2005, the FERC issued an Order Establishing Hearing and Settlement Judge Proceedings (the Order). In the Order, the FERC determined that PECO was entitled to reimbursement for the transmission congestion charges that PECO asserted PJM erroneously billed. The FERC ordered settlement discussions, before a judge, to determine the amount of the overcharge to PECO and the parties responsible for reimbursement to PECO. Based on an evaluation of FERC's Order, PPL Electric's management concluded that it was probable that a loss had been incurred in connection with the PJM billing dispute. PPL Electric recorded a loss accrual of $47 million, the amount of PECO's claim, in the first quarter of 2005. See Note 14 to the Financial Statements for additional information. See "Ongoing Assessment of Recorded Loss Accruals" for a discussion of the year-end 2005 assessment of this contingency. PPL Electric has identified certain other events that could give rise to a loss, but that do not meet the conditions for accrual under SFAS 5. SFAS 5 requires disclosure, but not a recording, of potential losses when it is "reasonably possible" that a loss has been incurred. The FASB defines "reasonably possible" as cases in which "the chance of the future event or events occurring is more than remote but less than likely." See Note 14 to the Financial Statements for disclosure of other potential loss contingencies that have not met the criteria for accrual under SFAS 5. Reducing Recorded Loss Accruals When an estimated loss is accrued, PPL Electric identifies, where applicable, the triggering events for subsequently reducing the loss accrual. The triggering events generally occur when the contingency has been resolved and the actual loss is incurred, or when the risk of loss has diminished or been eliminated. The following are some of the triggering events that provide for the reduction of certain recorded loss accruals: Allowances for excess or obsolete inventory are reduced as the inventory items are pulled from the warehouse shelves and sold as scrap or otherwise disposed. Allowances for uncollectible accounts are reduced when accounts are written off after prescribed collection procedures have been exhausted or when underlying amounts are ultimately collected. Environmental and other litigation contingencies are reduced when the contingency is resolved and PPL Electric makes actual payments or the loss is no longer considered probable. Ongoing Assessment of Recorded Loss Accruals PPL Electric reviews its loss accruals on a regular basis to assure that the recorded potential loss exposures are sufficient. This involves ongoing communication and analyses with internal and external legal counsel, engineers, tax specialists, operation management and other parties. Significant management judgment is required in developing PPL Electric's contingencies, or reserves, for income taxes and valuation allowances for deferred tax assets. The ongoing assessment of tax contingencies is intended to result in management's best estimate of the ultimate settled tax position for each tax year. Annual tax provisions include amounts considered sufficient to pay assessments that may result from examination of prior year tax returns by taxing authorities. However, the amount ultimately paid upon resolution of any issues raised by such authorities may differ from the amount accrued. In evaluating the exposure associated with various filing positions, PPL Electric accounts for changes in probable exposures based on management's best estimate of the amount that should be recognized. An allowance is maintained for the tax contingencies, the balance of which management believes to be adequate. The ongoing assessment of valuation allowances is based on an assessment of whether deferred tax assets will ultimately be realized. Management considers a number of factors in assessing the ultimate realization of deferred tax assets, including forecasts of taxable income in future periods. As part of the year-end preparation of its financial statements, PPL Electric's management re-assessed the loss accrual related to the PJM billing dispute, described above under "Initial Identification and Recording of the Loss Accrual." In re-assessing the PJM billing dispute, PPL Electric's management considered the proposed settlement agreement that was filed with FERC in September 2005. Under the settlement agreement, PPL Electric would pay $33 million plus interest over a four-year period to PJM through a new transmission charge that, under applicable law, is recoverable from PPL Electric's retail customers. Also, all PJM market participants would pay approximately $8 million plus interest over a four-year period to PJM through a new market adjustment charge. PJM would forward amounts collected under the two new charges to PECO. See Note 14 to the Financial Statements for additional information. Numerous parties filed comments with the FERC opposing the settlement agreement, and the FERC has not yet acted on the proposed settlement agreement. Accordingly, PPL Electric's management had no basis to revise the loss accrual that was recorded in the first quarter of 2005. PPL Electric's management will continue to assess the loss accrual for this contingency for future periods. Other Information PPL's Audit Committee has approved the independent auditor to provide audit and audit-related services and other services permitted by the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 and SEC rules. The audit and audit-related services include services in connection with statutory and regulatory filings, reviews of offering documents and registration statements, employee benefit plan audits and internal control reviews . 
