CIK: 922224
Company Name: PPL CORP
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2008-02-29


ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS Overview PPL Electric provides electricity delivery service in eastern and central Pennsylvania. Its headquarters are in Allentown, PA. See "Item 1. Business - Background," for a description of PPL Electric's business. PPL Electric's strategy and principal challenge is to own and operate its electricity delivery business while maintaining high quality customer service and reliability in a cost-effective manner. PPL Electric's electricity delivery business is rate-regulated. Accordingly, this business is subject to regulatory risk with respect to costs that may be recovered and investment returns that may be collected through customer rates. In particular, uncertainty driven by potential changes in the regulatory treatment of PPL Electric's PLR obligation after 2009, when its full requirements supply contracts with PPL EnergyPlus expire, presents a risk for the electricity delivery business. The Customer Choice Act requires electricity delivery companies, like PPL Electric, to act as a PLR of electricity and provides that electricity supply costs will be recovered by such companies pursuant to regulations to be established by the PUC. As discussed in more detail in "Results of Operations - Earnings - 2008 Outlook," there are a number of ongoing regulatory and legislative activities that may affect PPL Electric's recovery of supply costs after 2009. In May 2007, the PUC approved PPL Electric's plan to procure default electricity supply in 2007-2009 for retail customers who do not choose an alternative competitive supplier in 2010. Pursuant to this plan, PPL Electric has contracted for one-third of the 2010 electricity supply it expects to need for residential, small commercial and small industrial customers. In November 2007, PPL Electric filed a plan with the PUC, which is still pending, under which its residential and small commercial customers, beginning in mid-2008, could begin to pay in advance to smooth the impact of price increases when generation rate caps expire in 2010. In September 2007, the PUC regulations regarding the obligation of Pennsylvania electric utilities to provide default electricity supply in 2011 and beyond became effective. Later this year, PPL Electric plans to file for PUC approval of its post-2010 supply procurement plan under these regulations. In addition to this regulatory activity, the Governor of Pennsylvania has proposed an Energy Independence Strategy which, among other things, contains initiatives to address PLR issues including a requirement that PLRs will obtain a "least-cost portfolio" of electric supply. The Pennsylvania legislature has convened and continues a special session to address the proposals in the Governor's Strategy and other energy issues. In addition, certain Pennsylvania legislators have introduced legislation to extend generation rate caps or otherwise limit cost recovery through rates for Pennsylvania utilities beyond the end of their transition periods, which in PPL Electric's case is December 31, 2009. PPL Electric has expressed strong concern regarding the severe potential consequences of such legislation on customer service, system reliability, adequate future generation supply and PPL Electric's financial viability. In order to manage financing costs and access to credit markets, a key objective for PPL Electric is to maintain a strong credit profile. PPL Electric continually focuses on maintaining an appropriate capital structure and liquidity position. See "Item 1A. Risk Factors" for more information concerning material risks PPL Electric faces in its business. The purpose of "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" is to provide information concerning PPL Electric's past and expected future performance in implementing the strategy and managing the risks and challenges mentioned above. Specifically: "Results of Operations" provides an overview of PPL Electric's operating results in 2007, 2006 and 2005, including a review of earnings. It also provides a brief outlook for 2008. "Financial Condition - Liquidity and Capital Resources" provides an analysis of PPL Electric's liquidity position and credit profile, including its sources of cash (including bank credit facilities and sources of operating cash flow) and uses of cash (including contractual commitments and capital expenditure requirements) and the key risks and uncertainties that impact PPL Electric's past and future liquidity position and financial condition. This subsection also includes a listing of PPL Electric's current credit ratings. "Financial Condition - Risk Management" includes an explanation of PPL Electric's risk management activities regarding commodity price risk and interest rate risk. "Application of Critical Accounting Policies" provides an overview of the accounting policies that are particularly important to the results of operations and financial condition of PPL Electric and that require its management to make significant estimates, assumptions and other judgments. The information provided in this Item 7 should be read in conjunction with PPL Electric's Consolidated Financial Statements and the accompanying Notes. Terms and abbreviations are explained in the glossary. Dollars are in millions unless otherwise noted. Results of Operations Earnings Income available to PPL was: 2007 2006 2005 $ 145 $ 180 $ 145 The after-tax changes in income available to PPL were due to: 2007 vs. 2006 2006 vs. 2005 Delivery revenues (net of CTC/ITC amortization, interest expense on transition bonds and ancillary charges) $ 15 $ (6 ) Other operation and maintenance (4 ) (13 ) Depreciation (8 ) (4 ) Interest income on loans to affiliates (1 ) 4 Financing costs (excluding transition bond interest expense) (3 ) (6 ) Income tax adjustments (2 ) (5 ) Other 4 1 Special items (36 ) 64 $ (35 ) $ 35 The changes in net income from year to year were, in part, attributable to several special items that management considers significant. Details of these special items are provided below. The year-to-year changes in significant earnings components are explained in the "Statement of Income Analysis." PPL Electric's year-to-year earnings were affected by: Delivery revenues increased in 2007 compared with 2006, primarily due to a 4% increase in sales volume. This increase was primarily due to the impact of favorable weather in 2007 on residential and commercial sales and normal load growth. Delivery revenues decreased in 2006 compared with 2005 primarily due to milder weather in 2006. Operation and maintenance expenses increased in 2007 compared with 2006, primarily due to increased tree trimming, defined benefit and consumer education expenses. Operation and maintenance expenses increased in 2006 compared with 2005, primarily due to increased tree trimming costs, a union contract ratification bonus and storm restoration costs. Depreciation expense was higher in both periods primarily due to PP&E additions. The following after-tax amounts, which management considers special items, also had a significant impact on earnings. See the indicated Notes to the Financial Statements for additional information. 2007 2006 2005 Workforce reduction $ (1 ) Realization of benefits related to Black Lung Trust assets (Note 13) $ 21 PJM billing dispute (Note 15) 21 $ (27 ) Reversal of cost recovery - Hurricane Isabel (Note 1) (7 ) Acceleration of stock-based compensation expense for periods prior to 2005 (Note 1) (2 ) Total $ (1 ) $ 35 $ (29 ) PPL Electric's earnings beyond 2007 are subject to various risks and uncertainties. See "Forward-Looking Information," "Item 1A. Risk Factors," the rest of this Item 7 and Note 15 to the Financial Statements for a discussion of the risks, uncertainties and factors that may impact PPL Electric's future earnings. 2008 Outlook Excluding special items, PPL Electric projects higher earnings, driven by higher revenues as a result of PPL Electric's new distribution rates effective January 1, 2008. In March 2007, PPL Electric filed a request with the PUC to increase distribution rates by approximately $84 million (subsequently amended to $77 million). In August 2007, PPL Electric entered into a settlement agreement with the parties to increase its distribution rates by $55 million, effective January 1, 2008, for an overall revenue increase of 1.7% over PPL Electric's 2007 rates. In December 2007, the PUC approved this settlement without modification. In May 2007, the PUC approved PPL Electric's plan to procure default electricity supply in 2007-2009 for retail customers who do not choose an alternative competitive supplier in 2010 after PPL Electric's PLR contract with PPL EnergyPlus expires. Under the plan, PPL Electric was approved to issue a series of competitive bids for such supply in 2007, 2008 and 2009. In July 2007, the PUC approved bids for the first of six competitive solicitations and PPL Electric entered into supply contracts for 850 MW, or one-sixth of its expected electricity supply needs in 2010 for residential, small commercial and small industrial customers who do not choose a competitive supplier. The average generation supply prices from the first bid process were $101.77 per MWh for residential customers and $105.11 per MWh for small commercial and small industrial customers. In October 2007, the PUC approved bids for the second competitive solicitation and PPL Electric entered into contracts for another 850 MW of 2010 generation supply for these customers. The average generation supply prices from the second bid process were $105.08 per MWh for residential customers and $105.75 per MWh for small commercial and small industrial customers. As a result, PPL Electric has contracted for one-third of the electricity supply it expects to need for 2010. If the average prices paid for the supply purchased so far were to be the same for the remaining four purchases, the average residential customer's monthly bill in 2010 would increase about 34.5% over 2009 levels, while small commercial and small industrial bills would increase in the range of 22.8% to 42.2%. The estimated increases include Pennsylvania gross receipts tax and an adjustment for line losses, and exclude PPL Electric's January 1, 2008 rate increase. Actual 2010 prices will not be known until all six supply purchases have been made. The third solicitation will be conducted in March 2008. In May 2007, the PUC approved final regulations regarding the obligation of Pennsylvania electric utilities to provide default electricity supply in 2011 and beyond. The new regulations provide that default service providers will acquire electricity supply at prevailing market prices pursuant to procurement and implementation plans approved by the PUC. The regulations also address the utilities' recovery of market supply costs. The final regulations became effective in September 2007. In addition, the Governor of Pennsylvania proposed an Energy Independence Strategy (Strategy) in early 2007 which, among other things, contains initiatives to address PLR issues. For example, under the Strategy, retail customers could elect to phase-in over three years any initial generation rate increase approved by the PUC. Also, PLR providers would be required to obtain a "least cost portfolio" of supply by purchasing power in the spot market and through contracts of varying lengths, and the provider would be required to procure energy conservation resources before acquiring additional power. In addition, PLR providers could enter into long-term contracts with large energy users and alternative energy developers. It is uncertain at this time whether the details of implementing the Strategy, including the issues of deferral of costs and recovery of interest for the customer rate phase-in program and the timing of PUC approval for PLR supply portfolios, will be delegated to the PUC. Components of the Strategy are included in various bills. One such bill that passed in the Pennsylvania House of Representatives (House) in February 2008, contains conservation and demand-side management targets and mandatory deployment of smart metering technology. The bill provides for full and current cost recovery through an energy efficiency and demand-side management recovery mechanism. In September 2007, the Pennsylvania General Assembly convened a special session to address the proposals in the Governor's Strategy. Central to the Governor's Strategy is an $850 million Energy Independence Fund to support alternative and renewable energy sources and energy conservation that would be funded through revenue bonds and a surcharge on electricity bills. The Pennsylvania Senate (Senate) has formed a special committee to manage legislation for the special legislative session. As an alternative to the Governor's $850 million Energy Independence Fund, the full Senate has approved a bill that would create a $650 million fund for clean energy projects, conservation and energy efficiency initiatives and pollution control projects that would be funded through revenue bonds and gross receipts tax revenue, which will increase as rate caps expire. The House is also considering similar legislation to create an $850 million dollar fund, also to be funded through revenue bonds and gross receipts tax revenue. PPL Electric currently is working with Pennsylvania legislators, regulators and other stakeholders to develop constructive measures to help customers transition to market rates after 2009, including a variety of rate mitigation, educational and energy conservation programs, consistent with several initiatives being developed by the state administration and legislature. In this regard, in November 2007, PPL Electric requested the PUC to approve a plan under which its residential and small commercial customers could smooth the impact of price increases when generation rate caps expire in 2010. The proposed phase-in plan would provide customers the option of paying additional amounts on their electric bills beginning in mid-2008 and continuing through 2009. Funds collected during 2008 and 2009, plus accrued interest, would be applied to 2010 and 2011 electric bills, mitigating the impact of the rate cap expiration. PPL Electric requested expedited consideration by the PUC. Ten parties have filed responses to PPL Electric's petition, primarily because PPL Electric's proposal would offer the program on an "opt-out" basis (i.e., customers would be enrolled automatically and affirmatively have to "opt-out" if they choose not to participate). The parties have reached a settlement of this proceeding under which PPL Electric has agreed to change the "opt-out" approach to an "opt-in" approach (i.e., customers would have to affirmatively enroll). In addition, PPL Electric has agreed to make the program available to customers enrolled in budget billing. On February 27, 2008, the settlement agreement was filed with the Administrative Law Judge assigned to this case. The settlement must be approved by the Administrative Law Judge and the PUC. Certain Pennsylvania legislators have introduced or are contemplating the introduction of legislation to extend generation rate caps or otherwise limit cost recovery through rates for Pennsylvania utilities beyond their transition periods, which in PPL Electric's case would be December 31, 2009. PPL Electric has expressed strong concern regarding the severe potential consequences of such legislation on customer service, system reliability, adequate future generation supply and PPL Electric's financial viability. If such legislation or similar legislation is enacted, PPL Electric could experience operating losses, cash flow shortfalls and other adverse financial impacts. In addition, continuing uncertainty regarding PPL Electric's ability to recover its market supply and other costs of operation after 2009 could adversely impact its credit quality, financing costs and availability of credit facilities necessary to operate its business. In addition, PPL Electric believes that such an extension of rate caps, if enacted into law, would violate federal law and the U.S. Constitution. At this time, PPL Electric cannot predict the final outcome or impact of this legislative and regulatory process. Statement of Income Analysis -- Operating Revenues Retail Electric The increases in revenues from retail electric operations were attributable to: 2007 vs. 2006 2006 vs. 2005 PLR electric delivery $ 109 $ 127 Electric delivery 43 (38 ) Other (2 ) $ 152 $ 87 Higher PLR revenues and electric delivery revenues were primarily due to a 4% increase in sales volume. This increase was primarily due to the impact of favorable weather in 2007 on residential and commercial sales and normal load growth. The increases in revenues from retail electric operations for 2006 compared with 2005 were primarily due to increased PLR revenues resulting from an 8.4% rate increase, offset by a decrease in electric delivery revenues resulting from a decrease in sales volumes due in part to milder weather in 2006. Wholesale Electric to Affiliate PPL Electric has a contract to sell to PPL EnergyPlus the electricity that PPL Electric purchases under contracts with NUGs. The $9 million increase in wholesale revenue to affiliate in 2006 compared with 2005 was primarily due to an unplanned outage at a NUG facility in 2005. PPL Electric therefore had more electricity to sell to PPL EnergyPlus in 2006. Energy Purchases Energy purchases increased by $31 million for 2007 compared with 2006, primarily due to the $28 million reduction in 2006 of the loss accrual recorded in 2005, for the PJM billing dispute. See Note 15 to the Financial Statements for additional information regarding the PJM billing dispute. Also, $6 million in higher ancillary costs contributed to the increase. Energy purchases decreased by $81 million for 2006 compared with 2005, primarily due to the $39 million loss accrual for the PJM billing dispute recorded in 2005 and the $28 million reduction of that accrual recorded in 2006. Also, the decrease reflects $14 million in lower ancillary costs and a reduction of $8 million resulting from the elimination of a charge to load-serving entities, which minimized the impacts of integrating into the Midwest ISO and PJM markets. These decreases were partially offset by a $7 million increase due to an unplanned NUG outage in 2005. Energy Purchases from Affiliate Energy purchases from affiliate increased by $102 million in 2007 compared with 2006. The increase reflects higher PLR load, as well as higher prices for energy purchased under the power supply contracts with PPL EnergyPlus that were needed to support the PLR load. Energy purchases from affiliate increased by $118 million in 2006 compared with 2005. The increase is primarily the result of an 8.4% increase in prices for energy purchased under the power supply contracts with PPL EnergyPlus needed to support PLR load, offset by a slight decrease in that load. Other Operation and Maintenance The changes in other operation and maintenance expense were due to: 2007 vs. 2006 2006 vs. 2005 Realization of benefits related to Black Lung Trust assets in 2006 (Note 13) $ 36 $ (36 ) PUC-reportable storm costs 6 9 Distribution system reliability work, including tree trimming 6 19 Defined benefit costs (Note 13) 3 4 Consumer education 3 Insurance premiums 3 3 Allocation of certain corporate service costs (Note 16) (2 ) 2 Union contract ratification bonus 3 Accelerated amortization of stock-based compensation (Note 1) (5 ) PJM system control and dispatch services (2 ) Retired miners' medical benefits (7 ) Costs associated with severe ice storms in January 2005 (Note 1) (16 ) Subsequent deferral of a portion of costs associated with January 2005 ice storms (Note 1) 12 Hurricane Isabel (Note 1) (11 ) 11 Insurance recovery of storm costs (11 ) Other (3 ) $ 33 $ (6 ) Depreciation Depreciation increased by $14 million in 2007 compared with 2006 and by $6 million in 2006 compared with 2005 primarily due to PP&E additions. Both periods were also impacted by the purchase in 2006 of equipment previously leased. See Note 11 to the Financial Statements for additional information. Taxes, Other Than Income Taxes, other than income increased by $11 million in 2007 compared with 2006. The increase was primarily due to a $12 million increase in domestic gross receipts tax expense, which is passed through to customers, resulting from a 4% increase in sales volume. Taxes, other than income increased by $4 million in 2006 compared with 2005. The increase was primarily due to a $7 million increase in gross receipts tax expense, partially offset by a $2 million decrease in real estate tax expense. Other Income - net See Note 17 to the Financial Statements for details of other income and deductions. Financing Costs The decreases in financing costs, which include "Interest Expense," "Interest Expense with Affiliate" and "Dividends on Preferred Securities," were due to: 2007 vs. 2006 2006 vs. 2005 Interest accrued for PJM billing dispute (Note 15) $ 7 $ (15 ) Dividends on 6.25% Series Preference Stock issued in April 2006 (Note 7) 4 12 Interest on PLR contract collateral (Note 16) 5 Long-term debt interest expense primarily due to the repayment of transition bonds (22 ) (20 ) Other (1 ) (1 ) $ (12 ) $ (19 ) Income Taxes The changes in income taxes were due to: 2007 vs. 2006 2006 vs. 2005 Tax reserve adjustments (Note 5) $ 5 Tax return adjustments (Note 5) (5 ) $ 4 (Lower) higher pre-tax book income (23 ) 30 Other 2 1 $ (21 ) $ 35 See Note 5 to the Financial Statements for details on effective income tax rates. Financial Condition Liquidity and Capital Resources PPL Electric is focused on maintaining its investment grade credit profile by maintaining an appropriate liquidity position and a strong balance sheet. PPL Electric believes that its cash on hand, operating cash flows, access to debt and equity capital markets and borrowing capacity, taken as a whole, provide sufficient resources to fund its ongoing operating requirements, future security maturities and estimated future capital expenditures. PPL Electric currently expects cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments at the end of 2008 to be less than $100 million, while maintaining $200 million in credit facility capacity. However, PPL Electric's cash flows from operations and access to cost effective bank and capital markets are subject to risks and uncertainties including, but not limited to: unusual or extreme weather that may damage PPL Electric's transmission and distribution facilities or affect energy sales to customers; the ability to recover and the timeliness and adequacy of recovery of costs associated with regulated utility businesses; any adverse outcome of legal proceedings and investigations with respect to PPL Electric's current and past business activities; and a downgrade in PPL Electric's or its subsidiary's credit ratings that could adversely affect their ability to access capital and increase the cost of maintaining credit facilities and any new debt. At December 31, PPL Electric had the following: 2007 2006 2005 Cash and cash equivalents $ 33 $ 150 $ 298 Short-term investments 26 25 $ 33 $ 176 $ 323 Short-term debt $ 41 $ 42 $ 42 The changes in PPL Electric's cash and cash equivalents position resulted from: 2007 2006 2005 Net Cash Provided by Operating Activities $ 568 $ 578 $ 580 Net Cash Used in Investing Activities (239 ) (287 ) (193 ) Net Cash Used in Financing Activities (446 ) (439 ) (240 ) Net (Decrease) Increase in Cash and Cash Equivalents $ (117 ) $ (148 ) $ 147 Operating Activities PPL Electric's cash provided by operating activities remained stable from 2005 through 2007. Except for the items explained below, there were no other significant changes in the components of PPL Electric's cash provided by operating activities. In 2007, delivery revenues increased primarily as a result of an increase in sales volumes in 2007 compared with 2006, which was due to the impact of favorable weather in 2007 on residential and commercial sales and normal load growth. This increase in revenues was offset by an increase in energy purchases, primarily from PPL EnergyPlus under the PLR contracts to support the PLR load. In 2006, domestic retail electric revenues increased as a result of an 8.4% increase in PLR sales prices in 2006, but were partially offset by a decrease in domestic delivery revenues resulting from a decrease in sales volumes in 2006 compared with 2005, due in part to milder weather in 2006. The net increase from revenues in 2006 was offset by energy purchases PPL Electric made from PPL EnergyPlus under the PLR contracts. PPL Electric purchased less energy under the PLR contracts in 2006 compared with 2005 but incurred a scheduled 8.4% increase in the price it pays under such contracts. An important element supporting the stability of PPL Electric's cash from operations is its purchase contracts with PPL EnergyPlus. These contracts provide sufficient energy for PPL Electric to meet its PLR obligation through 2009, at the predetermined capped rates it is entitled to charge its customers over this period. These contracts require cash collateral or other credit enhancement, or reductions or terminations of a portion of the entire contract through cash settlement, in the event of adverse changes in market prices. Also under the contracts, PPL Energy Supply may request cash collateral or other credit enhancement, or reductions or terminations of a portion of the entire contract through cash settlement, in the event of a downgrade of PPL Electric's credit ratings. The maximum amount that PPL Electric would have to post under these contracts is $300 million, and PPL Electric estimates that it would not have had to post any collateral if energy prices decreased by 10% from year-end 2007 or 2006 levels. Investing Activities The primary use of cash in investing activities is capital expenditures. See "Forecasted Uses of Cash" for detail regarding capital expenditures in 2007 and projected expenditures for the years 2008 through 2012. Net cash used in investing activities decreased by $48 million in 2007 compared with 2006, primarily as a result of $25 million in net proceeds from purchases and sales of short-term investments and $23 million received from an affiliate as a partial repayment on a demand loan that was extended to the affiliate in 2004. Net cash used in investing activities increased by $94 million in 2006 compared with 2005, primarily as a result of an increase of $115 million in capital expenditures, of which $52 million related to the purchase of leased equipment. See Note 11 to the Financial Statements for further discussion of the 2006 purchase of leased equipment in connection with the termination of the related master lease agreements. Financing Activities Although net cash used in financing activities remained stable in 2007 compared with 2006, there were significant changes in certain components. PPL Electric had net debt retirements of $306 million in 2007 compared with $433 million in 2006. Additionally, in 2006, PPL Electric received net proceeds of $245 million from the issuance of preference stock, received a $75 million contribution from PPL and repurchased $200 million of common stock from PPL. A portion of the proceeds received from the issuance of the preference stock was used to fund the repurchase of common stock from PPL in 2006. See Note 7 to the Financial Statements for information regarding the preference stock issued by PPL Electric. Net cash used in financing activities increased $199 million in 2006 compared with 2005, primarily as a result of the repurchase of $200 million of common stock from PPL, an increase of $298 million in net debt retirements and an increase of $23 million in dividends paid to PPL, partially offset by net proceeds of $245 million from the issuance of preference stock and a $75 million contribution from PPL. See "Forecasted Sources of Cash" for a discussion of PPL Electric's plans to issue debt and equity securities, as well as a discussion of credit facility capacity available to PPL Electric. Also see "Forecasted Uses of Cash" for a discussion of PPL Electric's plans to pay dividends on its common and preferred securities, as well as maturities of PPL Electric's long-term debt. PPL Electric's debt financing activity in 2007 was: Issuances Retirements PPL Electric Senior Secured Bonds $ 250 $ (255 ) PPL Transition Bond Company Transition Bonds (300 ) PPL Electric short-term debt (net change) (1 ) Total $ 250 $ (556 ) Net decrease $ (306 ) See Note 8 to the Financial Statements for more detailed information regarding PPL Electric's financing activities in 2007. Forecasted Sources of Cash PPL Electric expects to continue to have significant sources of cash available in the near term, including a credit facility, a commercial paper program and an asset-backed commercial paper program. PPL Electric also expects to continue to have access to debt and equity capital markets, as necessary, for its long-term financing needs. Credit Facility At December 31, 2007, PPL Electric's total committed borrowing capacity under its credit facility and the use of this borrowing capacity were: Committed Capacity Borrowed Letters of Credit Issued (b) Available Capacity PPL Electric Credit Facility (a) $ 200 $ 200 (a) Borrowings under PPL Electric's credit facility generally bear interest at LIBOR-based rates plus a spread, depending upon the company's public debt rating. PPL Electric also has the capability to cause the lenders to issue up to $200 million of letters of credit under this facility, which issuances reduce available borrowing capacity. Under certain conditions, PPL Electric may request that the facility's capacity be increased by up to $100 million. The credit facility contains a financial covenant requiring debt to total capitalization to not exceed 70%. At December 31, 2007 and 2006, PPL Electric's consolidated debt to total capitalization percentages, as calculated in accordance with its credit facility, were 47% and 48%. The credit facility also contains standard representations and warranties that must be made for PPL Electric to borrow under it. (b) PPL Electric has a reimbursement obligation to the extent any letters of credit are drawn upon. In addition to the financial covenants noted in the table above, the credit agreement contains various other covenants. Failure to comply with the covenants after applicable grace periods could result in acceleration of repayment of borrowings and/or termination of the agreement. PPL Electric monitors compliance with the covenants on a regular basis. At December 31, 2007, PPL Electric was in material compliance with these covenants. At this time, PPL Electric believes that these covenants and other borrowing conditions will not limit access to this funding source. PPL Electric intends to renew and extend its $200 million credit facility in 2008. Commercial Paper PPL Electric maintains a commercial paper program for up to $200 million to provide an additional financing source to fund its short-term liquidity needs, if and when necessary. Commercial paper issuances are supported by the $200 million credit facility of PPL Electric. PPL Electric had no commercial paper outstanding at December 31, 2007 and 2006. During 2008, PPL Electric may issue commercial paper from time to time to facilitate short-term cash flow needs. Asset-Backed Commercial Paper Program PPL Electric participates in an asset-backed commercial paper program through which it obtains financing by selling and contributing its eligible accounts receivable and unbilled revenues to a special purpose, wholly-owned subsidiary on an ongoing basis. The subsidiary pledges these assets to secure loans of up to an aggregate of $150 million from a commercial paper conduit sponsored by a financial institution. PPL Electric uses the proceeds from the program for general corporate purposes and to cash collateralize letters of credit. At December 31, 2007 and 2006, loan balances outstanding were $41 million and $42 million, all of which were being used to cash collateralize letters of credit. See Note 8 to the Financial Statements for further discussion of the asset-backed commercial paper program. Contributions from PPL From time to time PPL may make capital contributions to PPL Electric. PPL Electric may use these contributions for general corporate purposes, including funding redemptions of existing debt. Long-Term Debt and Equity Securities PPL Electric currently does not plan to issue any long-term debt or equity securities in 2008. Forecasted Uses of Cash In addition to expenditures required for normal operating activities, such as purchased power, payroll, and taxes, PPL Electric currently expects to incur future cash outflows for capital expenditures, various contractual obligations and payment of dividends on its common and preferred securities. Capital Expenditures The table below shows PPL Electric's actual spending for the year 2007 and current capital expenditure projections for the years 2008 through 2012. Actual Projected 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 Construction expenditures (a) Transmission and distribution facilities $ 256 $ 239 $ 281 $ 377 $ 500 $ 488 Other 30 25 24 27 21 23 Total Capital Expenditures $ 286 $ 264 $ 305 $ 404 $ 521 $ 511 (a) Construction expenditures include AFUDC, which is expected to be approximately $26 million for the 2008-2012 period. PPL Electric's capital expenditure projections for the years 2008-2012 total approximately $2.0 billion. Capital expenditure plans are revised periodically to reflect changes in operational, market and regulatory conditions. The table includes projected costs for the PJM-approved regional transmission line expansion project. See Note 9 to the Financial Statements. PPL Electric plans to fund all of its capital expenditures in 2008 with cash on hand and cash from operations. Contractual Obligations PPL Electric has assumed various financial obligations and commitments in the ordinary course of conducting its business. At December 31, 2007, the estimated contractual cash obligations of PPL Electric were: Contractual Cash Obligations Total Less Than 1 Year 1-3 Years 4-5 Years After 5 Years Long-term Debt (a) $ 1,674 $ 395 $ 486 $ 793 Interest on Long-term Debt (b) 925 89 115 $ 84 637 Capital Lease Obligations Operating Leases Purchase Obligations (c) 4,710 1,921 2,779 5 5 Other Long-term Liabilities Reflected on the Balance Sheets under GAAP (d) Total Contractual Cash Obligations $ 7,309 $ 2,405 $ 3,380 $ 89 $ 1,435 (a) Reflects principal maturities only. Includes $305 million of transition bonds issued by PPL Transition Bond Company in 1999 to securitize a portion of PPL Electric's stranded costs. This debt is non-recourse to PPL Electric. (b) Assumes interest payments through maturity. The payments herein are subject to change, as payments for variable-rate debt have been estimated. (c) The payments reflected herein are subject to change, as the purchase obligation reflected is an estimate based on projected obligated quantities and projected pricing under the contract. Purchase orders made in the ordinary course of business are excluded from the amounts presented. (d) At December 31, 2007, total unrecognized tax benefits of $68 million were excluded from this table as PPL Electric cannot reasonably estimate the amount and period of future payments. See Note 5 to the Financial Statements for additional information. Dividends From time to time, as determined by its Board of Directors, PPL Electric pays dividends on its common stock to its parent, PPL, which uses the dividends for general corporate purposes, including meeting its cash flow needs. As discussed in Note 8 to the Financial Statements, PPL Electric may not pay dividends on its common stock, except in certain circumstances, unless full dividends have been paid on the 6.25% Series Preference Stock for the then-current dividend period. Additionally, PPL Electric's 2001 Senior Secured Bond Indenture restricts dividend payments on its common stock in the event that PPL Electric fails to meet interest coverage ratios or fails to comply with certain requirements included in its Articles of Incorporation and Bylaws to maintain its separateness from PPL and PPL's other subsidiaries. PPL Electric does not, at this time, expect that any of such limitations would significantly impact its ability to declare dividends. PPL Electric expects to continue to pay quarterly dividends on its outstanding preferred securities, if and as declared by its Board of Directors. Credit Ratings Moody's, S&P and Fitch periodically review the credit ratings on the debt and preferred securities of PPL Electric and PPL Transition Bond Company. Based on their respective independent reviews, the rating agencies may make certain ratings revisions or ratings affirmations. A credit rating reflects an assessment by the rating agency of the creditworthiness associated with an issuer and particular securities that it issues. The credit ratings of PPL Electric and PPL Transition Bond Company are based on information provided by PPL Electric and other sources. The ratings of Moody's, S&P and Fitch are not a recommendation to buy, sell or hold any securities of PPL Electric or PPL Transition Bond Company. Such ratings may be subject to revisions or withdrawal by the agencies at any time and should be evaluated independently of each other and any other rating that may be assigned to their securities. A downgrade in PPL Electric's or PPL Transition Bond Company's credit ratings could result in higher borrowing costs and reduced access to capital markets. The following table summarizes the credit ratings of PPL Electric and PPL Transition Bond Company at December 31, 2007. Moody's S&P Fitch (a) PPL Electric (b) Senior Unsecured/Issuer Rating Baa1 A- BBB First Mortgage Bonds A3 A- A- Senior Secured Bonds A3 A- A- Commercial Paper P-2 A-2 F2 Preferred Stock Baa3 BBB BBB+ Preference Stock Baa3 BBB BBB Outlook STABLE STABLE STABLE PPL Transition Bond Company Transition Bonds Aaa AAA AAA (a) Issuer Rating for Fitch is an "Issuer Default Rating." (b) Excludes Pollution Control Revenue Bonds issued by the Lehigh County Industrial Development Authority on behalf of PPL Electric, which are insured and are currently rated on the basis of the relevant insurer's ratings. Moody's did not take any actions related to PPL Electric or PPL Transition Bond Company during 2007. In August 2007, Fitch affirmed its AAA rating for the Transition Bonds of PPL Transition Bond Company. In December 2007, S&P completed its annual review of PPL Electric and affirmed its credit ratings and stable outlook noted in the table above for PPL Electric. Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements PPL Electric has entered into certain guarantee agreements that are within the scope of FIN 45, "Guarantor's Accounting and Disclosure Requirements for Guarantees, Including Indirect Guarantees of Indebtedness of Others, an Interpretation of FASB Statements No. 5, 57, and 107 and Rescission of FASB Interpretation No. 34." See Note 15 to the Financial Statements for a discussion of guarantees. Risk Management Market Risk Commodity Price Risk - PLR Contracts PPL Electric and PPL EnergyPlus have power supply agreements under which PPL EnergyPlus sells to PPL Electric (under a predetermined pricing arrangement) energy and capacity to fulfill PPL Electric's PLR obligation through 2009. As a result, PPL Electric has shifted any electric price risk relating to its PLR obligation to PPL EnergyPlus through 2009. See Note 16 to the Financial Statements for information on the PLR contracts. Commodity Price Risk - Post-PLR Contracts In order to mitigate the risk that PPL Electric will not be able to obtain adequate energy supply subsequent to 2009, when the full requirements energy supply agreements with PPL EnergyPlus expire, PPL Electric has entered into power purchase agreements that include fixed prices. PPL Electric's future financial performance will be affected by its ability to enter into other new supply contracts, the duration and pricing of such contracts relative to prevailing market conditions, and the regulatory treatment for such contracts and the associated recovery of its supply costs. Depending on these factors, PPL Electric's financial results may be materially adversely affected. See "Results of Operations - Earnings - 2008 Outlook" for information on the PUC-approved procurement plan and other ongoing Pennsylvania regulatory and legislative activities. Interest Rate Risk PPL Electric has issued debt to finance its operations, which exposes it to interest expense risk. At December 31, 2007 and 2006, PPL Electric's potential annual exposure to increased interest expense, based on a 10% increase in interest rates, was insignificant. PPL Electric is also exposed to changes in the fair value of its debt portfolio. At December 31, 2007, PPL Electric estimated that its potential exposure to a change in the fair value of its debt portfolio, through a 10% adverse movement in interest rates, was $49 million, compared with $37 million at December 31, 2006. Defined Benefit Plans - Securities Price Risk See "Application of Critical Accounting Policies - Defined Benefits" for additional information regarding the effect of securities price risk on plan assets. Related Party Transactions PPL Electric is not aware of any material ownership interests or operating responsibility by senior management of PPL Electric in outside partnerships, including leasing transactions with variable interest entities, or other entities doing business with PPL Electric. For additional information on related party transactions, see Note 16 to the Financial Statements. Environmental Matters See Note 15 to the Financial Statements for a discussion of environmental matters. Competition See "Item 1. Business - Competition" and "Item 1A. Risk Factors" for a discussion of competitive factors affecting PPL Electric. New Accounting Standards See Note 23 to the Financial Statements for a discussion of new accounting standards recently adopted or pending adoption. Application of Critical Accounting Policies PPL Electric's financial condition and results of operations are impacted by the methods, assumptions and estimates used in the application of critical accounting policies. The following accounting policies are particularly important to the financial condition or results of operations of PPL Electric, and require estimates or other judgments of matters inherently uncertain. Changes in the estimates or other judgments included within these accounting policies could result in a significant change to the information presented in the Financial Statements. (These accounting policies are also discussed in Note 1 to the Financial Statements.) PPL's senior management has reviewed these critical accounting policies, and the estimates and assumptions regarding them, with its Audit Committee. In addition, PPL's senior management has reviewed the following disclosures regarding the application of these critical accounting policies with the Audit Committee. In 2006, the FASB issued SFAS 157, "Fair Value Measurements." Among other things, SFAS 157 provides a definition of fair value as well as a framework for measuring fair value. In February 2008, the FASB amended SFAS 157 through the issuance of FSP FAS 157-1, "Application of FASB Statement No. 157 to FASB Statement No. 13 and Other Accounting Pronouncements That Address Fair Value Measurements for Purposes of Lease Classification or Measurement under Statement 13" and FSP FAS 157-2, "Effective Date of FASB Statement No. 157." FSP FAS 157-1 amends SFAS 157 to exclude from its scope, certain accounting pronouncements that address fair value measurements associated with leases. FSP FAS 157-2 delays the effective date of SFAS 157 to fiscal years beginning after November 15, 2008 for nonfinancial assets and nonfinancial liabilities that are not recognized or disclosed at fair value in the financial statements on a recurring basis (at least annually). As permitted by this guidance, PPL Electric will partially adopt SFAS 157, as amended, effective January 1, 2008. The January 1, 2008 adoption, although not expected to be significant, is expected to affect the fair value component of PPL Electric's critical accounting policy related to "Defined Benefits" in future periods. See Note 23 to the Financial Statements for additional information regarding SFAS 157, as amended. 1) Defined Benefits PPL Electric participates in, and is allocated a significant portion of the liability and net periodic defined benefit pension and other postretirement costs of plans sponsored by PPL Services based on participation in those plans. PPL follows the guidance of SFAS 87, "Employers' Accounting for Pensions," and SFAS 106, "Employers' Accounting for Postretirement Benefits Other Than Pensions," when accounting for these defined benefits. In addition, PPL adopted the recognition and measurement date provisions of SFAS 158, "Employers' Accounting for Defined Benefit Pension and Other Postretirement Plans," effective December 31, 2006. Subsequent to the adoption of SFAS 158, PPL is required to record an asset or liability to recognize the funded status of all defined benefit plans with an offsetting entry to regulatory assets for the portion allocated to PPL Electric. Consequently, the funded status of all defined benefit plans is now fully recognized on the Balance Sheets and PPL no longer recognizes additional minimum liability adjustments in other comprehensive income (OCI). See Note 13 to the Financial Statements for additional information about the plans and the accounting for defined benefits. Under these accounting standards, assumptions are made regarding the valuation of benefit obligations and performance of plan assets. Delayed recognition in earnings of differences between actual results and expected or estimated results is a guiding principle of these standards. Annual net periodic defined benefit costs are recorded in current earnings based on these estimated results. Any differences between actual and estimated results are recorded as regulatory assets. The regulatory assets are amortized to income over future periods. This delayed recognition in income of actual results allows for a smoothed recognition of costs over the working lives of the employees who benefit under the plans. The primary assumptions are: Discount Rate - The discount rate is used in calculating the present value of benefits, which are based on projections of benefit payments to be made in the future. The objective in selecting the discount rate is to measure the single amount that, if invested at the measurement date in a portfolio of high-quality debt instruments, would provide the necessary future cash flows to pay the accumulated benefits when due. Expected Return on Plan Assets - Management projects the future return on plan assets considering prior performance, but primarily based upon the plans' mix of assets and expectations for the long-term returns on those asset classes. These projected returns reduce the net benefit costs PPL Electric records currently. Rate of Compensation Increase - Management projects employees' annual pay increases, which are used to project employees' pension benefits at retirement. Health Care Cost Trend Rate - Management projects the expected increases in the cost of health care. In selecting a discount rate for its domestic defined benefit plans, PPL starts with an analysis of the expected benefit payment stream for its plans. This information is first matched against a spot-rate yield curve. A portfolio of over 500 Aa-graded non-callable (or callable with make-whole provisions) bonds, with a total amount outstanding in excess of $350 billion, serves as the base from which those with the lowest and highest yields are eliminated to develop the ultimate yield curve. The results of this analysis are considered together with other economic data and movements in various bond indices to determine the discount rate assumption. At December 31, 2007, PPL increased the discount rate for its domestic pension plans from 5.94% to 6.39% as a result of this assessment and increased the discount rate for its other postretirement benefit plans from 5.88% to 6.26%. In selecting an expected return on plan assets, PPL considers tax implications, past performance and economic forecasts for the types of investments held by the plans. At December 31, 2007, PPL's expected return on plan assets was reduced from 8.50% to 8.25% for its domestic pension plans and increased from 7.75% to 7.80% for its other postretirement benefit plans. In selecting a rate of compensation increase, PPL considers past experience in light of movements in inflation rates. At December 31, 2007, PPL's rate of compensation increase remained at 4.75% for its domestic plans. In selecting health care cost trend rates, PPL considers past performance and forecasts of health care costs. At December 31, 2007, PPL's health care cost trend rates were 9.0% for 2008, gradually declining to 5.5% for 2014. A variance in the assumptions listed above could have a significant impact on the accrued defined benefit liabilities or assets, reported annual net periodic defined benefit costs and the regulatory assets allocated to PPL Electric. The following chart reflects the sensitivities in the 2007 financial statements associated with a change in certain assumptions based on PPL's primary defined benefit plans. While the charts below reflect either an increase or decrease in each assumption, the inverse of this change would impact the accrued defined benefit liabilities or assets, reported annual net periodic defined benefit costs and regulatory assets by a similar amount in the opposite direction. The sensitivities below reflect an evaluation of the change based solely on a change in that assumption and does not include income tax effects. At December 31, 2007, PPL Electric had recorded the following defined benefit plan assets and liabilities: Pension assets $ 12 Pension liabilities 5 Other postretirement benefit liabilities 91 The following chart reflects the sensitivities in the December 31, 2007 Balance Sheet associated with a change in certain assumptions based on PPL's primary defined benefit plans. Increase (Decrease) Actuarial assumption Change in assumption Impact on obligations Impact on pension assets Impact on postretirement liabilities Impact on regulatory assets Discount Rate (0.25)% $ 29 $ (24 ) $ 5 $ (29 ) Rate of Compensation Increase 0.25% 5 (5 ) (5 ) Health Care Cost Trend Rate (a) 1.0% 8 N/A 8 (8 ) (a) Only impacts other postretirement benefits. In 2007, PPL Electric was allocated net periodic defined benefit costs charged to operating expense of $17 million. This amount represents a $2 million increase compared with the charge recognized during 2006. The following chart reflects the sensitivities in the 2007 Statement of Income associated with a change in certain assumptions based on PPL's primary defined benefit plans. Actuarial assumption Change in assumption Impact on defined benefit costs Discount Rate (0.25)% $ 1 Expected Return on Plan Assets (0.25)% 2 Rate of Compensation Increase 0.25% 1 Health Care Cost Trend Rate (a) 1.0% 1 (a) Only impacts other postretirement benefits. 2) Loss Accruals PPL Electric periodically accrues losses for the estimated impacts of various conditions, situations or circumstances involving uncertain outcomes. PPL Electric's accounting for such events is prescribed by SFAS 5, "Accounting for Contingencies," and other related accounting guidance. SFAS 5 defines a contingency as "an existing condition, situation, or set of circumstances involving uncertainty as to possible gain or loss to an enterprise that will ultimately be resolved when one or more future events occur or fail to occur." For loss contingencies, the loss must be accrued if (1) information is available that indicates it is "probable" that the loss has been incurred, given the likelihood of the uncertain future events and (2) the amount of the loss can be reasonably estimated. The FASB defines "probable" as cases in which "the future event or events are likely to occur." SFAS 5 does not permit the accrual of contingencies that might result in gains. PPL Electric continuously assesses potential loss contingencies for environmental remediation, litigation claims, regulatory penalties and other events. The accounting aspects of estimated loss accruals include: (1) the initial identification and recording of the loss; (2) the determination of triggering events for reducing a recorded loss accrual; and (3) the ongoing assessment as to whether a recorded loss accrual is sufficient. All three of these aspects of accounting for loss accruals require significant judgment by PPL Electric's management. Initial Identification and Recording of the Loss Accrual PPL Electric uses its internal expertise and outside experts (such as lawyers and engineers), as necessary, to help estimate the probability that a loss has been incurred and the amount (or range) of the loss. In 2005, a significant loss accrual was initially recorded for the PJM billing dispute. Significant judgment was required by PPL Electric's management to perform the initial assessment of this contingency. In 2004, Exelon Corporation, on behalf of its subsidiary, PECO Energy, Inc. (PECO), filed a complaint against PJM and PPL Electric with the FERC, alleging that PJM had overcharged PECO from April 1998 through May 2003 as a result of an error by PJM. The complaint requested the FERC, among other things, to direct PPL Electric to refund to PJM $39 million, plus interest of $8 million, and for PJM to refund these same amounts to PECO. In April 2005, the FERC issued an Order Establishing Hearing and Settlement Judge Proceedings (the Order). In the Order, the FERC determined that PECO was entitled to reimbursement for the transmission congestion charges that PECO asserted PJM erroneously billed. The FERC ordered settlement discussions, before a judge, to determine the amount of the overcharge to PECO and the parties responsible for reimbursement to PECO. Based on an evaluation of the FERC Order, PPL Electric's management concluded that it was probable that a loss had been incurred in connection with the PJM billing dispute. PPL Electric recorded a loss accrual of $47 million, the amount of PECO's claim, in the first quarter of 2005. See Note 15 to the Financial Statements for additional information on this contingency and see "Ongoing Assessment of Recorded Loss Accruals" for a discussion of the year-end assessment of this contingency. There were no significant loss accruals initially recorded in 2007 or 2006. PPL Electric has identified certain other events that could give rise to a loss, but that do not meet the conditions for accrual under SFAS 5. SFAS 5 requires disclosure, but not a recording, of potential losses when it is "reasonably possible" that a loss has been incurred. The FASB defines "reasonably possible" as cases in which "the chance of the future event or events occurring is more than remote but less than likely." See Note 15 to the Financial Statements for disclosure of other potential loss contingencies that have not met the criteria for accrual under SFAS 5. Reducing Recorded Loss Accruals When an estimated loss is accrued, PPL Electric identifies, where applicable, the triggering events for subsequently reducing the loss accrual. The triggering events generally occur when the contingency has been resolved and the actual loss is incurred, or when the risk of loss has diminished or been eliminated. The following are some of the triggering events that provide for the reduction of certain recorded loss accruals: Allowances for uncollectible accounts are reduced when accounts are written off after prescribed collection procedures have been exhausted, a better estimate of the allowance is determined or underlying amounts are ultimately collected. Environmental and other litigation contingencies are reduced when the contingency is resolved and PPL Electric makes actual payments, a better estimate of the loss is determined or the loss is no longer considered probable. Ongoing Assessment of Recorded Loss Accruals PPL Electric reviews its loss accruals on a regular basis to assure that the recorded potential loss exposures are sufficient. This involves ongoing communication and analyses with internal and external legal counsel, engineers, operation management and other parties. As part of the year-end preparation of its 2006 financial statements, PPL Electric's management re-assessed the loss accrual related to the PJM billing dispute, described above under "Initial Identification and Recording of the Loss Accrual. In December 2006, PPL Electric and Exelon filed with the FERC, pursuant to a November 2006 order, a modified offer of settlement (Compliance Filing). Under the Compliance Filing, PPL Electric would make a single payment through its monthly PJM bill of $38 million, plus interest through the date of payment, and PJM would include a single credit for this amount in PECO's monthly PJM bill. Through December 31, 2006, the estimated interest on this payment was $4 million, for a total payment of $42 million. Based on the Compliance Filing, PPL Electric reduced the recorded loss accrual by $5 million at December 31, 2006. PPL determined that PPL Electric was responsible for the claims prior to July 1, 2000 (totaling $12 million), and that PPL EnergyPlus was responsible for the claims subsequent to that date (totaling $30 million). Accordingly, PPL Electric recorded a receivable from PPL EnergyPlus of $30 million at December 31, 2006, reduced the recorded liability to PJM by $5 million and recorded credits to expense of $35 million, including $28 million of "Energy purchases" and $7 million of "Interest Expense" on the Statement of Income. In March 2007, the FERC entered an order approving the Compliance Filing. In April 2007, PPL Electric paid PJM the full settlement amount of $43 million, including additional interest of $1 million recorded during the three months ended March 31, 2007. PPL Energy Supply paid PPL Electric for its portion of the settlement. This proceeding is now terminated and no contingency exists at December 31, 2007. 3) Income Tax Uncertainties Significant management judgment is required in developing PPL Electric's provision for income taxes primarily due to uncertainty in various tax positions taken or expected to be taken in tax returns. Prior to January 1, 2007, and in accordance with SFAS 5, "Accounting for Contingencies," PPL Electric evaluated uncertain tax positions and accrued charges for probable exposures based on management's best estimate of the amount of benefit that should be recognized in the financial statements. This assessment resulted in management's best estimate of the ultimate settled tax position for each tax year. In addition, management considered the reversal of temporary differences, future taxable income and ongoing prudent and feasible tax planning strategies in initially recording and reevaluating the need for valuation allowances. In June 2006, the FASB issued FIN 48, "Accounting for Uncertainty in Income Taxes, an interpretation of FASB Statement No. 109." In May 2007, the FASB amended this guidance by issuing FSP FIN 48-1, "Definition of Settlement in FASB Interpretation No. 48." PPL Electric and its subsidiaries adopted FIN 48, as amended, effective January 1, 2007. The adoption of FIN 48 alters the methodology PPL Electric previously used to account for income tax uncertainties. Effective with the adoption of FIN 48, uncertain tax positions are no longer considered to be contingencies assessed in accordance with SFAS 5. Similar to SFAS 5, FIN 48 continues to require significant management judgment in determining the amount of benefit to be recognized in relation to an uncertain tax position. FIN 48 requires PPL Electric to evaluate its tax positions following a two-step process. The first step requires an entity to determine whether, based on the technical merits supporting a particular tax position, it is more likely than not (greater than a 50 percent chance) that the tax position will be sustained. This determination assumes that the relevant taxing authority will examine the tax position and is aware of all the relevant facts surrounding the tax position. The second step requires an entity to recognize in the financial statements the benefit of a tax position that meets the more-likely-than-not recognition criterion. The measurement of the benefit equals the largest amount of benefit that has a likelihood of realization, upon settlement, that exceeds 50 percent. PPL Electric 's management considers a number of factors in assessing the benefit to be recognized, including negotiation of a settlement. On a quarterly basis, PPL Electric reassesses its uncertain tax positions by considering information known at the reporting date. Based on management's assessment of new information, PPL Electric may subsequently recognize a tax benefit for a previously unrecognized tax position, de-recognize a previously recognized tax position, or re-measure the benefit of a previously recognized tax position. The amounts ultimately paid upon resolution of issues raised by taxing authorities may differ materially from the amounts accrued and may materially impact PPL Electric's financial statements in the future. The balance sheet classification of unrecognized tax benefits and the need for valuation allowances to reduce deferred tax assets also require significant management judgment. FIN 48 requires an entity to classify unrecognized tax benefits as current, to the extent management expects to settle an uncertain tax position, by paying cash, within one year of the reporting date. Valuation allowances are initially recorded and reevaluated each reporting period by assessing the likelihood of the ultimate realization of a deferred tax asset. Management considers a number of factors in assessing the realization of a deferred tax asset, including the reversal of temporary differences, future taxable income and ongoing prudent and feasible tax planning strategies. Any tax planning strategy utilized in this assessment must meet the recognition and measurement criteria of FIN 48. See Note 5 to the Financial Statements for the disclosures required by FIN 48. 4) Regulation PPL Electric's electricity delivery business is cost-based rate-regulated. As a result, PPL Electric accounts for this business in accordance with the provisions of SFAS 71, "Accounting for the Effects of Certain Types of Regulation," which requires cost-based rate-regulated entities to reflect the effects of regulatory actions in their financial statements. PPL Electric records assets and liabilities that result from the regulated ratemaking process that may not be recorded under GAAP for non-regulated entities. Regulatory assets generally represent incurred costs that have been deferred because such costs are probable of future recovery in regulated customer rates. Regulatory liabilities generally represent obligations to regulated customers for previous collections of costs that have not yet been incurred but are expected to be incurred in the future. These amounts are recorded to income only when the associated costs are incurred. Management continually assesses whether the regulatory assets are probable of future recovery by considering factors such as changes in the applicable regulatory and political environments, the ability to recover costs through regulated rates, recent rate orders to other regulated entities, and the status of any pending or potential deregulation legislation. Based on this continual assessment, management believes the existing regulatory assets are probable of recovery. This assessment reflects the current political and regulatory climate at the state and federal levels, and is subject to change in the future. If future recovery of costs ceases to be probable, then asset write-offs would be required to be recognized in operating income. Additionally, the regulatory agencies can provide flexibility in the manner and timing of the depreciation of PP&E and amortization of regulatory assets. At December 31, 2007 and 2006, PPL Electric had regulatory assets of $837 million and $1.2 billion. All of PPL Electric's regulatory assets are either currently being recovered under specific rate orders or represent amounts that will be recovered in future rates based upon established regulatory practices. In August 2006, the Commonwealth Court of Pennsylvania overturned the PUC's decision of December 2004 that previously allowed PPL Electric to recover, over a 10-year period, restoration costs incurred in connection with Hurricane Isabel in September 2003. As a result of the PUC's 2004 decision and in accordance with SFAS 71, PPL Electric had established a regulatory asset for the restoration costs. Effective January 1, 2005, PPL Electric began billing these costs to customers and amortizing the regulatory asset. The Commonwealth Court denied recovery of these costs because they were incurred when PPL Electric was subject to capped rates for transmission and distribution services, through December 31, 2004. See Note 1 to the Financial Statements for additional information. Other Information PPL's Audit Committee has approved the independent auditor to provide audit and audit-related services and other services permitted by Sarbanes-Oxley and SEC rules. The audit and audit-related services include services in connection with statutory and regulatory filings, reviews of offering documents and registration statements, and internal control reviews . 
