CIK: 922224
Company Name: PPL CORP
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2011-02-28


Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Overview The information provided in this Item 7 should be read in conjunction with PPL Electric's Consolidated Financial Statements and the accompanying Notes. Terms and abbreviations are explained in the glossary. Dollars are in millions unless otherwise noted. PPL Electric is an electricity delivery service provider in eastern and central Pennsylvania with headquarters in Allentown, Pennsylvania. Refer to "Item 1. Business - Background" for a description of its business. PPL Electric's strategy and principal challenge is to own and operate its electricity delivery business at the most efficient cost while maintaining high quality customer service and reliability. Because PPL Electric's electricity delivery business is rate-regulated, it is subject to regulatory risk with respect to costs that may be recovered and investment returns that may be collected through customer rates. To manage financing costs and access to credit markets, a key objective for PPL Electric's business is to maintain a strong credit profile. PPL Electric continually focuses on maintaining an appropriate capital structure and liquidity position. See "Item 1A. Risk Factors" for more information concerning these and other material risks PPL Electric faces in its business. "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" provides information concerning PPL Electric's performance in implementing the strategies and managing the risks and challenges mentioned above. Specifically: "Results of Operations" provides an overview of PPL Electric's operating results in 2010, 2009 and 2008, including a review of earnings. It also provides a brief outlook for 2011. "Financial Condition - Liquidity and Capital Resources" provides an analysis of PPL Electric's liquidity position and credit profile, including its sources of cash (including bank credit facilities and sources of operating cash flow) and uses of cash (including contractual obligations and capital expenditure requirements) and the key risks and uncertainties that impact PPL Electric's past and future liquidity position and financial condition. This subsection also includes rating agency actions on PPL Electric's credit ratings. "Financial Condition - Risk Management" provides an explanation of PPL Electric's risk management programs relating to market risk and credit risk. "Application of Critical Accounting Policies" provides an overview of the accounting policies that are particularly important to the results of operations and financial condition of PPL Electric and that require its management to make significant estimates, assumptions and other judgments. See "Item 1. Business - Background - Segment Information - Pennsylvania Regulated Segment" for a discussion of PPL Electric's PLR obligations, PPL Electric's agreement to provide electricity as a PLR at "capped" rates through the end of 2009, and plans for default electricity supply procurement after 2009. When comparing 2010 with 2009, certain line items on PPL Electric's financial statements were impacted by the Customer Choice Act, Act 129 and other related issues. The expiration of generation rate caps, the resulting competitive solicitations for power supply, the migration of customers to alternative suppliers, the Customer Choice Act and Act 129 had minimal impact on Pennsylvania gross delivery margins, as approved recovery mechanisms allow for cost recovery of associated expenses, including the cost of energy provided as a PLR. However, PPL Electric's 2010 Pennsylvania gross delivery margins were negatively impacted by the expiration of CTC recovery in December 2009. PPL Electric continues to remain the delivery provider for all customers in its service territory and charge a regulated rate for the se rvice of delivering electricity. See "Statement of Income Analysis - Pennsylvania Gross Delivery Margins" for additional information. Results of Operations Earnings 2010 2009 2008 Net Income Available to PPL Corporation $ 115 $ 124 $ 158 The after-tax changes in Net Income Available to PPL Corporation between these periods were due to the following factors, including several special items that management considers significant. Details of these special items are provided below. 2010 vs. 2009 2009 vs. 2008 Pennsylvania gross delivery margins $ 2 $ (18) Other operation and maintenance (29) 3 Interest expense 11 (12) Income taxes and other (2) 2 Special items 9 (9) $ (9) $ (34) See "Pennsylvania Gross Delivery Margins by Component" in the "Statement of Income Analysis" section for an explanation of margins generated by the regulated electric delivery operations. Other operation and maintenance increased in 2010 compared with 2009, primarily due to higher payroll-related costs and higher contractor costs related to vegetation management. Interest expense decreased in 2010 compared with 2009, primarily due to lower average debt balances in 2010 compared with 2009 and the interest related to the over-recovery of recoverable transition costs. Interest expense increased in 2009 compared with 2008, primarily due to $400 million of debt issuances in October 2008 that prefunded a portion of August 2009 debt maturities. The following after-tax amounts, which management considers special items, also impacted earnings. 2009 Asset impairments $ (1) Workforce reduction (Note 13) (5) Other: Change in tax accounting method related to repairs (Note 5) (3) Total $ (9) 2011 Outlook Excluding special items, higher earnings are projected in 2011 compared with 2010, due to higher distribution revenues resulting from an approved distribution base rate increase effective January 1, 2011. Earnings beyond 2010 are subject to various risks and uncertainties. See "Forward-Looking Information," "Item 1. Business," "Item 1A. Risk Factors," the rest of this Item 7 and Note 15 to the Financial Statements for a discussion of the risks, uncertainties and factors that may impact future earnings. See "Item 1. Business - Segment Information - Pennsylvania Regulated Segment" for additional information on the 2010 rate case. Statement of Income Analysis -- Pennsylvania Gross Delivery Margins Non-GAAP Financial Measure The following discussion includes financial information prepared in accordance with GAAP, as well as a non-GAAP financial measure, "Pennsylvania Gross Delivery Margins." "Pennsylvania Gross Delivery Margins" is a single financial performance measure of PPL Electric's Pennsylvania regulated electric delivery operations, which includes transmission and distribution activities, including PLR supply. In calculating this measure, Pennsylvania regulated utility revenues and expenses associated with approved recovery mechanisms, including energy provided as a PLR, are offset. These mechanisms allow for full cost recovery of certain expenses; therefore, certain expenses and revenues offset with minimal impact on earnings. As a result, this measure represents the net revenues from PPL Electric's Pennsylv ania regulated electric delivery operations. This performance measure is used, in conjunction with other information, internally by senior management and PPL's Board of Directors to manage its Pennsylvania regulated electric delivery operations. PPL Electric believes that "Pennsylvania Gross Delivery Margins" provides another criterion to make investment decisions. This measure is not intended to replace "Operating Income," which is determined in accordance with GAAP, as an indicator of overall operating performance. Other companies may use different measures to analyze and to report on the results of their operations. The following table reconciles "Operating Income" to "Pennsylvania Gross Delivery Margins" as defined by PPL Electric. 2010 2009 2008 Operating Income (a) $ 284 $ 329 $ 375 Adjustments: Other operation and maintenance (a) 502 417 410 Depreciation (a) 136 128 131 Taxes, other than income (a) 138 194 203 Expense adjustments (b) (205) (216) (236) Pennsylvania gross delivery margins $ 855 $ 852 $ 883 (a) As reported on the Statements of Income. (b) The components of these adjustments are detailed in the table below. The following table provides the income statement line items and other adjustments that comprise Pennsylvania gross delivery margins. 2010 2009 Change 2009 2008 Change Revenue Retail electric (a) $ 2,448 $ 3,218 $ (770) $ 3,218 $ 3,290 $ (72) Wholesale electric to affiliate (a) 7 74 (67) 74 111 (37) 2,455 3,292 (837) 3,292 3,401 (109) Expense Energy purchases (a) 1,075 114 961 114 163 (49) Energy purchases from affiliate (a) 320 1,806 (1,486) 1,806 1,826 (20) Amortization of recoverable transition costs (a) 304 (304) 304 293 11 Expense adjustments (b) Include gross receipts tax (c) 129 186 (57) 186 198 (12) Include Act 129 (d) 54 54 Other 22 30 (8) 30 38 (8) Total expense adjustments 205 216 (11) 216 236 (20) 1,600 2,440 (840) 2,440 2,518 (78) Pennsylvania gross delivery margins $ 855 $ 852 $ 3 $ 852 $ 883 $ (31) (a) As reported on the Statements of Income. (b) To include/exclude the impact of any revenues and expenses consistent with the way management reviews Pennsylvania gross delivery margins internally. (c) Included in "Taxes, other than income" on the Statements of Income. (d) Included in "Other operation and maintenance" on the Statement of Income. Pennsylvania Gross Delivery Margins by Component Pennsylvania gross delivery margins are generated through domestic regulated electric distribution activities, including PLR supply, and transmission activities. 2010 2009 Change 2009 2008 Change Distribution $ 679 $ 702 $ (23) $ 702 $ 731 $ (29) Transmission 176 150 26 150 152 (2) Pennsylvania gross delivery margins $ 855 $ 852 $ 3 $ 852 $ 883 $ (31) Distribution The decrease in 2010 compared with 2009 was primarily due to margins realized in 2009 related to the collection of CTC, which ended in December 2009, partially offset by favorable recovery mechanisms for certain energy related costs. The decrease in 2009 compared with 2008 was primarily due to lower CTC/ITC margins in 2009, ITC collections ended in 2008. Lower margins were also attributable to unfavorable economic conditions, including industrial customers scaling back on production. In addition, weather had an unfavorable impact on sales volumes, offset by favorable price increases. Transmission The increase in 2010 compared with 2009 was primarily due to increased investment in rate base, an increase in the cost of capital due to an increase in equity and the recovery of additional costs through FERC formula-based rates. Other Operation and Maintenance The changes in other operation and maintenance expenses were due to: 2010 vs. 2009 2009 vs. 2008 Act 129 costs incurred (a) $ 54 Vegetation management costs (b) 13 $ (5) Payroll-related costs 13 3 Contractor-related expenses 7 (2) Allocation of certain corporate support group costs 6 PUC-reportable storm costs, net of insurance recovery 5 (8) Uncollectible accounts 3 7 Customer education programs 3 (2) Ancillary charges (c) (11) 1 Workforce reduction (Note 13) (9) 9 Employee benefits (4) 5 Other 5 (1) Total $ 85 $ 7 (a) Relates to costs associated with a PUC-approved energy efficiency and conservation plan. These costs are recovered in customer rates. See "Regulatory Issues - Pennsylvania Activities" in Note 15 to the Financial Statements for additional information on this plan. These costs are included in "Pennsylvania Gross Delivery Margins" above. (b) In 2010, PPL Electric increased its vegetation management around its 230- and 500-kV major transmission lines in response to federal reliability requirements for transmission vegetation management. See "Regulatory Issues - Energy Policy Act of 2005 - Reliability Standards" in Note 15 to the Financial Statements for additional information. (c) Prior to 2010, these charges were assessed to load serving entities (LSE), and PPL Electric was considered the LSE. In 2010, PPL Electric was not billed directly for these charges. The individual PLR generation suppliers incurred these costs and billed PPL Electric as part of the bundled price of PLR supply. Such costs are reflected in energy purchases. Taxes, Other Than Income Taxes, other than income decreased by $56 million in 2010 compared with 2009. The decrease was primarily due to lower Pennsylvania gross receipts tax expense due to a decrease in electricity revenue as customers chose alternate suppliers in 2010. Taxes, other than income decreased by $9 million in 2009 compared with 2008. The decrease was primarily due to a $12 million decrease in Pennsylvania gross receipts tax expense, which reflects a decrease in the tax rate in 2009. Depreciation Depreciation increased by $8 million in 2010 compared with 2009, primarily due to PP&E additions. Other Income (Expense) - net See Note 17 to the Financial Statements for details. Interest Income from Affiliate Interest income from affiliate decreased by $5 million in 2009 compared with 2008. This decrease was the result of a reduced average balance outstanding on a note receivable from an affiliate and a lower average rate on this note due to a floating interest rate. Financing Costs The changes in financing costs, which includes "Interest Expense", "Interest Expense with Affiliate" and "Distributions on Preferred Securities," were due to: 2010 vs. 2009 2009 vs. 2008 Long-term debt interest expense (a) $ (16) $ 24 Repayment of transition bonds (13) Interest on PLR contract collateral (Note 16) (2) (8) Distributions on preferred securities 2 Recoverable transition costs (3) 3 Other 2 1 Total $ (17) $ 7 (a) The decrease in 2010 compared with 2009 was primarily due to long-term debt retirements in the third quarter of 2009. The increase in 2009 compared with 2008 was primarily due to $400 million of debt issuances in October 2008 that prefunded a portion of August 2009 debt maturities. Income Taxes The changes in income taxes were due to: 2010 vs. 2009 2009 vs. 2008 Lower pre-tax book income $ (13) $ (19) Federal and state tax reserve adjustments (5) (2) Federal and state tax return adjustments (5) (2) Other 1 $ (22) $ (23) See Note 5 to the Financial Statements for additional information on income taxes. Financial Condition Liquidity and Capital Resources PPL Electric continues to focus on maintaining a strong credit profile and liquidity position. PPL Electric expects to continue to have adequate liquidity available through operating cash flows, cash and cash equivalents and its credit facilities. Additionally, PPL Electric currently plans to access debt capital markets in 2011, subject to market conditions. PPL Electric's cash flows from operations and access to cost-effective bank and capital markets are subject to risks and uncertainties including, but not limited to: unusual or extreme weather that may damage PPL Electric's transmission and distribution facilities or affect energy sales to customers; the ability to recover and the timeliness and adequacy of recovery of costs associated with regulated utility businesses; any adverse outcome of legal proceedings and investigations with respect to PPL Electric's current and past business activities; deterioration in the financial markets that could make obtaining new sources of bank and capital markets funding more difficult and more costly; and a downgrade in PPL Electric's credit ratings that could adversely affect its ability to access capital and increase the cost of credit facilities and any new debt. See "Item 1A. Risk Factors" for further discussion of risks and uncertainties affecting PPL Electric's cash flows. At December 31, PPL Electric had the following: 2010 2009 2008 Cash and cash equivalents $ 204 $ 485 $ 483 Short-term debt $ 95 The changes in PPL Electric's cash and cash equivalents position resulted from: 2010 2009 2008 Net cash provided by operating activities $ 212 $ 294 $ 648 Net cash provided by (used in) investing activities (403) 6 (226) Net cash provided by (used in) financing activities (90) (298) 28 Net Increase (Decrease) in Cash and Cash Equivalents $ (281) $ 2 $ 450 Operating Activities Net cash provided by operating activities decreased by 28%, or $82 million, in 2010 compared with 2009. The expiration of the generation rate caps at the end of 2009 had little impact on net income, while increased transmission revenue was almost completely offset by decreased distribution revenue. However, higher tree trimming and payroll costs and additional defined benefit plan contributions were the primary drivers to the decrease in cash provided by operating activities. Also impacting the 2010 operating cash flows was the elimination of the CTC charge of approximately $300 million that was received in 2009. This amount offsets the benefit of not paying the $300 million in cash collateral to PPL Energy Supply, as discussed below. Net cash provided by operating activities decreased by 55%, or $354 million, in 2009 compared with 2008, primarily as a result of the repayment by PPL Electric of $300 million in cash collateral related to the long-term PLR energy supply agreements with PPL Energy Supply, which expired at the end of 2009. The decrease also reflects the impact of lower delivery revenues and higher payments of interest and income taxes. PPL Electric expects an increase in cash flows from operations in the near-term from its $77.5 million, or 1.6%, rate increase that became effective on January 1, 2011. Investing Activities The primary use of cash in investing activities is capital expenditures. See "Forecasted Uses of Cash" for detail regarding capital expenditures in 2010 and projected expenditures for the years 2011 through 2015. Net cash used in investing activities was $403 million in 2010 compared with cash provided by investing activities of $6 million in 2009. The change from 2009 to 2010 primarily reflects an increase of $113 million in capital expenditures in 2010 and the receipt of $300 million from an affiliate as repayment of a demand loan in 2009. Net cash provided by investing activities was $6 million in 2009 compared with cash used in investing activities of $226 million in 2008. The change from 2008 to 2009 primarily reflects the receipt of $300 million from an affiliate as repayment of a demand loan. Financing Activities Net cash used in financing activities was $90 million in 2010 compared with $298 million in 2009. The change from 2009 to 2010 primarily reflects no debt activity, decreased contributions from and common stock dividends paid to PPL, and the redemption of preferred stock in 2010. PPL Electric had net debt retirements of $392 million in 2009 compared with no activity in 2010, received $345 million less of contributions from PPL in 2010 compared to 2009, paid $203 million less of common stock dividends to PPL in 2010 compared to 2009, and paid $54 million to redeem preferred stock in 2010. Net cash used in financing activities was $298 million in 2009 compared with net cash provided by financing activities of $28 million in 2008. The change from 2008 to 2009 primarily reflects less issuances and increased retirements of long-term debt, contributions received from PPL, increased common stock dividends to PPL and the repayment of short-term borrowings in 2009. PPL Electric had net debt retirements of $392 million in 2009 compared with net debt issuances of $148 million in 2008, received $400 million of contributions from PPL in 2009 and paid $176 million more of common stock dividends to PPL in 2009 compared to 2008. See "Forecasted Sources of Cash" for a discussion of PPL Electric's plans to issue debt and equity securities, as well as a discussion of credit facility capacity available to PPL Electric. Also see "Forecasted Uses of Cash" for a discussion of PPL Electric's plans to pay dividends on its common and preferred securities, as well as maturities of PPL Electric's long-term debt. Forecasted Sources of Cash PPL Electric expects to continue to have significant sources of cash available in the near term, including various credit facilities and a commercial paper program. PPL Electric currently plans to issue up to $250 million in long-term debt securities in 2011, subject to market conditions. Credit Facilities At December 31, 2010, PPL Electric's total committed borrowing capacity under its credit facilities and the use of this borrowing capacity were: Letters of Committed Credit Unused Capacity Borrowed Issued (a) Capacity Syndicated Credit Facility (b) $ 200 $ 13 $ 187 Asset-backed Credit Facility (c) 150 n/a 150 Total PPL Electric Credit Facilities (d) $ 350 $ 13 $ 337 (a) PPL Electric has a reimbursement obligation to the extent any letters of credit are drawn upon. (b) Borrowings under PPL Electric's syndicated credit facility generally bear interest at LIBOR-based rates plus a spread, depending upon the company's senior secured long-term debt rating. PPL Electric also has the capability to request the lenders to issue up to $200 million of letters of credit under this facility, which issuances reduce available borrowing capacity. Subject to certain conditions, PPL Electric may request that the facility's capacity be increased by up to $100 million. This syndicated credit facility contains a financial covenant requiring debt to total capitalization not to exceed 70%. At December 31, 2010, PPL Electric's consolidated debt to total capitalization percentages, as calculated in accordance with its credit facility, was 43%. The syndicated credit facility also contains standard representations and warranties that must be made for PPL Electric to borrow under it. The commitments under the credit facility are provided by a diverse bank group, with no one bank and its affiliates providing an aggregate commitment of more than 6% of the total committed capacity. (c) This credit facility relates to an asset-backed commercial paper program through which PPL Electric obtains financing by selling and contributing its eligible accounts receivable and unbilled revenues to a special purpose, wholly owned subsidiary on an ongoing basis. The subsidiary pledges these assets to secure loans of up to an aggregate of $150 million from a commercial paper conduit sponsored by a financial institution. At December 31, 2010, based on accounts receivable and unbilled revenue pledged, $150 million was available for borrowing. (d) The committed capacity expires as follows: $150 million in 2011 and $200 million in 2014. PPL Electric intends to renew its existing $150 million asset-backed credit facility in 2011 in order to maintain its current total committed capacity level. In addition to the financial covenant noted in the table above, the credit agreements governing the credit facilities contain various other covenants. Failure to comply with the covenants after applicable grace periods could result in acceleration of repayment of borrowings and/or termination of the agreements. PPL Electric monitors compliance with the covenants on a regular basis. At December 31, 2010, PPL Electric was in material compliance with these covenants. At this time, PPL Electric believes that these covenants and other borrowing conditions will not limit access to these funding sources. See Note 7 to the Financial Statements for further discussion of PPL Electric's credit facilities. Commercial Paper PPL Electric maintains a commercial paper program for up to $200 million to provide an additional financing source to fund its short-term liquidity needs, if and when necessary. Commercial paper issuances are currently supported by PPL Electric's $200 million syndicated credit facility, which expires in December 2014, based on available capacity. PPL Electric did not issue any commercial paper during 2010. Based on its current cash position and anticipated cash flows, PPL Electric currently does not plan to issue any commercial paper during 2011, but it may do so from time to time, subject to market conditions, to facilitate short-term cash flow needs. Contributions from PPL From time to time PPL may make capital contributions to PPL Electric. PPL Electric may use these contributions for general corporate purposes. Long-Term Debt and Equity Securities Subject to market conditions, PPL Electric currently plans to issue up to $250 million in long-term debt securities in 2011. PPL Electric expects to use the proceeds from the issuance of long-term debt securities primarily to fund capital expenditures and for general corporate purposes. The Economic Stimulus Package In April 2010, PPL Electric entered into an agreement with the DOE, in which the agency is to provide funding for one-half of a $38 million smart grid project. The project would use smart grid technology to strengthen reliability, save energy and improve electric service for 60,000 Harrisburg, Pennsylvania area customers. It would also provide benefits beyond the Harrisburg region, helping to speed power restoration across PPL Electric's 29-county service territory. Work on the project is progressing on schedule, and PPL Electric is receiving reimbursements under the grant for costs incurred. The project is scheduled to be completed by the end of September 2012. Forecasted Uses of Cash In addition to expenditures required for normal operating activities, such as purchased power, payroll, and taxes, PPL Electric currently expects to incur future cash outflows for capital expenditures, various contractual obligations, payment of dividends on its common and preferred securities and possibly the purchase or redemption of a portion of its debt securities. Capital Expenditures The table below shows PPL Electric's actual spending for the year 2010 and current capital expenditure projections for the years 2011 through 2015. Actual Projected 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 Construction expenditures (a) (b) Transmission and distribution facilities $ 368 $ 401 $ 576 $ 841 $ 795 $ 641 Other 43 51 53 27 26 26 Total Capital Expenditures $ 411 $ 452 $ 629 $ 868 $ 821 $ 667 (a) Construction expenditures include AFUDC, which is expected to be approximately $79 million for the years 2011 through 2015. (b) Includes expenditures for intangible assets. PPL Electric's capital expenditure projections for the years 2011 through 2015 total approximately $3.4 billion. Capital expenditure plans are revised periodically to reflect changes in operational, market and regulatory conditions. The table includes projected costs for the asset optimization program focused on the replacement of aging transmission and distribution assets, and the PJM-approved regional transmission line expansion project. See Note 8 to the Financial Statements for additional information. PPL Electric plans to fund its capital expenditures in 2011 with cash on hand, cash from operations and proceeds from the issuance of debt securities. Contractual Obligations PPL Electric has assumed various financial obligations and commitments in the ordinary course of conducting its business. At December 31, 2010, the estimated contractual cash obligations of PPL Electric were: Total Less Than 1 Year 1-3 Years 4-5 Years After 5 Years Long-term Debt (a) $ 1,474 $ 400 $ 110 $ 964 Interest on Long-term Debt (b) 1,369 $ 88 177 119 985 Purchase Obligations (c) 1,480 937 383 160 Total Contractual Cash Obligations $ 4,323 $ 1,025 $ 960 $ 389 $ 1,949 (a) Reflects principal maturities only based on stated maturity dates. PPL Electric does not have any capital or operating lease obligations. (b) Assumes interest payments through stated maturity. (c) The payments reflected herein are subject to change, as the purchase obligation reflected is an estimate based on projected obligated quantities and projected pricing under the contract. Purchase orders made in the ordinary course of business are excluded from the amounts presented. At December 31, 2010, total unrecognized tax benefits of $62 million were excluded from this table as PPL Electric cannot reasonably estimate the amount and period of future payments. See Note 5 to the Financial Statements for additional information. Dividends From time to time, as determined by its Board of Directors, PPL Electric pays dividends on its common stock to its parent, PPL. As discussed in Note 7 to the Financial Statements, PPL Electric may not pay dividends on its common stock, except in certain circumstances, unless full dividends have been paid on the 6.25% Series Preference Stock for the then-current dividend period. PPL Electric does not, at this time, expect that such limitation would significantly impact its ability to declare dividends. PPL Electric expects to continue to pay quarterly dividends on its outstanding preferred securities, if and as declared by its Board of Directors. Purchase or Redemption of Debt Securities PPL Electric will continue to evaluate purchasing or redeeming outstanding debt securities and may decide to take action depending upon prevailing market conditions and available cash. Credit Ratings Moody's, S&P and Fitch periodically review the credit ratings on the debt and preferred securities of PPL Electric. Based on their respective independent reviews, the rating agencies may make certain ratings revisions or ratings affirmations. A credit rating reflects an assessment by the rating agency of the creditworthiness associated with an issuer and particular securities that it issues. The credit ratings of PPL Electric are based on information provided by PPL Electric and other sources. The ratings of Moody's, S&P and Fitch are not a recommendation to buy, sell or hold any securities of PPL Electric. Such ratings may be subject to revisions or withdrawal by the agencies at any time and should be evaluated independently of each other and any other rating that may be assigned to the securities. A downgrade in PPL Electric's credit ratings could result in higher borrowing costs and reduced access to capital markets. In prior periodic reports, PPL Electric described its then-current debt ratings in connection with, and to facilitate, an understanding of its liquidity position. As a result of the passage of the Dodd-Frank Act and the attendant uncertainties relating to the extent to which issuers of non-asset backed securities may disclose credit ratings without being required to obtain rating agency consent to the inclusion of such disclosure, or incorporation by reference of such disclosure, in a registrant's registration statement or section 10(a) prospectus, PPL Electric is limiting its credit rating disclosure to a description of the actions taken by the rating agencies with respect to PPL Electric's ratings, but without stating what ratings have been assigned to PPL Electric or its securities. The ratings assigned by the rat ing agencies to PPL Electric and its respective securities may be found, without charge, on each of the respective ratings agencies' websites, which ratings together with all other information contained on such rating agency websites is, hereby, explicitly not incorporated by reference in this report. The rating agencies took the following actions related to PPL Electric in 2010. Moody's In April 2010, Moody's took the following actions: Revised the outlook for PPL Electric; Lowered the rating of PPL Electric's preferred securities; Lowered the issuer rating of PPL Electric; and Affirmed the senior secured rating and commercial paper rating of PPL Electric. Moody's stated in its press release that the revision in the rating for PPL Electric, while reflective of PPL's then-announced agreement to acquire LKE, is driven more by weakening financial metrics and the outlooks that had been in place for PPL and PPL Electric for the past year. S&P In April 2010, S&P affirmed its credit rating for PPL Electric following PPL's then-announced agreement to acquire LKE. In October 2010, S&P affirmed its credit ratings for PPL Electric and revised the outlook on PPL Electric. Fitch In January 2010, as a result of implementing its revised guidelines for rating preferred stock and hybrid securities, Fitch lowered the ratings of PPL Electric's preferred stock and preference stock. Fitch stated in its press release that the new guidelines, which apply to instruments issued by companies in all sectors, typically resulted in downgrades of one notch for many instruments that provide for the ability to defer interest or dividend payments. Fitch stated that it has no reason to believe that such deferral will be activated. In April 2010, Fitch affirmed its credit ratings and outlook for PPL Electric following PPL's then-announced agreement to acquire LKE. Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements PPL Electric has entered into certain agreements that may contingently require payment to a guaranteed or indemnified party. See Note 15 to the Financial Statements for a discussion of these agreements. Risk Management Market Risk Commodity Price and Volumetric Risk - PLR Contracts PPL Electric is exposed to market price and volumetric risks from its obligation as PLR. The PUC has approved a cost recovery mechanism that allows PPL Electric to pass through to customers the cost associated with fulfilling its PLR obligation. This cost recovery mechanism substantially eliminates PPL Electric's exposure to market price risk. PPL Electric also mitigates its exposure to volumetric risk by entering into full requirement energy supply contracts for its customers. These supply contracts transfer the volumetric risk associated with the PLR obligation to the energy suppliers. Interest Rate Risk PPL Electric has issued debt to finance its operations, which exposes it to interest rate risk. PPL Electric had no potential annual exposure to increased interest expense, based on a 10% increase in interest rates, at December 31, 2010. Such amount was not significant at December 31, 2009. PPL Electric estimated that a 10% decrease in interest rates at December 31, 2010 would increase the fair value of its debt portfolio by $66 million, compared with $69 million at December 31, 2009. Credit Risk Credit risk is the risk that PPL Electric would incur a loss as a result of nonperformance by counterparties of their contractual obligations. PPL Electric requires that counterparties maintain specified credit ratings and requires other assurances in the form of credit support or collateral in certain circumstances in order to limit counterparty credit risk. However, PPL Electric has concentrations of suppliers, financial institutions and customers. These concentrations may impact PPL Electric's overall exposure to credit risk, positively or negatively, as counterparties may be similarly affected by changes in economic, regulatory or other conditions. In 2007, the PUC approved PPL Electric's post-rate cap plan to procure default electricity supply for retail customers who do not choose an alternative competitive supplier in 2010. Pursuant to this plan, PPL Electric had contracted for all of the electric supply for customers who elected this service in 2010. In June 2009, the PUC approved PPL Electric's procurement plan for the period January 2011 through May 2013. Through 2010, PPL Electric has conducted six of its 14 planned competitive solicitations. Under the standard Supply Master Agreement (the Agreement) for the competitive solicitation process, PPL Electric requires all suppliers to post collateral if their credit exposure exceeds an established credit limit. In the event a supplier defaults on its obligation, PPL Electric would be required to seek replacement power in the market. All incremental costs incurred by PPL Electric would be recoverable from customers in future rates. At December 31, 2010, all of the successful bidders under all of the solicitations had an investment grade credit rating from S&P, and were not required to post collateral under the Agreement. There is no instance under the Agreement in which PPL Electric is required to post collateral to its suppliers. See "Overview" in this Item 7 and Notes 15, 16, 18 and 19 to the Financial Statements for additional information on the competitive solicitations, the Agreement, credit concentration and credit risk. Related Party Transactions PPL Electric is not aware of any material ownership interests or operating responsibility by senior management of PPL Electric in outside partnerships, including leasing transactions with variable interest entities, or other entities doing business with PPL Electric. See Note 16 to the Financial Statements for additional information on related party transactions. Environmental Matters See "Item 1. Business - Environmental Matters" and Note 15 to the Financial Statements for a discussion of environmental matters. Competition See "Item 1. Business - Segment Information - Pennsylvania Regulated Segment - Competition" for a discussion of competitive factors affecting PPL Electric. New Accounting Guidance See Note 1 to the Financial Statements for a discussion of new accounting guidance adopted. Application of Critical Accounting Policies Financial condition and results of operations are impacted by the methods, assumptions and estimates used in the application of critical accounting policies. The following accounting policies are particularly important to the financial condition or results of operations, and require estimates or other judgments of matters inherently uncertain. Changes in the estimates or other judgments included within these accounting policies could result in a significant change to the information presented in the Financial Statements (these accounting policies are also discussed in Note 1 to the Financial Statements). PPL's senior management has reviewed these critical accounting policies, the following disclosures regarding their application and the estimates and assumptions regarding them, with PPL's Audit Committee. 1) Defined Benefits PPL Electric participates in and is allocated a significant portion of the liability and net periodic defined benefit pension and other postretirement costs of plans sponsored by PPL Services based on participation in those plans. PPL Electric records an asset or liability to recognize the funded status of all defined benefit plans with an offsetting entry to regulatory assets. Consequently, the funded status of all defined benefit plans is fully recognized on the Balance Sheets. See Note 13 to the Financial Statements for additional information about the plans and the accounting for defined benefits. PPL Services makes certain assumptions regarding the valuation of benefit obligations and the performance of plan assets. When accounting for defined benefits, delayed recognition in earnings of differences between actual results and expected or estimated results is a guiding principle. Annual net periodic defined benefit costs are recorded in current earnings based on estimated results. Any differences between actual and estimated results are recorded in regulatory assets. The amount in regulatory assets is amortized to income over future periods. The delayed recognition allows for a smoothed recognition of costs over the working lives of the employees who benefit under the plans. The primary assumptions are: Discount Rate - The discount rate is used in calculating the present value of benefits, which is based on projections of benefit payments to be made in the future. The objective in selecting the discount rate is to measure the single amount that, if invested at the measurement date in a portfolio of high-quality debt instruments, would provide the necessary future cash flows to pay the accumulated benefits when due. Expected Return on Plan Assets - Management projects the long-term rates of return on plan assets based on historical performance, future expectations and periodic portfolio rebalancing among the diversified asset classes. These projected returns reduce the net benefit costs PPL records currently. Rate of Compensation Increase - Management projects employees' annual pay increases, which are used to project employees' pension benefits at retirement. Health Care Cost Trend Rate - Management projects the expected increases in the cost of health care. In selecting a discount rate for its U.S. defined benefit plans, PPL Services starts with an analysis of the expected benefit payment stream for its plans. This information is first matched against a spot-rate yield curve. A portfolio of 604 Aa-graded non-callable (or callable with make-whole provisions) bonds, with a total amount outstanding in excess of $667 billion, serves as the base from which those with the lowest and highest yields are eliminated to develop the ultimate yield curve. The results of this analysis are considered together with other economic data and movements in various bond indices to determine the discount rate assumption. At December 31, 2010, PPL Services decreased the discount rate for its U.S. pension plans from 6.00% to 5.41% as a result of this assessment and de creased the discount rate for its other postretirement benefit plans from 5.81% to 5.16%. The expected long-term rates of return for PPL Services' U.S. defined benefit pension and other postretirement benefits have been developed using a best-estimate of expected returns, volatilities and correlations for each asset class. PPL management corroborates these rates with expected long-term rates of return calculated by its independent actuary, who uses a building block approach that begins with a risk-free rate of return with factors being added such as inflation, duration, credit spreads and equity risk. Each plan's specific asset allocation is also considered in developing a reasonable return assumption. At December 31, 2010, PPL Services' expected return on plan assets decreased from 8.00% to 7.25% for its U.S. pension plan and decreased from 7.00% to 6.45% for its other postretirement bene fit plan. In selecting a rate of compensation increase, PPL Services considers past experience in light of movements in inflation rates. At December 31, 2010, PPL Services' rate of compensation increase remained at 4.75% for its U.S. plan. In selecting health care cost trend rates for PPL Services' other postretirement benefit plans, PPL Services considers past performance and forecasts of health care costs. At December 31, 2010, PPL Services' health care cost trend rates were 9.00% for 2011, gradually declining to 5.50% for 2019. A variance in the assumptions listed above could have a significant impact on the accrued defined benefit liabilities or assets, reported annual net periodic defined benefit costs and the regulatory assets allocated to PPL Electric. While the charts below reflect either an increase or decrease in each assumption, the inverse of this change would impact the accrued defined benefit liabilities or assets, reported annual net periodic defined benefit costs and regulatory assets by a similar amount in the opposite direction. The sensitivities below reflect an evaluation of the change based solely on a change in that assumption and does not include income tax effects. At December 31, 2010, defined benefit plan liabilities were as follows. Pension liabilities $ 259 Other postretirement benefit liabilities 57 Increase (Decrease) Change in Impact on defined Impact on Actuarial assumption assumption benefit liabilities regulatory assets Discount Rate (0.25)% $ 35 $ 35 Rate of Compensation Increase 0.25% 6 6 Health Care Cost Trend Rate (a) 1.00% 1 1 (a) Only impacts other postretirement benefits. In 2010, PPL Electric was allocated net periodic defined benefit costs charged to operating expense of $20 million. This amount represents a $4 million decrease compared with the charge recognized during 2009. Actuarial assumption Change in assumption Impact on defined benefit costs Discount Rate (0.25)% $ 1 Expected Return on Plan Assets (0.25)% 2 Rate of Compensation Increase 0.25% 1 Health Care Cost Trend Rate (a) 1.00% 1 (a) Only impacts other postretirement benefits. 2) Loss Accruals Losses are accrued for the estimated impacts of various conditions, situations or circumstances involving uncertain or contingent future outcomes. For loss contingencies, the loss must be accrued if (1) information is available that indicates it is probable that a loss has been incurred, given the likelihood of the uncertain future events, and (2) the amount of the loss can be reasonably estimated. Accounting guidance defines "probable" as cases in which "the future event or events are likely to occur." The accrual of contingencies that might result in gains is not recorded unless recovery is assured. Potential loss contingencies for environmental remediation, litigation claims, regulatory penalties and other events are continuously assessed. The accounting aspects of estimated loss accruals include (1) the initial identification and recording of the loss, (2) the determination of triggering events for reducing a recorded loss accrual, and (3) the ongoing assessment as to whether a recorded loss accrual is sufficient. All three of these aspects require significant judgment by management. Internal expertise and outside experts (such as lawyers and engineers) are used, as necessary, to help estimate the probability that a loss has been incurred and the amount (or range) of the loss. No new significant loss accruals were recorded in 2010. Certain other events have been identified that could give rise to a loss, but that do not meet the conditions for accrual. Such events are disclosed, but not recorded, when it is "reasonably possible" that a loss has been incurred. See Note 15 to the Financial Statements for disclosure of other potential loss contingencies that have not met the criteria for accrual. When an estimated loss is accrued, the triggering events for subsequently reducing the loss accrual are identified, where applicable. The triggering events generally occur when the contingency has been resolved and the actual loss is paid or written off, or when the risk of loss has diminished or been eliminated. The following are some of the triggering events that provide for the reduction of certain recorded loss accruals: Allowances for uncollectible accounts are reduced when accounts are written off after prescribed collection procedures have been exhausted, a better estimate of the allowance is determined or underlying amounts are ultimately collected. Environmental and other litigation contingencies are reduced when the contingency is resolved and actual payments are made, a better estimate of the loss is determined or the loss is no longer considered probable. Loss accruals are reviewed on a regular basis to assure that the recorded potential loss exposures are appropriate. This involves ongoing communication and analyses with internal and external legal counsel, engineers, operation management and other parties. 3) Income Taxes Significant management judgment is required in developing the provision for income taxes, primarily due to the uncertainty related to tax positions taken or expected to be taken in tax returns and the determination of deferred tax assets, liabilities and valuation allowances. Significant management judgment is required to determine the amount of benefit recognized related to an uncertain tax position. Tax positions are evaluated following a two-step process. The first step requires an entity to determine whether, based on the technical merits supporting a particular tax position, it is more likely than not (greater than a 50% chance) that the tax position will be sustained. This determination assumes that the relevant taxing authority will examine the tax position and is aware of all the relevant facts surrounding the tax position. The second step requires an entity to recognize in the financial statements the benefit of a tax position that meets the more-likely-than-not recognition criterion. The benefit recognized is measured at the largest amount of ben efit that has a likelihood of realization, upon settlement, that exceeds 50%. Management considers a number of factors in assessing the benefit to be recognized, including negotiation of a settlement. On a quarterly basis, uncertain tax positions are reassessed by considering information known at the reporting date. Based on management's assessment of new information, a tax benefit may subsequently be recognized for a previously unrecognized tax position, a previously recognized tax position may be de-recognized, or the benefit of a previously recognized tax position may be remeasured. The amounts ultimately paid upon resolution of issues raised by taxing authorities may differ materially from the amounts accrued and may materially impact the financial statements in the future. At December 31, 2010, it was reasonably possible that during the next 12 months the total amount of unrecognized tax benefits could increase by as much as $28 million or decrease by up to $42 million. This change could result from the timing and/or valuation of certain deductions, intercompany transactions and unitary filing groups. The events that could cause these changes are direct settlements with taxing authorities, litigation, legal or administrative guidance by relevant taxing authorities and the lapse of an applicable statute of limitation. The balance sheet classification of unrecognized tax benefits and the need for valuation allowances to reduce deferred tax assets also require significant management judgment. Unrecognized tax benefits are classified as current to the extent management expects to settle an uncertain tax position by payment or receipt of cash within one year of the reporting date. Valuation allowances are initially recorded and reevaluated each reporting period by assessing the likelihood of the ultimate realization of a deferred tax asset. Management considers a number of factors in assessing the realization of a deferred tax asset, including the reversal of temporary differences, future taxable income and ongoing prudent and feasible tax planning strategies. Any tax planning strategy utilized in this assessment must meet the recognition and measurement criteria utilized to account for an uncertain tax position. See Note 5 to the Financial Statements for income tax disclosures. 4) Regulatory Assets and Liabilities PPL Electric's electricity delivery business is subject to cost-based rate regulation. As a result, the effects of regulatory actions are required to be reflected in the financial statements. Assets and liabilities are recorded that result from the regulated ratemaking process that may not be recorded under GAAP for non-regulated entities. Regulatory assets generally represent incurred costs that have been deferred because such costs are probable of future recovery in regulated customer rates. Regulatory liabilities generally represent obligations to regulated customers for previous collections of costs that are expected to be refunded to customers in the future. In certain cases, regulatory liabilities are recorded based on the understanding with the regulator that current rates are being set to recover costs that are expected to be incurred in the future, and the regulated entity is accountable for any amounts charged pursuant to such rates and not yet expended for the intended purpose. Management continually assesses whether the regulatory assets are probable of future recovery by considering factors such as changes in the applicable regulatory and political environments, the ability to recover costs through regulated rates, recent rate orders to other regulated entities, and the status of any pending or potential deregulation legislation. Based on this continual assessment, management believes the existing regulatory assets are probable of recovery. This assessment reflects the current political and regulatory climate at the state and federal levels, and is subject to change in the future. If future recovery of costs ceases to be probable, then asset write-offs would be required to be recognized in operating income. Additionally, the regulatory agencies can provide flexibilit y in the manner and timing of the depreciation of PP&E and amortization of regulatory assets. At December 31, 2010 and 2009, PPL Electric had regulatory assets of $620 million and $542 million. All regulatory assets are either currently being recovered under specific rate orders, represent amounts that are expected to be recovered in future rates or benefit future periods based upon established regulatory practices. At December 31, 2010 and 2009, PPL Electric had regulatory liabilities of $32 million and $84 million. See Note 3 to the Financial Statements for additional information on regulatory assets and liabilities. Other Information PPL's Audit Committee has approved the independent auditor to provide audit and audit-related services and other services permitted by Sarbanes-Oxley and SEC rules. The audit and audit-related services include services in connection with statutory and regulatory filings, reviews of offering documents and registration statements, and internal control reviews. See "Item 14. Principal Accounting Fees and Services" for more information. 
